<html><body><pre>
[Title 24 CFR ]
[Code of Federal Regulations (annual edition) - April 1, 1999 Edition]
[From the U.S. Government Printing Office]


          24


<R02>
          Housing and Urban Development

<R03>

[[Page i]]

          PARTS 0 TO 199

                         Revised as of April 1, 1999

          CONTAINING
          A CODIFICATION OF DOCUMENTS
          OF GENERAL APPLICABILITY
          AND FUTURE EFFECT

          AS OF APRIL 1, 1999
          With Ancillaries
          Published by
          the Office of the Federal Register
          National Archives and Records
          Administration

          as a Special Edition of
          the Federal Register



[[Page ii]]

                                      




                     U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
                            WASHINGTON : 1999



               For sale by U.S. Government Printing Office
 Superintendent of Documents, Mail Stop: SSOP, Washington, DC 20402-9328



[[Page iii]]



<R02>
                            Table of Contents


<R03>
                                                                    Page
  Explanation.................................................       v

  Title 24:

          Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary, Department of 
          Housing and Urban Development.......................       3

          Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Housing and 
          Urban Development...................................     537

          Chapter I--Office of Assistant Secretary for Equal 
          Opportunity, Department of Housing and Urban 
          Development.........................................     539

  Finding Aids:

      Material Approved for Incorporation by Reference........     649

      Table of CFR Titles and Chapters........................     651

      Alphabetical List of Agencies Appearing in the CFR......     669

      List of CFR Sections Affected...........................     679



[[Page iv]]


      


                     ----------------------------

                     Cite this Code:  CFR
                     To cite the regulations in 
                       this volume use title, 
                       part and section number. 
                       Thus,  24 CFR 0.1 refers 
                       to title 24, part 0, 
                       section 1.

                     ----------------------------

[[Page v]]



                               EXPLANATION

    The Code of Federal Regulations is a codification of the general and 
permanent rules published in the Federal Register by the Executive 
departments and agencies of the Federal Government. The Code is divided 
into 50 titles which represent broad areas subject to Federal 
regulation. Each title is divided into chapters which usually bear the 
name of the issuing agency. Each chapter is further subdivided into 
parts covering specific regulatory areas.
    Each volume of the Code is revised at least once each calendar year 
and issued on a quarterly basis approximately as follows:

Title 1 through Title 16.................................as of January 1
Title 17 through Title 27..................................as of April 1
Title 28 through Title 41...................................as of July 1
Title 42 through Title 50................................as of October 1

    The appropriate revision date is printed on the cover of each 
volume.

LEGAL STATUS

    The contents of the Federal Register are required to be judicially 
noticed (44 U.S.C. 1507). The Code of Federal Regulations is prima facie 
evidence of the text of the original documents (44 U.S.C. 1510).

HOW TO USE THE CODE OF FEDERAL REGULATIONS

    The Code of Federal Regulations is kept up to date by the individual 
issues of the Federal Register. These two publications must be used 
together to determine the latest version of any given rule.
    To determine whether a Code volume has been amended since its 
revision date (in this case, April 1, 1999), consult the ``List of CFR 
Sections Affected (LSA),'' which is issued monthly, and the ``Cumulative 
List of Parts Affected,'' which appears in the Reader Aids section of 
the daily Federal Register. These two lists will identify the Federal 
Register page number of the latest amendment of any given rule.

EFFECTIVE AND EXPIRATION DATES

    Each volume of the Code contains amendments published in the Federal 
Register since the last revision of that volume of the Code. Source 
citations for the regulations are referred to by volume number and page 
number of the Federal Register and date of publication. Publication 
dates and effective dates are usually not the same and care must be 
exercised by the user in determining the actual effective date. In 
instances where the effective date is beyond the cut-off date for the 
Code a note has been inserted to reflect the future effective date. In 
those instances where a regulation published in the Federal Register 
states a date certain for expiration, an appropriate note will be 
inserted following the text.

OMB CONTROL NUMBERS

    The Paperwork Reduction Act of 1980 (Pub. L. 96-511) requires 
Federal agencies to display an OMB control number with their information 
collection request.

[[Page vi]]

Many agencies have begun publishing numerous OMB control numbers as 
amendments to existing regulations in the CFR. These OMB numbers are 
placed as close as possible to the applicable recordkeeping or reporting 
requirements.

OBSOLETE PROVISIONS

    Provisions that become obsolete before the revision date stated on 
the cover of each volume are not carried. Code users may find the text 
of provisions in effect on a given date in the past by using the 
appropriate numerical list of sections affected. For the period before 
January 1, 1986, consult either the List of CFR Sections Affected, 1949-
1963, 1964-1972, or 1973-1985, published in seven separate volumes. For 
the period beginning January 1, 1986, a ``List of CFR Sections 
Affected'' is published at the end of each CFR volume.

INCORPORATION BY REFERENCE

    What is incorporation by reference? Incorporation by reference was 
established by statute and allows Federal agencies to meet the 
requirement to publish regulations in the Federal Register by referring 
to materials already published elsewhere. For an incorporation to be 
valid, the Director of the Federal Register must approve it. The legal 
effect of incorporation by reference is that the material is treated as 
if it were published in full in the Federal Register (5 U.S.C. 552(a)). 
This material, like any other properly issued regulation, has the force 
of law.
    What is a proper incorporation by reference? The Director of the 
Federal Register will approve an incorporation by reference only when 
the requirements of 1 CFR part 51 are met. Some of the elements on which 
approval is based are:
    (a) The incorporation will substantially reduce the volume of 
material published in the Federal Register.
    (b) The matter incorporated is in fact available to the extent 
necessary to afford fairness and uniformity in the administrative 
process.
    (c) The incorporating document is drafted and submitted for 
publication in accordance with 1 CFR part 51.
    Properly approved incorporations by reference in this volume are 
listed in the Finding Aids at the end of this volume.
    What if the material incorporated by reference cannot be found? If 
you have any problem locating or obtaining a copy of material listed in 
the Finding Aids of this volume as an approved incorporation by 
reference, please contact the agency that issued the regulation 
containing that incorporation. If, after contacting the agency, you find 
the material is not available, please notify the Director of the Federal 
Register, National Archives and Records Administration, Washington DC 
20408, or call (202) 523-4534.

CFR INDEXES AND TABULAR GUIDES

    A subject index to the Code of Federal Regulations is contained in a 
separate volume, revised annually as of January 1, entitled CFR Index 
and Finding Aids. This volume contains the Parallel Table of Statutory 
Authorities and Agency Rules (Table I), and Acts Requiring Publication 
in the Federal Register (Table II). A list of CFR titles, chapters, and 
parts and an alphabetical list of agencies publishing in the CFR are 
also included in this volume.
    An index to the text of ``Title 3--The President'' is carried within 
that volume.
    The Federal Register Index is issued monthly in cumulative form. 
This index is based on a consolidation of the ``Contents'' entries in 
the daily Federal Register.

[[Page vii]]

    A List of CFR Sections Affected (LSA) is published monthly, keyed to 
the revision dates of the 50 CFR titles.

REPUBLICATION OF MATERIAL

    There are no restrictions on the republication of material appearing 
in the Code of Federal Regulations.

INQUIRIES

    For a legal interpretation or explanation of any regulation in this 
volume, contact the issuing agency. The issuing agency's name appears at 
the top of odd-numbered pages.
    For inquiries concerning CFR reference assistance, call 202-523-5227 
or write to the Director, Office of the Federal Register, National 
Archives and Records Administration, Washington, DC 20408.

SALES

    The Government Printing Office (GPO) processes all sales and 
distribution of the CFR. For payment by credit card, call 202-512-1800, 
M-F, 8 a.m. to 4 p.m. e.s.t. or fax your order to 202-512-2233, 24 hours 
a day. For payment by check, write to the Superintendent of Documents, 
Attn: New Orders, P.O. Box 371954, Pittsburgh, PA 15250-7954. For GPO 
Customer Service call 202-512-1803.

ELECTRONIC SERVICES

    The full text of the Code of Federal Regulations, the LSA (List of 
CFR Sections Affected), The United States Government Manual, the Federal 
Register, Public Laws, Weekly Compilation of Presidential Documents and 
the Privacy Act Compilation are available in electronic format at 
www.access.gpo.gov/nara (``GPO Access''). For more information, contact 
Electronic Information Dissemination Services, U.S. Government Printing 
Office. Phone 202-512-1530, or 888-293-6498 (toll-free). E-mail, 
gpoaccess@gpo.gov.
    The Office of the Federal Register also offers a free service on the 
National Archives and Records Administration's (NARA) World Wide Web 
site for public law numbers, Federal Register finding aids, and related 
information. Connect to NARA's web site at www.nara.gov/fedreg. The NARA 
site also contains links to GPO Access.

                              Raymond A. Mosley,
                                    Director,
                          Office of the Federal Register.

April 1, 1999.



[[Page ix]]



                               THIS TITLE

    Title 24--Housing and Urban Development is composed of five volumes. 
The first four volumes containing parts 0-199, parts 200-499, parts 500-
699, parts 700-1699, represent the regulations of the Department of 
Housing and Urban Development. The fifth volume, containing part 1700 to 
end continues with regulations of the Department of Housing and Urban 
Development and also includes regulations of the Neighborhood 
Reinvestment Corporation. The contents of these volumes represent all 
current regulations codified under this title of the CFR as of April 1, 
1999.

    For this volume, Cheryl E. Sirofchuck was Chief Editor. The Code of 
Federal Regulations publication program is under the direction of 
Frances D. McDonald, assisted by Alomha S. Morris.

[[Page x]]

<GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT>



[[Page 1]]


<R01>
                 TITLE 24--HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT


<R02>

                   (This book contains parts 0 to 199)

  --------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                    Part

SUBTITLE A--Office of the Secretary, Department of Housing 
  and Urban Development.....................................           0
SUBTITLE B--Regulations Relating to Housing and Urban Development:

Chapter I--Office of Assistant Secretary for Equal 
  Opportunity, Department of Housing and Urban Development..         100

Cross References: Farmers Home Administration, Department of 
  Agriculture: For agricultural credit, see 7 CFR chapter XVIII.

  Office of Thrift Supervision, Department of the Treasury, 12 CFR 
chapter V.

  Department of Veterans Affairs regulations on assistance to certain 
veterans in acquiring specially adapted housing and guaranty of loans on 
homes: See Pensions, Bonuses, and Veteran Relief, 38 CFR part 36.

[[Page 3]]

  Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary, Department of Housing and Urban 
                               Development

  --------------------------------------------------------------------

Part                                                                Page
0               Standards of conduct........................           7
1               Nondiscrimination in federally assisted 
                    programs of the Department of Housing 
                    and Urban Development--effectuation of 
                    Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964           7
4               HUD Reform Act..............................          14
5               General HUD program requirements; waivers...          21
6               Nondiscrimination in programs and activities 
                    receiving assistance under Title I of 
                    the Housing and Community Development 
                    Act of 1974.............................          76
7               Equal employment opportunity; policy and 
                    procedures..............................          84
8               Nondiscrimination based on handicap in 
                    federally assisted programs and 
                    activities of the Department of Housing 
                    and Urban Development...................          90
9               Enforcement of nondiscrimination on the 
                    basis of disability in programs or 
                    activities conducted by the department 
                    of housing and urban development........         111
10              Rulemaking: policy and procedures...........         122
13              Use of penalty mail in the location and 
                    recovery of missing children............         125
14              Implementation of the Equal Access to 
                    Justice Act in administrative 
                    proceedings.............................         125
15              Testimony, production and disclosure of 
                    material or information by HUD employees         138
16              Implementation of the Privacy Act of 1974...         146
17              Administrative claims.......................         159

[[Page 4]]

18              Indemnification of HUD employees............         185
20              Board of contract appeals...................         187
24              Government debarment and suspension and 
                    governmentwide requirements for drug-
                    free workplace (grants).................         196
25              Mortgagee Review Board......................         218
26              Hearing procedures..........................         225
27              Nonjudicial foreclosure of multifamily and 
                    single family mortgages.................         239
28              Implementation of the Program Fraud Civil 
                    Remedies Act of 1986....................         247
30              Civil money penalties: certain prohibited 
                    conduct.................................         251
35              Lead-based paint poisoning prevention in 
                    certain residential structures..........         256
40              Accessibility standards for design, 
                    construction, and alteration of publicly 
                    owned residential structures............         267
41              Policies and procedures for the enforcement 
                    of standards and requirements for 
                    accessibility by the physically 
                    handicapped.............................         268
42              Displacement, relocation assistance, and 
                    real property acquisition for HUD and 
                    HUD-assisted programs...................         271
43-45           [Reserved]
50              Protection and enhancement of environmental 
                    quality.................................         275
51              Environmental criteria and standards........         284
52              Intergovernmental review of Department of 
                    Housing and Urban Development programs 
                    and activities..........................         302
55              Floodplain management.......................         305
58              Environmental review procedures for entities 
                    assuming HUD environmental 
                    responsibilities........................         314
60              Protection of human subjects................         332
70              Use of volunteers on projects subject to 
                    Davis-Bacon and HUD-determined wage 
                    rates...................................         332
81              The Secretary of HUD's regulation of the 
                    Federal National Mortgage Association 
                    (Fannie Mae) and the Federal Home Loan 
                    Mortgage Corporation (Freddie Mac)......         335
84              Grants and agreements with institutions of 
                    higher education, hospitals, and other 
                    non-profit organizations................         367
85              Administrative requirements for grants and 
                    cooperative agreements to State, local 
                    and federally recognized Indian tribal 
                    governments.............................         404
87              New restrictions on lobbying................         431

[[Page 5]]

91              Consolidated submissions for community 
                    planning and development programs.......         442
92              Home Investment Partnerships Program........         475

  

Appendixes A-C to Subtitle A [Reserved]


  Editorial Note: For nomenclature changes to chapter I see 59 FR 14092, 
Mar. 25, 1994.

[[Page 7]]


<R03>
PART 0--STANDARDS OF CONDUCT--Table of Contents

<R05>



<R05>
Sec. 0.1  Cross-reference to employees ethical conduct standards and financial disclosure regulations.

    Employees of the Department of Housing and Urban Development 
(Department) are subject to the executive branch-wide standards of 
ethical conduct at 5 CFR part 2635, the Department's regulation at 5 CFR 
part 7501 which supplements the executive branch-wide standards, and the 
executive branch-wide financial disclosure regulation at 5 CFR part 
2634.

5 U.S.C. 301, 7301; 42 U.S.C. 3535(d)

[61 FR 36251, July 9, 1996]


<R03>
PART 1--NONDISCRIMINATION IN FEDERALLY ASSISTED PROGRAMS OF THE DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT--EFFECTUATION OF TITLE VI OF THE CIVIL RIGHTS ACT OF 
1964--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
1.1  Purpose.
1.2  Definitions.
1.3  Application of Part 1.
1.4  Discrimination prohibited.
1.5  Assurances required.
1.6  Compliance information.
1.7  Conduct of investigations.
1.8  Procedure for effecting compliance.
1.9  Hearings.
1.10  Effect on other regulations; forms and instructions.

    Authority: 42 U.S.C. 2000d-1 and 3535(d).

    Source: 38 FR 17949, July 5, 1973, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 1.1  Purpose.

    The purpose of this part 1 is to effectuate the provisions of title 
VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (hereafter referred to as the Act) to 
the end that no person in the United States shall, on the ground of 
race, color, or national origin, be excluded from participation in, be 
denied the benefits of, or be otherwise subjected to discrimination 
under any program or activity receiving Federal financial assistance 
from the Department of Housing and Urban Development.


<R05>
Sec. 1.2  Definitions.

    As used in this part 1--
    (a) The term Department means the Department of Housing and Urban 
Development.
    (b) The term Secretary means the Secretary of Housing and Urban 
Development.
    (c) The term responsible Department official means the Secretary or, 
to the extent of any delegation of authority by the Secretary to act 
under this part 1, any other Department official to whom the Secretary 
may hereafter delegate such authority.
    (d) The term United States means the States of the United States, 
the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, American 
Samoa, Guam, Wake Island, the Canal Zone, and the territories and 
possessions of the United States, and the term State means any one of 
the foregoing.
    (e) The term Federal financial assistance includes: (1) Grants, 
loans, and advances of Federal funds, (2) the grant or donation of 
Federal property and interests in property, (3) the detail of Federal 
personnel, (4) the sale and lease of, and the permission to use (on 
other than a casual or transient basis), Federal property or any 
interest in such property without consideration or at a nominal 
consideration, or at a consideration which is reduced for the purpose of 
assisting the recipient, or in recognition of the public interest to be 
served by such sale or lease to the recipient, and (5) any Federal 
agreement, arrangement, or other contract which has as one of its 
purposes the provision of assistance. The term Federal financial 
assistance does not include a contract of insurance or guaranty.
    (f) The term recipient means any State, political subdivision of any 
State, or instrumentality of any State or political subdivision, any 
public or private agency, institution, organization, or other entity, or 
any individual, in any State, to whom Federal financial assistance is 
extended, directly or through another recipient, for any program or 
activity, or who otherwise participates in carrying out such program or 
activity (such as a redeveloper in the Urban Renewal Program), including 
any successor, assign, or transferee thereof, but such term does not 
include

[[Page 8]]

any ultimate beneficiary under any such program or activity.
    (g) The term applicant means one who submits an application, 
contract, request, or plan requiring Department approval as a condition 
to eligibility for Federal financial assistance, and the term 
application means such an application, contract, request, or plan.


<R05>
Sec. 1.3  Application of Part 1.

    This part 1 applies to any program or activity for which Federal 
financial assistance is authorized under a law administered by the 
Department, including any program or activity assisted under the 
statutes listed in appendix A of this part 1. It applies to money paid, 
property transferred, or other Federal financial assistance extended to 
any such program or activity on or after January 3, 1965. This part 1 
does not apply to: (a) Any Federal financial assistance by way of 
insurance or guaranty contracts, (b) money paid, property transferred, 
or other assistance extended to any such program or activity before 
January 3, 1965, (c) any assistance to any person who is the ultimate 
beneficiary under any such program or activity, or (d) any employment 
practice, under any such program or activity, of any employer, 
employment agency, or labor organization, except to the extent described 
in Sec. 1.4(c). The fact that certain financial assistance is not listed 
in appendix A shall not mean, if title VI of the Act is otherwise 
applicable, that such financial assistance is not covered. Other 
financial assistance under statutes now in force or hereinafter enacted 
may be added to this list by notice published in the Federal Register.


<R05>
Sec. 1.4  Discrimination prohibited.

    (a) General. No person in the United States shall, on the ground of 
race, color, or national origin, be excluded from participation in, be 
denied the benefits of, or be otherwise subjected to discrimination 
under any program or activity to which this part 1 applies.
    (b) Specific discriminatory actions prohibited. (1) A recipient 
under any program or activity to which this part 1 applies may not, 
directly or through contractual or other arrangements, on the ground of 
race, color, or national origin:
    (i) Deny a person any housing, accommodations, facilities, services, 
financial aid, or other benefits provided under the program or activity;
    (ii) Provide any housing, accommodations, facilities, services, 
financial aid, or other benefits to a person which are different, or are 
provided in a different manner, from those provided to others under the 
program or activity;
    (iii) Subject a person to segregation or separate treatment in any 
matter related to his receipt of housing, accommodations, facilities, 
services, financial aid, or other benefits under the program or 
activity;
    (iv) Restrict a person in any way in access to such housing, 
accommodations, facilities, services, financial aid, or other benefits, 
or in the enjoyment of any advantage or privilege enjoyed by others in 
connection with such housing, accommodations, facilities, services, 
financial aid, or other benefits under the program or activity;
    (v) Treat a person differently from others in determining whether he 
satisfies any occupancy, admission, enrollment, eligibility, membership, 
or other requirement or condition which persons must meet in order to be 
provided any housing, accommodations, facilities, services, financial 
aid, or other benefits provided under the program or activity;
    (vi) Deny a person opportunity to participate in the program or 
activity through the provision of services or otherwise, or afford him 
an opportunity to do so which is different from that afforded others 
under the program or activity (including the opportunity to participate 
in the program or activity as an employee but only to the extent set 
forth in paragraph (c) of this section).
    (vii) Deny a person the opportunity to participate as a member of a 
planning or advisory body which is an integral part of the program.
    (2)(i) A recipient, in determining the types of housing, 
accommodations, facilities, services, financial aid, or other benefits 
which will be provided under any such program or activity, or the

[[Page 9]]

class of persons to whom, or the situations in which, such housing, 
accommodations, facilities, services, financial aid, or other benefits 
will be provided under any such program or activity, or the class of 
persons to be afforded an opportunity to participate in any such program 
or activity, may not, directly or through contractual or other 
arrangements, utilize criteria or methods of administration which have 
the effect of subjecting persons to discrimination because of their 
race, color, or national origin, or have the effect of defeating or 
substantially impairing accomplishment of the objectives of the program 
or activity as respect to persons of a particular race, color, or 
national origin.
    (ii) A recipient, in operating low-rent housing with Federal 
financial assistance under the United States Housing Act of 1937, as 
amended (42 U.S.C. 1401 et seq.), shall assign eligible applicants to 
dwelling units in accordance with a plan, duly adopted by the recipient 
and approved by the responsible Department official, providing for 
assignment on a community-wide basis in sequence based upon the date and 
time the application is received, the size or type of unit suitable, and 
factors affecting preference or priority established by the recipient's 
regulations, which are not inconsistent with the objectives of title VI 
of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and this part 1. The plan may allow an 
applicant to refuse a tendered vacancy for good cause without losing his 
standing on the list but shall limit the number of refusals without 
cause as prescribed by the responsible Department official.
    (iii) The responsible Department official is authorized to prescribe 
and promulgate plans, exceptions, procedures, and requirements for the 
assignment and reassignment of eligible applicants and tenants 
consistent with the purpose of paragraph (b)(2)(ii) of this section, 
this part 1, and title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, in order to 
effectuate and insure compliance with the requirements imposed 
thereunder.
    (3) In determining the site or location of housing, accommodations, 
or facilities, an applicant or recipient may not make selections with 
the purpose or effect of excluding individuals from, denying them the 
benefits of, or subjecting them to discrimination under any program to 
which this part 1 applies, on the ground of race, color, or national 
origin; or with the purpose or effect of defeating or substantially 
impairing the accomplishment of the objectives of the Act or this part 
1.
    (4) As used in this part 1 the housing, accommodations, facilities, 
services, financial aid, or other benefits provided under a program or 
activity receiving Federal financial assistance shall be deemed to 
include any housing, accommodations, facilities, services, financial 
aid, or other benefits provided in or through a facility provided with 
the aid of Federal financial assistance.
    (5) The enumeration of specific forms of prohibited discrimination 
in paragraphs (b) and (c) of this section does not limit the generality 
of the prohibition in paragraph (a) of this section.
    (6)(i) In administering a program regarding which the recipient has 
previously discriminated against persons on the ground of race, color, 
or national origin, the recipient must take affirmative action to 
overcome the effects of prior discrimination.
    (ii) Even in the absence of such prior discrimination, a recipient 
in administering a program should take affirmative action to overcome 
the effects of conditions which resulted in limiting participation by 
persons of a particular race, color, or national origin.

Where previous discriminatory practice or usage tends, on the ground of 
race, color, or national origin, to exclude individuals from 
participation in, to deny them the benefits of, or to subject them to 
discrimination under any program or activity to which this part 1 
applies, the applicant or recipient has an obligation to take reasonable 
action to remove or overcome the consequences of the prior 
discriminatory practice or usage, and to accomplish the purpose of the 
Act.
    (c) Employment practices. (1) Where a primary objective of the 
Federal financial assistance to a program or activity to which this part 
1 applies is to provide employment, a recipient may not, directly or 
through contractual or other arrangements, subject a person to 
discrimination on the ground of race, color, or national origin in its

[[Page 10]]

employment practices under such program or activity (including 
recruitment or recruitment advertising, employment, layoff, termination, 
upgrading, demotion, transfer, rates of pay or other forms of 
compensation and use of facilities). The requirements applicable to 
construction employment under such program or activity shall be those 
specified in or pursuant to part III of Executive Order 11246 or any 
executive order which supersedes or amends it.
    (2) Where a primary objective of the Federal financial assistance is 
not to provide employment, but discrimination on the ground of race, 
color, or national origin in the employment practices of the recipient 
or other persons subject to this part 1 tends, on the ground of race, 
color, or national origin, to exclude individuals from participation in, 
to deny them the benefits of, or to subject them to discrimination under 
any program to which this part 1 applies, the provisions of this 
paragraph (c) shall apply to the employment practices of the recipient 
or other persons subject to this part 1 to the extent necessary to 
assure equality of opportunity to, and nondiscriminatory treatment of, 
beneficiaries.


<R05>
Sec. 1.5  Assurances required.

    (a) General. (1) Every contract for Federal financial assistance to 
carry out a program or activity to which this part 1 applies, executed 
on or after January 3, 1965, and every application for such Federal 
financial assistance submitted on or after January 3, 1965, shall, as a 
condition to its approval and the extension of any Federal financial 
assistance pursuant to such contract or application, contain or be 
accompanied by an assurance that the program or activity will be 
conducted and the housing, accommodations, facilities, services, 
financial aid, or other benefits to be provided will be operated and 
administered in compliance with all requirements imposed by or pursuant 
to this part 1. In the case of a contract or application where the 
Federal financial assistance is to provide or is in the form of personal 
property or real property or interest therein or structures thereon, the 
assurance shall obligate the recipient or, in the case of a subsequent 
transfer, the transferee, for the period during which the property is 
used for a purpose for which the Federal financial assistance is 
extended or for another purpose involving the provision of similar 
services or benefits, or for as long as the recipient retains ownership 
or possession of the property, whichever is longer. In all other cases 
the assurance shall obligate the recipient for the period during which 
Federal financial assistance is extended pursuant to the contract or 
application. The responsible Department official shall specify the form 
of the foregoing assurance for such program or activity, and the extent 
to which like assurances will be required of subgrantees, contractors 
and subcontractors, transferees, successors in interest, and other 
participants in the program or activity. Any such assurance shall 
include provisions which give the United States a right to seek its 
judicial enforcement.
    (2) In the case of real property, structures or improvements 
thereon, or interests therein, acquired through a program of Federal 
financial assistance the instrument effecting any disposition by the 
recipient of such real property, structures or improvements thereon, or 
interests therein, shall contain a covenant running with the land 
assuring nondiscrimination for the period during which the real property 
is used for a purpose for which the Federal financial assistance is 
extended or for another purpose involving the provision of similar 
services or benefits. In the case where Federal financial assistance is 
provided in the form of a transfer of real property or interests therein 
from the Federal Government, the instrument effecting or recording the 
transfer shall contain such a covenant.
    (3) In program receiving Federal financial assistance in the form, 
or for the acquisition, of real property or an interest in real 
property, to the extent that rights to space on, over, or under any such 
property are included as part of the program receiving such assistance, 
the nondiscrimination requirements of this part 1 shall extend to any 
facility located wholly or in part in such space.
    (b) Preexisting contracts--funds not disbursed. In any case where a 
contract for Federal financial assistance, to carry

[[Page 11]]

out a program or activity to which this part 1 applies, has been 
executed prior to January 3, 1965, and the funds have not been fully 
disbursed by the Department, the responsible Department official shall, 
where necessary to effectuate the purposes of this part 1, require an 
assurance similar to that provided in paragraph (a) of this section as a 
condition to the disbursement of further funds.
    (c) Preexisting contracts--periodic payments. In any case where a 
contract for Federal financial assistance, to carry out a program or 
activity to which this part 1 applies, has been executed prior to 
January 3, 1965, and provides for periodic payments for the continuation 
of the program or activity, the recipient shall, in connection with the 
first application for such periodic payments on or after January 3, 
1965: (1) Submit a statement that the program or activity is being 
conducted in compliance with all requirements imposed by or pursuant to 
this part 1 and (2) provide such methods of administration for the 
program or activity as are found by the responsible Department official 
to give reasonable assurance that the recipient will comply with all 
requirements imposed by or pursuant to this part 1.
    (d) Assurances from institutions. (1) In the case of any application 
for Federal financial assistance to an institution of higher education, 
the assurance required by this section shall extend to admission 
practices and to all other practices relating to the treatment of 
students.
    (2) The assurance required with respect to an institution of higher 
education, hospital, or any other institution, insofar as the assurance 
relates to the institution's practices with respect to admission or 
other treatment of persons as students, patients, or clients of the 
institution or to the opportunity to participate in the provision of 
services or other benefits to such persons, shall be applicable to the 
entire institution unless the applicant establishes, to the satisfaction 
of the responsible Department official, that the institution's practices 
in designated parts or programs of the institution will in no way affect 
its practices in the program of the institution for which Federal 
financial assistance is sought, or the beneficiaries of or participants 
in such program. If in any such case the assistance sought is for the 
construction of a facility or part of a facility, the assurance shall in 
any event extend to the entire facility and to facilities operated in 
connection therewith.
    (e) Elementary and secondary schools. The requirements of this 
section with respect to any elementary or secondary school or school 
system shall be deemed to be satisfied if such school or school system 
(1) is subject to a final order of a court of the United States for the 
desegregation of such school or school system, and provides an assurance 
that it will comply with such order, including any future modification 
of such order, or (2) submits a plan for the desegregation of such 
school or school system which the responsible official of the Department 
of Health and Human Services determines is adequate to accomplish the 
purposes of the Act and this part 1 within the earliest practicable 
time, and provides reasonable assurance that it will carry out such 
plan.

[38 FR 17949, July 5, 1973, as amended at 50 FR 9269, Mar. 7, 1985]


<R05>
Sec. 1.6  Compliance information.

    (a) Cooperation and assistance. The responsible Department official 
and each Department official who by law or delegation has the principal 
responsibility within the Department for the administration of any law 
extending financial assistance subject to this part 1 shall to the 
fullest extent practicable seek the cooperation of recipients in 
obtaining compliance with this part 1 and shall provide assistance and 
guidance to recipients to help them comply voluntarily with this part 1.
    (b) Compliance reports. Each recipient shall keep such records and 
submit to the responsible Department official or his designee timely, 
complete, and accurate compliance reports at such times, and in such 
form and containing such information, as the responsible Department 
official or his designee may determine to be necessary to enable him to 
ascertain whether the recipient has complied or is complying with this 
part 1. In general, recipients should have available for the department 
racial and ethnic data showing

[[Page 12]]

the extent to which members of minority groups are beneficiaries of 
federally assisted programs.
    (c) Access to sources of information. Each recipient shall permit 
access by the responsible Department official or his designee during 
normal business hours to such of its books, records, accounts, and other 
sources of information, and its facilities as may be pertinent to 
ascertain compliance with this part 1. Where any information required of 
a recipient is in the exclusive possession of any other agency, 
institution, or person and this agency, institution, or person shall 
fail or refuse to furnish this information, the recipient shall so 
certify in its report and shall set forth what efforts it has made to 
obtain the information.
    (d) Information to beneficiaries and participants. Each recipient 
shall make available to participants, beneficiaries, and other 
interested persons such information regarding the provisions of this 
part 1 and its applicability to the program or activity under which the 
recipient receives Federal financial assistance, and make such 
information available to them in such manner, as the responsible 
Department official finds necessary to apprise such persons of the 
protections against discrimination assured them by the Act and this part 
1.


<R05>
Sec. 1.7  Conduct of investigations.

    (a) Periodic compliance reviews. The responsible Department official 
or his designee shall from time to time review the practices of 
recipients to determine whether they are complying with this part 1.
    (b) Complaints. Any person who believes himself or any specific 
class of persons to be subjected to discrimination prohibited by this 
part 1 may by himself or by a representative file with the responsible 
Department official or his designee a written complaint. A complaint 
must be filed not later than 180 days from the date of the alleged 
discrimination, unless the time for filing is extended by the 
responsible Department official or his designee.
    (c) Investigations. The responsible Department official or his 
designee shall make a prompt investigation whenever a compliance review, 
report, complaint, or any other information indicates a possible failure 
to comply with this part 1. The investigation should include, where 
appropriate, a review of the pertinent practices and policies of the 
recipient, the circumstances under which the possible noncompliance with 
this part 1 occurred, and other factors relevant to a determination as 
to whether the recipient has failed to comply with this part .
    (d) Resolution of matters. (1) If an investigation pursuant to 
paragraph (c) of this section indicates a failure to comply with this 
part 1, the responsible Department official or his designee will so 
inform the recipient and the matter will be resolved by informal means 
whenever possible. If it has been determined that the matter cannot be 
resolved by informal means, action will be taken as provided for in 
Sec. 1.8.
    (2) If an investigation does not warrant action pursuant to 
paragraph (d)(1) of this section the responsible Department official or 
his designee will so inform the recipient and the complainant, if any, 
in writing.
    (e) Intimidatory or retaliatory acts prohibited. No recipient or 
other person shall intimidate, threaten, coerce, or discriminate against 
any person for the purpose of interfering with any right or privilege 
secured by title VI of the Act or this part 1, or because he has made a 
complaint, testified, assisted, or participated in any manner in an 
investigation, proceeding, or hearing under this part. The identity of 
complainants shall be kept confidential except to the extent necessary 
to carry out the purposes of this part, including the conduct of any 
investigation, hearing, or judicial proceeding arising thereunder.


<R05>
Sec. 1.8  Procedure for effecting compliance.

    (a) General. If there appears to be a failure or threatened failure 
to comply with this part 1, and if the noncompliance or threatened 
noncompliance cannot be corrected by informal means, compliance with 
this part 1 may be effected by the suspension or termination of or 
refusal to grant or to continue Federal financial assistance, or by any 
other means authorized by law. Such other means may include, but are not 
limited to: (1) A reference to the

[[Page 13]]

Department of Justice with a recommendation that appropriate proceedings 
be brought to enforce any rights of the United States under any law of 
the United States (including other titles of the Act), or any assurance 
or other contractual undertaking, and (2) any applicable proceeding 
under State or local law.
    (b) Noncompliance with Sec. 1.5. If an applicant fails or refuses to 
furnish an assurance required under Sec. 1.5 or otherwise fails or 
refuses to comply with the requirement imposed by or pursuant to that 
section, Federal financial assistance may be refused in accordance with 
the procedures of paragraph (c) of this section. The Department shall 
not be required to provide assistance in such a case during the pendency 
of the administrative proceedings under such paragraph, except that the 
Department shall continue assistance during the pendency of such 
proceedings where such assistance is due and payable pursuant to a 
contract therefor approved prior to January 3, 1965.
    (c) Termination of or refusal to grant or to continue Federal 
financial assistance. No order suspending, terminating, or refusing to 
grant or continue Federal financial assistance shall become effective 
until (1) the responsible Department official has advised the applicant 
or recipient of his failure to comply and has determined that compliance 
cannot be secured by voluntary means, (2) there has been an express 
finding on the record, after opportunity for hearing, of a failure by 
the applicant or recipient to comply with a requirement imposed by or 
pursuant to this part 1, (3) the action has been approved by the 
Secretary, and (4) the expiration of 30 days after the Secretary has 
filed with the committees of the House and Senate having legislative 
jurisdiction over the program or activity involved a full written report 
of the circumstances and the grounds for such action. Any action to 
suspend or terminate or to refuse to grant or to continue Federal 
financial assistance shall be limited to the particular political 
entity, or part thereof, or other recipient as to whom such a finding 
has been made and shall be limited in its effect to the particular 
program, or part thereof, in which such noncompliance has been so found.
    (d) Other means authorized by law. No action to effect compliance by 
any other means authorized by law shall be taken until (1) the 
responsible Department official has determined that compliance cannot be 
secured by voluntary means, (2) the recipient or other person has been 
notified of its failure to comply and of the action to be taken to 
effect compliance, and (3) the expiration of at least 10 days from the 
mailing of such notice to the applicant or recipient. During this period 
of at least 10 days additional efforts shall be made to persuade the 
applicant or recipient to comply with this part 1 and to take such 
corrective action as may be appropriate.


<R05>
Sec. 1.9  Hearings.

    (a) Opportunity for hearing. Whenever an opportunity for a hearing 
is required by Sec. 1.8(c), reasonable notice shall be given by 
registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the affected 
applicant or recipient. This notice shall advise the applicant or 
recipient of the action proposed to be taken, the specific provision 
under which the proposed action against it is to be taken, and the 
matters of fact or law asserted as the basis for this action, and 
either:
    (1) Fix a date not less than 20 days after the date of such notice 
within which the applicant or recipient may request of the responsible 
Department official that the matter be scheduled for hearing, or (2) 
advise the applicant or recipient that the matter in question has been 
set down for hearing at a stated time and place. The time and place so 
fixed shall be reasonable and shall be subject to change for cause. The 
complainant, if any, shall be advised of the time and place of the 
hearing. An applicant or recipient may waive a hearing and submit 
written information and argument for the record. The failure of an 
applicant or recipient to request a hearing under this paragraph (a) or 
to appear at a hearing for which a date has been set shall be deemed to 
be a waiver of the right to a hearing under section 602 of the Act and 
Sec. 1.8(c) and consent to the making

[[Page 14]]

of a decision on the basis of such information as is available.
    (b) Hearing procedures. Hearings shall be conducted in accordance 
with 24 CFR part 180.

38 FR 17949, July 5, 1973, as amended at 61 FR 52217, Oct. 4, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 1.10  Effect on other regulations; forms and instructions.

    (a) Effect on other regulations. All regulations, orders, or like 
directions heretofore issued by any officer of the Department which 
impose requirements designed to prohibit any discrimination against 
persons on the ground of race, color, or national origin under any 
program or activity to which this part applies, and which authorize the 
suspension or termination of or refusal to grant or to continue Federal 
financial assistance to any applicant or recipient for failure to comply 
with such requirements, are hereby superseded to the extent that such 
discrimination is prohibited by this part, except that nothing in this 
part shall be deemed to relieve any person of any obligation assumed or 
imposed under any such superseded regulation, order, instruction, or 
like direction prior to January 3, 1965. Nothing in this part, however, 
shall be deemed to supersede any of the following (including future 
amendments thereof):
    (1) Executive Orders 11246 and 11375 and regulations issued 
thereunder, or
    (2) Executive Order 11063 and regulations issued thereunder, or any 
other order, regulations or instructions, insofar as such order, 
regulations, or instructions, prohibit discrimination on the ground of 
race, color, or national origin in any program or activity or situation 
to which this part is inapplicable, or prohibit discrimination on any 
other ground.
    (b) Forms and instructions. The responsible Department official 
shall assure that forms and detailed instructions and procedures for 
effectuating this part are issued and promptly made available to 
interested persons.
    (c) Supervision and coordination. The Secretary may from time to 
time assign to officials of the Department, or to officials of other 
departments or agencies of the Government with the consent of such 
department or agency, responsibilities in connection with the 
effectuation of the purposes of title VI of the Act and this part (other 
than responsibility for final decision as provided in Sec. 1.10), 
including the achievement of effective coordination and maximum 
uniformity within the Department and within the Executive Branch of the 
Government in the application of title VI and this part to similar 
programs or activities and in similar situations. Any action taken, 
determination made, or requirement imposed by an official of another 
department or agency acting pursuant to an assignment of responsibility 
under this paragraph shall have the same effect as though such action 
had been taken by the responsible official of this Department.

[38 FR 17949, July 5, 1973. Redesignated at 61 FR 52217, Oct. 4, 1996]


<R03>
PART 4--HUD REFORM ACT--Table of Contents

<R05>


      Subpart A--Accountability in the Provision of HUD Assistance

Sec.
4.1  Purpose.
4.3  Definitions.
4.5  Notice and documentation of assistance subject to section 102(a).
4.7  Notice of funding decisions.
4.9  Disclosure requirements for assistance subject to section 102(b).
4.11  Updating of disclosure.
4.13  Limitation of assistance subject to section 102(d).

    Subpart B--Prohibition of Advance Disclosure of Funding Decisions

4.20  Purpose.
4.22  Definitions.
4.24  Scope.
4.26  Permissible and impermissible disclosures.
4.28  Civil penalties.
4.30  Procedure upon discovery of a violation.
4.32  Investigation by Office of Inspector General.
4.34  Review of Inspector General's report by the Ethics Law Division.
4.36  Action by the Ethics Law Division.
4.38  Administrative remedies.

    Authority: 42 U.S.C. 3535(d), 3537a, 3545.

    Source: 61 FR 14449, Apr. 1, 1996, unless otherwise noted.

[[Page 15]]


<R04>
      Subpart A--Accountability in the Provision of HUD Assistance


<R05>
Sec. 4.1  Purpose.

    The provisions of this subpart A are authorized under section 102 of 
the Department of Housing and Urban Development Reform Act of 1989 (Pub. 
L. 101-235, approved December 15, 1989) (42 U.S.C. 3537a) (hereinafter, 
Section 102). Both the provisions of Section 102 and this subpart A 
apply for the purposes of Section 102. Section 102 contains a number of 
provisions designed to ensure greater accountability and integrity in 
the way in which the Department makes assistance available under certain 
of its programs.


<R05>
Sec. 4.3  Definitions.

    Applicant includes a person whose application for assistance must be 
submitted to HUD for any purpose including approval, environmental 
review, or rent determination.
    Assistance under any program or discretionary fund administered by 
the Secretary is subject to Section 102(a), and means any assistance, 
under any program administered by the Department, that provides by 
statute, regulation or otherwise for the competitive distribution of 
funding.
    Assistance within the jurisdiction of the Department is subject to 
Section 102(b), and means any contract, grant, loan, cooperative 
agreement, or other form of assistance, including the insurance or 
guarantee of a loan or mortgage, that is provided with respect to a 
specific project or activity under a program administered by the 
Department, whether or not it is awarded through a competitive process.
    Assistance within the jurisdiction of the Department to any housing 
project is subject to Section 102(d), and means:
    (1) Assistance which is provided directly by HUD to any person or 
entity, but not to subrecipients. It includes assistance for the 
acquisition, rehabilitation, operation conversion, modernization, 
renovation, or demolition of any property containing five or more 
dwelling units that is to be used primarily for residential purposes. It 
includes assistance to independent group residences, board and care 
facilities, group homes and transitional housing but does not include 
primarily nonresidential facilities such as intermediate care 
facilities, nursing homes and hospitals. It also includes any change 
requested by a recipient in the amount of assistance previously 
provided, except changes resulting from annual adjustments in Section 8 
rents under Section 8(c)(2)(A) of the United States Housing Act of 1937 
(42 U.S.C. 1437f);
    (2) Assistance to residential rental property receiving a tax credit 
under Federal, State or local law.
    (3) For purposes of this definition, assistance includes assistance 
resulting from annual adjustments in Section 8 rents under Section 
8(c)(2)(A) of the United States Housing Act of 1937, unless the initial 
assistance was made available before April 15, 1991, and no other 
assistance subject to this subpart A was made available on or after that 
date.
    Housing project means: (1) Property containing five or more dwelling 
units that is to be used for primarily residential purposes, including 
(but not limited to) living arrangements such as independent group 
residences, board and care facilities, group homes, and transitional 
housing, but excluding facilities that provide primarily non-residential 
services, such as intermediate care facilities, nursing homes, and 
hospitals.
    (2) Residential rental property receiving a tax credit under 
Federal, State, or local law.
    Interested party means any person involved in the application for 
assistance, or in the planning, development or implementation of the 
project or activity for which assistance is sought and any other person 
who has a pecuniary interest exceeding the lower of $50,000 or 10 
percent in the project or activity for which assistance is sought.
    Selection criteria includes, in addition to any objective measures 
of housing and other need, project merit, or efficient use of resources, 
the weight or relative importance of each published selection criterion 
as well as any other factors that may affect the selection of 
recipients.

[[Page 16]]


<R05>
Sec. 4.5  Notice and documentation of assistance subject to section 102(a).

    (a) Notice. Before the Department solicits an application for 
assistance subject to Section 102(a), it will publish a Notice in the 
Federal Register describing application procedures. Not less than 30 
calendar days before the deadline by which applications must be 
submitted, the Department will publish selection criteria in the Federal 
Register.
    (b) Documentation of decisions. HUD will make available for public 
inspection, for at least five (5) years, and beginning not less than 30 
calendars days after it provides the assistance, all documentation and 
other information regarding the basis for the funding decision with 
respect to each application submitted to HUD for assistance. HUD will 
also make available any written indication of support that it received 
from any applicant. Recipients of HUD assistance must ensure, in 
accordance with HUD guidance, the public availability of similar 
information submitted by subrecipients of HUD assistance.


<R05>
Sec. 4.7  Notice of funding decisions.

    HUD will publish a Notice in the Federal Register at least quarterly 
to notify the public of all decisions made by the Department to provide:
    (a) Assistance subject to Section 102(a); and
    (b) Assistance that is provided through grants or cooperative 
agreements on a discretionary (non-formula, non-demand) basis, but that 
is not provided on the basis of a competition.


<R05>
Sec. 4.9  Disclosure requirements for assistance subject to section 102(b).

    (a) Receipt and reasonable expectation of receipt. (1) In 
determining the threshold of applicability of Section 102(b), an 
applicant will be deemed to have received or to have a reasonable 
expectation of receiving:
    (i) The total amount of assistance received during the Federal 
fiscal year during which the application was submitted;
    (ii) The total amount of assistance requested for the fiscal year in 
which any pending application, including the current application, was 
submitted; and
    (iii) For the fiscal year described in paragraph (a)(1)(ii) of this 
section, the total amount of assistance from the Department or any other 
entity that is likely to be made available on a formula basis or in the 
form of program income as defined in 24 CFR part 85.
    (2) In the case of assistance that will be provided pursuant to 
contract over a period of time (such as project-based assistance under 
Section 8 of the United States Housing Act of 1937), all amounts that 
are to be provided over the term of the contract, irrespective of when 
they are to be received.
    (b) Content of disclosure. Applicants that receive or can reasonably 
be expected to receive, as defined in paragraph (a) of this section, an 
aggregate amount of assistance that is in excess of $200,000 must 
disclose the following information:
    (1) Other governmental assistance that is or is expected to be made 
available, based upon a reasonable assessment of the circumstances, with 
respect to the project or activities for which the assistance is sought;
    (2) The name and pecuniary interest of any interested party; and
    (3) A report of the expected sources and uses of funds for the 
project or activity which is the subject of the application, including 
governmental and non-governmental sources of funds and private capital 
resulting from tax benefits.
    (c) In the case of mortgage insurance under 24 CFR subtitle B, 
chapter II, the mortgagor is responsible for making the disclosures 
required under Section 102(b) and this section, and the mortgagee is 
responsible for furnishing the mortgagor's disclosures to the 
Department.

(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 
2510-0011)


<R05>
Sec. 4.11  Updating of disclosure.

    (a) During the period in which an application for assistance covered 
under Section 102(b) is pending, or in which such assistance is being 
provided, the applicant must report to the Department, or to the State 
or unit of general local government, as appropriate:

[[Page 17]]

    (1) Any information referred to in Section 102(b) that the applicant 
should have disclosed with respect to the application, but did not 
disclose;
    (2) Any information referred to in Section 102(b) that initially 
arose after the time for making disclosures under that subsection, 
including the name and pecuniary interest of any person who did not have 
a pecuniary interest in the project or activity that exceeded the 
threshold in Section 102(b) at the time of the application, but that 
subsequently exceeded the threshold.
    (b) With regard to changes in information that was disclosed under 
Sections 102(b) or 102(c):
    (1) For programs administered by the Assistant Secretary for 
Community Planning and Development:
    (i) Any change in other government assistance covered by Section 
102(b) that exceeds the amount of all assistance that was previously 
disclosed by the lesser of $250,000 or 10 percent of the assistance;
    (ii) Any change in the expected sources or uses of funds that exceed 
the amount of all previously disclosed sources or uses by the lesser of 
$250,000 or 10 percent of previously disclosed sources;
    (2) For all other programs:
    (i) Any change in other government assistance under Section 
102(b)(1) that exceeds the amount of assistance that was previously 
disclosed;
    (ii) Any change in the pecuniary interest of any person under 
Section 102(b)(2) that exceeds the amount of all previously disclosed 
interests by the lesser of $50,000 or 10 percent of such interest;
    (iii) For all projects receiving a tax credit under Federal, Sate or 
local law, any change in the expected sources or uses of funds that were 
previously disclosed;
    (iv) For all other projects:
    (A) Any change in the expected source of funds from a single source 
that exceeds the lesser of the amount previously disclosed for that 
source of funds by $250,000 or 10 percent of the funds previously 
disclosed for that source;
    (B) Any change in the expected sources of funds from all sources 
previously disclosed that exceeds the lesser of $250,000 or 10 percent 
of the amounts previously disclosed from all sources of funds;
    (C) Any change in a single expected use of funds that exceeds the 
lesser of $250,000 or 10 percent of the previously disclosed use;
    (D) Any change in the use of all funds that exceeds the lesser of 
$250,000 or 10 percent of the previously disclosed uses for all funds.
    (c) Period of coverage. For purposes of updating of Section 102(c), 
an application for assistance will be considered to be pending from the 
time the application is submitted until the Department communicates its 
decision with respect to the selection of the applicant.

(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 
2510-0011)


<R05>
Sec. 4.13  Limitation of assistance subject to section 102(d).

    (a) In making the certification for assistance subject to Section 
102(d), the Secretary will consider the aggregate amount of assistance 
from the Department and from other sources that is necessary to ensure 
the feasibility of the assisted activity. The Secretary will take into 
account all factors relevant to feasibility, which may include, but are 
not limited to, past rates of returns for owners, sponsors, and 
investors; the long-term needs of the project and its tenants; and the 
usual and customary fees charged in carrying out the assisted activity.
    (b) If the Department determines that the aggregate of assistance 
within the jurisdiction of the Department to a housing project from the 
Department and from other governmental sources exceeds the amount that 
the Secretary determines is necessary to make the assisted activity 
feasible, the Department will consider all options available to enable 
it to make the required certification, including reductions in the 
amount of Section 8 subsidies. The Department also may impose a dollar-
for-dollar, or equivalent, reduction in the amount of HUD assistance to 
offset the amount of other government assistance. In grant programs, 
this could result in a reduction of any grant amounts not yet drawn 
down. The Department may make these adjustments immediately, or in 
conjunction with

[[Page 18]]

servicing actions anticipated to occur in the near future (e.g., in 
conjunction with the next annual adjustment of Section 8 rents).
    (c) If an applicant does not meet the $200,000 disclosure 
requirement in Sec. 4.7(b), an applicant must certify whether there is, 
or is expected to be made, available with respect to the housing project 
any other governmental assistance. The Department may also require any 
applicant subject to this subpart A to submit such a certification in 
conjunction with the Department's processing of any subsequent servicing 
action on that project. If there is other government assistance for 
purposes of the two preceding sentences, the applicant must submit such 
information as the Department deems necessary to make the certification 
and subsequent adjustments under Section 102(d).
    (d) The certification under Section 102(d) shall be retained in the 
official file for the housing project.


<R04>
    Subpart B--Prohibition of Advance Disclosure of Funding Decisions


<R05>
Sec. 4.20  Purpose.

    The provisions of this subpart B are authorized under section 103 of 
the Department of Housing and Urban Development Reform Act of 1989 (Pub. 
L. 101-235, approved December 15, 1989) (42 U.S.C. 3537a) (hereinafter, 
Section 103). Both the provisions of Section 103 and this subpart B 
apply for the purposes of Section 103. Section 103 proscribes direct or 
indirect communication of certain information during the selection 
process by HUD employees to persons within or outside of the Department 
who are not authorized to receive that information. The purpose of the 
proscription is to preclude giving an unfair advantage to applicants who 
would receive information not available to other applicants or to the 
public. Section 103 also authorizes the Department to impose a civil 
money penalty on a HUD employee who knowingly discloses protected 
information, if such a violation of Section 103 is material, and 
authorizes the Department to sanction the person who received 
information improperly by, among other things, denying assistance to 
that person.


<R05>
Sec. 4.22  Definitions.

    Application means a written request for assistance regardless of 
whether the request is in proper form or format.
    Assistance does not include any contract (e.g., a procurement 
contract) that is subject to the Federal Acquisition Regulation (FAR) 
(48 CFR ch. 1).
    Disclose means providing information directly or indirectly to a 
person through any means of communication.
    Employee includes persons employed on a full-time, part-time, or 
temporary basis, and special government employees as defined in 18 
U.S.C. 202. The term applies whether or not the employee is denoted as 
an officer of the Department. ``Employee'' is to be construed broadly to 
include persons who are retained on a contractual or consultative basis 
under an Office of Human Resources appointment. However, ``employee'' 
does not include an independent contractor, e.g., a firm or individual 
working under the authority of a procurement contract.
    Material or materially means in some influential or substantial 
respect or having to do more with substance than with form.
    Person means an individual, corporation, company, association, 
authority, firm, partnership, society, State, local government, or any 
other organization or group of people.
    Selection process means the period with respect to a selection for 
assistance that begins when the HUD official responsible for awarding 
the assistance involved, or his or her designee, makes a written request 
(which includes the selection criteria to be used in providing the 
assistance) to the Office of General Counsel (OGC) to prepare the NOFA, 
solicitation, or request for applications for assistance for publication 
in the Federal Register. The period includes the evaluation of 
applications, and concludes with the announcement of the selection of 
recipients of assistance.


<R05>
Sec. 4.24  Scope.

    (a) Coverage. The prohibitions against improper disclosure of 
covered selection information apply to any person

[[Page 19]]

who is an employee of the Department. In addition, the Department will 
require any other person who participates at the invitation of the 
Department in the selection process to sign a certification that he or 
she will be bound by the provisions of this part.
    (b) Applicability. The prohibitions contained in this part apply to 
conduct occurring on or after June 12, 1991.


<R05>
Sec. 4.26  Permissible and impermissible disclosures.

    (a) Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 103, an employee is 
permitted to disclose information during the selection process with 
respect to:
    (1) The requirements of a HUD program or programs, including 
unpublished policy statements and the provision of technical assistance 
concerning program requirements, provided that the requirements or 
statements are disclosed on a uniform basis to any applicant or 
potential applicant. For purposes of this part, the term ``technical 
assistance'' includes such activities as explaining and responding to 
questions about program regulations, defining terms in an application 
package, and providing other forms of technical guidance that may be 
described in a NOFA. The term ``technical assistance'' also includes 
identification of those parts of an application that need substantive 
improvement, but this term does not include advising the applicant how 
to make those improvements.
    (2) The dates by which particular decisions in the selection process 
will be made;
    (3) Any information which has been published in the Federal Register 
in a NOFA or otherwise;
    (4) Any information which has been made public through means other 
than the Federal Register;
    (5) An official audit, inquiry or investigation, if the disclosure 
is made to an auditor or investigator authorized by the HUD Inspector 
General to conduct the audit or investigation;
    (6) Legal activities, including litigation, if the disclosure is 
made to an attorney who is representing or is otherwise responsible to 
the Department in connection with the activities; or
    (7) Procedures that are required to be performed to process an 
application, e.g., environmental or budget reviews, and technical 
assistance from experts in fields who are regularly employed by other 
government agencies, provided that the agency with which the expert is 
employed or associated is not an applicant for HUD assistance during the 
pending funding cycle.
    (b) An authorized employee, during the selection process, may 
contact an applicant for the purpose of:
    (1) Communication of the applicant's failure to qualify, after a 
preliminary review for eligibility and completeness with respect to his 
or her application, and the reasons for the failure to qualify, or the 
fact of the applicant's failure to be determined to be technically 
acceptable after a full review; or
    (2) Clarification of the terms of the applicant's application. A 
clarification, for the purpose of this paragraph (b), may include a 
request for additional information consistent with regulatory 
requirements.
    (c) Prohibition of advance disclosure of funding decisions. During 
the selection process an employee shall not knowingly disclose any 
covered selection information regarding the selection process to any 
person other than an employee authorized to receive that information.
    (1) The following disclosures of information are, at any time during 
the selection process, a violation of Section 103:
    (i) Information regarding any applicant's relative standing;
    (ii) The amount of assistance requested by any applicant;
    (iii) Any information contained in an application;
    (2) The following disclosures of information, before the deadline 
for the submission of applications, shall be a violation of Section 103:
    (i) The identity of any applicant; and
    (ii) The number of applicants.


<R05>
Sec. 4.28  Civil penalties.

    Whenever any employee knowingly and materially violates the 
prohibition in Section 103, the Department may impose a civil money 
penalty on the employee in accordance with the provisions of 24 CFR part 
30.

[[Page 20]]


<R05>
Sec. 4.30  Procedure upon discovery of a violation.

    (a) In general. When an alleged violation of Section 103 or this 
subpart B comes to the attention of any person, including an employee, 
he or she may either:
    (1) Contact the HUD Ethics Law Division to provide information about 
the alleged violation; or
    (2) Contact the HUD Office of Inspector General to request an 
inquiry or investigation into the matter.
    (b) Ethics Law Division. When the Ethics Law Division receives 
information concerning an alleged violation of Section 103, it shall 
refer the matter to the Inspector General stating the facts of the 
alleged violation and requesting that the Inspector General make an 
inquiry or investigation into the matter.
    (c) Inspector General. When the Inspector General receives 
information concerning an alleged violation of Section 103 or this 
subpart B, he or she shall notify the Ethics Law Division when the 
Inspector General begins an inquiry or investigation into the matter.
    (d) Protection of employee complainants. (1) No official of the 
Ethics Law Division, after receipt of information from an employee 
stating the facts of an alleged violation of this part, shall disclose 
the identity of the employee without the consent of that employee. The 
Inspector General, after receipt of information stating the facts of an 
alleged violation of this part, shall not disclose the identity of the 
employee who provided the information without the consent of that 
employee, unless the Inspector General determines that disclosure of the 
employee's identity is unavoidable during the course of an 
investigation. However, any employee who knowingly reports a false 
alleged violation of this part is not so protected and may be subject to 
disciplinary action.
    (2) Any employee who has authority to take, direct others to take, 
recommend or approve a personnel action is prohibited from threatening, 
taking, failing to take, recommending, or approving any personnel action 
as reprisal against another employee for providing information to 
investigating officials.


<R05>
Sec. 4.32  Investigation by Office of Inspector General.

    The Office of Inspector General shall review every alleged violation 
of Section 103. If after a review the Office of Inspector General 
determines that further investigation is not warranted, it shall notify 
the Ethics Law Division of that determination. If, after a review, the 
Office of Inspector General determines that additional investigation is 
warranted, it shall conduct the investigation and upon completion issue 
a report of the investigation to the Ethics Law Division as to each 
alleged violation.


<R05>
Sec. 4.34  Review of Inspector General's report by the Ethics Law Division.

    After receipt of the Inspector General's report, the Ethics Law 
Division shall review the facts and circumstances of the alleged 
violations. In addition, the Ethics Law Division may:
    (a) Return the report to the Inspector General with a request for 
further investigation;
    (b) Discuss the violation with the employee alleged to have 
committed the violation; or
    (c) Interview any other person, including employees who it believes 
will be helpful in furnishing information relevant to the inquiry.


<R05>
Sec. 4.36  Action by the Ethics Law Division.

    (a) After review of the Inspector General's report, the Ethics Law 
Division shall determine whether or not there is sufficient information 
providing a reasonable basis to believe that a violation of Section 103 
or this subpart B has occurred.
    (b) If the Ethics Law Division determines that there is no 
reasonable basis to believe that a violation of Section 103 or this 
subpart B has occurred, it shall close the matter and send its 
determination to the Office of Inspector General.
    (c) If the Ethics Law Division determines that there is sufficient 
information to provide a reasonable basis to believe that a violation of 
Section 103 or this subpart B has occurred, it shall:
    (1) Send its determination to the Office of Inspector General; and

[[Page 21]]

    (2) Refer the matter to the appropriate official for review as to 
whether to impose a civil money penalty in accordance with 24 CFR part 
30; provided, however, that the Ethics Law Division shall not make a 
civil money penalty recommendation unless it finds the violation to have 
been knowing and material. The decision to impose a civil money penalty 
in a particular matter may be made only upon referral from the Ethics 
Law Division.
    (d) In determining whether a violation is material, the Ethics Law 
Division shall consider the following factors, as applicable:
    (1) The content of the disclosure and its significance to the person 
to whom the disclosure was made;
    (2) The time during the selection process when the disclosure was 
made;
    (3) The person to whom the disclosure was made;
    (4) The dollar amount of assistance requested by the person to whom 
the disclosure was made;
    (5) The dollar amount of assistance available for a given 
competition or program;
    (6) The benefit, if any, received or expected by the employee, the 
employee's relatives or friends, or any other person with whom the 
employee is affiliated;
    (7) The potential injury to the Department.
    (e) If the Ethics Law Division determines that there is sufficient 
information to provide a reasonable basis to believe that a violation of 
Section 103 or this subpart B has occurred, it may, in addition to 
referring the matter under 24 CFR part 30, refer the matter to an 
appropriate HUD official for consideration of any other available 
disciplinary action. Any referral authorized by this paragraph (e) shall 
be reported to the Inspector General and may be reported to the 
employee's supervisor.


<R05>
Sec. 4.38  Administrative remedies.

    (a) If the Department receives or obtains information providing a 
reasonable basis to believe that a violation of Section 103 has 
occurred, the Department may impose a sanction, as determined to be 
appropriate, upon an applicant for or a recipient of assistance who has 
received covered selection information.
    (b) In determining whether a sanction is appropriate and if so which 
sanction or sanctions should be sought, the Secretary shall give 
consideration to the applicant's conduct with respect to the violation. 
In so doing, the Secretary shall consider the factors listed at 
Sec. 4.36(d), as well as any history of prior violations in any HUD 
program, the benefits received or expected, deterrence of future 
violations and the extent of any complicity in the violation.
    (c) The Secretary may impose a sanction authorized by this section 
whether or not the Ethics Law Division refers a case under 24 CFR part 
30, and whether or not a civil money penalty is imposed.


<R03>
PART 5--GENERAL HUD PROGRAM REQUIREMENTS; WAIVERS--Table of Contents

<R05>


 Subpart A--Generally Applicable Definitions and Federal Requirements; 
                                 Waivers

Sec.
5.100  Definitions.
5.105  Other Federal requirements.
5.107  Audit requirements for non-profit organizations.
5.110  Waivers.

 Subpart B--Disclosure and Verification of Social Security Numbers and 
    Employer Identification Numbers; Procedures for Obtaining Income 
                               Information

5.210  Purpose, applicability, and Federal preemption.
5.212  Compliance with the Privacy Act and other requirements.
5.214  Definitions.

  Disclosure and Verification of Social Security Numbers and Employer 
 Identification Numbers for Applicants and Participants in Certain HUD 
                                Programs

5.216  Disclosure and verification of Social Security and Employer 
          Identification Numbers.
5.218  Penalties for failing to disclose and verify Social Security and 
          Employer Identification Numbers.

    Procedures for Obtaining Income Information About Applicants and 
                              Participants

5.230  Consent by assistance applicants and participants.
5.232  Penalties for failing to sign consent forms.

[[Page 22]]

5.234  Requests for information from SWICAs and Federal agencies; 
          restrictions on use.
5.236  Procedures for termination, denial, suspension, or reduction of 
          assistance based on information obtained from a SWICA or 
          Federal agency.
5.238  Criminal and civil penalties.

  Subpart C--Pet Ownership for the Elderly or Persons With Disabilities

                          General Requirements

5.300  Purpose.
5.303  Exclusion for animals that assist persons with disabilities.
5.306  Definitions.
5.309  Prohibition against discrimination.
5.312  Notice to tenants.
5.315  Content of pet rules: general requirements.
5.318  Discretionary pet rules.
5.321  Lease provisions.
5.324  Implementation of lease provisions.
5.327  Nuisance or threat to health or safety.

             Pet Ownership Requirements for Housing Programs

5.350  Mandatory pet rules for housing programs.
5.353  Housing programs: Procedure for development of pet rules.
5.356  Housing programs: Pet rule violation procedures.
5.359  Housing programs: Rejection of units by applicants for tenancy.
5.360  Housing programs: Additional lease provisions.
5.363  Housing programs: Protection of the pet.

         Pet Ownership Requirements for Public Housing Programs

5.380  Public housing programs: Procedure for development of pet rules.

  Subpart D--Definitions and Other General Requirements for Assistance 
               Under the United States Housing Act of 1937

5.400  Applicability.
5.403  Definitions.
5.405  Basic eligibility; preference over single persons; and housing 
          assistance limitation for single persons.
5.410  Selection preferences.
5.415  Federal preferences: general.
5.420  Federal preference: involuntary displacement.
5.425  Federal preference: substandard housing.
5.430  Federal preference: rent burden.

          Subpart E--Restrictions on Assistance to Noncitizens

5.500  Applicability.
5.501  PHA election whether to comply with this subpart.
5.502  Requirements concerning documents.
5.504  Definitions.
5.506  General provisions.
5.508  Submission of evidence of citizenship or eligible immigration 
          status.
5.510  Documents of eligible immigration status.
5.512  Verification of eligible immigration status.
5.514  Delay, denial, reduction or termination of assistance.
5.516  Availability of preservation assistance to mixed families and 
          other families.
5.518  Types of preservation assistance available to mixed families and 
          other families.
5.520  Proration of assistance.
5.522  Prohibition of assistance to noncitizen students.
5.524  Compliance with nondiscrimination requirements.
5.526  Protection from liability for responsible entities and State and 
          local government agencies and officials.
5.528  Liability of ineligible tenants for reimbursement of benefits.

  Subpart F--Income Limits, Annual Income, Adjusted Income, Rent, and 
       Examinations for the Public Housing and Section 8 Programs

5.601  Purpose and applicability.
5.603  Definitions.
5.605  Overall income eligibility for assistance.
5.607  Income limits for admission.
5.609  Annual income.
5.611  Adjusted income.
5.613  Total tenant payment.
5.615  Utility reimbursements.
5.617  Reexamination and verification.

   Subpart G--Physical Condition Standards and Inspection Requirements

5.701  Applicability.
5.703  Physical condition standards for HUD housing that is decent, 
          safe, sanitary and in good repair (DSS/GR).
5.705  Uniform physical inspection requirements.

            Subpart H--Uniform Financial Reporting Standards

5.801  Uniform financial reporting standards.

    Authority: 42 U.S.C. 3535(d), unless otherwise noted.

[[Page 23]]


    Source: 61 FR 5202, Feb. 9, 1996, unless otherwise noted.


<R04>
 Subpart A--Generally Applicable Definitions and Federal Requirements; 
                                 Waivers


<R05>
Sec. 5.100  Definitions.

    The following definitions apply as noted in the respective program 
regulations:
    1937 Act means the United States Housing Act of 1937 (42 U.S.C. 1437 
et seq.)
    ADA means the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (42 U.S.C. 
12101 et seq.).
    ALJ means an administrative law judge appointed to HUD pursuant to 5 
U.S.C. 3105 or detailed to HUD pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 3344.
    Department means the Department of Housing and Urban Development.
    Elderly Person means an individual who is at least 62 years of age.
    Fair Housing Act means title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968, 
as amended by the Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988 (42 U.S.C. 3601 et 
seq.).
    Fair Market Rent (FMR) means the rent that would be required to be 
paid in the particular housing market area in order to obtain privately 
owned, decent, safe and sanitary rental housing of modest (non-luxury) 
nature with suitable amenities. This Fair Market Rent includes utilities 
(except telephone). Separate Fair Market Rents will be established by 
HUD for dwelling units of varying sizes (number of bedrooms) and will be 
published in the Federal Register in accordance with part 888 of this 
title.
    General Counsel means the General Counsel of HUD.
    Grantee means the person or legal entity to which a grant is awarded 
and that is accountable for the use of the funds provided.
    Housing agency (HA) means a State, county, municipality or other 
governmental entity or public body (or agency or instrumentality 
thereof) authorized to engage in or assist in the development or 
operation of low-income housing. (``PHA'' and ``HA'' mean the same 
thing.)
    HUD means the same as Department.
    MSA means a metropolitan statistical area.
    NAHA means the Cranston-Gonzalez National Affordable Housing Act (42 
U.S.C. 12701 et seq.).
    NEPA means the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (42 U.S.C. 
4321).
    NOFA means Notice of Funding Availability.
    OMB means the Office of Management and Budget.
    Organizational Unit means the jurisdictional area of each Assistant 
Secretary, and each office head or field administrator reporting 
directly to the Secretary.
    Public Housing Agency (PHA) means any State, county, municipality, 
or other governmental entity or public body, or agency or 
instrumentality of these entities, that is authorized to engage or 
assist in the development or operation of low-income housing under the 
1937 Act.
    Section 8 means section 8 of the United States Housing Act of 1937 
(42 U.S.C. 1437f).
    Secretary means the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development.
    URA means the Uniform Relocation Assistance and Real Property 
Acquisition Policies Act of 1970 (42 U.S.C. 4201-4655).

[61 FR 5202, Feb. 9, 1996, as amended at 63 FR 23853, Apr. 30, 1998]


<R05>
Sec. 5.105  Other Federal requirements.

    The following Federal requirements apply as noted in the respective 
program regulations:
    (a) Nondiscrimination and equal opportunity. The Fair Housing Act 
(42 U.S.C. 3601-19) and implementing regulations at 24 CFR part 100 et 
seq.; Executive Order 11063, as amended by Executive Order 12259 (3 CFR, 
1959-1963 Comp., p. 652 and 3 CFR, 1980 Comp., p. 307) (Equal 
Opportunity in Housing Programs) and implementing regulations at 24 CFR 
part 107; title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000d-
2000d-4) (Nondiscrimination in Federally Assisted Programs) and 
implementing regulations at 24 CFR part 1; the Age Discrimination Act of 
1975 (42 U.S.C. 6101-6107) and implementing regulations at 24 CFR part 
146; section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (29

[[Page 24]]

U.S.C. 794) and implementing regulations at 24 CFR part 8; section 3 of 
the Housing and Urban Development Act of 1968 (12 U.S.C. 1701u) and 
implementing regulations at 24 CFR part 135; Executive Order 11246, as 
amended by Executive Orders 11375, 11478, 12086, and 12107 (3 CFR, 1964-
1965 Comp., p. 339; 3 CFR, 1966-1970 Comp., p. 684; 3 CFR, 1966-1970 
Comp., p. 803; 3 CFR, 1978 Comp., p. 230; and 3 CFR, 1978 Comp., p. 264, 
respectively) (Equal Employment Opportunity Programs) and implementing 
regulations at 41 CFR chapter 60; Executive Order 11625, as amended by 
Executive Order 12007 (3 CFR, 1971-1975 Comp., p. 616 and 3 CFR, 1977 
Comp., p. 139) (Minority Business Enterprises); Executive Order 12432 (3 
CFR, 1983 Comp., p. 198) (Minority Business Enterprise Development); and 
Executive Order 12138, as amended by Executive Order 12608 (3 CFR, 1977 
Comp., p. 393 and 3 CFR, 1987 Comp., p. 245) (Women's Business 
Enterprise).
    (b) Disclosure requirements. The disclosure requirements and 
prohibitions of 31 U.S.C. 1352 and implementing regulations at 24 CFR 
part 87; and the requirements for funding competitions established by 
the Department of Housing and Urban Development Reform Act of 1989 (42 
U.S.C. 3531 et seq.).
    (c) Debarred, suspended or ineligible contractors. The prohibitions 
at 24 CFR part 24 on the use of debarred, suspended or ineligible 
contractors.
    (d) Drug-Free Workplace. The Drug-Free Workplace Act of 1988 (41 
U.S.C. 701 et seq.) and HUD's implementing regulations at 24 CFR part 
24.


<R05>
Sec. 5.107  Audit requirements for non-profit organizations.

    Non-profit organizations subject to regulations in the part 200 and 
part 800 series of title 24 of the CFR shall comply with the audit 
requirements of revised OMB Circular A-133, ``Audits of States, Local 
Governments, and Non-profit Organizations'' (see 24 CFR 84.26). For HUD 
programs, a non-profit organization is the mortgagor or owner (as these 
terms are defined in the regulations in the part 200 and part 800 
series) and not a related or affiliated organization or entity.

[62 FR 61617, Nov. 18, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 5.110  Waivers.

    Upon determination of good cause, the Secretary may, subject to 
statutory limitations, waive any provision of this title and delegate 
this authority in accordance with section 106 of the Department of 
Housing and Urban Development Reform Act of 1989 (42 U.S.C. 3535(q)).


<R04>
 Subpart B--Disclosure and Verification of Social Security Numbers and 
    Employer Identification Numbers; Procedures for Obtaining Income 
                               Information

    Authority: 42 U.S.C. 3535(d), 3543, 3544, and 11901 et seq.

    Source: 61 FR 11113, Mar. 18, 1996, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 5.210  Purpose, applicability, and Federal preemption.

    (a) Purpose. This subpart B requires applicants for and participants 
in covered HUD programs to disclose, and submit documentation to verify, 
their Social Security Numbers (SSNs). This subpart B also enables HUD 
and HAs to obtain income information about applicants and participants 
in the covered programs through computer matches with State Wage 
Information Collection Agencies (SWICAs) and Federal agencies, in order 
to verify an applicant's or participant's eligibility for or level of 
assistance. The purpose of this subpart B is to enable HUD to decrease 
the incidence of fraud, waste, and abuse in the covered programs.
    (b) Applicability. (1) This subpart B applies to mortgage and loan 
insurance and coinsurance and housing assistance programs contained in 
chapter II, subchapter B, and chapters VIII and IX of this title.
    (2) The information covered by consent forms described in this 
subpart involves income information from SWICAs, and wages, net earnings 
from self-employment, payments of retirement income, and unearned income 
as referenced at 26 U.S.C. 6103. In addition, consent forms may 
authorize the collection of other information from applicants and 
participants to determine eligibility or level of benefits, as

[[Page 25]]

provided in parts 813 and 913 of this title.
    (c) Federal preemption. This subpart B preempts any State law, 
including restrictions and penalties, that governs the collection and 
use of income information to the extent State law is inconsistent with 
this subpart.


<R05>
Sec. 5.212  Compliance with the Privacy Act and other requirements.

    (a) Compliance with the Privacy Act. The collection, maintenance, 
use, and dissemination of SSNs, EINs, any information derived from SSNs 
and Employer Identification Numbers (EINs), and income information under 
this subpart shall be conducted, to the extent applicable, in compliance 
with the Privacy Act (5 U.S.C. 552a) and all other provisions of 
Federal, State, and local law.
    (b) Privacy Act notice. All assistance applicants shall be provided 
with a Privacy Act notice at the time of application. All participants 
shall be provided with a Privacy Act notice at each annual income 
recertification.


<R05>
Sec. 5.214  Definitions.

    In addition to the definitions in Sec. 5.100, the following 
definitions apply to this subpart B:
    Assistance applicant. Except as excluded pursuant to 42 U.S.C. 
3543(b) and 3544(a)(2), this term means the following:
    (1) For any program under 24 CFR parts 215, 221, 236, 290, or 891, 
or any program under Section 8 of the 1937 Act: A family or individual 
that seeks rental assistance under the program.
    (2) For any program under 24 CFR parts 904, 950, and 960: A 
prospective tenant or homebuyer seeking the benefit of the program.
    (3) For any program under 24 CFR part 235: A homeowner or 
cooperative member seeking homeownership assistance (including where the 
individual seeks to assume an existing mortgage).
    Computer match means the automated comparison of data bases 
containing records about individuals.
    Computer matching agreement means the agreement that describes the 
responsibilities and obligations of the parties participating in a 
computer match.
    Consent form means any consent form approved by HUD to be signed by 
assistance applicants and participants for the purpose of obtaining 
income information from employers and SWICAs; return information from 
the Social Security Administration (including wages, net earnings from 
self-employment, and payments of retirement income), as referenced at 26 
U.S.C. 6103(l)(7)(A); and return information for unearned income from 
the Internal Revenue Service, as referenced at 26 U.S.C. 6103(l)(7)(B). 
The consent forms expire after a certain time and may authorize the 
collection of other information from assistance applicants or 
participants to determine eligibility or level of benefits as provided 
in Secs. 813.109, 913.109, and 950.315 of this title.
    Employer Identification Number (EIN) means the nine-digit taxpayer 
identifying number that is assigned to an individual, trust, estate, 
partnership, association, company, or corporation pursuant to sections 
6011(b), or corresponding provisions of prior law, or 6109 of the 
Internal Revenue Code.
    Entity applicant. (1) Except as excluded pursuant to 42 U.S.C. 
3543(b), 3544(a)(2), and paragraph (2) of this definition, this term 
means a partnership, corporation, or any other association or entity, 
other than an individual owner applicant, that seeks to participate as a 
private owner in any of the following:
    (i) The project-based assistance programs under Section 8 of the 
1937 Act;
    (ii) The programs in 24 CFR parts 215, 221, or 236; or
    (iii) The other mortgage and loan insurance programs in 24 CFR parts 
201 through 267, except that the term ``entity applicant'' does not 
include a mortgagee or lender.
    (2) The term does not include a public entity, such as a PHA, IHA, 
or State Housing Finance Agency.
    Federal agency means a department of the executive branch of the 
Federal Government.
    Income information means information relating to an individual's 
income, including:
    (1) All employment income information known to current or previous 
employers or other income sources that

[[Page 26]]

HUD or the processing entity determines is necessary for purposes of 
determining an assistance applicant's or participant's eligibility for, 
or level of assistance in, a covered program;
    (2) All information about wages, as defined in the State's 
unemployment compensation law, including any Social Security Number; 
name of the employee; quarterly wages of the employee; and the name, 
full address, telephone number, and, when known, Employer Identification 
Number of an employer reporting wages under a State unemployment 
compensation law;
    (3) With respect to unemployment compensation:
    (i) Whether an individual is receiving, has received, or has applied 
for unemployment compensation;
    (ii) The amount of unemployment compensation the individual is 
receiving or is entitled to receive; and
    (iii) The period with respect to which the individual actually 
received such compensation;
    (4) Unearned IRS income and self-employment, wages and retirement 
income as described in the Internal Revenue Code, 26 U.S.C. 6103(l)(7); 
and
    (5) Wage, social security (Title II), and supplemental security 
income (Title XVI) data obtaied from the Social Security Administration.
    Individual owner applicant. Except as excluded pursuant to 42 U.S.C. 
3543(b), 3544(a)(2), or paragraph (2) of this definition, this term 
means:
    (1) An individual who seeks to participate as a private owner in any 
of:
    (i) The project-based assistance programs under Section 8 of the 
1937 Act; or
    (ii) The programs in 24 CFR parts 215, 221, 235 (without 
homeownership assistance), or 236, including where the individual seeks 
to assume an existing mortgage; or
    (2) An individual who:
    (i) Either: (A) Applies for a mortgage or loan insured or coinsured 
under any of the programs referred to in paragraph (1)(iii) of the 
definition of ``entity applicant'' in this section; or
    (B) Seeks to assume an existing mortgage or loan; and
    (ii) Intends to hold the mortgaged property in his or her individual 
right.
    IRS means the Internal Revenue Service.
    Owner means the person or entity (or employee of an owner) that 
leases an assisted dwelling unit to an eligible family and includes, 
when applicable, a mortgagee.
    Participant. Except as excluded pursuant to 42 U.S.C. 3543(b) and 
3544(a)(2), this term has the following meaning:
    (1) For any program under 24 CFR part 891, or Section 8 of the 1937 
Act: A family receiving rental assistance under the program;
    (2) For 24 CFR parts 904, 950, 960: A tenant or homebuyer under the 
program;
    (3) For 24 CFR parts 215, 221, 236, and 290: A tenant or qualified 
tenant under any of the programs; and
    (4) For 24 CFR part 235: A homeowner or a cooperative member 
receiving homeownership assistance.
    Processing entity means the person or entity that, under any of the 
programs covered under this subpart B, is responsible for making 
eligibility and related determinations and any income reexamination.
    Social Security Number (SSN) means the nine-digit number that is 
assigned to a person by the Social Security Administration and that 
identifies the record of the person's earnings reported to the Social 
Security Administration. The term does not include a number with a 
letter as a suffix that is used to identify an auxiliary beneficiary.
    SSA means the Social Security Administration.
    State Wage Information Collection Agency (SWICA) means the State 
agency, including any Indian tribal agency, receiving quarterly wage 
reports from employers in the State, or an alternative system that has 
been determined by the Secretary of Labor to be as effective and timely 
in providing employment-related income and eligibility information.

[61 FR 11113, Mar. 18, 1996, as amended at 63 FR 23853, Apr. 30, 1998]

[[Page 27]]

  Disclosure and Verification of Social Security Numbers and Employer 
 Identification Numbers for Applicants and Participants in Certain HUD 
                                Programs


<R05>
Sec. 5.216  Disclosure and verification of Social Security and Employer Identification Numbers.

    (a) Disclosure: assistance applicants. Each assistance applicant 
must submit the following information to the processing entity when the 
assistant applicant's eligibility under the program involved is being 
determined:
    (1)(i) The complete and accurate SSN assigned to the assistant 
applicant and to each member of the assistant applicant's household who 
is at least six years of age; and
    (ii) The documentation referred to in paragraph (f)(1) of this 
section to verify each such SSN; or
    (2) If the assistance applicant or any member of the assistance 
applicant's household who is at least six years of age has not been 
assigned an SSN, a certification executed by the individual involved 
that meets the requirements of paragraph (j) of this section.
    (b) Disclosure: individual owner applicants. Each individual owner 
applicant must submit the following information to the processing entity 
when the individual owner applicant's eligibility under the program 
involved is being determined:
    (1)(i) The complete and accurate SSNs assigned to the individual 
owner applicant and to each member of the individual owner applicant's 
household who will be obligated to pay the debt evidenced by the 
mortgage or loan documents; and
    (ii) The documentation referred to in paragraph (f)(1) of this 
section to verify the SSNs; or
    (2) If any person referred to in paragraph (b)(1)(i) of this section 
has not been assigned an SSN, a certification executed by the individual 
involved that meets the requirements of paragraph (j) of this section.
    (c) Disclosure: certain officials of entity applicants. As explained 
more fully in HUD administrative instructions, each officer, director, 
principal stockholder, or other official of an entity applicant must 
submit the following information to the processing entity when the 
entity applicant's eligibility under the program involved is being 
determined:
    (1) The complete and accurate SSN assigned to each such individual; 
and
    (2) The documentation referred to in paragraph (f)(1) of this 
section to verify each SSN.
    (d) Disclosure: participants--(1) Initial disclosure. Each 
participant whose initial determination of eligibility under the program 
involved was begun before November 6, 1989, must submit the following 
information to the processing entity at the next regularly scheduled 
income reexamination for the program involved:
    (i)(A) The complete and accurate SSN assigned to the participant and 
to each member of the participant's family who is at least six years of 
age; and
    (B) The documentation referred to in paragraph (f)(1) of this 
section to verify each such SSN; or
    (ii) If the participant or any member of the participant's household 
who is at least six years of age has not been assigned an SSN, a 
certification executed by the individual(s) involved that meets the 
requirements of paragraph (j) of this section.
    (2) Subsequent disclosure. Once a participant has disclosed and 
verified every SSN, or submitted any certification that an SSN has not 
been assigned, as provided by paragraph (a) of this section (for an 
assistance applicant) or paragraph (d)(1) (for a preexisting 
participant) of this section, the following rules apply:
    (i) If the participant's household adds a new member who is at least 
six years of age, the participant must submit to the processing entity, 
at the next interim or regularly scheduled income reexamination that 
includes the new members:
    (A) The complete and accurate SSNs assigned to each new member and 
the documentation referred to in paragraph (f)(1) of this section to 
verify the SSNs for each new member; or
    (B) If the new member has not been assigned an SSN, a certification 
executed by the individual involved that meets the requirements of 
paragraph (j) of this section.
    (ii) If the participant or any member of the participant's household 
who is at

[[Page 28]]

least six years of age obtains a previously undisclosed SSN, or has been 
assigned a new SSN, the participant must submit the following to the 
processing entity at the next regularly scheduled income reexamination:
    (A) The complete and accurate SSN assigned to the participant or 
household member involved; and
    (B) The documentation referred to in paragraph (f)(1) of this 
section to verify the SSN of each such individual.
    (iii) Additional SSN disclosure and verification requirements, 
including the nature of the disclosure and the verification required and 
the time and manner for making the disclosure and verification, may be 
specified in administrative instructions by:
    (A) HUD; and
    (B) In the case of the public housing program or the programs under 
parts 882 and 887 of this title, the HA.
    (e) Disclosure: entity applicants. Each entity applicant must submit 
the following information to the processing entity when the entity 
applicant's eligibility under the program involved is being determined:
    (1) Any complete and accurate EIN assigned to the entity applicant; 
and
    (2) The documentation referred to in paragraph (f)(2) of this 
section to verify the EIN.
    (f) Required documentation--(1) Social Security Numbers. The 
documentation necessary to verify the SSN of an individual who is 
required to disclose his or her SSN under paragraphs (a) through (d) of 
this section is a valid SSN card issued by the SSA, or such other 
evidence of the SSN as HUD and, where applicable, the HA may prescribe 
in administrative instructions.
    (2) Employer Identification Numbers. The documentation necessary to 
verify any EIN of an entity applicant that is required to disclose its 
EIN under paragraph (e) of this section is the official, written 
communication from the IRS assigning the EIN to the entity applicant, or 
such other evidence of the EIN as HUD may prescribe in administrative 
instructions.
    (g) Special documentation rules for assistance applicants and 
participants--(1) Certification of inability to meet documentation 
requirements. If an individual who is required to disclose his or her 
SSN under paragraph (a) (assistance applicants) of this section or 
paragraph (d) (participants) of this section is able to disclose the 
SSN, but cannot meet the documentation requirements of paragraph (f)(1) 
of this section, the assistance applicant or participant must submit to 
the processing entity the individual's SSN and a certification executed 
by the individual that the SSN submitted has been assigned to the 
individual, but that acceptable documentation to verify the SSN cannot 
be provided.
    (2) Acceptance or certification by processing entity. Except as 
provided by paragraph (h) of this section, the processing entity must 
accept the certification referred to in paragraph (g)(1) of this section 
and continue to process the assistant applicant's or participant's 
eligibility to participate in the program involved.
    (3) Effect on assistance applicants. If the processing entity 
determines that the assistance applicant is otherwise eligible to 
participate in the program, the assistance applicant may not become a 
participant in the program, unless it submits to the processing entity 
the documentation required under paragraph (f)(1) of this section within 
the time period specified in paragraph (g)(5) of this section. During 
such period, the assistance applicant will retain the position that it 
occupied in the program at the time the determination of eligibility was 
made, including its place on any waiting list maintained for the 
program, if applicable.
    (4) Effect on participants. If the processing entity determines that 
the participant otherwise continues to be eligible to participate in the 
program, participation will continue, provided that the participant 
submits to the processing entity the documentation required under 
paragraph (f)(1) of this section within the time period specified in 
paragraph (g)(5) of this section.
    (5) Time for submitting documentation. The time period referred to 
in paragraphs (g)(4) and (5) of this section is 60 calendar days from 
the date on which the certification referred to in paragraph (g)(1) of 
this section is executed, except that the processing entity may, in its 
discretion, extend this period for

[[Page 29]]

up to an additional 60 days if the individual is at least 62 years of 
age and is unable to submit the required documentation within the 
initial 60-day period.
    (h) Rejection of documentation or certification. The processing 
entity may reject documentation referred to in paragraph (f) of this 
section, or a certification provided under paragraphs (a)(2), (b)(2), 
(d), or (g)(1) of this section, only for such reasons as HUD and the HA 
may prescribe in applicable administrative instructions.
    (i) Information on SSNs and EINs. (1) Information regarding SSNs and 
SSN cards may be obtained by contacting the local SSA Office or 
consulting the SSA regulations at 20 CFR chapter III (see, particularly, 
part 422).
    (2) Information regarding EINs may be obtained by contacting the 
local office of the IRS or consulting the appropriate regulations for 
the IRS.
    (j) Form and manner of certifications. The certifications referred 
to in paragraphs (a)(2), (b)(2), (d), and (g)(1) of this section must be 
in the form and manner that HUD and the HA prescribe in applicable 
administrative instructions. If an individual who is required to execute 
a certification is less than 18 years of age, the certification must be 
executed by his or her parent or guardian or, in accordance with 
administrative instructions, by the individual or another person.

(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 
2502-0204)


<R05>
Sec. 5.218  Penalties for failing to disclose and verify Social Security and Employer Identification Numbers.

    (a) Denial of eligibility: assistance applicants and individual 
owner applicants. The processing entity must deny the eligibility of an 
assistance applicant or individual owner applicant in accordance with 
the provisions governing the program involved, if the assistance or 
individual owner applicant does not meet the applicable SSN disclosure, 
documentation and verification, and certification requirements specified 
in Sec. 5.216.
    (b) Denial of eligibility: entity applicants. The processing entity 
must deny the eligibility of an entity applicant in accordance with the 
provisions governing the program involved; if:
    (1) The entity applicant does not meet the applicable EIN disclosure 
and verification requirements specified in Sec. 5.216; or
    (2) Any of the officials of the entity applicant referred to in 
Sec. 5.216(c) does not meet the applicable SSN disclosure, and 
documentation and verification requirements specified in Sec. 5.216.
    (c) Termination of assistance or tenancy: participants. The 
processing entity must terminate the assistance or tenancy, or both, of 
a participant, in accordance with the provisions governing the program 
involved, if the participant does not meet the applicable SSN 
disclosure, documentation and verification, and certification 
requirements specified in Sec. 5.216.
    (d) Cross reference. Individuals should consult the regulations and 
administrative instructions for the programs covered under this subpart 
B for further information on the use of SSNs and EINs in determinations 
regarding eligibility.

    Procedures for Obtaining Income Information About Applicants and 
                              Participants


<R05>
Sec. 5.230  Consent by assistance applicants and participants.

    (a) Required consent by assistance applicants and participants. Each 
member of the family of an assistance applicant or participant who is at 
least 18 years of age, and each family head and spouse regardless of 
age, shall sign one or more consent forms.
    (b) Consent authorization--(1) To whom and when. The assistance 
applicant shall submit the signed consent forms to the processing entity 
when eligibility under a covered program is being determined. A 
participant shall sign and submit consent forms at the next regularly 
scheduled income reexamination. Assistance applicants and participants 
shall be responsible for the signing and submitting of consent forms by 
each applicable family member.
    (2) Subsequent consent forms--special cases. Participants are 
required to sign and submit consent forms at the next interim or 
regularly scheduled income

[[Page 30]]

reexamination under the following circumstances:
    (i) When any person 18 years or older becomes a member of the 
family;
    (ii) When a member of the family turns 18 years of age; and
    (iii) As required by HUD or the HA in administrative instructions.
    (c) Consent form--contents. The consent form required by this 
section shall contain, at a minimum, the following:
    (1) A provision authorizing HUD and HAs to obtain from SWICAs any 
information or materials necessary to complete or verify the application 
for participation and to maintain continued assistance under a covered 
program; and
    (2) A provision authorizing HUD, HAs, or the owner responsible for 
determining eligibility for or the level of assistance to verify with 
previous or current employers income information pertinent to the 
assistance applicant's or participant's eligibility for or level of 
assistance under a covered program;
    (3) A provision authorizing HUD to request income return information 
from the IRS and the SSA for the sole purpose of verifying income 
information pertinent to the assistance applicant's or participant's 
eligibility or level of benefits; and
    (4) A statement that the authorization to release the information 
requested by the consent form expires 15 months after the date the 
consent form is signed.


<R05>
Sec. 5.232  Penalties for failing to sign consent forms.

    (a) Denial or termination of benefits. In accordance with the 
provisions governing the program involved, if the assistance applicant 
or participant, or any member of the assistance applicant's or 
participant's family, does not sign and submit the consent form as 
required in Sec. 5.230, then:
    (1) The processing entity shall deny assistance to and admission of 
an assistance applicant;
    (2) Assistance to, and the tenancy of, a participant may be 
terminated.
    (b) Cross references. Individuals should consult the regulations and 
administrative instructions for the programs covered under this subpart 
B for further information on the use of income information in 
determinations regarding eligibility.


<R05>
Sec. 5.234  Requests for information from SWICAs and Federal agencies; restrictions on use.

    (a) Information available from SWICAs and Federal agencies--to whom 
and what. Income information will generally be obtained through computer 
matching agreements between HUD and a SWICA or Federal agency, or 
between a HA and a SWICA, as described in paragraph (c) of this section. 
Certification that the applicable assistance applicants and participants 
have signed appropriate consent forms and have received the necessary 
Privacy Act notice is required, as follows:
    (1) When HUD requests the computer match, the processing entity 
shall certify to HUD; and
    (2) When the HA requests the computer match, the HA shall certify to 
the SWICA.
    (b) Restrictions on use of information. The restrictions of 42 
U.S.C. 3544(c)(2)(A) apply to the use by HUD or a HA of income 
information obtained from a SWICA. The restrictions of 42 U.S.C. 
3544(c)(2)(A) and of 26 U.S.C. 6103(l)(7) apply to the use by HUD or a 
HA of income information obtained from the IRS or SSA.
    (c) Computer matching agreements. Computer matching agreements shall 
specify the purpose and the legal authority for the match, and shall 
include a description of the records to be matched, a statement 
regarding disposition of information generated through the match, a 
description of the administrative and technical safeguards to be used in 
protecting the information obtained through the match, a description of 
the use of records, the restrictions on duplication and redisclosure, a 
certification, and the amount that will be charged for processing a 
request.

(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 
2508-0008)

[[Page 31]]


<R05>
Sec. 5.236  Procedures for termination, denial, suspension, or reduction of assistance based on information obtained from a SWICA or Federal agency.

    (a) Termination, denial, suspension, or reduction of assistance. The 
provisions of 42 U.S.C. 3544(c)(2)(B) and (C) shall govern the 
termination, denial, suspension, or reduction of benefits for an 
assistance applicant or participant based on income information obtained 
from a SWICA or a Federal agency. Procedures necessary to comply with 
these provisions are provided in paragraph (b) of this section.
    (b) Procedures for independent verification. (1) Any determination 
or redetermination of family income made on the basis of information 
verified in accordance with paragraph (b) of this section shall be 
carried out in accordance with the requirements and procedures 
applicable to the individual covered program. Independent verification 
of information obtained from a SWICA or a Federal agency may be:
    (i) By HUD; and
    (ii) By a HA, when the benefit to be provided to the assistance 
applicant or participant is under a program in parts 880, 882, 886, 887, 
891, 904, 950, or 960 of this title, including when the HA is the 
contract administrator for the owner.
    (2) Upon receiving income information from a SWICA or a Federal 
agency, HUD or, when applicable, the HA shall compare the information 
with the information about a family's income that was:
    (i) Provided by the assistance applicant or participant to the HA; 
or
    (ii) Obtained by the owner (or mortgagee, as applicable) from the 
assistance applicant or participant or from his or her employer.
    (3) When the income information reveals an employer or other income 
source that was not disclosed by the assistance applicant or 
participant, or when the income information differs substantially from 
the information received from the assistance applicant or participant or 
from his or her employer:
    (i) HUD or, as applicable or directed by HUD, the HA shall request 
the undisclosed employer or other income source to furnish any 
information necessary to establish an assistance applicant's or 
participant's eligibility for or level of assistance in a covered 
program. This information shall be furnished in writing, as directed to:
    (A) HUD, with respect to programs under parts 215, 221, 235, 236, or 
290 of this title;
    (B) The HA, with respect to programs under parts 880, 882, 886, 887, 
891, 904, 950, or 960 of this title for which the HA is responsible for 
determining eligibility or level of benefits; or
    (C) The owner (or mortgagee, as applicable), with respect to 
programs under parts 215, 221, 235, 236, or 290 of this title, or when 
the owner is responsible under parts 880, 882, 886, 887, 891, 904, 950, 
or 960 of this title for determining eligibility or the level of 
assistance; or
    (ii) HUD or the HA may verify the income information directly with 
an assistance applicant or participant. Such verification procedures 
shall not include any disclosure of income information prohibited under 
paragraph (b)(6) of this section.
    (4) HUD and the HA shall not be required to pursue these 
verification procedures when the sums of money at issue are too small to 
raise an inference of fraud or justify the expense of independent 
verification and the procedures related to termination, denial, 
suspension, or reduction of assistance.
    (5) Based on the income information received from a SWICA or Federal 
agency, HUD or the HA, as appropriate, may inform an owner (or 
mortgagee) that an assistance applicant's or participant's eligibility 
for or level of assistance is uncertain and needs to be verified. The 
owner (or mortgagee) shall then confirm the assistance applicant's or 
participant's income information by checking the accuracy of the 
information with the employer or other income source, or directly with 
the family.
    (6) Nondisclosure of Income information. Neither HUD nor the HA may 
disclose income information obtained from a SWICA directly to an owner 
(unless a HA is the owner). Disclosure of income information obtained 
from the SSA or IRS is restricted under 26 U.S.C. Sec. 6103(l)(7) and 42 
U.S.C. 3544.

[[Page 32]]

    (c) Opportunity to contest. HUD, the HA, or the owner (or mortgagee, 
as applicable) shall promptly notify any assistance applicant or 
participant in writing of any adverse findings made on the basis of the 
information verified in accordance with paragraph (b) of this section. 
The assistance applicant or participant may contest the findings in the 
same manner as applies to other information and findings relating to 
eligibility factors under the applicable program. Termination, denial, 
suspension, or reduction of assistance shall be carried out in 
accordance with requirements and procedures applicable to the individual 
covered program, and shall not occur until the expiration of any notice 
period provided by the statute or regulations governing the program.


<R05>
Sec. 5.238  Criminal and civil penalties.

    Persons who violate the provisions of 42 U.S.C. 3544 or 26 U.S.C. 
6103(l)(7) with respect to the use and disclosure of income information 
may be subject to civil or criminal penalties under 42 U.S.C. 
3544(c)(3), 26 U.S.C. 7213(a), or 18 U.S.C. 1905.


<R04>
  Subpart C--Pet Ownership for the Elderly or Persons With Disabilities

    Authority: 42 U.S.C. 1701r-1 and 3535(d).

                          General Requirements


<R05>
Sec. 5.300  Purpose.

    (a) This subpart implements section 227 of the Housing and Urban-
Rural Recovery Act of 1983 (12 U.S.C. 1701r-1) as it pertains to 
projects for the elderly or persons with disabilities under:
    (1) The housing programs administered by the Assistant Secretary for 
Housing-Federal Housing Commissioner;
    (2) Projects assisted under the programs contained in chapter VIII 
of this title 24; and
    (3) The public housing programs administered by the Assistant 
Secretary for Public and Indian Housing under title I of the United 
States Housing Act of 1937 (42 U.S.C. 1437, et seq.). This part does not 
apply to Indian housing administered under title II of that Act.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 5.303  Exclusion for animals that assist persons with disabilities.

    (a) This subpart C does not apply to animals that are used to assist 
persons with disabilities. Project owners and PHAs may not apply or 
enforce any pet rules developed under this subpart against individuals 
with animals that are used to assist persons with disabilities. This 
exclusion applies to animals that reside in projects for the elderly or 
persons with disabilities, as well as to animals that visit these 
projects.
    (1) A project owner may require resident animals to qualify for this 
exclusion. Project owners must grant this exclusion if:
    (i) The tenant or prospective tenant certifies in writing that the 
tenant or a member of his or her family is a person with a disability;
    (ii) The animal has been trained to assist persons with that 
specific disability; and
    (iii) The animal actually assists the person with a disability.
    (2) [Reserved]
    (b) Nothing in this subpart C:
    (1) Limits or impairs the rights of persons with disabilities;
    (2) Authorizes project owners or PHAs to limit or impair the rights 
of persons with disabilities; or
    (3) Affects any authority that project owners or PHAs may have to 
regulate animals that assist persons with disabilities, under Federal, 
State, or local law.


<R05>
Sec. 5.306  Definitions.

    Common household pet means:
    (1) For purposes of Housing programs: A domesticated animal, such as 
a dog, cat, bird, rodent (including a rabbit), fish, or turtle, that is 
traditionally kept in the home for pleasure rather than for commercial 
purposes. Common household pet does not include reptiles (except 
turtles). If this definition conflicts with any applicable State or 
local law or regulation defining the pets that may be owned or kept in 
dwelling accommodations, the State or local law or regulation shall 
apply. This definition shall not include animals that are used to assist 
persons with disabilities.

[[Page 33]]

    (2) For purposes of Public Housing programs: PHAs may define the 
term ``common household pet'' under Sec. 5.318.
    Elderly or disabled family means:
    (1) For purposes of Housing programs: An elderly person, a person 
with a disability, or an elderly or disabled family for purposes of the 
program under which a project for the elderly or persons with 
disabilities is assisted or has its mortgage insured.
    (2) For purposes of Public Housing programs: (i) An elderly person, 
a person with a disability, or an elderly or disabled family as defined 
in Sec. 5.403 in subpart A of this part.
    (ii) [Reserved]
    Housing programs means:
    (1) The housing programs administered by the Assistant Secretary for 
Housing-Federal Housing Commissioner; and
    (2) The programs contained in chapter VIII of this title 24 that 
assist rental projects that meet the definition of project for the 
elderly or persons with disabilities in this subpart C.
    Project for the elderly or persons with disabilities means:
    (1) For purposes of Housing programs: (i) A specific rental or 
cooperative multifamily property that, unless currently owned by HUD, is 
subject to a first mortgage, and:
    (A) That is assisted under statutory authority identified by HUD 
through notice;
    (B) That was designated for occupancy by elderly or disabled 
families when funds for the project were reserved, or when the 
commitment to insure the mortgage was issued or, of not then so 
designated, that is designated for such occupancy in an effective 
amendment to the regulatory agreement covering the project, made 
pursuant to the project owner's request, and that is assisted or insured 
under one of the programs identified by HUD through notice; or
    (C) For which preference in tenant selection is given for all units 
in the project to elderly or disabled families and that is owned by HUD 
or assisted under one of the programs identified by HUD through notice.
    (ii) This term does not include health and care facilities that have 
mortgage insurance under the National Housing Act. This term also does 
not include any of the project owner's other property that does not meet 
the criteria contained in any one of paragraphs (1)(i)(A) through (C) of 
this definition, even if the property is adjacent to or under joint or 
common management with such specific property.
    (2) For purposes of Public Housing programs: Any project assisted 
under title I of the United States Housing Act of 1937 (other than under 
section 8 or 17 of the Act), including any building within a mixed-use 
project, that was designated for occupancy by the elderly or persons 
with disabilities at its inception or, although not so designated, for 
which the PHA gives preference in tenant selection (with HUD approval) 
for all units in the project (or for a building within a mixed-use 
project) to elderly or disabled families. For purposes of this part, 
this term does not include projects assisted the Low-Rent Housing 
Homeownership Opportunity program or under title II of the United States 
Housing Act of 1937.
    Project owner means an owner (including HUD, where HUD is the owner) 
or manager of a project for the elderly or persons with disabilities, or 
an agent authorized to act for an owner or manager of such housing.
    Public Housing Agency (PHA) is defined in Sec. 5.100.
    Public Housing programs means the public housing programs 
administered by the Assistant Secretary for Public and Indian Housing 
under title I of the United States Housing Act of 1937.


<R05>
Sec. 5.309  Prohibition against discrimination.

    Except as otherwise specifically authorized under this subpart no 
project owner or PHA that owns or manages a project for the elderly or 
persons with disabilities may:
    (a) As a condition of tenancy or otherwise, prohibit or prevent any 
tenant of such housing from owning common household pets or having such 
pets living in the tenant's dwelling unit; or
    (b) Restrict or discriminate against any person in connection with 
admission to, or continued occupancy of, such housing by reason of the 
person's ownership of common household pets

[[Page 34]]

or the presence of such pets in the person's dwelling unit.


<R05>
Sec. 5.312  Notice to tenants.

    (a) During the development of pet rules as described in Secs. 5.353 
or 5.380, the project owner or PHA shall serve written notice on all 
tenants of projects for the elderly or persons with disabilities in 
occupancy at the time of service, stating that:
    (1) Tenants are permitted to own and keep common household pets in 
their dwelling units, in accordance with the pet rules (if any) 
promulgated under this subpart C;
    (2) Animals that are used to assist persons with disabilities are 
excluded from the requirements of this subpart C, as provided in 
Sec. 5.303;
    (3) Tenants may, at any time, request a copy of any current pet rule 
developed under this subpart C (as well as any current proposed rule or 
proposed amendment to an existing rule); and
    (4) Tenants may request that their leases be amended under 
Sec. 5.321 to permit common household pets.
    (b) The project owner or PHA shall provide to each applicant for 
tenancy when he or she is offered a dwelling unit in a project for the 
elderly or persons with disabilities, the written notice specified in 
paragraphs (a) (1), (2), and (3) of this section.
    (c) If a PHA chooses not to promulgate pet rules, the notice shall 
be served within 60 days of the effective date of this part. PHAs shall 
serve notice under this section in accordance with their normal service 
of notice procedures.


<R05>
Sec. 5.315  Content of pet rules: general requirements.

    (a) Housing programs. The project owner shall prescribe reasonable 
rules to govern the keeping of common household pets. The pet rules must 
include the mandatory rules described in Sec. 5.350 and may, unless 
otherwise noted in this subpart C, include other discretionary 
provisions as provided in Sec. 5.318.
    (b) Public Housing programs. (1) PHAs may choose not to promulgate 
rules governing the keeping of common household pets or may include 
rules as provided in Sec. 5.318. PHAs may elect to include provisions 
based on those in Sec. 5.350. If they so choose, the PHAs may modify the 
provisions in Sec. 5.350 in any manner consistent with this subpart C.
    (2) If PHAs choose to promulgate pet rules, tenants must be 
permitted to own and keep pets in their units in accordance with the 
terms and conditions of their leases, the provisions of this subpart C, 
and any applicable State or local law or regulation governing the owning 
or keeping of pets in dwelling accommodations.
    (3) PHAs that choose not to promulgate pet rules, shall not impose, 
by lease modification or otherwise, any requirement that is inconsistent 
with the provisions of this subpart C.
    (c) Use of discretion. (1) This subpart C does not define with 
specificity the limits of the project owners' or PHAs' discretion to 
promulgate pet rules. Where a project owner or PHA has discretion to 
prescribe pet rules under this subpart C, the pet rules should be:
    (i) Reasonably related to furthering a legitimate interest of the 
project owner or PHA, such as the owner's or PHA's interest in providing 
a decent, safe, and sanitary living environment for existing and 
prospective tenants and in protecting and preserving the physical 
condition of the project and the owner's or PHA's financial interest in 
it; and
    (ii) Drawn narrowly to achieve the owner's or PHA's legitimate 
interests, without imposing unnecessary burdens and restrictions on pet 
owners and prospective pet owners.
    (2) Where a project owner or PHA has discretion to prescribe pet 
rules under this subpart C, the owner or PHA may vary the rules' content 
among projects and within individual projects, based on factors such as 
the size, type, location, and occupancy of the project or its units, 
provided that the applicable rules are reasonable and do not conflict 
with any applicable State or local law or regulation governing the 
owning or keeping of pets in dwelling accommodations.
    (d) Conflict with State or local law. The pet rules adopted by the 
project owner or PHA shall not conflict with applicable State or local 
law or regulations. If such a conflict may exist, the State

[[Page 35]]

and local law or regulations shall apply.


<R05>
Sec. 5.318  Discretionary pet rules.

    Pet rules promulgated by project owners and PHAs may include, but 
are not limited to, consideration of the following factors:
    (a) Definitions of ``common household pet''--(1) For Public Housing 
programs. The pet rules established by a PHA may contain a reasonable 
definition of a common household pet.
    (2) For Housing programs. Project owners wishing to define ``common 
household pet'' in their pet rules must use the Housing programs 
definition of the term in Sec. 5.306.
    (b) Density of tenants and pets. (1)(i) The pet rules established 
under this section may take into account tenant and pet density. The pet 
rules may place reasonable limitations on the number of common household 
pets that may be allowed in each dwelling unit. In the case of group 
homes, the pet rules may place reasonable limitations on the number of 
common household pets that may be allowed in each home.
    (ii) For Housing programs. Under these rules, project owners may 
limit the number of four-legged, warm-blooded pets to one pet in each 
dwelling unit or group home.
    (iii) Other than the limitations described in this paragraph (b)(1), 
the pet rules may not limit the total number of pets allowed in the 
project.
    (2) As used in paragraph (b)(1) of this section, the term ``group 
home'' means:
    (i) For purposes of Housing programs. A small, communal living 
arrangement designed specifically for individuals who are chronically 
mentally ill, developmentally disabled, or physically disabled who 
require a planned program of continual supportive services or 
supervision (other than continual nursing, medical or psychiatric care).
    (ii) For purposes of Public Housing programs. A dwelling or dwelling 
unit for the exclusive residential use of elderly persons or persons 
with disabilities who are not capable of living completely independently 
and who require a planned program of continual supportive services or 
supervision (other than continual nursing, medical or psychiatric care).
    (c) Pet size and pet type. The pet rules may place reasonable 
limitations on the size, weight, and type of common household pets 
allowed in the project.
    (d) Potential financial obligations of tenants--(1) Pet deposits. 
The pet rules may require tenants who own or keep pets in their units to 
pay a refundable pet deposit. In the case of project owners, this pet 
deposit shall be limited to those tenants who own or keep cats or dogs 
in their units. This deposit is in addition to any other financial 
obligation generally imposed on tenants of the project. The project 
owner or PHA may use the pet deposit only to pay reasonable expenses 
directly attributable to the presence of the pet in the project, 
including (but not limited to) the cost of repairs and replacements to, 
and fumigation of, the tenant's dwelling unit and, for project owners, 
the cost of animal care facilities under Sec. 5.363. The project owner 
or PHA shall refund the unused portion of the pet deposit to the tenant 
within a reasonable time after the tenant moves from the project or no 
longer owns or keeps a pet (or a cat or dog in the case of project 
owners) in the dwelling unit.
    (2) Housing programs: Maximum pet deposit. (i) Pet deposits for the 
following tenants shall not exceed an amount periodically fixed by HUD 
through notice.
    (A) Tenants whose rents are subsidized (including tenants of a HUD-
owned project, whose rents were subsidized before HUD acquired it) under 
one of the programs identified by HUD through notice.
    (B) Tenants who live in a project assisted (including tenants who 
live in a HUD-owned project that was assisted before HUD acquired it) 
under one of the programs identified by HUD through notice.
    (C) For all other tenants of projects for the elderly or persons 
with disabilities, the pet deposit shall not exceed one month's rent at 
the time the pet is brought onto the premises.
    (ii) In establishing the maximum amount of pet deposit under 
paragraph (d)(2)(i) of this section, HUD will consider factors such as:
    (A) Projected, estimated expenses directly attributable to the 
presence of pets in the project;

[[Page 36]]

    (B) The ability of project owners to offset such expenses by use of 
security deposits or HUD-reimbursable expenses; and
    (C) The low income status of tenants of projects for the elderly or 
persons with disabilities.
    (iii) For pet deposits subject to paragraph (d)(2)(i)(A) of this 
section, the pet rules shall provide for gradual accumulation of the 
deposit by the pet owner through an initial payment not to exceed $50 
when the pet is brought onto the premises, and subsequent monthly 
payments not to exceed $10 per month until the amount of the deposit is 
reached.
    (iv) For pet deposits subject to paragraphs (d)(2)(i)(B) and (C) of 
this section, the pet rules may provide for gradual accumulation of the 
deposit by the pet owner.
    (v) The project owner may (subject to the HUD-prescribed limits) 
increase the amount of the pet deposit by amending the house pet rules 
in accordance with Sec. 5.353.
    (A) For pet deposits subject to paragraph (d)(2)(i)(A) of this 
section, the house pet rules shall provide for gradual accumulation of 
any such increase not to exceed $10 per month for all deposit amounts 
that are being accumulated.
    (B) [Reserved]
    (vi) Any pet deposit that is established within the parameters set 
forth by paragraph (d)(2) of this section shall be deemed reasonable for 
purposes of this subpart C.
    (3) Public Housing programs: Maximum pet deposit. The maximum amount 
of pet deposit that may be charged by the PHA, on a per dwelling unit 
basis, shall not exceed the higher of the Total Tenant Payment (as 
defined in 24 CFR 913.102) or such reasonable fixed amount as the PHA 
may require. The pet rules may permit gradual accumulation of the pet 
deposit by the pet owner.
    (4) Housing programs: Waste removal charge. The pet rules may permit 
the project owner to impose a separate waste removal charge of up to 
five dollars ($5) per occurrence on pet owners that fail to remove pet 
waste in accordance with the prescribed pet rules. Any pet waste removal 
charge that is within this five dollar ($5) limitation shall be deemed 
to be a reasonable amount for the purposes of this subpart C.
    (5) The pet deposit (for Housing and Public Housing programs) and 
waste removal charge (for Housing programs) are not part of the rent 
payable by the tenant. Except as provided in paragraph (d) of this 
section for Housing programs and, paragraph (d) of this section and 24 
CFR 966.4(b) for Public Housing programs, project owners or PHAs may not 
prescribe pet rules that impose additional financial obligations on pet 
owners that are designed to compensate the project owner or PHA for 
costs associated with the presence of pets in the project, including 
(but not limited to) requiring pet owners:
    (i) To obtain liability or other insurance to cover damage caused by 
the pet;
    (ii) To agree to be strictly liable for all damages caused by the 
pet where this liability is not otherwise imposed by State or local law, 
or
    (iii) To indemnify the project owner for pet-related litigation and 
attorney's fees.
    (e) Standards of pet care. The pet rules may prescribe standards of 
pet care and handling, but must be limited to those necessary to protect 
the condition of the tenant's unit and the general condition of the 
project premises, or to protect the health or safety of present tenants, 
project employees, and the public. The pet rules may not require pet 
owners to have any pet's vocal cords removed. Permitted rules may:
    (1) Bar pets from specified common areas (such as lobbies, laundry 
rooms, and social rooms), unless the exclusion will deny a pet 
reasonable ingress and egress to the project or building.
    (2) Require the pet owner to control noise and odor caused by a pet.
    (3) Housing programs: Project owners may also:
    (i) Require pet owners to have their dogs and cats spayed or 
neutered; and
    (ii) Limit the length of time that a pet may be left unattended in a 
dwelling unit.
    (f) Pet licensing. The pet rules may require pet owners to license 
their pets in accordance with applicable State

[[Page 37]]

and local laws and regulations. (Failure of the pet rules to contain 
this requirement does not relieve the pet owner of responsibility for 
complying with applicable State and local pet licensing requirements.)
    (g) Public Housing programs: Designated pet areas. (1) PHAs may 
designate buildings, floors of buildings, or sections of buildings as 
no-pet areas where pets generally may not be permitted. Similarly, the 
pet rules may designate buildings, floors of buildings, or sections of 
buildings for residency generally by pet-owning tenants. The PHA may 
direct such initial tenant moves as may be necessary to establish pet 
and no-pet areas. The PHA may not refuse to admit (or delay admission 
of) an applicant for tenancy on the grounds that the applicant's 
admission would violate a pet or no-pet area. The PHA may adjust the pet 
and no-pet areas or may direct such additional moves as may be necessary 
(or both) to accommodate such applicants for tenancy or to meet the 
changing needs of existing tenants.
    (2) Project owners may not designate pet areas in buildings in their 
pet rules.
    (h) Pets temporarily on the premises. The pet rules may exclude from 
the project pets not owned by a tenant that are to be kept temporarily 
on the project premises. For the purposes of paragraph (h) of this 
section, pets are to be kept ``temporarily'' if they are to be kept in 
the tenant's dwelling accommodations for a period of less than 14 
consecutive days and nights. HUD, however, encourages project owners and 
PHAs to permit the use of a visiting pet program sponsored by a humane 
society, or other nonprofit organization.


<R05>
Sec. 5.321  Lease provisions.

    (a) Lease provisions. (1) PHAs which have established pet rules and 
project owners shall ensure that the leases for all tenants of projects 
for the elderly or persons with disabilities:
    (i) State that tenants are permitted to keep common household pets 
in their dwelling units (subject to the provisions of this subpart and 
the pet rules);
    (ii) Shall incorporate by reference the pet rules promulgated by the 
project owner or PHA;
    (iii) Shall provide that the tenant agrees to comply with these 
rules; and
    (iv) Shall state that violation of these rules may be grounds for 
removal of the pet or termination of the pet owner's tenancy (or both), 
in accordance with the provisions of this subpart and applicable 
regulations and State or local law.
    (2) [Reserved]
    (b) Where a PHA has not established pet rules, the leases of all 
tenants of such projects shall not contain any provisions prohibiting 
the owning or keeping of common household pets, and shall state that 
owning and keeping of such pets will be subject to the general 
obligations imposed on the PHA and tenants in the lease and any 
applicable State or local law or regulation governing the owning or 
keeping of pets in dwelling accommodations.


<R05>
Sec. 5.324  Implementation of lease provisions.

    The lease for each tenant of a project for the elderly or persons 
with disabilities who is admitted on or after the date on which this 
subpart C is implemented shall contain the lease provisions described in 
Sec. 5.321 and, if applicable, Sec. 5.360. The lease for each tenant who 
occupies a unit in such a project under lease on the date of 
implementation of this part shall be amended to include the provisions 
described in Sec. 5.321 and, if applicable, Sec. 5.360:
    (a) For Housing programs:
    (1) Upon renewal of the lease and in accordance with any applicable 
regulation; and
    (2) When a Housing program tenant registers a common household pet 
under Sec. 5.350
    (b) For Public Housing programs:
    (1) Upon annual reexamination of tenant income in accordance with 
any applicable regulation; and
    (2) When a Public Housing program tenant wishes to own or keep a 
common household pet in his or her unit.


<R05>
Sec. 5.327  Nuisance or threat to health or safety.

    Nothing in this subpart C prohibits a project owner, PHA, or an 
appropriate

[[Page 38]]

community authority from requiring the removal of any pet from a 
project, if the pet's conduct or condition is duly determined to 
constitute, under the provisions of State or local law, a nuisance or a 
threat to the health or safety of other occupants of the project or of 
other persons in the community where the project is located.

             Pet Ownership Requirements for Housing Programs


<R05>
Sec. 5.350  Mandatory pet rules for housing programs.

    Mandatory rules. The project owner must prescribe the following pet 
rules:
    (a) Inoculations. The pet rules shall require pet owners to have 
their pets inoculated in accordance with State and local laws.
    (b) Sanitary standards. (1) The pet rules shall prescribe sanitary 
standards to govern the disposal of pet waste. These rules may:
    (i) Designate areas on the project premises for pet exercise and the 
deposit of pet waste;
    (ii) Forbid pet owners from exercising their pets or permitting 
their pets to deposit waste on the project premises outside the 
designated areas;
    (iii) Require pet owners to remove and properly dispose of all 
removable pet waste; and
    (iv) Require pet owners to remove pets from the premises to permit 
the pet to exercise or deposit waste, if no area in the project is 
designated for such purposes.
    (2) In the case of cats and other pets using litter boxes, the pet 
rules may require the pet owner to change the litter (but not more than 
twice each week), may require pet owners to separate pet waste from 
litter (but not more than once each day), and may prescribe methods for 
the disposal of pet waste and used litter.
    (c) Pet restraint. The pet rules shall require that all cats and 
dogs be appropriately and effectively restrained and under the control 
of a responsible individual while on the common areas of the project.
    (d) Registration. (1) The pet rules shall require pet owners to 
register their pets with the project owner. The pet owner must register 
the pet before it is brought onto the project premises, and must update 
the registration at least annually. The project owner may coordinate the 
annual update with the annual reexamination of tenant income, if 
applicable. The registration must include:
    (i) A certificate signed by a licensed veterinarian or a State or 
local authority empowered to inoculate animals (or designated agent of 
such an authority) stating that the pet has received all inoculations 
required by applicable State and local law;
    (ii) Information sufficient to identify the pet and to demonstrate 
that it is a common household pet; and
    (iii) The name, address, and phone number of one or more responsible 
parties who will care for the pet if the pet owner dies, is 
incapacitated, or is otherwise unable to care for the pet.
    (2) The project owner may require the pet owner to provide 
additional information necessary to ensure compliance with any 
discretionary rules prescribed under Sec. 5.318, and shall require the 
pet owner to sign a statement indicating that he or she has read the pet 
rules and agrees to comply with them.
    (3) The pet rules shall permit the project owner to refuse to 
register a pet if:
    (i) The pet is not a common household pet;
    (ii) The keeping of the pet would violate any applicable house pet 
rule;
    (iii) The pet owner fails to provide complete pet registration 
information or fails annually to update the pet registration; or
    (iv) The project owner reasonably determines, based on the pet 
owner's habits and practices, that the pet owner will be unable to keep 
the pet in compliance with the pet rules and other lease obligations. 
The pet's temperament may be considered as a factor in determining the 
prospective pet owner's ability to comply with the pet rules and other 
lease obligations.
    (4) The project owner may not refuse to register a pet based on a 
determination that the pet owner is financially unable to care for the 
pet or that the pet is inappropriate, based on the therapeutic value to 
the pet owner or the interests of the property or existing tenants.

[[Page 39]]

    (5) The pet rules shall require the project owner to notify the pet 
owner if the project owner refuses to register a pet. The notice shall 
state the basis for the project owner's action and shall be served on 
the pet owner in accordance with the requirements of Sec. 5.353(f)(1)(i) 
or (ii). The notice of refusal to register a pet may be combined with a 
notice of pet violation as required in Sec. 5.356.


<R05>
Sec. 5.353  Housing programs: Procedure for development of pet rules.

    (a) General. Project owners shall use the procedures specified in 
this section to promulgate the pet rules referred to in Secs. 5.318 and 
5.350.
    (b) Development and notice of proposed pet rules. Project owners 
shall develop proposed rules to govern the owning or keeping of common 
household pets in projects for the elderly or persons with disabilities. 
Notice of the proposed pet rules shall be served on each tenant of the 
project as provided in paragraph (f) of this section. The notice shall:
    (1) Include the text of the proposed rules;
    (2) State that tenants or tenant representatives may submit written 
comments on the rules; and
    (3) State that all comments must be submitted to the project owner 
no later than 30 days from the effective date of the notice of the 
proposed rules.
    (4) The notice may also announce the date, time, and place for a 
meeting to discuss the proposed rules (as provided in paragraph (c) of 
this section).
    (c) Tenant consultation. Tenants or tenant representatives may 
submit written comments on the proposed pet rules to the project owner 
by the date specified in the notice of proposed rules. In addition, the 
owner may schedule one or more meetings with tenants during the comment 
period to discuss the proposed rules. Tenants and tenant representatives 
may make oral comments on the proposed rules at these meetings. The 
project owner must consider comments made at these meetings only if they 
are summarized, reduced to writing, and submitted to the project owner 
before the end of the comment period.
    (d) Development and notice of final pet rules. The project owner 
shall develop the final rules after reviewing tenants' written comments 
and written summaries of any owner-tenant meetings. The project owner 
may meet with tenants and tenant representatives to attempt to resolve 
issues raised by the comments. Subject to this subpart C, the content of 
the final pet rules, however, is within the sole discretion of the 
project owner. The project owner shall serve on each tenant of the 
project, a notice of the final pet rules as provided in paragraph (f) of 
this section. The notice must include the text of the final pet rules 
and must specify the effective date of the final pet rules.
    (e) Amendment of pet rules. The project owner may amend the pet 
rules at any time by following the procedure for the development of pet 
rules specified in paragraphs (b) through (d) of this section.
    (f) Service of notice. (1) The project owner must serve the notice 
required under this section by:
    (i) Sending a letter by first class mail, properly stamped and 
addressed to the tenant at the dwelling unit, with a proper return 
address; or
    (ii) Serving a copy of the notice on any adult answering the door at 
the tenant's leased dwelling unit, or if no adult responds, by placing 
the notice under or through the door, if possible, or else by attaching 
the notice to the door; or
    (iii) For service of notice to tenants of a high-rise building, 
posting the notice in at least three conspicuous places within the 
building and maintaining the posted notices intact and in legible form 
for 30 days. For purposes of paragraph (f) of this section, a high-rise 
building is a structure that is equipped with an elevator and has a 
common lobby.
    (2) For purposes of computing time periods following service of the 
notice, service is effective on the day that all notices are delivered 
or mailed, or in the case of service by posting, on the day that all 
notices are initially posted.


<R05>
Sec. 5.356  Housing programs: Pet rule violation procedures.

    (a) Notice of pet rule violation. If a project owner determines on 
the basis of objective facts, supported by written

[[Page 40]]

statements, that a pet owner has violated a rule governing the owning or 
keeping of pets; the project owner may serve a written notice of pet 
rule violation on the pet owner in accordance with Sec. 5.353(f)(1)(i) 
or (ii). The notice of pet rule violation must:
    (1) Contain a brief statement of the factual basis for the 
determination and the pet rule or rules alleged to be violated;
    (2) State that the pet owner has 10 days from the effective date of 
service of the notice to correct the violation (including, in 
appropriate circumstances, removal of the pet) or to make a written 
request for a meeting to discuss the violation;
    (3) State that the pet owner is entitled to be accompanied by 
another person of his or her choice at the meeting; and
    (4) State that the pet owner's failure to correct the violation, to 
request a meeting, or to appear at a requested meeting may result in 
initiation of procedures to terminate the pet owner's tenancy.
    (b)(1) Pet rule violation meeting. If the pet owner makes a timely 
request for a meeting to discuss an alleged pet rule violation, the 
project owner shall establish a mutually agreeable time and place for 
the meeting but no later than 15 days from the effective date of service 
of the notice of pet rule violation (unless the project owner agrees to 
a later date). At the pet rule violation meeting, the pet owner and 
project owner shall discuss any alleged pet rule violation and attempt 
to correct it. The project owner may, as a result of the meeting, give 
the pet owner additional time to correct the violation.
    (2) Notice for pet removal. If the pet owner and project owner are 
unable to resolve the pet rule violation at the pet rule violation 
meeting, or if the project owner determines that the pet owner has 
failed to correct the pet rule violation within any additional time 
provided for this purpose under paragraph (b)(1) of this section, the 
project owner may serve a written notice on the pet owner in accordance 
with Sec. 5.353(f)(1) (i) or (ii) (or at the meeting, if appropriate), 
requiring the pet owner to remove the pet. The notice must:
    (i) Contain a brief statement of the factual basis for the 
determination and the pet rule or rules that have been violated;
    (ii) State that the pet owner must remove the pet within 10 days of 
the effective date of service of the notice of pet removal (or the 
meeting, if notice is served at the meeting); and
    (iii) State that failure to remove the pet may result in initiation 
of procedures to terminate the pet owner's tenancy.
    (c) Initiation of procedures to remove a pet or terminate the pet 
owner's tenancy. (1) The project owner may not initiate procedures to 
terminate a pet owner's tenancy based on a pet rule violation, unless:
    (i) The pet owner has failed to remove the pet or correct a pet rule 
violation within the applicable time period specified in this section 
(including any additional time permitted by the owner); and
    (ii) The pet rule violation is sufficient to begin procedures to 
terminate the pet owner's tenancy under the terms of the lease and 
applicable regulations.
    (2) The project owner may initiate procedures to remove a pet under 
Sec. 5.327 at any time, in accordance with the provisions of applicable 
State or local law.


<R05>
Sec. 5.359  Housing programs: Rejection of units by applicants for tenancy.

    (a) An applicant for tenancy in a project for the elderly or persons 
with disabilities may reject a unit offered by a project owner if the 
unit is in close proximity to a dwelling unit in which an existing 
tenant of the project owns or keeps a common household pet. An 
applicant's rejection of a unit under this section shall not adversely 
affect his or her application for tenancy in the project, including (but 
not limited to) his or her position on the project waiting list or 
qualification for any tenant selection preference.
    (b) Nothing in this subpart C imposes a duty on project owners to 
provide alternate dwelling units to existing or prospective tenants 
because of the proximity of common household pets to a particular unit 
or the presence of such pets in the project.

[[Page 41]]


<R05>
Sec. 5.360  Housing programs: Additional lease provisions.

    (a) Inspections. In addition to other inspections permitted under 
the lease, the leases for all Housing program tenants of projects for 
the elderly or persons with disabilities may state that the project 
owner may, after reasonable notice to the tenant and during reasonable 
hours, enter and inspect the premises. The lease shall permit entry and 
inspection only if the project owner has received a signed, written 
complaint alleging (or the project owner has reasonable grounds to 
believe) that the conduct or condition of a pet in the dwelling unit 
constitutes, under applicable State or local law, a nuisance or a threat 
to the health or safety of the occupants of the project or other persons 
in the community where the project is located.
    (b) Emergencies. (1) If there is no State or local authority (or 
designated agent of such an authority) authorized under applicable State 
or local law to remove a pet that becomes vicious, displays symptoms of 
severe illness, or demonstrates other behavior that constitutes an 
immediate threat to the health or safety of the tenancy as a whole, the 
project owner may place a provision in tenant leases permitting the 
project owner to enter the premises (if necessary), remove the pet, and 
take such action with respect to the pet as may be permissible under 
State and local law, which may include placing it in a facility that 
will provide care and shelter for a period not to exceed 30 days.
    (2) The lease shall permit the project owner to enter the premises 
and remove the pet or take such other permissible action only if the 
project owner requests the pet owner to remove the pet from the project 
immediately, and the pet owner refuses to do so, or if the project owner 
is unable to contact the pet owner to make a removal request. The lease 
may not contain a provision relieving the project owner from liability 
for wrongful removal of a pet. The cost of the animal care facility 
shall be paid as provided in Sec. 5.363.
    (3) The project owner may place a provision in tenant leases 
permitting the project owner to enter the premises, remove the pet, and 
place the pet in a facility that will provide care and shelter, in 
accordance with the provisions of Sec. 5.363. The lease may not contain 
a provision relieving the project owner from liability for wrongful 
removal of a pet.


<R05>
Sec. 5.363  Housing programs: Protection of the pet.

    (a) If the health or safety of a pet is threatened by the death or 
incapacity of the pet owner, or by other factors that render the pet 
owner unable to care for the pet, the project owner may contact the 
responsible party or parties listed in the pet registration required 
under Sec. 5.350(d)(1)(iii).
    (b) If the responsible party or parties are unwilling or unable to 
care for the pet, or the project owner, despite reasonable efforts, has 
been unable to contact the responsible party or parties, the project 
owner may contact the appropriate State or local authority (or 
designated agent of such an authority) and request the removal of the 
pet.
    (c) If there is no State or local authority (or designated agent of 
such an authority) authorized to remove a pet under these circumstances 
and the project owner has placed a provision in the lease agreement (as 
described in Sec. 5.360(c)(2)), the project owner may enter the pet 
owner's unit, remove the pet, and place the pet in a facility that will 
provide care and shelter until the pet owner or a representative of the 
pet owner is able to assume responsibility for the pet, but not longer 
than 30 days.
    (d) The cost of the animal care facility provided under this section 
shall be borne by the pet owner. If the pet owner (or the pet owner's 
estate) is unable or unwilling to pay, the cost of the animal care 
facility may be paid from the pet deposit, if imposed under the pet 
rules.

         Pet Ownership Requirements for Public Housing Programs


<R05>
Sec. 5.380  Public housing programs: Procedure for development of pet rules.

    PHAs that choose to promulgate pet rules shall consult with tenants 
of projects for the elderly or persons with disabilities administered by 
them with

[[Page 42]]

respect to their promulgation and subsequent amendment. PHAs shall 
develop the specific procedures governing tenant consultation, but these 
procedures must be designed to give tenants (or, if appropriate, tenant 
councils) adequate opportunity to review and comment upon the pet rules 
before they are issued for effect. PHAs are solely responsible for the 
content of final pet rules, but must give consideration to tenant 
comments. PHAs shall send to the responsible HUD field office, copies of 
the final (or amended) pet rules, as well as summaries or copies of all 
tenant comments received in the course of the tenant consultation.


<R04>
  Subpart D--Definitions and Other General Requirements for Assistance 
               Under the United States Housing Act of 1937

    Authority: 42 U.S.C. 1437a and 3535(d).

    Source: 61 FR 5665, Feb. 13, 1996, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 5.400  Applicability.

    This part applies to public housing (other than Indian housing under 
24 CFR part 950) and Section 8 programs.


<R05>
Sec. 5.403  Definitions.

    (a) The terms displaced person, elderly person, low income family, 
near-elderly person, person with disabilities, and very low income 
family are defined in section 3(b) of the 1937 Act (42 U.S.C. 1437a(b)). 
For purposes of reasonable accommodation and program accessibility for 
persons with disabilities, the term ``person with disabilities'' means 
``individual with handicaps'' as defined in 24 CFR 8.3.
    (b) In addition to the terms listed in paragraph (a) of this 
section, the following definitions apply:
    Annual contributions contract (ACC) means the written contract 
between HUD and a PHA under which HUD agrees to provide funding for a 
program under the 1937 Act, and the PHA agrees to comply with HUD 
requirements for the program.
    Applicant means a person or a family that has applied for housing 
assistance.
    Disabled family means a family whose head, spouse, or sole member is 
a person with disabilities; or two or more persons with disabilities 
living together; or one or more persons with disabilities living with 
one or more live-in aides.
    Displaced family means a family in which each member, or whose sole 
member, is a person displaced by governmental action, or a person whose 
dwelling has been extensively damaged or destroyed as a result of a 
disaster declared or otherwise formally recognized pursuant to Federal 
disaster relief laws.
    Elderly family means a family whose head, spouse, or sole member is 
a person who is at least 62 years of age; or two or more persons who are 
at least 62 years of age living together; or one or more persons who are 
at least 62 years of age living with one or more live-in aides.
    Family includes but is not limited to:
    (1) A family with or without children (the temporary absence of a 
child from the home due to placement in foster care shall not be 
considered in determining family composition and family size);
    (2) An elderly family;
    (3) A near-elderly family;
    (4) A disabled family;
    (5) A displaced family;
    (6) The remaining member of a tenant family; and
    (7) A single person who is not an elderly or displaced person, or a 
person with disabilities, or the remaining member of a tenant family.
    Live-in aide means a person who resides with one or more elderly 
persons, or near-elderly persons, or persons with disabilities, and who:
    (1) Is determined to be essential to the care and well-being of the 
persons;
    (2) Is not obligated for the support of the persons; and
    (3) Would not be living in the unit except to provide the necessary 
supportive services.
    Near-elderly family means a family whose head, spouse, or sole 
member is a person who is at least 50 years of age but below the age of 
62; or two or more persons, who are at least 50 years of age but below 
the age of 62, living together; or one or more persons who are at least 
50 years of age but below the

[[Page 43]]

age of 62 living with one or more live-in aides.

[61 FR 5665, Feb. 13, 1996, as amended at 63 FR 23853, Apr. 30, 1998]


<R05>
Sec. 5.405  Basic eligibility; preference over single persons; and housing assistance limitation for single persons.

    (a) Basic eligibility. An applicant must meet all of the eligibility 
requirements of the housing assistance for which an application is made 
in order to obtain the housing assistance. At a minimum, the applicant 
must be a family, and must be income-eligible. Eligible applicants 
include single persons who are not elderly persons, or displaced 
persons, or persons with disabilities.
    (b) Preference over single persons. An applicant that is a one- or 
two-person elderly, disabled or displaced family, must be given a 
preference over an applicant that is a single person who is not an 
elderly or displaced person, or a person with disabilities, regardless 
of the applicant's Federal or local preferences.
    (c) Housing assistance limitation for single persons. A single 
person who is not an elderly or displaced person, or a person with 
disabilities, or the remaining member of a tenant family may not be 
provided:
    (1) For public housing and other project-based assistance, a housing 
unit with two or more bedrooms; or
    (2) For tenant-based assistance, housing assistance for which the 
family unit size as determined by the HA subsidy standard exceeds the 
one bedroom level.
    (d) This section shall not apply to the Section 8 Moderate 
Rehabilitation Program for Single Room Occupancy Dwellings for Homeless 
Individuals set forth at 24 CFR part 882, subpart H.

[61 FR 5665, Feb. 13, 1996, as amended at 61 FR 13616, Mar. 27, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 5.410  Selection preferences.

    (a) Applicability. The selection preferences that are described in 
this part are applicable to public housing and housing assisted under 
the Section 8 Housing Assistance Payments program. (Corresponding 
provisions applicable to the Indian housing program are found in 24 CFR 
part 950.) These preferences are administered by the entity responsible 
for admission functions in the programs covered (``responsible 
entity''), i.e., the public housing agency (``HA'') in the public 
housing and Section 8 Certificate/Voucher and Moderate Rehabilitation 
programs and the owner in all other Section 8 programs.
    (b) Types of preference. There are three types of admission 
preferences:
    (1) ``Federal preferences'' are admission preferences for three 
categories of families, as prescribed in 42 U.S.C. 1437d(c)(4)(A), 
1437f(d)(1)(A), 1437f(o)(3), and 1437f note. Federal preference is given 
for selection of families that are:
    (i) Involuntarily displaced;
    (ii) Living in substandard housing (including families that are 
homeless or living in a shelter for the homeless); or
    (iii) Paying more than 50 percent of family income for rent.
    (2) ``Ranking preferences'' are preferences that may be established 
by the responsible entity to use in selecting among applicants that 
qualify for federal preferences.
    (3) ``Local preferences'' are preferences for use in selecting among 
applicants without regard to their federal preference status. (See 42 
U.S.C. 1437d(c)(4)(A), 1437f(d)(1)(A), 1437f(o)(3), and 1437f note.)
    (c) System. In the Section 8 programs other than the Certificate/
Voucher and Moderate Rehabilitation programs, the owner must establish a 
system for selection of applicants from the waiting list that includes 
the following:
    (1) How the federal preferences will be used;
    (2) How any ranking preferences will be used;
    (3) How any local preferences will be used; and
    (4) How any residency preference will be used.
    (d) Use of preference in selection process--(1) Factors other than 
federal and local preferences--(i) Characteristics of the unit. For 
developments administered under the Section 8 programs and for public 
housing, the responsible entity may, in selecting a family for a 
particular unit, match other characteristics of the applicant family 
with the type of unit available, e.g., number of

[[Page 44]]

bedrooms. In selection of a family for a unit that has special 
accessibility features, the responsible entity must give preference to 
families that include persons with disabilities who can benefit from 
those features of the unit (see 24 CFR 8.27 and 24 CFR 100.202(c)(3)). 
Also, in selection of a family for a unit in a mixed population project, 
the responsible entity will give preference to elderly families and 
disabled families (see subpart D of part 960 or Sec. 880.612a or 
Sec. 881.612a of this title).
    (ii) Singles preference. See Sec. 5.405.
    (2) Local preference admissions. (i) Local preferences may be 
adopted or amended by an HA to respond to local housing needs and 
priorities after the HA has conducted a public hearing.
    (ii) For Section 8 programs other than the Section 8 Certificate/
Voucher, Project-Based Certificate, and Moderate Rehabilitation programs 
operated under 24 CFR part 982, 983, and 882, respectively, if the owner 
wants to use preferences to select among applicants without regard to 
their federal preference status, it must use the local preference system 
adopted for use in the Section 8 Certificate/Voucher programs by the 
housing agency for the jurisdiction. If there is more than one HA for 
the jurisdiction, the owner shall use the local preference system of the 
HA for the lowest level of government that has jurisdiction where the 
project is located. For the public housing program, the HA may use a 
local preference system it adopts for that program.
    (iii) In the Section 8 programs other than the Certificate/Voucher, 
Project-Based Certificate, and Moderate Rehabilitation programs operated 
under 24 CFR parts 982, 983 and 882, respectively, before an owner 
implements the HA's local preferences, the owner must receive approval 
from the HUD Field Office. HUD shall review these preferences to ensure 
that they are applicable to any tenant eligibility limitations for the 
subject housing and that they are consistent with HUD requirements 
pertaining to nondiscrimination and the Affirmative Fair Housing 
Marketing objectives. If HUD determines that the local preferences are 
in violation of those requirements, the owner will not be permitted to 
admit applicants on the basis of any local preferences.
    (iv) In any year, the number of families given preference in 
admission pursuant to a local preference over families with a federal 
preference may not exceed the local preference limit. ``Local preference 
limit'' means the following:
    (A) For an HA's Section 8 Certificate/Voucher program operated under 
24 CFR part 982, ten percent of annual waiting list admissions;
    (B) For an HA's public housing program, fifty percent of annual 
admissions;
    (C) For an HA's Section 8 Moderate Rehabilitation program, thirty 
percent of annual admissions;
    (D) For Section 8 New Construction, Substantial Rehabilitation, and 
Loan Management/Property Disposition projects, thirty percent of annual 
admissions to each project; and
    (E) For the Section 8 Project-Based Certificate program, thirty 
percent of total annual waiting list admissions to the HA's Project-
Based Certificate program (including admissions pursuant to 24 CFR 
983.203(c)(3)).
    (3) Prohibition of preference if applicant was evicted for drug-
related criminal activity. With respect to the Section 8 Certificate, 
Voucher, Loan Management, and Property Disposition programs and the 
public housing program, the HA may not give a preference (federal 
preference, local preference, or ranking preference) to an applicant if 
any member of the family is a person who was evicted during the past 
three years from housing assisted under a 1937 Housing Act program 
because of drug-related criminal activity. However, the HA may give an 
admission preference in any of the following cases:
    (i) If the HA determines that the evicted person has successfully 
completed a rehabilitation program approved by the HA;
    (ii) If the HA determines that the evicted person clearly did not 
participate in or know about the drug-related criminal activity; or
    (iii) If the HA determines that the evicted person no longer 
participates in any drug-related criminal activity.

[[Page 45]]

    (4) Retention of federal preference status. With respect to 
determining the preference status of an applicant for the Section 8 
Certificate/Voucher programs, an applicant who is receiving tenant-based 
assistance under the HOME program (24 CFR part 92) and an applicant who 
resides in public or Indian housing of the same HA (and was on the 
tenant-based program waiting list when admitted to the HA's public or 
Indian housing on or after April 26, 1993), the HA determines whether 
the applicant qualifies for federal preference based on the situation of 
the applicant at the time the applicant began to receive tenant-based 
assistance under the HOME program or was admitted to the HA's public or 
Indian housing program (beginning of initial public or Indian housing 
lease).
    (e) Income-based admission. (1) In public housing, the HA may only 
give preference to select a relatively higher income family for 
admission if the preference is pursuant to a ``local preference'' 
admission. (For other income-related restrictions on selection, see 24 
CFR 913.105.)
    (2) In Section 8 programs, the responsible entity may not select a 
family for admission in an order different from the order on the waiting 
list for the purpose of selecting a relatively higher income family for 
admission.
    (f) Informing applicants about admission preferences. (1) The 
responsible entity must inform all applicants about available 
preferences and must give applicants an opportunity to show that they 
qualify for available preferences (federal preference, ranking 
preference, or local preference).
    (2) If the responsible entity determines that the notification to 
all applicants on a waiting list required by paragraph (f)(1) of this 
section is impracticable because of the length of the list, the 
responsible entity may provide this notification to fewer than all 
applicants on the list at any given time. The responsible entity must, 
however, have notified a sufficient number of applicants at any given 
time that, on the basis of the entity's determination of the number of 
applicants on the waiting list who already claim a federal preference 
and the anticipated number of project admissions:
    (i) There is an adequate pool of applicants who are likely to 
qualify for a federal preference; and
    (ii) It is unlikely that, on the basis of the responsible entity's 
framework for applying the preferences under paragraph (c) of this 
section and the federal preferences claimed by those already on the 
waiting list, any applicant who has not been so notified would receive 
assistance before those who have received notification.
    (g) Notice and opportunity for a meeting where preference is denied. 
(1) If the responsible entity determines that an applicant does not 
qualify for a federal preference, ranking preference, or local 
preference claimed by the applicant, the responsible entity must 
promptly give the applicant written notice of the determination. The 
notice must contain a brief statement of the reasons for the 
determination, and state that the applicant has the right to meet with a 
representative of the responsible entity to review the determination. 
The meeting may be conducted by any person or persons designated by the 
responsible entity, who may be an officer or employee of the responsible 
entity, including the person who made or reviewed the determination or a 
subordinate employee.
    (2) The applicant may exercise other rights if the applicant 
believes that the applicant has been discriminated against on the basis 
of race, color, religion, sex, national origin, age, disability or 
familial status.
    (h) Residency preferences. A ``residency preference'' is a 
preference for admission of families that reside anywhere in a specified 
``residency preference area.'' A residency preference may be used as a 
ranking or local preference.
    (1) Section 8 programs other than Certificate/Voucher and Project-
Based Certificate. In these developments, local residency requirements 
are prohibited.
    (2) Section 8 Certificate/Voucher and Project-Based Certificate 
programs. Any residency preference must be approved by HUD.
    (i) A county or municipality may be used as a residency preference 
area.
    (ii) An area smaller than a county or municipality may not be used 
as a residency preference area.

[[Page 46]]

    (3) All projects. With respect to any residency preference, 
applicants who are working or who have been notified that they are hired 
to work in the residency preference area shall be treated as residents 
of the residency preference area. A residency preference may not be 
based on how long the applicant has resided in or worked in the 
residency preference area.
    (i) Nondiscrimination. (1) Any selection preferences must be 
established and administered in accordance with the following 
authorities:
    (i) Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000d) and 
the implementing regulations at 24 CFR part 1;
    (ii) The Fair Housing Act (42 U.S.C. 3601-3619) and the implementing 
regulations at 24 CFR parts 100, 108, 109, and 110;
    (iii) Executive Order 11063 on Equal Opportunity in Housing and the 
implementing regulations at 24 CFR part 107;
    (iv) Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (29 U.S.C. 794) 
and the implementing regulations at 24 CFR part 8;
    (v) The Age Discrimination Act of 1975 (42 U.S.C. 6101-6107) and the 
implementing regulations at 24 CFR part 146; and
    (vi) The Americans with Disabilities Act (42 U.S.C. 12101-12213) to 
the extent applicable.
    (2) Such preferences also must be consistent with HUD's affirmative 
fair housing objectives and (where applicable) the owner's HUD-approved 
affirmative fair housing marketing plan.

(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under OMB control 
numbers 2577-0105 and 2502-0372)

[61 FR 9041, Mar. 6, 1996, as amended at 62 FR 27125, May 16, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 5.415  Federal preferences: general.

    (a) Definitions. The definitions of these preference categories 
stated in Secs. 5.420, 5.425, and 5.430 must be used by the responsible 
entity, except that an HA may use its own alternative definitions if 
they have been approved by HUD.
    (b) Ranking preferences: selection among federal preference holders. 
The responsible entity's system of administering the federal preferences 
(its admission policy, in the case of the Section 8 Certificate/Voucher 
programs) may provide for use of ranking preference for selecting among 
applicants who qualify for federal preference.
    (1) The responsible entity may give preference to working families--
so long as the prohibition of Sec. 5.410 against selection based on 
income and the nondiscrimination provisions that protect against 
discrimination on the basis of age or disability are not violated. (If a 
responsible entity adopts such a preference, it may not give greater 
weight to an applicant based on the amount of employment income, and an 
applicant household shall be given the benefit of the preference if the 
head and spouse, or sole member, are age 62 or older or are receiving 
social security disability, supplemental security income disability 
benefits, or any other payments based on an individual's inability to 
work.) A responsible entity may give preference to graduates of, as well 
as active participants in, educational and training programs that are 
designed to prepare individuals for the job market. The responsible 
entity also may use the housing agency's ``local preferences'' for the 
Section 8 Certificate and Voucher programs to rank federal preference 
holders.
    (2) The ranking preferences may give different weight to the federal 
preferences, through such means as:
    (i) Aggregating the federal preferences (e.g., provide that two 
federal preferences outweigh one);
    (ii) Giving greater weight to holders of a particular category of 
federal preference; or
    (iii) Giving greater weight to a federal preference holder who fits 
a particular category of federal preference.
    (c) Qualifying for a federal preference--(1) Certification of 
preference. An applicant may claim qualification for a federal 
preference by certifying to the responsible entity that the family 
qualifies for federal preference. The responsible entity must accept 
this certification, unless the responsible entity verifies that the 
applicant is not qualified for federal preference.
    (2) Verification of preference. (i) Before admitting an applicant on 
the basis of a federal preference, the responsible entity must require 
the applicant to

[[Page 47]]

provide information needed by the responsible entity to verify that the 
applicant qualifies for a federal preference because of the applicant's 
current status. The applicant's current status must be determined 
without regard to whether there has been a change in the applicant's 
qualification for a federal preference between the time of application 
and selection for admission, including a change from one federal 
preference category to another.
    (ii) In the case of Section 8 programs other than the Section 8 
Certificate/Voucher, Project-Based Certificate, and Moderate 
Rehabilitation programs, the owner must use the verification procedures 
specified in Sec. 5.420(c) (involuntary displacement); Sec. 5.425(c) 
(substandard housing); and Sec. 5.430(b) (rent burden). In the case of 
the Section 8 Certificate/Voucher, Project-Based Certificate, and 
Moderate Rehabilitation programs and the public housing program, the HA 
may adopt its own verification procedure.
    (iii) Once the responsible entity has verified an applicant's 
qualification for a federal preference, the responsible entity need not 
require the applicant to provide information needed by the responsible 
entity to verify such qualification again unless:
    (A) The responsible entity determines reverification is desirable 
because a long time has passed since verification; or
    (B) The responsible entity has reasonable grounds to believe that 
the applicant no longer qualifies for a federal preference.
    (3) Effect of current residence in assisted housing. No applicant is 
to be denied a federal preference for which the family otherwise 
qualifies on the basis that the applicant already resides in assisted 
housing; for example, the actual condition of the housing unit must be 
considered, or the possibility of involuntary displacement resulting 
from domestic violence must be evaluated.
    (d) Approval of special conditions satisfying preference 
definitions. With respect to Section 8 programs other than the Section 8 
Certificate/Voucher, Project-Based Certificate and Moderate 
Rehabilitation programs, HUD may specify additional conditions under 
which the federal preferences, as described in Secs. 5.420, 5.425, and 
5.430, can be satisfied. In such cases, appropriate certification of 
qualification must be provided. (See HUD Handbook 4350.3, which is 
available at HUD field offices.)

(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under OMB control 
number 2502-0372 and 2577-0105)

[61 FR 9043, Mar. 6, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 5.420  Federal preference: involuntary displacement.

    (a) How applicant qualifies for displacement preference. (See 
Sec. 5.415(a)(2) and (c)(2)(ii) for applicability of this section to the 
Section 8 Certificate/Voucher, Project-Based Certificate, and Moderate 
Rehabilitation programs and the public housing program.)
    (1) An applicant qualifies for a federal preference on the basis of 
involuntary displacement if either of the following apply:
    (i) The applicant has been involuntarily displaced and is not living 
in standard, permanent replacement housing; or
    (ii) The applicant will be involuntarily displaced within no more 
than six months from the date of preference status certification by the 
family or verification by the responsible entity.
    (2)(i) ``Standard, permanent replacement housing'' is housing:
    (A) That is decent, safe, and sanitary;
    (B) That is adequate for the family size; and
    (C) That the family is occupying pursuant to a lease or occupancy 
agreement.
    (ii) ``Standard, permanent replacement housing'' does not include:
    (A) Transient facilities, such as motels, hotels, or temporary 
shelters for victims of domestic violence or homeless families; or
    (B) In the case of domestic violence, the housing unit in which the 
applicant and the applicant's spouse or other member of the household 
who engages in such violence live.
    (b) Meaning of involuntary displacement. An applicant is or will be 
involuntarily displaced if the applicant has vacated or will have to 
vacate the unit where the applicant lives because of one or more of the 
following:

[[Page 48]]

    (1) Displacement by disaster. An applicant's unit is uninhabitable 
because of a disaster, such as a fire or flood.
    (2) Displacement by government action. Activity carried on by an 
agency of the United States or by any State or local governmental body 
or agency in connection with code enforcement or a public improvement or 
development program.
    (3) Displacement by action of housing owner. (i) Action by a housing 
owner forces the applicant to vacate its unit.
    (ii) An applicant does not qualify as involuntarily displaced 
because action by a housing owner forces the applicant to vacate its 
unit unless:
    (A) The applicant cannot control or prevent the owner's action;
    (B) The owner action occurs although the applicant met all 
previously imposed conditions of occupancy; and
    (C) The action taken by the owner is other than a rent increase.
    (iii) To qualify as involuntarily displaced because action by a 
housing owner forces the applicant to vacate its unit, reasons for an 
applicant's having to vacate a housing unit include, but are not limited 
to, conversion of an applicant's housing unit to non-rental or non-
residential use; closing of an applicant's housing unit for 
rehabilitation or for any other reason; notice to an applicant that the 
applicant must vacate a unit because the owner wants the unit for the 
owner's personal or family use or occupancy; sale of a housing unit in 
which an applicant resides under an agreement that the unit must be 
vacant when possession is transferred; or any other legally authorized 
act that results or will result in the withdrawal by the owner of the 
unit or structure from the rental market.
    (iv) Such reasons do not include the vacating of a unit by a tenant 
as a result of actions taken by the owner because the tenant refuses:
    (A) To comply with HUD program policies and procedures for the 
occupancy of under-occupied or overcrowded units; or
    (B) To accept a transfer to another housing unit in accordance with 
a court decree or in accordance with policies and procedures under a 
HUD-approved desegregation plan.
    (4) Displacement by domestic violence. (i) An applicant is 
involuntarily displaced if:
    (A) The applicant has vacated a housing unit because of domestic 
violence; or
    (B) The applicant lives in a housing unit with a person who engages 
in domestic violence.
    (ii) ``Domestic violence'' means actual or threatened physical 
violence directed against one or more members of the applicant family by 
a spouse or other member of the applicant's household.
    (iii) To qualify as involuntarily displaced because of domestic 
violence:
    (A) The responsible entity must determine, in accordance with HUD's 
administrative instructions, that the domestic violence occurred 
recently or is of a continuing nature; and
    (B) The applicant must certify that the person who engaged in such 
violence will not reside with the applicant family unless the 
responsible entity has given advance written approval. If the family is 
admitted, the responsible entity may deny or terminate assistance to the 
family for breach of this certification.
    (5) Displacement to avoid reprisals. (i) An applicant family is 
involuntarily displaced if:
    (A) Family members provided information on criminal activities to a 
law enforcement agency; and
    (B) Based on a threat assessment, a law enforcement agency 
recommends rehousing the family to avoid or minimize a risk of violence 
against family members as a reprisal for providing such information.
    (ii) The responsible entity may establish appropriate safeguards to 
conceal the identity of families requiring protection against such 
reprisals.
    (6) Displacement by hate crimes. (i) An applicant is involuntarily 
displaced if:
    (A) One or more members of the applicant's family have been the 
victim of one or more hate crimes; and
    (B) The applicant has vacated a housing unit because of such crime, 
or the fear associated with such crime has destroyed the applicant's 
peaceful enjoyment of the unit.

[[Page 49]]

    (ii) ``Hate crime'' means actual or threatened physical violence or 
intimidation that is directed against a person or his or her property 
and that is based on the person's race, color, religion, sex, national 
origin, handicap, or familial status.
    (iii) The responsible entity must determine, in accordance with 
HUD's administrative instructions, that the hate crime involved occurred 
recently or is of a continuing nature.
    (7) Displacement by inaccessibility of unit. An applicant is 
involuntarily displaced if:
    (i) A member of the family has a mobility or other impairment that 
makes the person unable to use critical elements of the unit; and
    (ii) The owner is not legally obligated to make the changes to the 
unit that would make critical elements accessible to the disabled person 
as a reasonable accommodation.
    (8) Displacement because of HUD disposition of multifamily project. 
Involuntary displacement includes displacement because of disposition of 
a multifamily rental housing project by HUD under section 203 of the 
Housing and Community Development Amendments of 1978.
    (c) Involuntary displacement preference: Verification. A private 
owner's verification of an applicant's involuntary displacement is 
established by the following documentation:
    (1) Displacement by disaster. Certification, in a form prescribed by 
the Secretary, from a unit or agency of government that an applicant has 
been or will be displaced as a result of a disaster that results in the 
uninhabitability of an applicant's unit.
    (2) Displacement by government action. Certification, in a form 
prescribed by the Secretary, from a unit or agency of government that an 
applicant has been or will be displaced by activity carried on by an 
agency of the United States or by any State or local governmental body 
or agency in connection with code enforcement or a public improvement or 
development program.
    (3) Displacement by owner action. Certification, in a form 
prescribed by the Secretary, from an owner or owner's agent that an 
applicant had to or will have to vacate a unit by a date certain because 
of owner action.
    (4) Displacement because of domestic violence. Certification, in a 
form prescribed by the Secretary, of displacement because of domestic 
violence from the local police department, social services agency, or 
court of competent jurisdiction, or a clergyman, physician, or public or 
private facility that provides shelter or counseling to the victims of 
domestic violence.
    (5) Displacement to avoid reprisals. A threat assessment by a law 
enforcement agency.
    (6) Displacement by hate crime. Certification by a law enforcement 
agency or other reliable information.
    (7) Displacement by inaccessibility of unit. Certification by a 
health care professional that a family member has a mobility or other 
impairment that makes critical elements of the current unit 
inaccessible, and statement by the owner that it is unable to make 
necessary changes to the unit to make it accessible.
    (8) Displacement by HUD disposition of multifamily project. 
Certification by HUD with respect to the disposition.

[61 FR 9044, Mar. 6, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 5.425  Federal preference: substandard housing.

    (a) When unit is substandard. (See Sec. 5.415(a)(2) and (c)(2)(ii) 
for applicability of this section to the Section 8 Certificate/Voucher, 
Project-Based Certificate, Moderate Rehabilitation programs and the 
public housing program.) A unit is substandard if it:
    (1) Is dilapidated;
    (2) Does not have operable indoor plumbing;
    (3) Does not have a usable flush toilet inside the unit for the 
exclusive use of a family;
    (4) Does not have a usable bathtub or shower inside the unit for the 
exclusive use of a family;
    (5) Does not have electricity, or has inadequate or unsafe 
electrical service;
    (6) Does not have a safe or adequate source of heat;
    (7) Should, but does not, have a kitchen; or
    (8) Has been declared unfit for habitation by an agency or unit of 
government.

[[Page 50]]

    (b) Other definitions--(1) Dilapidated unit. A housing unit is 
dilapidated if:
    (i) The unit does not provide safe and adequate shelter, and in its 
present condition endangers the health, safety, or well-being of a 
family; or
    (ii) The unit has one or more critical defects, or a combination of 
intermediate defects in sufficient number or extent to require 
considerable repair or rebuilding. The defects may involve original 
construction, or they may result from continued neglect or lack of 
repair or from serious damage to the structure.
    (2) Homeless family. (i) An applicant that is a ``homeless family'' 
is considered to be living in substandard housing.
    (ii) A ``homeless family'' includes:
    (A) Any person or family that lacks a fixed, regular, and adequate 
nighttime residence; and
    (B) Any person or family that has a primary nighttime residence that 
is:
    (1) A supervised publicly or privately operated shelter designed to 
provide temporary living accommodations (including welfare hotels, 
congregate shelters, and transitional housing);
    (2) An institution that provides a temporary residence for 
individuals intended to be institutionalized; or
    (3) A public or private place not designed for, or ordinarily used 
as, a regular sleeping accommodation for human beings.
    (iii) A ``homeless family'' does not include any person imprisoned 
or otherwise detained pursuant to an Act of Congress or a State law.
    (3) Status of SRO housing. In determining whether an individual 
living in single room occupancy (SRO) housing qualifies for federal 
preference, SRO housing is not considered substandard solely because it 
does not contain sanitary or food preparation facilities.
    (c) Substandard housing preference: verification. The following 
provisions are applicable to private owners:
    (1) Verification that an applicant is living in substandard housing 
consists of certification, in a form prescribed by the Secretary, from a 
unit or agency of government or from an applicant's present landlord 
that the applicant's unit is ``substandard housing'' (as described in 
this section).
    (2) In the case of a ``homeless family'' (as described in this 
section), verification consists of certification, in a form prescribed 
by the Secretary, of this status from a public or private facility that 
provides shelter for such individuals, or from the local police 
department or social services agency.

[61 FR 9045, Mar. 6, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 5.430  Federal preference: rent burden.

    (a) Rent burden preference: how determined. (See Sec. 5.415(a)(2) 
and (c)(2)(ii) for applicability of this section to the Section 8 
Certificate/Voucher, Project-Based Certificate, and Moderate 
Rehabilitation programs and the public housing program.)
    (1) ``Rent burden preference'' means the federal preference for 
admission of applicants that pay more than 50 percent of family income 
for rent.
    (2) For purposes of determining whether an applicant qualifies for 
the rent burden preference:
    (i) ``Family income'' means Monthly Income, as defined in 24 CFR 
813.102.
    (ii) ``Rent'' means:
    (A) The actual monthly amount due under a lease or occupancy 
agreement between a family and the family's current landlord; and
    (B) For utilities purchased directly by tenants from utility 
providers:
    (1) The utility allowance for family-purchased utilities and 
services that is used in the HA tenant-based program; or
    (2) If the family chooses, the average monthly payments that the 
family actually made for these utilities and services for the most 
recent 12-month period or, if information is not obtainable for the 
entire period, for an appropriate recent period.
    (iii) Amounts paid to or on behalf of a family under any energy 
assistance program must be subtracted from the otherwise applicable 
rental amount, to the extent that they are not included in the family's 
income.
    (iv) For purposes of the Section 8 Certificate/Voucher programs, 
rent for an applicant who owns a manufactured home, but rents the space 
upon which it is located, includes the monthly payment to amortize the 
purchase price of the home, calculated in accordance with HUD's 
requirements. In addition,

[[Page 51]]

for this program, rent for members of a cooperative means the charges 
under the occupancy agreement between the members and the cooperative.
    (3) An applicant does not qualify for a rent burden preference if 
either of the following is applicable:
    (i) The applicant has been paying more than 50 percent of income for 
rent for less than 90 days.
    (ii) The applicant is paying more than 50 percent of family income 
to rent a unit because the applicant's housing assistance for occupancy 
of the unit under any of the following programs has been terminated 
because of the applicant's refusal to comply with applicable program 
policies and procedures on the occupancy of underoccupied and 
overcrowded units:
    (A) The Section 8 programs or public and Indian housing programs 
under the United States Housing Act of 1937;
    (B) The rent supplement program under section 101 of the Housing and 
Urban Development Act of 1965; or
    (C) Rental assistance payments under section 236(f)(2) of the 
National Housing Act.
    (b) Rent burden preference: verification of income and rent. The 
owner must verify that an applicant is paying more than 50 percent of 
family income for rent, as follows:
    (1) How to verify income. The owner must verify a family's income by 
using the standards and procedures that it uses to verify family income 
under 24 CFR part 813.
    (2) How to verify rent. The owner must verify the amount due to the 
family's landlord (or cooperative) under the lease or occupancy 
agreement:
    (i) By requiring the family to furnish copies of its most recent 
rental (or cooperative charges) receipts (which may include canceled 
checks or money order receipts) or a copy of the family's current lease 
or occupancy agreement; or
    (ii) By contacting the landlord (or cooperative) or its agent 
directly.
    (3) Utilities. To verify the actual amount that a family paid for 
utilities and other housing services, the owner must require the family 
to provide copies of the appropriate bills or receipts, or must obtain 
the information directly from the utility or service supplier.

[61 FR 9045, Mar. 6, 1996]


<R04>
          Subpart E--Restrictions on Assistance to Noncitizens

    Authority: 42 U.S.C. 1436a and 3535(d).


<R05>
Sec. 5.500  Applicability.

    (a) Covered programs/assistance. This subpart E implements Section 
214 of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1980, as amended (42 
U.S.C. 1436a). Section 214 prohibits HUD from making financial 
assistance available to persons who are not in eligible status with 
respect to citizenship or noncitizen immigration status. This subpart E 
is applicable to financial assistance provided under:
    (1) Section 235 of the National Housing Act (12 U.S.C. 1715z) (the 
Section 235 Program);
    (2) Section 236 of the National Housing Act (12 U.S.C. 1715z-1) 
(tenants paying below market rent only) (the Section 236 Program);
    (3) Section 101 of the Housing and Urban Development Act of 1965 (12 
U.S.C. 1701s) (the Rent Supplement Program); and
    (4) The United States Housing Act of 1937 (42 U.S. C. 1437 et seq.) 
which covers:
    (i) HUD's Public Housing Programs;
    (ii) The Section 8 Housing Assistance Programs; and
    (iii) The Housing Development Grant Programs (with respect to low 
income units only).
    (b) Covered individuals and entities--(1) Covered individuals/
persons and families. The provisions of this subpart E apply to both 
applicants for assistance and persons already receiving assistance 
covered under this subpart E.
    (2) Covered entities. The provisions of this subpart E apply to 
Public Housing Agencies (PHAs), project (or housing) owners, and 
mortgagees under the Section 235 Program. The term ``responsible 
entity'' is used in this subpart E to refer collectively to these 
entities, and is further defined in Sec. 5.504.

[[Page 52]]


<R05>
Sec. 5.501  PHA election whether to comply with this subpart.

    (a) PHA opt-out. A PHA that is a responsible entity under this 
subpart may elect not to comply with (``opt-out'' of) the requirements 
of this subpart.
    (b) PHA compliance. If the PHA elects to comply with this subpart, 
the PHA:
    (1) May initiate procedures to affirmatively establish or verify the 
eligibility of a family under this section at any time at which the PHA 
determines that such eligibility is in question, without regard to 
position of the family member's family on the waiting list of the PHA;
    (2) May affirmatively establish or verify the eligibility of a 
family member in accordance with the procedures set forth in section 
274A(b)(1) of the Immigration and Nationality Act; and
    (3) Shall have access to any relevant information contained in the 
INS SAVE system (or any successor thereto) that relates to any family 
member applying for financial assistance.
    (c) HUD not responsible due to PHA opt-out. HUD shall not bear any 
responsibility in connection with compliance with the requirements of 
Section 214 if a PHA elects not to comply with this subpart under 
paragraph (a) of this section.

[61 FR 60538, Nov. 29, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 5.502  Requirements concerning documents.

    For any notice or document (decision, declaration, consent form, 
etc.) that this subpart E requires the responsible entity to provide to 
an individual, or requires the responsible entity to obtain the 
signature of an individual, the responsible entity, where feasible, must 
arrange for the notice or document to be provided to the individual in a 
language that is understood by the individual if the individual is not 
proficient in English. (See 24 CFR 8.6 of HUD's regulations for 
requirements concerning communications with persons with disabilities.)


<R05>
Sec. 5.504  Definitions.

    (a) The definitions 1937 Act, HUD, Public Housing Agency (PHA), and 
Section 8 are defined in subpart A of this part.
    (b) As used in this subpart E:
    Child means a member of the family other than the family head or 
spouse who is under 18 years of age.
    Citizen means a citizen or national of the United States.
    Evidence of citizenship or eligible status means the documents which 
must be submitted to evidence citizenship or eligible immigration 
status. (See Sec. 5.508(b).)
    Family has the same meaning as provided in the program regulations 
of the relevant Section 214 covered program.
    Head of household means the adult member of the family who is the 
head of the household for purposes of determining income eligibility and 
rent.
    Housing covered programs means the following programs administered 
by the Assistant Secretary for Housing:
    (1) Section 235 of the National Housing Act (12 U.S.C. 1715z) (the 
Section 235 Program);
    (2) Section 236 of the National Housing Act (12 U.S.C. 1715z-1) 
(tenants paying below market rent only) (the Section 236 Program); and
    (3) Section 101 of the Housing and Urban Development Act of 1965 (12 
U.S.C. 1701s) (the Rent Supplement Program).
    INS means the U.S. Immigration and Naturalization Service.
    Mixed family means a family whose members include those with 
citizenship or eligible immigration status, and those without 
citizenship or eligible immigration status.
    National means a person who owes permanent allegiance to the United 
States, for example, as a result of birth in a United States territory 
or possession.
    Noncitizen means a person who is neither a citizen nor national of 
the United States.
    Project owner means the person or entity that owns the housing 
project containing the assisted dwelling unit.
    Public Housing covered programs means the public housing programs 
administered by the Assistant Secretary for Public and Indian Housing 
under title I of the 1937 Act. This definition does not encompass HUD's 
Indian Housing programs administered under

[[Page 53]]

title II of the 1937 Act. Further, this term does not include those 
programs providing assistance under section 8 of the 1937 Act. (See 
definition of ``Section 8 Covered Programs'' in this section.)
    Responsible entity means the person or entity responsible for 
administering the restrictions on providing assistance to noncitizens 
with ineligible immigrations status. The entity responsible for 
administering the restrictions on providing assistance to noncitizens 
with ineligible immigration status under the various covered programs is 
as follows:
    (1) For the Section 235 Program, the mortgagee.
    (2) For Public Housing, the Section 8 Rental Certificate, the 
Section 8 Rental Voucher, and the Section 8 Moderate Rehabilitation 
programs, the PHA administering the program under an ACC with HUD.
    (3) For all other Section 8 programs, the Section 236 Program, and 
the Rent Supplement Program, the owner.
    Section 8 covered programs means all HUD programs which assist 
housing under Section 8 of the 1937 Act, including Section 8-assisted 
housing for which loans are made under section 202 of the Housing Act of 
1959.
    Section 214 means section 214 of the Housing and Community 
Development Act of 1980, as amended (42 U.S.C. 1436a).
    Section 214 covered programs is the collective term for the HUD 
programs to which the restrictions imposed by Section 214 apply. These 
programs are set forth in Sec. 5.500.
    Tenant means an individual or a family renting or occupying an 
assisted dwelling unit. For purposes of this subpart E, the term tenant 
will also be used to include a homebuyer, where appropriate.


<R05>
Sec. 5.506  General provisions.

    (a) Restrictions on assistance. Financial assistance under a Section 
214 covered program is restricted to:
    (1) Citizens; or
    (2) Noncitizens who have eligible immigration status under one of 
the categories set forth in Section 214 (see 42 U.S.C. 1436a(a)).
    (b) Family eligibility for assistance. (1) A family shall not be 
eligible for assistance unless every member of the family residing in 
the unit is determined to have eligible status, as described in 
paragraph (a) of this section, or unless the family meets the conditions 
set forth in paragraph (b)(2) of this section.
    (2) Despite the ineligibility of one or more family members, a mixed 
family may be eligible for one of the three types of assistance provided 
in Secs. 5.516 and 5.518. A family without any eligible members and 
receiving assistance on June 19, 1995 may be eligible for temporary 
deferral of termination of assistance as provided in Secs. 5.516 and 
5.518.


<R05>
Sec. 5.508  Submission of evidence of citizenship or eligible immigration status.

    (a) General. Eligibility for assistance or continued assistance 
under a Section 214 covered program is contingent upon a family's 
submission to the responsible entity of the documents described in 
paragraph (b) of this section for each family member. If one or more 
family members do not have citizenship or eligible immigration status, 
the family members may exercise the election not to contend to have 
eligible immigration status as provided in paragraph (e) of this 
section, and the provisions of Secs. 5.516 and 5.518 shall apply.
    (b) Evidence of citizenship or eligible immigration status. Each 
family member, regardless of age, must submit the following evidence to 
the responsible entity.
    (1) For citizens, the evidence consists of a signed declaration of 
U.S. citizenship. The responsible entity may request verification of the 
declaration by requiring presentation of a United States passport, 
resident alien card, registration card, social security card, or other 
appropriate documentation.
    (2) For noncitizens who are 62 years of age or older or who will be 
62 years of age or older and receiving assistance under a Section 214 
covered program on September 30, 1996 or applying for assistance on or 
after that date, the evidence consists of:
    (i) A signed declaration of eligible immigration status; and
    (ii) Proof of age document.

[[Page 54]]

    (3) For all other noncitizens, the evidence consists of:
    (i) A signed declaration of eligible immigration status;
    (ii) One of the INS documents referred to in Sec. 5.510; and
    (iii) A signed verification consent form.
    (c) Declaration. (1) For each family member who contends that he or 
she is a U.S. citizen or a noncitizen with eligible immigration status, 
the family must submit to the responsible entity a written declaration, 
signed under penalty of perjury, by which the family member declares 
whether he or she is a U.S. citizen or a noncitizen with eligible 
immigration status.
    (i) For each adult, the declaration must be signed by the adult.
    (ii) For each child, the declaration must be signed by an adult 
residing in the assisted dwelling unit who is responsible for the child.
    (2) For Housing covered programs: The written declaration may be 
incorporated as part of the application for housing assistance or may 
constitute a separate document.
    (d) Verification consent form--(1) Who signs. Each noncitizen who 
declares eligible immigration status (except certain noncitizens who are 
62 years of age or older as described in paragraph (b)(2) of this 
section) must sign a verification consent form as follows.
    (i) For each adult, the form must be signed by the adult.
    (ii) For each child, the form must be signed by an adult residing in 
the assisted dwelling unit who is responsible for the child.
    (2) Notice of release of evidence by responsible entity. The 
verification consent form shall provide that evidence of eligible 
immigration status may be released by the responsible entity without 
responsibility for the further use or transmission of the evidence by 
the entity receiving it, to:
    (i) HUD, as required by HUD; and
    (ii) The INS for purposes of verification of the immigration status 
of the individual.
    (3) Notice of release of evidence by HUD. The verification consent 
form also shall notify the individual of the possible release of 
evidence of eligible immigration status by HUD. Evidence of eligible 
immigration status shall only be released to the INS for purposes of 
establishing eligibility for financial assistance and not for any other 
purpose. HUD is not responsible for the further use or transmission of 
the evidence or other information by the INS.
    (e) Individuals who do not contend that they have eligible status. 
If one or more members of a family elect not to contend that they have 
eligible immigration status, and other members of the family establish 
their citizenship or eligible immigration status, the family may be 
eligible for assistance under Secs. 5.516 and 5.518, or Sec. 5.520, 
despite the fact that no declaration or documentation of eligible status 
is submitted for one or more members of the family. The family, however, 
must identify in writing to the responsible entity, the family member 
(or members) who will elect not to contend that he or she has eligible 
immigration status.
    (f) Notification of requirements of Section 214--(1) When notice is 
to be issued. Notification of the requirement to submit evidence of 
citizenship or eligible immigration status, as required by this section, 
or to elect not to contend that one has eligible status as provided by 
paragraph (e) of this section, shall be given by the responsible entity 
as follows:
    (i) Applicant's notice. The notification described in paragraph 
(f)(1) of this section shall be given to each applicant at the time of 
application for assistance. Applicants whose applications are pending on 
June 19, 1995, shall be notified of the requirement to submit evidence 
of eligible status as soon as possible after June 19, 1995.
    (ii) Notice to tenants. The notification described in paragraph 
(f)(1) of this section shall be given to each tenant at the time of, and 
together with, the responsible entity's notice of regular reexamination 
of income, but not later than one year following June 19, 1995.
    (iii) Timing of mortgagor's notice. A mortgagor receiving Section 
235 assistance must be provided the notification described in paragraph 
(f)(1) of this section and any additional requirements imposed under the 
Section 235 Program.

[[Page 55]]

    (2) Form and content of notice. The notice shall:
    (i) State that financial assistance is contingent upon the 
submission and verification, as appropriate, of evidence of citizenship 
or eligible immigration status as required by paragraph (a) of this 
section;
    (ii) Describe the type of evidence that must be submitted, and state 
the time period in which that evidence must be submitted (see paragraph 
(g) of this section concerning when evidence must be submitted); and
    (iii) State that assistance will be prorated, denied or terminated, 
as appropriate, upon a final determination of ineligibility after all 
appeals have been exhausted (see Sec. 5.514 concerning INS appeal, and 
informal hearing process) or, if appeals are not pursued, at a time to 
be specified in accordance with HUD requirements. Tenants also shall be 
informed of how to obtain assistance under the preservation of families 
provisions of Secs. 5.516 and 5.518.
    (g) When evidence of eligible status is required to be submitted. 
The responsible entity shall require evidence of eligible status to be 
submitted at the times specified in paragraph (g) of this section, 
subject to any extension granted in accordance with paragraph (h) of 
this section.
    (1) Applicants. For applicants, responsible entities must ensure 
that evidence of eligible status is submitted not later than the date 
the responsible entity anticipates or has knowledge that verification of 
other aspects of eligibility for assistance will occur (see 
Sec. 5.512(a)).
    (2) Tenants. For tenants, evidence of eligible status is required to 
be submitted as follows:
    (i) For financial assistance under a Section 214 covered program, 
with the exception of Section 235 assistance payments, the required 
evidence shall be submitted at the first regular reexamination after 
June 19, 1995, in accordance with program requirements.
    (ii) For financial assistance in the form of Section 235 assistance 
payments, the mortgagor shall submit the required evidence in accordance 
with requirements imposed under the Section 235 Program.
    (3) New occupants of assisted units. For any new occupant of an 
assisted unit (e.g., a new family member comes to reside in the assisted 
unit), the required evidence shall be submitted at the first interim or 
regular reexamination following the person's occupancy.
    (4) Changing participation in a HUD program. Whenever a family 
applies for admission to a Section 214 covered program, evidence of 
eligible status is required to be submitted in accordance with the 
requirements of this subpart unless the family already has submitted the 
evidence to the responsible entity for a Section 214 covered program.
    (5) One-time evidence requirement for continuous occupancy. For each 
family member, the family is required to submit evidence of eligible 
status only one time during continuously assisted occupancy under any 
Section 214 covered program.
    (h) Extensions of time to submit evidence of eligible status--(1) 
When extension must be granted. The responsible entity shall extend the 
time, provided in paragraph (g) of this section, to submit evidence of 
eligible immigration status if the family member:
    (i) Submits the declaration required under Sec. 5.508(a) certifying 
that any person for whom required evidence has not been submitted is a 
noncitizen with eligible immigration status; and
    (ii) Certifies that the evidence needed to support a claim of 
eligible immigration status is temporarily unavailable, additional time 
is needed to obtain and submit the evidence, and prompt and diligent 
efforts will be undertaken to obtain the evidence.
    (2) Thirty-day extension period. Any extension of time, if granted, 
shall not exceed thirty (30) days. The additional time provided should 
be sufficient to allow the individual the time to obtain the evidence 
needed. The responsible entity's determination of the length of the 
extension needed shall be based on the circumstances of the individual 
case.
    (3) Grant or denial of extension to be in writing. The responsible 
entity's decision to grant or deny an extension as provided in paragraph 
(h)(1) of this section shall be issued to the family by written notice. 
If the extension is

[[Page 56]]

granted, the notice shall specify the extension period granted (which 
shall not exceed thirty (30) days). If the extension is denied, the 
notice shall explain the reasons for denial of the extension.
    (i) Failure to submit evidence or to establish eligible status. If 
the family fails to submit required evidence of eligible immigration 
status within the time period specified in the notice, or any extension 
granted in accordance with paragraph (h) of this section, or if the 
evidence is timely submitted but fails to establish eligible immigration 
status, the responsible entity shall proceed to deny, prorate or 
terminate assistance, or provide continued assistance or temporary 
deferral of termination of assistance, as appropriate, in accordance 
with the provisions of Secs. 5.514, 5.516, and 5.518.
    (ii) [Reserved]

[61 FR 13616, Mar. 27, 1996, as amended at 61 FR 60538, Nov. 29, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 5.510  Documents of eligible immigration status.

    (a) General. A responsible entity shall request and review original 
documents of eligible immigration status. The responsible entity shall 
retain photocopies of the documents for its own records and return the 
original documents to the family.
    (b) Acceptable evidence of eligible immigration status. Acceptable 
evidence of eligible immigration status shall be the original of a 
document designated by INS as acceptable evidence of immigration status 
in one of the six categories mentioned in Sec. 5.506(a) for the specific 
immigration status claimed by the individual.

[61 FR 13616, Mar. 27, 1996, as amended at 61 FR 60539, Nov. 29, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 5.512  Verification of eligible immigration status.

    (a) General. Except as described in Secs. 5.501 and 5.514, no 
individual or family applying for assistance may receive such assistance 
prior to the verification of the eligibility of at least the individual 
or one family member. Verification of eligibility consistent with 
Sec. 5.514 occurs when the individual or family members have submitted 
documentation to the responsible entity in accordance with Sec. 5.508.
    (b) Primary verification--(1) Automated verification system. Primary 
verification of the immigration status of the person is conducted by the 
responsible entity through the INS automated system (INS Systematic 
Alien Verification for Entitlements (SAVE)). The INS SAVE system 
provides access to names, file numbers and admission numbers of 
noncitizens.
    (2) Failure of primary verification to confirm eligible immigration 
status. If the INS SAVE system does not verify eligible immigration 
status, secondary verification must be performed.
    (c) Secondary verification--(1) Manual search of INS records. 
Secondary verification is a manual search by the INS of its records to 
determine an individual's immigration status. The responsible entity 
must request secondary verification, within 10 days of receiving the 
results of the primary verification, if the primary verification system 
does not confirm eligible immigration status, or if the primary 
verification system verifies immigration status that is ineligible for 
assistance under a Section 214 covered program.
    (2) Secondary verification initiated by responsible entity. 
Secondary verification is initiated by the responsible entity forwarding 
photocopies of the original INS documents required for the immigration 
status declared (front and back), attached to the INS document 
verification request form G-845S (Document Verification Request), or 
such other form specified by the INS to a designated INS office for 
review. (Form G-845S is available from the local INS Office.)
    (3) Failure of secondary verification to confirm eligible 
immigration status. If the secondary verification does not confirm 
eligible immigration status, the responsible entity shall issue to the 
family the notice described in Sec. 5.514(d), which includes 
notification of the right to appeal to the INS of the INS finding on 
immigration status (see Sec. 5.514(d)(4)).
    (d) Exemption from liability for INS verification. The responsible 
entity shall not be liable for any action,

[[Page 57]]

delay, or failure of the INS in conducting the automated or manual 
verification.

[61 FR 13616, Mar. 27, 1996, as amended at 61 FR 60539, Nov. 29, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 5.514  Delay, denial, reduction or termination of assistance.

    (a) General. Assistance to a family may not be delayed, denied, 
reduced or terminated because of the immigration status of a family 
member except as provided in this section.
    (b) Restrictions on delay, denial, reduction or termination of 
assistance--(1) Restrictions on reduction, denial or termination of 
assistance for applicants and tenants. Assistance to an applicant or 
tenant shall not be delayed, denied, reduced, or terminated, on the 
basis of ineligible immigration status of a family member if:
    (i) The primary and secondary verification of any immigration 
documents that were timely submitted has not been completed;
    (ii) The family member for whom required evidence has not been 
submitted has moved from the assisted dwelling unit;
    (iii) The family member who is determined not to be in an eligible 
immigration status following INS verification has moved from the 
assisted dwelling unit;
    (iv) The INS appeals process under Sec. 5.514(e) has not been 
concluded;
    (v) Assistance is prorated in accordance with Sec. 5.520; or
    (vi) Assistance for a mixed family is continued in accordance with 
Secs. 5.516 and 5.518; or
    (vii) Deferral of termination of assistance is granted in accordance 
with Secs. 5.516 and 5.518.
    (2) Restrictions on delay, denial, reduction or termination of 
assistance pending fair hearing for tenants. In addition to the factors 
listed in paragraph (b)(1) of this section, assistance to a tenant 
cannot be delayed, denied, reduced or terminated until the completion of 
the informal hearing described in paragraph (f) of this section.
    (c) Events causing denial or termination of assistance--(1) General. 
Assistance to an applicant shall be denied, and a tenant's assistance 
shall be terminated, in accordance with the procedures of this section, 
upon the occurrence of any of the following events:
    (i) Evidence of citizenship (i.e., the declaration) and eligible 
immigration status is not submitted by the date specified in 
Sec. 5.508(g) or by the expiration of any extension granted in 
accordance with Sec. 5.508(h);
    (ii) Evidence of citizenship and eligible immigration status is 
timely submitted, but INS primary and secondary verification does not 
verify eligible immigration status of a family member; and
    (A) The family does not pursue INS appeal or informal hearing rights 
as provided in this section; or
    (B) INS appeal and informal hearing rights are pursued, but the 
final appeal or hearing decisions are decided against the family member; 
or
    (iii) The responsible entity determines that a family member has 
knowingly permitted another individual who is not eligible for 
assistance to reside (on a permanent basis) in the public or assisted 
housing unit of the family member. Such termination shall be for a 
period of not less than 24 months. This provision does not apply to a 
family if the ineligibility of the ineligible individual was considered 
in calculating any proration of assistance provided for the family.
    (2) Termination of assisted occupancy. For termination of assisted 
occupancy, see paragraph (i) of this section.
    (d) Notice of denial or termination of assistance. The notice of 
denial or termination of assistance shall advise the family:
    (1) That financial assistance will be denied or terminated, and 
provide a brief explanation of the reasons for the proposed denial or 
termination of assistance;
    (2) That the family may be eligible for proration of assistance as 
provided under Sec. 5.520;
    (3) In the case of a tenant, the criteria and procedures for 
obtaining relief under the provisions for preservation of families in 
Secs. 5.514 and 5.518;
    (4) That the family has a right to request an appeal to the INS of 
the results of secondary verification of immigration status and to 
submit additional

[[Page 58]]

documentation or a written explanation in support of the appeal in 
accordance with the procedures of paragraph (e) of this section;
    (5) That the family has a right to request an informal hearing with 
the responsible entity either upon completion of the INS appeal or in 
lieu of the INS appeal as provided in paragraph (f) of this section;
    (6) For applicants, the notice shall advise that assistance may not 
be delayed until the conclusion of the INS appeal process, but 
assistance may be delayed during the pendency of the informal hearing 
process.
    (e) Appeal to the INS--(1) Submission of request for appeal. Upon 
receipt of notification by the responsible entity that INS secondary 
verification failed to confirm eligible immigration status, the 
responsible entity shall notify the family of the results of the INS 
verification, and the family shall have 30 days from the date of the 
responsible entity's notification, to request an appeal of the INS 
results. The request for appeal shall be made by the family 
communicating that request in writing directly to the INS. The family 
must provide the responsible entity with a copy of the written request 
for appeal and proof of mailing.
    (2) Documentation to be submitted as part of appeal to INS. The 
family shall forward to the designated INS office any additional 
documentation or written explanation in support of the appeal. This 
material must include a copy of the INS document verification request 
form G-845S (used to process the secondary verification request) or such 
other form specified by the INS, and a cover letter indicating that the 
family is requesting an appeal of the INS immigration status 
verification results.
    (3) Decision by INS--(i) When decision will be issued. The INS will 
issue to the family, with a copy to the responsible entity, a decision 
within 30 days of its receipt of documentation concerning the family's 
appeal of the verification of immigration status. If, for any reason, 
the INS is unable to issue a decision within the 30 day time period, the 
INS will inform the family and responsible entity of the reasons for the 
delay.
    (ii) Notification of INS decision and of informal hearing 
procedures. When the responsible entity receives a copy of the INS 
decision, the responsible entity shall notify the family of its right to 
request an informal hearing on the responsible entity's ineligibility 
determination in accordance with the procedures of paragraph (f) of this 
section.
    (4) No delay, denial, reduction, or termination of assistance until 
completion of INS appeal process; direct appeal to INS. Pending the 
completion of the INS appeal under this section, assistance may not be 
delayed, denied, reduced or terminated on the basis of immigration 
status.
    (f) Informal hearing--(1) When request for hearing is to be made. 
After notification of the INS decision on appeal, or in lieu of request 
of appeal to the INS, the family may request that the responsible entity 
provide a hearing. This request must be made either within 30 days of 
receipt of the notice described in paragraph (d) of this section, or 
within 30 days of receipt of the INS appeal decision issued in 
accordance with paragraph (e) of this section.
    (2) Informal hearing procedures--(i) Tenants assisted under a 
Section 8 covered program: For tenants assisted under a Section 8 
covered program, the procedures for the hearing before the responsible 
entity are set forth in:
    (A) For Section 8 Moderate Rehabilitation assistance: 24 CFR part 
882;
    (B) For Section 8 tenant-based assistance: 24 CFR part 982; or
    (C) For Section 8 project-based certificate program: 24 CFR part 
983.
    (ii) Tenants assisted under any other Section 8 covered program or a 
Public Housing covered program: For tenants assisted under a Section 8 
covered program not listed in paragraph (f)(3)(i) of this section or a 
Public Housing covered program, the procedures for the hearing before 
the responsible entity are set forth in 24 CFR part 966.
    (iii) Families under Housing covered programs and applicants for 
assistance under all covered programs. For all families under Housing 
covered programs (applicants as well as tenants already receiving 
assistance) and for applicants for assistance under all covered 
programs, the procedures for the informal

[[Page 59]]

hearing before the responsible entity are as follows:
    (A) Hearing before an impartial individual. The family shall be 
provided a hearing before any person(s) designated by the responsible 
entity (including an officer or employee of the responsible entity), 
other than a person who made or approved the decision under review, and 
other than a person who is a subordinate of the person who made or 
approved the decision;
    (B) Examination of evidence. The family shall be provided the 
opportunity to examine and copy at the individual's expense, at a 
reasonable time in advance of the hearing, any documents in the 
possession of the responsible entity pertaining to the family's 
eligibility status, or in the possession of the INS (as permitted by INS 
requirements), including any records and regulations that may be 
relevant to the hearing;
    (C) Presentation of evidence and arguments in support of eligible 
status. The family shall be provided the opportunity to present evidence 
and arguments in support of eligible status. Evidence may be considered 
without regard to admissibility under the rules of evidence applicable 
to judicial proceedings;
    (D) Controverting evidence of the responsible entity. The family 
shall be provided the opportunity to controvert evidence relied upon by 
the responsible entity and to confront and cross-examine all witnesses 
on whose testimony or information the responsible entity relies;
    (E) Representation. The family shall be entitled to be represented 
by an attorney, or other designee, at the family's expense, and to have 
such person make statements on the family's behalf;
    (F) Interpretive services. The family shall be entitled to arrange 
for an interpreter to attend the hearing, at the expense of the family, 
or responsible entity, as may be agreed upon by the two parties to the 
proceeding; and
    (G) Hearing to be recorded. The family shall be entitled to have the 
hearing recorded by audiotape (a transcript of the hearing may, but is 
not required to, be provided by the responsible entity).
    (3) Hearing decision. The responsible entity shall provide the 
family with a written final decision, based solely on the facts 
presented at the hearing, within 14 days of the date of the informal 
hearing. The decision shall state the basis for the decision.
    (g) Judicial relief. A decision against a family member, issued in 
accordance with paragraphs (e) or (f) of this section, does not preclude 
the family from exercising the right, that may otherwise be available, 
to seek redress directly through judicial procedures.
    (h) Retention of documents. The responsible entity shall retain for 
a minimum of 5 years the following documents that may have been 
submitted to the responsible entity by the family, or provided to the 
responsible entity as part of the INS appeal or the informal hearing 
process:
    (1) The application for financial assistance;
    (2) The form completed by the family for income reexamination;
    (3) Photocopies of any original documents (front and back), 
including original INS documents;
    (4) The signed verification consent form;
    (5) The INS verification results;
    (6) The request for an INS appeal;
    (7) The final INS determination;
    (8) The request for an informal hearing; and
    (9) The final informal hearing decision.
    (i) Termination of assisted occupancy. (1) Under Housing covered 
programs, and in the Section 8 covered programs other than the Section 8 
Rental Certificate, Rental Voucher, and Moderate Rehabilitation 
programs, assisted occupancy is terminated by:
    (i) If permitted under the lease, the responsible entity notifying 
the tenant that because of the termination of assisted occupancy the 
tenant is required to pay the HUD-approved market rent for the dwelling 
unit.
    (ii) The responsible entity and tenant entering into a new lease 
without financial assistance.
    (iii) The responsible entity evicting the tenant. While the tenant 
continues in occupancy of the unit, the responsible entity may continue 
to receive

[[Page 60]]

assistance payments if action to terminate the tenancy under an assisted 
lease is promptly initiated and diligently pursued, in accordance with 
the terms of the lease, and if eviction of the tenant is undertaken by 
judicial action pursuant to State and local law. Action by the 
responsible entity to terminate the tenancy and to evict the tenant must 
be in accordance with applicable HUD regulations and other HUD 
requirements. For any jurisdiction, HUD may prescribe a maximum period 
during which assistance payments may be continued during eviction 
proceedings and may prescribe other standards of reasonable diligence 
for the prosecution of eviction proceedings.
    (2) In the Section 8 Rental Certificate, Rental Voucher, and 
Moderate Rehabilitation programs, assisted occupancy is terminated by 
terminating assistance payments. (See provisions of this section 
concerning termination of assistance.) The PHA shall not make any 
additional assistance payments to the owner after the required 
procedures specified in this section have been completed. In addition, 
the PHA shall not approve a lease, enter into an assistance contract, or 
process a portability move for the family after those procedures have 
been completed.

[61 FR 13616, Mar. 27, 1996, as amended at 61 FR 60539, Nov. 29, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 5.516  Availability of preservation assistance to mixed families and other families.

    (a) Assistance available for tenant mixed families--(1) General. 
Preservation assistance is available to tenant mixed families, following 
completion of the appeals and informal hearing procedures provided in 
Sec. 5.514. There are three types of preservation assistance:
    (i) Continued assistance (see paragraph (a) of Sec. 5.518);
    (ii) Temporary deferral of termination of assistance (see paragraph 
(b) of Sec. 5.518); or
    (iii) Prorated assistance (see Sec. 5.520, a mixed family must be 
provided prorated assistance if the family so requests).
    (2) Availability of assistance--(i) For Housing covered programs: 
One of the three types of assistance described is available to tenant 
mixed families assisted under a National Housing Act or 1965 HUD Act 
covered program, depending upon the family's eligibility for such 
assistance. Continued assistance must be provided to a mixed family that 
meets the conditions for eligibility for continued assistance.
    (ii) For Section 8 or Public Housing covered programs. One of the 
three types of assistance described may be available to tenant mixed 
families assisted under a Section 8 or Public Housing covered program.
    (b) Assistance available for applicant mixed families. Prorated 
assistance is also available for mixed families applying for assistance 
as provided in Sec. 5.520.
    (c) Assistance available to other families in occupancy. Temporary 
deferral of termination of assistance may be available to families 
receiving assistance under a Section 214 covered program on June 19, 
1995, and who have no members with eligible immigration status, as set 
forth in paragraphs (c) (1) and (2) of this section.
    (1) For Housing covered programs: Temporary deferral of termination 
of assistance is available to families assisted under a Housing covered 
program.
    (2) For Section 8 or Public Housing covered programs: The 
responsible entity may make temporary deferral of termination of 
assistance to families assisted under a Section 8 or Public Housing 
covered program.
    (d) Section 8 covered programs: Discretion afforded to provide 
certain family preservation assistance--(1) Project owners. With respect 
to assistance under a Section 8 Act covered program administered by a 
project owner, HUD has the discretion to determine under what 
circumstances families are to be provided one of the two statutory forms 
of assistance for preservation of the family (continued assistance or 
temporary deferral of assistance). HUD is exercising its discretion by 
specifying the standards in this section under which a project owner 
must provide one of these two types of assistance to a family. However, 
project owners and PHAs must offer prorated assistance to eligible mixed 
families.

[[Page 61]]

    (2) PHAs. The PHA, rather than HUD, has the discretion to determine 
the circumstances under which a family will be offered one of the two 
statutory forms of assistance (continued assistance or temporary 
deferral of termination of assistance). The PHA must establish its own 
policy and criteria to follow in making its decision. In establishing 
the criteria for granting continued assistance or temporary deferral of 
termination of assistance, the PHA must incorporate the statutory 
criteria, which are set forth in paragraphs (a) and (b) of Sec. 5.518. 
However, the PHA must offer prorated assistance to eligible families.

[61 FR 13616, Mar. 27, 1996, as amended at 61 FR 60539, Nov. 29, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 5.518  Types of preservation assistance available to mixed families and other families.

    (a) Continued assistance--(1) General. A mixed family may receive 
continued housing assistance if all of the following conditions are met 
(a mixed family assisted under a Housing covered program must be 
provided continued assistance if the family meets the following 
conditions):
    (i) The family was receiving assistance under a Section 214 covered 
program on June 19, 1995;
    (ii) The family's head of household or spouse has eligible 
immigration status as described in Sec. 5.506; and
    (iii) The family does not include any person (who does not have 
eligible immigration status) other than the head of household, any 
spouse of the head of household, any parents of the head of household, 
any parents of the spouse, or any children of the head of household or 
spouse.
    (2) Proration of continued assistance. A family entitled to 
continued assistance before November 29, 1996 is entitled to continued 
assistance as described in paragraph (a) of this section. A family 
entitled to continued assistance after November 29, 1996 shall receive 
prorated assistance as described in Sec. 5.520.
    (b) Temporary deferral of termination of assistance--(1) Eligibility 
for this type of assistance. If a mixed family qualifies for prorated 
assistance (and does not qualify for continued assistance), but decides 
not to accept prorated assistance, or if a family has no members with 
eligible immigration status, the family may be eligible for temporary 
deferral of termination of assistance if necessary to permit the family 
additional time for the orderly transition of those family members with 
ineligible status, and any other family members involved, to other 
affordable housing. Other affordable housing is used in the context of 
transition of an ineligible family from a rent level that reflects HUD 
assistance to a rent level that is unassisted; the term refers to 
housing that is not substandard, that is of appropriate size for the 
family and that can be rented for an amount not exceeding the amount 
that the family pays for rent, including utilities, plus 25 percent.
    (2) Housing covered programs: Conditions for granting temporary 
deferral of termination of assistance. The responsible entity shall 
grant a temporary deferral of termination of assistance to a mixed 
family if the family is assisted under a Housing covered program and one 
of the following conditions is met:
    (i) The family demonstrates that reasonable efforts to find other 
affordable housing of appropriate size have been unsuccessful (for 
purposes of this section, reasonable efforts include seeking information 
from, and pursuing leads obtained from the State housing agency, the 
city government, local newspapers, rental agencies and the owner);
    (ii) The vacancy rate for affordable housing of appropriate size is 
below five percent in the housing market for the area in which the 
project is located; or
    (iii) The consolidated plan, as described in 24 CFR part 91 and if 
applicable to the covered program, indicates that the local 
jurisdiction's housing market lacks sufficient affordable housing 
opportunities for households having a size and income similar to the 
family seeking the deferral.
    (3) Time limit on deferral period. If temporary deferral of 
termination of assistance is granted, the deferral period shall be for 
an initial period not to exceed six months. The initial period may be 
renewed for additional periods of six months, but the aggregate deferral 
period for deferrals provided after

[[Page 62]]

November 29, 1996 shall not exceed a period of eighteen months. The 
aggregate deferral period for deferrals granted prior to November 29, 
1996 shall not exceed 3 years. These time periods do not apply to a 
family which includes a refugee under section 207 of the Immigration and 
Nationality Act or an individual seeking asylum under section 208 of 
that Act.
    (4) Notification requirements for beginning of each deferral period. 
At the beginning of each deferral period, the responsible entity must 
inform the family of its ineligibility for financial assistance and 
offer the family information concerning, and referrals to assist in 
finding, other affordable housing.
    (5) Determination of availability of affordable housing at end of 
each deferral period. (i) Before the end of each deferral period, the 
responsible entity must satisfy the applicable requirements of either 
paragraph (b)(5)(i) (A) or (B) of this section. Specifically, the 
responsible entity must:
    (A) For Housing covered programs: Make a determination that one of 
the two conditions specified in paragraph (b)(2) of this section 
continues to be met (note: affordable housing will be determined to be 
available if the vacancy rate is five percent or greater), the owner's 
knowledge and the tenant's evidence indicate that other affordable 
housing is available; or
    (B) For Section 8 or Public Housing covered programs: Make a 
determination of the availability of affordable housing of appropriate 
size based on evidence of conditions which when taken together will 
demonstrate an inadequate supply of affordable housing for the area in 
which the project is located, the consolidated plan (if applicable, as 
described in 24 CFR part 91), the responsible entity's own knowledge of 
the availability of affordable housing, and on evidence of the tenant 
family's efforts to locate such housing.
    (ii) The responsible entity must also:
    (A) Notify the tenant family in writing, at least 60 days in advance 
of the expiration of the deferral period, that termination will be 
deferred again (provided that the granting of another deferral will not 
result in aggregate deferral periods that exceeds the maximum deferral 
period). This time period does not apply to a family which includes a 
refugee under section 207 of the Immigration and Nationality Act or an 
individual seeking asylum under section 208 of that Act, and a 
determination was made that other affordable housing is not available; 
or
    (B) Notify the tenant family in writing, at least 60 days in advance 
of the expiration of the deferral period, that termination of financial 
assistance will not be deferred because either granting another deferral 
will result in aggregate deferral periods that exceed the maximum 
deferral period (unless the family includes a refugee under section 207 
of the Immigration and Nationality Act or an individual seeking asylum 
under section 208 of that Act), or a determination has been made that 
other affordable housing is available.
    (c) Option to select proration of assistance at end of deferral 
period. A family who is eligible for, and receives temporary deferral of 
termination of assistance, may request, and the responsible entity shall 
provide proration of assistance at the end of the deferral period if the 
family has made a good faith effort during the deferral period to locate 
other affordable housing.
    (d) Notification of decision on family preservation assistance. A 
responsible entity shall notify the family of its decision concerning 
the family's qualification for family preservation assistance. If the 
family is ineligible for family preservation assistance, the 
notification shall state the reasons, which must be based on relevant 
factors. For tenant families, the notice also shall inform the family of 
any applicable appeal rights.

[61 FR 13616, Mar. 27, 1996, as amended at 61 FR 60539, Nov. 29, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 5.520  Proration of assistance.

    (a) Applicability. This section applies to a mixed family other than 
a family receiving continued assistance, or other than a family who is 
eligible for and requests and receives temporary deferral of termination 
of assistance. An eligible mixed family who requests prorated assistance 
must be provided prorated assistance.
    (b) Method of prorating assistance for Housing covered programs--(1) 
Proration under Rent Supplement Program. If the

[[Page 63]]

household participates in the Rent Supplement Program, the rent 
supplement paid on the household's behalf shall be the rent supplement 
the household would otherwise be entitled to, multiplied by a fraction, 
the denominator of which is the number of people in the household and 
the numerator of which is the number of eligible persons in the 
household;
    (2) Proration under Section 235 Program. If the household 
participates in the Section 235 Program, the interest reduction payments 
paid on the household's behalf shall be the payments the household would 
otherwise be entitled to, multiplied by a fraction the denominator of 
which is the number of people in the household and the numerator of 
which is the number of eligible persons in the household;
    (3) Proration under Section 236 Program without the benefit of 
additional assistance. If the household participates in the Section 236 
Program without the benefit of any additional assistance, the 
household's rent shall be increased above the rent the household would 
otherwise pay by an amount equal to the difference between the market 
rate rent for the unit and the rent the household would otherwise pay 
multiplied by a fraction the denominator of which is the number of 
people in the household and the numerator of which is the number of 
ineligible persons in the household;
    (4) Proration under Section 236 Program with the benefit of 
additional assistance. If the household participates in the Section 236 
Program with the benefit of additional assistance under the rent 
supplement, rental assistance payment or Section 8 programs, the 
household's rent shall be increased above the rent the household would 
otherwise pay by:
    (i) An amount equal to the difference between the market rate rent 
for the unit and the basic rent for the unit multiplied by a fraction, 
the denominator of which is the number of people in the household, and 
the numerator of which is the number of ineligible persons in the 
household, plus;
    (ii) An amount equal to the rent supplement, housing assistance 
payment or rental assistance payment the household would otherwise be 
entitled to multiplied by a fraction, the denominator of which is the 
number of people in the household and the numerator of which is the 
number of ineligible persons in the household.
    (c) Method of prorating assistance for Section 8 covered programs--
(1) Section 8 assistance other than assistance provided for a tenancy 
under the Section 8 Rental Voucher Program or for an over-FMR tenancy in 
the Section 8 Rental Certificate Program. For Section 8 assistance other 
than assistance for a tenancy under the voucher program or an over-FMR 
tenancy under the certificate program, the PHA must prorate the family's 
assistance as follows:
    (i) Step 1. Determine gross rent for the unit. (Gross rent is 
contract rent plus any allowance for tenant paid utilities).
    (ii) Step 2. Determine total tenant payment in accordance with 
section 5.613(a). (Annual income includes income of all family members, 
including any family member who has not established eligible immigration 
status.)
    (iii) Step 3. Subtract amount determined in paragraph (c)(1)(ii), 
(Step 2), from amount determined in paragraph (c)(1)(i), (Step 1).
    (iv) Step 4. Multiply the amount determined in paragraph 
(c)(1)(iii), (Step 3) by a fraction for which:
    (A) The numerator is the number of family members who have 
established eligible immigration status; and
    (B) The denominator is the total number of family members.
    (v) Prorated housing assistance. The amount determined in paragraph 
(c)(1)(iv), (Step 4) is the prorated housing assistance payment for a 
mixed family.
    (vi) No effect on contract rent. Proration of the housing assistance 
payment does not affect contract rent to the owner. The family must pay 
as rent the portion of contract rent not covered by the prorated housing 
assistance payment.
    (2) Assistance for a Section 8 voucher tenancy or over-FMR tenancy. 
For a tenancy under the voucher program or for an over-FMR tenancy under 
the certificate program, the PHA must prorate the family's assistance as 
follows:
    (i) Step 1. Determine the amount of the pre-proration housing 
assistance

[[Page 64]]

payment. (Annual income includes income of all family members, including 
any family member who has not established eligible immigration status.)
    (ii) Step 2. Multiply the amount determined in paragraph (c)(2)(i), 
(Step 1) by a fraction for which:
    (A) The numerator is the number of family members who have 
established eligible immigration status; and
    (B) The denominator is the total number of family members.
    (iii) Prorated housing assistance. The amount determined in 
paragraph (c)(2)(ii), (Step 2) is the prorated housing assistance 
payment for a mixed family.
    (iv) No effect on rent to owner. Proration of the housing assistance 
payment does not affect rent to owner. The family must pay the portion 
of rent to owner not covered by the prorated housing assistance payment.
    (d) Method of prorating assistance for Public Housing covered 
programs. The PHA shall prorate the family's assistance by:
    (1) Step 1. Determining total tenant payment in accordance with 24 
CFR 913.107(a). (Annual income includes income of all family members, 
including any family member who has not established eligible immigration 
status.)
    (2) Step 2. Subtracting the total tenant payment from a HUD-supplied 
``public housing maximum rent'' applicable to the unit or the PHA. (This 
``maximum rent'' shall be determined by HUD using the 95th percentile 
rent for the PHA.) The result is the maximum subsidy for which the 
family could qualify if all members were eligible (``family maximum 
subsidy'').
    (3) Step 3. Dividing the family maximum subsidy by the number of 
persons in the family (all persons) to determine the maximum subsidy per 
each family member who has citizenship or eligible immigration status 
(``eligible family member''). The subsidy per eligible family member is 
the ``member maximum subsidy''.
    (4) Step 4. Multiplying the member maximum subsidy by the number of 
family members who have citizenship or eligible immigration status 
(``eligible family members'').
    (5) Step 5. The product of steps 1 through 4, as set forth in 
paragraph (d)(2) of this section is the amount of subsidy for which the 
family is eligible (``eligible subsidy''). The family's rent is the 
``public housing maximum rent'' minus the amount of the eligible 
subsidy.

[61 FR 5202, Feb. 9, 1996, as amended at 63 FR 23853, Apr. 30, 1998; 64 
FR 13056, Mar. 16, 1999]

    Effective Date Note: At 64 FR 13056, Mar. 16, 1999, Sec. 5.520 was 
amended by revising paragraphs (c)(1) heading and introductory text, 
(c)(1)(ii), (c)(2) heading and introductory text, (c)(2)(i), and 
(c)(2)(iv), effective Apr. 15, 1999. For the convenience of the user, 
the superseded text is set forth as follows:

Sec. 5.520  Proration of assistance.

                                * * * * *

    (c)* * *
    (1) Section 8 assistance other than Section 8 rental voucher 
assistance. For Section 8 assistance other than assistance provided 
under the Section 8 Rental Voucher Program, the PHA shall prorate the 
family's assistance as follows:

                                * * * * *

    (ii) Step 1. Determine total tenant payment in accordance with 
Sec. 5.613. (Annual income includes income of all family members, 
including any family member who has not established eligible immigration 
status.

                                * * * * *

    (2) Section 8 Rental Voucher assistance. For assistance under the 
Section 8 Rental Voucher Program, the PHA shall prorate the family's 
assistance as follows:
    (i) Step 1. Determine the amount of the pre-proration voucher 
housing assistance payment in accordance with 24 CFR 982.505. (Annual 
income includes income of all family members, including any family 
member who has not established eligible immigration status.

                                * * * * *

    (iv) No effect on rent to owner. Proration of the voucher housing 
assistance payment does not affect rent to the owner. The family must 
pay as rent the portion of rent not covered by the prorated housing 
assistance payment.

                                * * * * *

[[Page 65]]


<R05>
Sec. 5.522  Prohibition of assistance to noncitizen students.

    (a) General. The provisions of Secs. 5.516 and 5.518 permitting 
continued assistance or temporary deferral of termination of assistance 
for certain families do not apply to any person who is determined to be 
a noncitizen student as in paragraph (c)(2)(A) of Section 214 (42 U.S.C. 
1436a(c)(2)(A)). The family of a noncitizen student may be eligible for 
prorated assistance, as provided in paragraph (b)(2) of this section.
    (b) Family of noncitizen students. (1) The prohibition on providing 
assistance to a noncitizen student as described in paragraph (a) of this 
section extends to the noncitizen spouse of the noncitizen student and 
minor children accompanying the student or following to join the 
student.
    (2) The prohibition on providing assistance to a noncitizen student 
does not extend to the citizen spouse of the noncitizen student and the 
children of the citizen spouse and noncitizen student.


<R05>
Sec. 5.524  Compliance with nondiscrimination requirements.

    The responsible entity shall administer the restrictions on use of 
assisted housing by noncitizens with ineligible immigration status 
imposed by this part in conformity with all applicable nondiscrimination 
and equal opportunity requirements, including, but not limited to, title 
VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000d-2000d-5) and the 
implementing regulations in 24 CFR part 1, section 504 of the 
Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (29 U.S.C. 794) and the implementing 
regulations in 24 CFR part 8, the Fair Housing Act (42 U.S.C. 3601-3619) 
and the implementing regulations in 24 CFR part 100.


<R05>
Sec. 5.526  Protection from liability for responsible entities and State and local government agencies and officials.

    (a) Protection from liability for responsible entities. Responsible 
entities are protected from liability as set forth in Section 214(e) (42 
U.S.C 1436a(e)).
    (b) Protection from liability for State and local government 
agencies and officials. State and local government agencies and 
officials shall not be liable for the design or implementation of the 
verification system described in Sec. 5.512, as long as the 
implementation by the State and local government agency or official is 
in accordance with prescribed HUD rules and requirements.

[61 FR 60540, Nov. 29, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 5.528  Liability of ineligible tenants for reimbursement of benefits.

    Where a tenant has received the benefit of HUD financial assistance 
to which the tenant was not entitled because the tenant intentionally 
misrepresented eligible status, the ineligible tenant is responsible for 
reimbursing HUD for the assistance improperly paid. If the amount of the 
assistance is substantial, the responsible entity is encouraged to refer 
the case to the HUD Inspector General's office for further 
investigation. Possible criminal prosecution may follow based on the 
False Statements Act (18 U.S.C. 1001 and 1010).


<R04>
  Subpart F--Income Limits, Annual Income, Adjusted Income, Rent, and 
       Examinations for the Public Housing and Section 8 Programs

    Authority: 42 U.S.C. 1437a, 1437c, 1437d, 1437f, 1437n, and 3535(d).

    Source: 61 FR 54498, Oct. 18, 1996, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 5.601  Purpose and applicability.

    (a) This subpart establishes definitions and requirements concerning 
income limits for admission, annual income, adjusted income, total 
tenant payment, utility allowances and reimbursements, and reexamination 
of income and family composition for:
    (1) HUD's public housing programs, including its public housing 
homeownership programs.
    (2) Housing assisted under section 8 of the United States Housing 
Act of 1937 (the 1937 Act) (42 U.S.C. 1437f).
    (i) Section 5.613 (Total tenant payment) and the definitions of 
``tenant rent'' and ``total tenant payment'' found in Sec. 5.603 do not 
apply to the Section 8 Rental Voucher Program.

[[Page 66]]

    (ii) Section 5.615 (Utility reimbursement) and the definition of 
utility reimbursement found in Sec. 5.603 also do not apply to the 
Section 8 Rental Voucher Program. For the Voucher Program, in cases 
where the amount of the HAP payment exceeds the rent to owner, the 
excess will be paid to the family.
    (iii) Section 5.607 (Income limits for admission) does not apply to 
the Section 8 Rental Voucher and Rental Certificate Programs.
    (3) Applicants and tenants assisted under sections 10(c) and 23 of 
the 1937 Act as in effect before amendment by the Housing and Community 
Development Act of 1974 (42 U.S.C. 1410 and 1421b (1970 ed.)).
    (b) This subpart does not apply to HUD's Indian housing programs. 
The analogous rule that applies to Indian housing is located at 24 CFR 
part 950.


<R05>
Sec. 5.603  Definitions.

    As used in this subpart:
    (a) The terms elderly person, low-income family, person with 
disabilities, State, and very low-income family are defined in section 
3(b) of the 1937 Act (42 U.S.C. 1437a(b)).
    (b) The terms 1937 Act and public housing agency (PHA) are defined 
in Sec. 5.100.
    (c) The terms disabled family, elderly family, family, and live-in 
aide are defined in Sec. 5.403.
    (d) The following terms shall have the meanings set forth below:
    Adjusted income. See Sec. 5.611.
    Annual income. See Sec. 5.609.
    Child care expenses. Amounts anticipated to be paid by the family 
for the care of children under 13 years of age during the period for 
which annual income is computed, but only where such care is necessary 
to enable a family member to actively seek employment, be gainfully 
employed, or to further his or her education and only to the extent such 
amounts are not reimbursed. The amount deducted shall reflect reasonable 
charges for child care. In the case of child care necessary to permit 
employment, the amount deducted shall not exceed the amount of 
employment income that is included in annual income.
    Dependent. A member of the family (except foster children and foster 
adults) other than the family head or spouse, who is under 18 years of 
age, or is a person with a disability, or is a full-time student.
    Disability assistance expenses. Reasonable expenses that are 
anticipated, during the period for which annual income is computed, for 
attendant care and auxiliary apparatus for a disabled family member and 
that are necessary to enable a family member (including the disabled 
member) to be employed, provided that the expenses are neither paid to a 
member of the family nor reimbursed by an outside source.
    Full-time student. A person who is carrying a subject load that is 
considered full-time for day students under the standards and practices 
of the educational institution attended. An educational institution 
includes a vocational school with a diploma or certificate program, as 
well as an institution offering a college degree.
    Medical expenses. Medical expenses, including medical insurance 
premiums, that are anticipated during the period for which annual income 
is computed, and that are not covered by insurance.
    Monthly adjusted income. One twelfth of adjusted income.
    Monthly income. One twelfth of annual income.
    Net family assets. (1) Net cash value after deducting reasonable 
costs that would be incurred in disposing of real property, savings, 
stocks, bonds, and other forms of capital investment, excluding 
interests in Indian trust land and excluding equity accounts in HUD 
homeownership programs. The value of necessary items of personal 
property such as furniture and automobiles shall be excluded.
    (2) In cases where a trust fund has been established and the trust 
is not revocable by, or under the control of, any member of the family 
or household, the value of the trust fund will not be considered an 
asset so long as the fund continues to be held in trust. Any income 
distributed from the trust fund shall be counted when determining annual 
income under Sec. 5.609.
    (3) In determining net family assets, PHAs or owners, as applicable, 
shall include the value of any business or family assets disposed of by 
an applicant or tenant for less than fair market

[[Page 67]]

value (including a disposition in trust, but not in a foreclosure or 
bankruptcy sale) during the two years preceding the date of application 
for the program or reexamination, as applicable, in excess of the 
consideration received therefor. In the case of a disposition as part of 
a separation or divorce settlement, the disposition will not be 
considered to be for less than fair market value if the applicant or 
tenant receives important consideration not measurable in dollar terms.
    Owner has the meaning provided in the relevant program regulations. 
As used in this subpart, where appropriate, the term ``owner'' shall 
also include a ``borrower'' as defined in 24 CFR part 885.
    Tenant rent. The amount payable monthly by the family as rent to the 
PHA or owner, as applicable. Where all utilities (except telephone) and 
other essential housing services are supplied by the PHA or owner, 
tenant rent equals total tenant payment. Where some or all utilities 
(except telephone) and other essential housing services are supplied by 
the PHA or owner and the cost thereof is not included in the amount paid 
as rent, tenant rent equals total tenant payment less the utility 
allowance.
    Total tenant payment. See Sec. 5.613.
    Utility allowance. If the cost of utilities (except telephone) and 
other housing services for an assisted unit is not included in the 
tenant rent but is the responsibility of the family occupying the unit, 
an amount equal to the estimate made or approved by a PHA or HUD of the 
monthly cost of a reasonable consumption of such utilities and other 
services for the unit by an energy-conservative household of modest 
circumstances consistent with the requirements of a safe, sanitary, and 
healthful living environment.
    Utility reimbursement. The amount, if any, by which the utility 
allowance for the unit, if applicable, exceeds the total tenant payment 
for the family occupying the unit.
    Welfare assistance. Welfare or other payments to families or 
individuals, based on need, that are made under programs funded, 
separately or jointly, by Federal, State or local governments.


<R05>
Sec. 5.605  Overall income eligibility for assistance.

    No family other than a low-income family shall be eligible for 
admission to a program covered by this part.


<R05>
Sec. 5.607  Income limits for admission.

    (a) General--(1) Admission to units available before October 1, 
1981. Not more than 25 percent of the dwelling units that were available 
for occupancy under Annual Contributions Contracts (ACC) and Section 8 
Housing Assistance Payments (HAP) Contracts taking effect before October 
1, 1981 and that are leased on or after that date shall be available for 
leasing by low-income families other than very low-income families. HUD 
reserves the right to limit the admission of low-income families other 
than very low-income families to these units.
    (2) Admission to units available on or after October 1, 1981. Not 
more than 15 percent of the dwelling units that initially become 
available for occupancy under Annual Contributions Contracts (ACC) and 
Section 8 Housing Assistance Payments (HAP) Contracts on or after 
October 1, 1981 shall be available for leasing by low-income families 
other than very low-income families. Except with the prior approval of 
HUD under paragraphs (b) and (c) of this section, no low-income family, 
other than a very low-income family shall be admitted to these units.
    (b) Request for exception. A request by a PHA or owner for approval 
of admission of low-income families other than very low-income families 
to units described in paragraph (a)(2) of this section must state the 
basis for requesting the exception and provide supporting data. Bases 
for exceptions that may be considered include the following:
    (1) For Section 8 Programs. (i) Low-income families that would 
otherwise be displaced from Section 8 Substantial Rehabilitation or 
Moderate Rehabilitation projects;
    (ii) Low-income families that are displaced as a result of Rental 
Rehabilitation or Development activities assisted under section 17 of 
the 1937 Act (42 U.S.C. 1437o), or as a result of activities under the 
Rental Rehabilitation Demonstration Program;

[[Page 68]]

    (iii) Need for admission of a broader range of tenants to preserve 
the financial or management viability of a project because there is an 
insufficient number of potential applicants who are very low-income 
families;
    (iv) Commitment of an owner to attaining occupancy by families with 
a broad range of incomes, as evidenced in the application for 
development. An application citing this basis should be supported by 
evidence that the owner is pursuing this goal throughout its assisted 
projects in the community; and
    (v) Project supervision by a State Housing Finance Agency having a 
policy of occupancy by families with a broad range of incomes, supported 
by evidence that the Agency is pursuing this goal throughout its 
assisted projects in the community, or a project with financing through 
Section 11(b) of the 1937 Act (42 U.S.C. 1437i) or under Section 103 of 
the Internal Revenue Code (26 U.S.C. 103).
    (2) For public housing only. (i) Need for admission of a broader 
range of tenants to obtain full occupancy;
    (ii) Local commitment to attaining occupancy by families with a 
broad range of incomes. An application citing this basis should be 
supported by evidence that the PHA is pursuing this goal throughout its 
housing program in the community;
    (iii) Need for higher incomes to sustain homeownership eligibility 
in a homeownership project; and
    (iv) Need to avoid displacing low-income families from a project 
acquired by the PHA for rehabilitation.
    (c) Action on request for exception. Whether to grant any request 
for exception is a matter committed by law to HUD's sole discretion, and 
no implication is intended to be created that HUD will seek to grant 
approvals up to the maximum limits permitted by statute, nor is any 
presumption of an entitlement to an exception created by the 
specification of certain grounds for exception that HUD may consider. 
HUD will review exceptions granted to owners and PHAs at regular 
intervals. HUD may withdraw permission to exercise those exceptions for 
program applicants at any time that exceptions are not being used or 
after a periodic review, based on the findings of the review.
    (d) Reporting. PHAs and owners shall comply with HUD-prescribed 
reporting requirements that will permit HUD to maintain the reasonably 
current data necessary to monitor compliance with the income eligibility 
restrictions described in paragraph (a) of this section.
    (e) Inapplicability to certain scattered site housing. The income 
eligibility restrictions described in paragraph (a) of this section do 
not apply to scattered site public housing dwelling units sold or 
intended to be sold to public housing tenants under section 5(h) of the 
1937 Act (42 U.S.C. 1437c(h)).
    (f) Inapplicability to the Section 8 Rental Voucher and Rental 
Certificate Programs. The provisions of this section do not apply to the 
Section 8 Rental Voucher and Section 8 Rental Certificate Programs.

(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under Control number 
2502-0204.)


<R05>
Sec. 5.609  Annual income.

    (a) Annual income means all amounts, monetary or not, which:
    (1) Go to, or on behalf of, the family head or spouse (even if 
temporarily absent) or to any other family member; or
    (2) Are anticipated to be received from a source outside the family 
during the 12-month period following admission or annual reexamination 
effective date; and
    (3) Which are not specifically excluded in paragraph (c) of this 
section.
    (4) Annual income also means amounts derived (during the 12-month 
period) from assets to which any member of the family has access.
    (b) Annual income includes, but is not limited to:
    (1) The full amount, before any payroll deductions, of wages and 
salaries, overtime pay, commissions, fees, tips and bonuses, and other 
compensation for personal services;
    (2) The net income from the operation of a business or profession. 
Expenditures for business expansion or amortization of capital 
indebtedness shall not be used as deductions in determining net income. 
An allowance for depreciation of assets used in a

[[Page 69]]

business or profession may be deducted, based on straight line 
depreciation, as provided in Internal Revenue Service regulations. Any 
withdrawal of cash or assets from the operation of a business or 
profession will be included in income, except to the extent the 
withdrawal is reimbursement of cash or assets invested in the operation 
by the family;
    (3) Interest, dividends, and other net income of any kind from real 
or personal property. Expenditures for amortization of capital 
indebtedness shall not be used as deductions in determining net income. 
An allowance for depreciation is permitted only as authorized in 
paragraph (b)(2) of this section. Any withdrawal of cash or assets from 
an investment will be included in income, except to the extent the 
withdrawal is reimbursement of cash or assets invested by the family. 
Where the family has net family assets in excess of $5,000, annual 
income shall include the greater of the actual income derived from all 
net family assets or a percentage of the value of such assets based on 
the current passbook savings rate, as determined by HUD;
    (4) The full amount of periodic amounts received from Social 
Security, annuities, insurance policies, retirement funds, pensions, 
disability or death benefits, and other similar types of periodic 
receipts, including a lump-sum amount or prospective monthly amounts for 
the delayed start of a periodic amount (except as provided in paragraph 
(c)(14) of this section);
    (5) Payments in lieu of earnings, such as unemployment and 
disability compensation, worker's compensation and severance pay (except 
as provided in paragraph (c)(3) of this section);
    (6) Welfare assistance. If the welfare assistance payment includes 
an amount specifically designated for shelter and utilities that is 
subject to adjustment by the welfare assistance agency in accordance 
with the actual cost of shelter and utilities, the amount of welfare 
assistance income to be included as income shall consist of:
    (i) The amount of the allowance or grant exclusive of the amount 
specifically designated for shelter or utilities; plus
    (ii) The maximum amount that the welfare assistance agency could in 
fact allow the family for shelter and utilities. If the family's welfare 
assistance is ratably reduced from the standard of need by applying a 
percentage, the amount calculated under this paragraph (b)(6)(ii) shall 
be the amount resulting from one application of the percentage;
    (7) Periodic and determinable allowances, such as alimony and child 
support payments, and regular contributions or gifts received from 
organizations or from persons not residing in the dwelling;
    (8) All regular pay, special pay and allowances of a member of the 
Armed Forces (except as provided in paragraph (c)(7) of this section).
    (c) Annual income does not include the following:
    (1) Income from employment of children (including foster children) 
under the age of 18 years;
    (2) Payments received for the care of foster children or foster 
adults (usually persons with disabilities, unrelated to the tenant 
family, who are unable to live alone);
    (3) Lump-sum additions to family assets, such as inheritances, 
insurance payments (including payments under health and accident 
insurance and worker's compensation), capital gains and settlement for 
personal or property losses (except as provided in paragraph (b)(5) of 
this section);
    (4) Amounts received by the family that are specifically for, or in 
reimbursement of, the cost of medical expenses for any family member;
    (5) Income of a live-in aide, as defined in Sec. 5.403;
    (6) The full amount of student financial assistance paid directly to 
the student or to the educational institution;
    (7) The special pay to a family member serving in the Armed Forces 
who is exposed to hostile fire;
    (8)(i) Amounts received under training programs funded by HUD;
    (ii) Amounts received by a person with a disability that are 
disregarded for a limited time for purposes of Supplemental Security 
Income eligibility and benefits because they are set aside for use under 
a Plan to Attain Self-Sufficiency (PASS);

[[Page 70]]

    (iii) Amounts received by a participant in other publicly assisted 
programs which are specifically for or in reimbursement of out-of-pocket 
expenses incurred (special equipment, clothing, transportation, child 
care, etc.) and which are made solely to allow participation in a 
specific program;
    (iv) Amounts received under a resident service stipend. A resident 
service stipend is a modest amount (not to exceed $200 per month) 
received by a resident for performing a service for the PHA or owner, on 
a part-time basis, that enhances the quality of life in the development. 
Such services may include, but are not limited to, fire patrol, hall 
monitoring, lawn maintenance, and resident initiatives coordination. No 
resident may receive more than one such stipend during the same period 
of time;
    (v) Incremental earnings and benefits resulting to any family member 
from participation in qualifying State or local employment training 
programs (including training programs not affiliated with a local 
government) and training of a family member as resident management 
staff. Amounts excluded by this provision must be received under 
employment training programs with clearly defined goals and objectives, 
and are excluded only for the period during which the family member 
participates in the employment training program;
    (9) Temporary, nonrecurring or sporadic income (including gifts);
    (10) Reparation payments paid by a foreign government pursuant to 
claims filed under the laws of that government by persons who were 
persecuted during the Nazi era;
    (11) Earnings in excess of $480 for each full-time student 18 years 
old or older (excluding the head of household and spouse);
    (12) Adoption assistance payments in excess of $480 per adopted 
child;
    (13) For public housing only: (i) The earnings and benefits to any 
family member resulting from the participation in a program providing 
employment training and supportive services in accordance with the 
Family Support Act of 1988, section 22 of the 1937 Act (42 U.S.C. 
1437t), or any comparable Federal, State, or local law during the 
exclusion period.
    (ii) For purposes of this paragraph, the following definitions 
apply:
    (A) Comparable Federal, State or local law means a program providing 
employment training and supportive services that--
    (1) Is authorized by a Federal, State or local law;
    (2) Is funded by the Federal, State or local government;
    (3) Is operated or administered by a public agency; and
    (4) Has as its objective to assist participants in acquiring 
employment skills.
    (B) Exclusion period means the period during which the family member 
participates in a program described in this section, plus 18 months from 
the date the family member begins the first job acquired by the family 
member after completion of such program that is not funded by public 
housing assistance under the 1937 Act. If the family member is 
terminated from employment with good cause, the exclusion period shall 
end.
    (C) Earnings and benefits means the incremental earnings and 
benefits resulting from a qualifying employment training program or 
subsequent job;
    (14) Deferred periodic amounts from supplemental security income and 
social security benefits that are received in a lump sum amount or in 
prospective monthly amounts.
    (15) Amounts received by the family in the form of refunds or 
rebates under State or local law for property taxes paid on the dwelling 
unit;
    (16) Amounts paid by a State agency to a family with a member who 
has a developmental disability and is living at home to offset the cost 
of services and equipment needed to keep the developmentally disabled 
family member at home; or
    (17) Amounts specifically excluded by any other Federal statute from 
consideration as income for purposes of determining eligibility or 
benefits under a category of assistance programs that includes 
assistance under any program to which the exclusions set forth in 24 CFR 
5.609(c) apply. A notice will be published in the Federal Register and 
distributed to PHAs and housing

[[Page 71]]

owners identifying the benefits that qualify for this exclusion. Updates 
will be published and distributed when necessary.
    (d) For public housing only. In addition to the exclusions from 
annual income covered in paragraph (c) of this section, a PHA may adopt 
additional exclusions for earned income pursuant to an established 
written policy.
    (1) In establishing such a policy, a PHA must adopt one or more of 
the following types of earned income exclusions, including variations 
thereof:
    (i) Exclude all or part of the family's earned income;
    (ii) Apply the exclusion only to new sources of earned income or 
only to increases in earned income;
    (iii) Apply the exclusion to the earned income of the head, the 
spouse, or any other family member age 18 or older;
    (iv) Apply the exclusion only to the earned income of persons other 
than the primary earner;
    (v) Apply the exclusion to applicants, newly admitted families, 
existing tenants, or persons joining the family;
    (vi) Make the exclusion temporary or permanent, for the PHA, the 
family, or the affected family member;
    (vii) Make the exclusion graduated, so that more earned income is 
excluded at first and less earned income is excluded after a period of 
time;
    (viii) Exclude any or all of the costs that are incurred in order to 
go to work but are not compensated, such as the cost of special tools, 
equipment, or clothing;
    (ix) Exclude any or all of the costs that result from earning 
income, such as social security taxes or other items that are withheld 
in payroll deductions;
    (x) Exclude any portion of the earned income that is not available 
to meet the family's own needs, such as amounts that are paid to someone 
outside the family for alimony or child support; and
    (xi) Exclude any portion of the earned income that is necessary to 
replace benefits lost because a family member becomes employed, such as 
amounts that the family pays for medical costs or to obtain medical 
insurance.
    (2) Any amounts that are excluded from annual income under this 
paragraph (d) may not also be deducted in determining adjusted income, 
as defined in Sec. 5.611.
    (3) Housing agencies do not need HUD approval to adopt optional 
earned income exclusions.
    (4) In the calculation of Performance Funding System operating 
subsidy eligibility, housing agencies will have to absorb any loss in 
rental income that results from the adoption of any of the optional 
earned income exclusions discussed in paragraph (d)(1) of this section, 
including any variations of the listed options.
    (e) If it is not feasible to anticipate a level of income over a 12-
month period, the income anticipated for a shorter period may be 
annualized, subject to a redetermination at the end of the shorter 
period.


<R05>
Sec. 5.611  Adjusted income.

    Adjusted income means annual income less the following deductions:
    (a) $480 for each dependent;
    (b) $400 for any elderly family or disabled family;
    (c) For any family that is not an elderly family or disabled family 
but has a member (other than the head of household or spouse) who is a 
person with a disability, disability assistance expenses in excess of 
three percent of annual income, but this allowance may not exceed the 
employment income received by family members who are 18 years of age or 
older as a result of the assistance to the person with disabilities;
    (d) For any elderly family or disabled family:
    (1) That has no disability assistance expenses, an allowance for 
medical expenses equal to the amount by which the medical expenses 
exceed three percent of annual income;
    (2) That has disability assistance expenses greater than or equal to 
three percent of annual income, an allowance for disability assistance 
expenses computed in accordance with paragraph (c) of this section, plus 
an allowance for medical expenses that is equal to the family's medical 
expenses;
    (3) That has disability assistance expenses that are less than three 
percent

[[Page 72]]

of annual income, an allowance for combined disability assistance 
expenses and medical expenses that is equal to the amount by which the 
sum of these expenses exceeds three percent of annual income; and
    (e) Child care expenses.


<R05>
Sec. 5.613  Total tenant payment.

    (a) Total tenant payment for families whose initial lease is 
effective on or after August 1, 1982. (1) Total tenant payment is the 
amount calculated under section 3(a)(1) of the 1937 Act (42 U.S.C. 
1437a(a)(1)). If the family's welfare assistance is ratably reduced from 
the standard of need by applying a percentage, the amount calculated 
under paragraph (C) of section 3(a)(1) of the 1937 Act (42 U.S.C. 
1437a(a)(1)(C)) shall be the amount resulting from one application of 
the percentage.
    (2) For public housing only. Total tenant payment for families 
residing in public housing does not include charges for excess utility 
consumption or other miscellaneous charges (see Sec. 966.4 of this 
chapter).
    (b) Total tenant payment for families residing in public housing 
whose initial lease was effective before August 1, 1982. Paragraphs (b) 
and (c) of 24 CFR 913.107, as it existed immediately before November 18, 
1996 (contained in the April 1, 1995 edition of 24 CFR, parts 900 to 
1699), will continue to govern the total tenant payment of families, 
under a public housing program, whose initial lease was effective before 
August 1, 1982.
    (c) Inapplicability to the Section 8 Rental Voucher Program. The 
provisions of this section do not apply to the Section 8 Rental Voucher 
Program.


<R05>
Sec. 5.615  Utility reimbursements.

    (a) General. Where applicable, the utility reimbursement shall be 
paid to the family in the manner provided in the pertinent program 
regulations. If the family and the utility company consent, a PHA or 
owner may pay the utility reimbursement jointly to the family and the 
utility company, or directly to the utility company.
    (b) Inapplicability to the Section 8 Rental Voucher Program. The 
provisions of this section do not apply to the Section 8 Rental Voucher 
Program. For the Voucher Program, in cases where the amount of the HAP 
payment exceeds the rent to owner, the excess will be paid to the 
family.


<R05>
Sec. 5.617  Reexamination and verification.

    (a) Responsibility for initial determination and reexamination. The 
PHA or owner, as applicable, must conduct a reexamination of family 
income and composition at least annually. The ``effective date'' of an 
examination or reexamination refers to:
    (1) In the case of an examination for admission, the effective date 
of the lease; and
    (2) In the case of a reexamination of an existing participant, the 
effective date of the redetermined housing assistance payment with 
respect to the Rental Voucher program and the effective date of the 
redetermined total tenant payment in all other cases.
    (b) Verification. (1) As a condition of admission to, or continued 
occupancy of, any assisted unit, the PHA or owner, as applicable, shall 
require the family head and other such family members as it designates 
to execute a HUD-approved release and consent form (including any 
release and consent as required under 24 CFR part 760) authorizing any 
depository or private source of income, or any Federal, State or local 
agency, to furnish or release to the PHA or owner, as applicable, and to 
HUD such information as the HA or owner, as applicable, and HUD 
determines to be necessary.
    (2) The PHA or owner shall also require the family to submit 
directly documentation determined to be necessary. Information or 
documentation shall be considered necessary if it is required for 
purposes of determining or auditing a family's eligibility to receive 
housing assistance, for determining the family's annual income, adjusted 
income or total tenant payment.
    (3) The use or disclosure of information obtained from a family or 
from another source pursuant to this release

[[Page 73]]

and consent shall be limited to purposes directly connected with 
administration of this subpart or applying for assistance.

(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control numbers 
2502-0204 and 2577-0083.)

[61 FR 54498, Oct. 18, 1996, as amended at 62 FR 27125, May 16, 1997]


<R04>
   Subpart G--Physical Condition Standards and Inspection Requirements

    Source: 63 FR 46577, Sept. 1, 1998, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 5.701  Applicability.

    (a) This subpart applies to housing assisted by HUD under the 
following programs:
    (1) All Section 8 project-based assistance. ``Project-based 
assistance'' means Section 8 assistance that is attached to the 
structure (see Sec. 982.1(b)(1) of this title regarding the distinction 
between ``project-based'' and ``tenant-based'' assistance);
    (2) Section 202 Program of Supportive Housing for the Elderly;
    (3) Section 811 Program of Supportive Housing for Persons with 
Disabilities;
    (4) Section 202 loan program for projects for the elderly and 
handicapped (including 202/8 projects and 202/162 projects).
    (b) This subpart also applies to housing with mortgages insured or 
held by HUD, or housing that is receiving assistance from HUD, under the 
following authorities:
    (1) Section 207 of the National Housing Act (NHA) (12 U.S.C. 1701 et 
seq.) (Rental Housing Insurance);
    (2) Section 213 of the NHA (Cooperative Housing Insurance);
    (3) Section 220 of the NHA (Rehabilitation and Neighborhood 
Conservation Housing Insurance);
    (4) Section 221(d)(3) and (5) of the NHA (Housing for Moderate 
Income and Displaced Families);
    (5) Section 221(d)(4) of the NHA (Housing for Moderate Income and 
Displaced Families);
    (6) Section 231 of the NHA (Housing for Elderly Persons);
    (7) Section 232 of the NHA (Mortgage Insurance for Nursing Homes, 
Intermediate Care Facilities, Board and Care Homes);
    (8) Section 234(d) of the NHA (Rental) (Mortgage Insurance for 
Condominiums);
    (9) Section 236 of the NHA (Rental and Cooperative Housing for Lower 
Income Families);
    (10) Section 241 of the NHA (Supplemental Loans for Multifamily 
Projects); and
    (11) Section 542(c) of the Housing and Community Development Act of 
1992 (12 U.S.C. 1707 note) (Housing Finance Agency Risk Sharing 
Program).
    (c) This subpart also applies to Public Housing (housing receiving 
assistance under the U.S. Housing Act of 1937, other than under section 
8 of the Act).
    (d) For purposes of this subpart, the term ``HUD housing'' means the 
types of housing listed in paragraphs (a), (b), and (c) of this section.


<R05>
Sec. 5.703  Physical condition standards for HUD housing that is decent, safe, sanitary and in good repair (DSS/GR).

    HUD housing must be decent, safe, sanitary and in good repair. 
Owners of housing described in Sec. 5.701(a), mortgagors of housing 
described in Sec. 5.701(b), and PHAs and other entities approved by HUD 
owning housing described in Sec. 5.701(c), must maintain such housing in 
a manner that meets the physical condition standards set forth in this 
section in order to be considered decent, safe, sanitary and in good 
repair. These standards address the major areas of the HUD housing: the 
site; the building exterior; the building systems; the dwelling units; 
the common areas; and health and safety considerations.
    (a) Site. The site components, such as fencing and retaining walls, 
grounds, lighting, mailboxes/project signs, parking lots/driveways, play 
areas and equipment, refuse disposal, roads, storm drainage and walkways 
must be free of health and safety hazards and be in good repair. The 
site must not be subject to material adverse conditions, such as 
abandoned vehicles, dangerous walks or steps, poor drainage, septic tank 
back-ups, sewer hazards, excess

[[Page 74]]

accumulations of trash, vermin or rodent infestation or fire hazards.
    (b) Building exterior. Each building on the site must be 
structurally sound, secure, habitable, and in good repair. Each 
building's doors, fire escapes, foundations, lighting, roofs, walls, and 
windows, where applicable, must be free of health and safety hazards, 
operable, and in good repair.
    (c) Building systems. Each building's domestic water, electrical 
system, elevators, emergency power, fire protection, HVAC, and sanitary 
system must be free of health and safety hazards, functionally adequate, 
operable, and in good repair.
    (d) Dwelling units. (1) Each dwelling unit within a building must be 
structurally sound, habitable, and in good repair. All areas and aspects 
of the dwelling unit (for example, the unit's bathroom, call-for-aid (if 
applicable), ceiling, doors, electrical systems, floors, hot water 
heater, HVAC (where individual units are provided), kitchen, lighting, 
outlets/switches, patio/porch/balcony, smoke detectors, stairs, walls, 
and windows) must be free of health and safety hazards, functionally 
adequate, operable, and in good repair.
    (2) Where applicable, the dwelling unit must have hot and cold 
running water, including an adequate source of potable water (note for 
example that single room occupancy units need not contain water 
facilities).
    (3) If the dwelling unit includes its own sanitary facility, it must 
be in proper operating condition, usable in privacy, and adequate for 
personal hygiene and the disposal of human waste.
    (4) The dwelling unit must include at least one battery-operated or 
hard-wired smoke detector, in proper working condition, on each level of 
the unit.
    (e) Common areas. The common areas must be structurally sound, 
secure, and functionally adequate for the purposes intended. The 
basement/garage/carport, restrooms, closets, utility, mechanical, 
community rooms, day care, halls/corridors, stairs, kitchens, laundry 
rooms, office, porch, patio, balcony, and trash collection areas, if 
applicable, must be free of health and safety hazards, operable, and in 
good repair. All common area ceilings, doors, floors, HVAC, lighting, 
outlets/switches, smoke detectors, stairs, walls, and windows, to the 
extent applicable, must be free of health and safety hazards, operable, 
and in good repair. These standards for common areas apply, to a varying 
extent, to all HUD housing, but will be particularly relevant to 
congregate housing, independent group homes/residences, and single room 
occupancy units, in which the individual dwelling units (sleeping areas) 
do not contain kitchen and/or bathroom facilities.
    (f) Health and safety concerns. All areas and components of the 
housing must be free of health and safety hazards. These areas include, 
but are not limited to, air quality, electrical hazards, elevators, 
emergency/fire exits, flammable materials, garbage and debris, handrail 
hazards, infestation, and lead-based paint. For example, the buildings 
must have fire exits that are not blocked and have hand rails that are 
undamaged and have no other observable deficiencies. The housing must 
have no evidence of infestation by rats, mice, or other vermin, or of 
garbage and debris. The housing must have no evidence of electrical 
hazards, natural hazards, or fire hazards. The dwelling units and common 
areas must have proper ventilation and be free of mold, odor (e.g., 
propane, natural gas, methane gas), or other observable deficiencies. 
The housing must comply with all requirements related to the evaluation 
and reduction of lead-based paint hazards and have available proper 
certifications of such (see 24 CFR part 35).
    (g) Compliance with State and local codes. The physical condition 
standards in this section do not supersede or preempt State and local 
codes for building and maintenance with which HUD housing must comply. 
HUD housing must continue to adhere to these codes.


<R05>
Sec. 5.705  Uniform physical inspection requirements.

    (a) Any entity responsible for conducting a physical inspection of 
HUD housing, to determine compliance with this subpart, must inspect 
such HUD housing annually (unless otherwise specifically notified by 
HUD), in accordance with HUD-prescribed physical inspection procedures. 
For Public

[[Page 75]]

Housing, PHAs have the option to inspect Public Housing units using the 
procedures prescribed in accordance with this section.
    (b) Inspections in accordance with the physical inspection 
procedures identified in paragraph (a) of this section shall not be 
required until HUD has issued the inspection software and accompanying 
guidebook. When the software and guidebook have been issued, HUD will 
publish a notice in the Federal Register to inform the public when the 
software and guidebook are available. The notice will provide 30 days 
within which covered entities must prepare to conduct inspections in 
accordance with this subpart. Until the date that is 30 days after HUD 
publishes such notice, any entity responsible for conducting a physical 
inspection of HUD housing, to determine compliance with this subpart, 
must continue to comply with inspection requirements in effect 
immediately prior to that date.


<R04>
            Subpart H--Uniform Financial Reporting Standards


<R05>
Sec. 5.801  Uniform financial reporting standards.

    (a) Applicability. This subpart H implements uniform financial 
reporting standards for:
    (1) Public housing agencies (PHAs) receiving assistance under 
sections 5, 9, or 14 of the 1937 Act (42 U.S.C. 1437c, 1437g, and 1437l) 
(Public Housing);
    (2) PHAs as contract administrators for any Section 8 project-based 
or tenant-based housing assistance payments program, which includes 
assistance under the following programs:
    (i) Section 8 project-based housing assistance payments programs, 
including, but not limited to, the Section 8 New Construction, 
Substantial Rehabilitation, Loan Management Set-Aside, Property 
Disposition, and Moderate Rehabilitation (including the Single Room 
Occupancy program for homeless individuals);
    (ii) Section 8 Project-Based Certificate programs;
    (iii) Any program providing Section 8 project-based renewal 
contracts; and
    (iv) Section 8 tenant-based assistance under the Section 8 
Certificate and Voucher program.
    (3) Owners of housing assisted under any Section 8 project-based 
housing assistance payments program:
    (i) Including, but not limited to, the Section 8 New Construction, 
Substantial Rehabilitation, Loan Management Set-Aside, and Property 
Disposition programs;
    (ii) Excluding the Section 8 Moderate Rehabilitation Program (which 
includes the Single Room Occupancy program for homeless individuals) and 
the Section 8 Project-Based Certificate Program;
    (4) Owners of multifamily projects receiving direct or indirect 
assistance from HUD, or with mortgages insured, coinsured, or held by 
HUD, including but not limited to housing under the following HUD 
programs:
    (i) Section 202 Program of Supportive Housing for the Elderly;
    (ii) Section 811 Program of Supportive Housing for Persons with 
Disabilities;
    (iii) Section 202 loan program for projects for the elderly and 
handicapped (including 202/8 projects and 202/162 projects);
    (iv) Section 207 of the National Housing Act (NHA) (12 U.S.C. 1701 
et seq.) (Rental Housing Insurance);
    (v) Section 213 of the NHA (Cooperative Housing Insurance);
    (vi) Section 220 of the NHA (Rehabilitation and Neighborhood 
Conservation Housing Insurance);
    (vii) Section 221(d) (3) and (5) of the NHA (Housing for Moderate 
Income and Displaced Families);
    (viii) Section 221(d)(4) of the NHA (Housing for Moderate Income and 
Displaced Families);
    (ix) Section 231 of the NHA (Housing for Elderly Persons);
    (x) Section 232 of the NHA (Mortgage Insurance for Nursing Homes, 
Intermediate Care Facilities, Board and Care Homes);
    (xi) Section 234(d) of the NHA (Rental) (Mortgage Insurance for 
Condominiums);
    (xii) Section 236 of the NHA (Rental and Cooperative Housing for 
Lower Income Families);

[[Page 76]]

    (xiii) Section 241 of the NHA (Supplemental Loans for Multifamily 
Projects); and
    (xiv) Section 542(c) of the Housing and Community Development Act of 
1992 (12 U.S.C. 1707 note) (Housing Finance Agency Risk-Sharing 
Program).
    (b) Submission of financial information. Entities (or individuals) 
to which this subpart is applicable must provide to HUD, on an annual 
basis, such financial information as required by HUD. This financial 
information must be:
    (1) Prepared in accordance with Generally Accepted Accounting 
Principles as further defined by HUD in supplementary guidance;
    (2) Submitted electronically to HUD through the internet, or in such 
other electronic format designated by HUD, or in such non-electronic 
format as HUD may allow if the burden or cost of electronic reporting is 
determined by HUD to be excessive; and
    (3) Submitted in such form and substance as prescribed by HUD.
    (c) Annual financial report filing dates. The financial information 
to be submitted to HUD in accordance with paragraph (b) of this section, 
must be submitted to HUD annually, no later than 60 days after the end 
of the fiscal year of the reporting period, and as otherwise provided by 
law. For entities listed in paragraphs (a)(3) and (4) of this section 
and that have fiscal years ending December 31, 1998, the report shall be 
due June 30, 1999. This extended report due date is only for entities 
listed in paragraphs (a)(3) and (4) of this section, and only for the 
first report due under this section.
    (d) Reporting compliance dates. Entities (or individuals) that are 
subject to the reporting requirements in this section must commence 
compliance with these requirements as follows:
    (1) For PHAs listed in paragraphs (a)(1) and (a)(2) of this section, 
the requirements of this section will begin with those PHAs with fiscal 
years ending September 30, 1999 and later. Unaudited financial 
statements will be required 60 days after the PHA's fiscal year end, and 
audited financial statements will then be required no later than 9 
months after the PHA's fiscal year end, in accordance with the Single 
Audit Act and OMB Circular A-133 (See 24 CFR 84.26). A PHA with a fiscal 
year ending September 30, 1999 that elects to submit its unaudited 
financial report earlier than the due date of November 30, 1999 must 
submit its report as required in this section. On or after September 30, 
1998, but prior to November 30, 1999 (except for a PHA with its fiscal 
year ending September 30, 1999), PHAs may submit their financial reports 
in accordance with this section.
    (2) For entities listed in paragraphs (a)(3) and (a)(4) of this 
section, the requirements of this section will begin with those entities 
with fiscal years ending December 31, 1998 and later. Entities listed in 
paragraphs (a)(3) and (a)(4) of this section with fiscal years ending 
December 31, 1998 that elect to submit their reports earlier than the 
due date must submit their financial reports as required in this 
section. On or after September 30, 1998 but prior to January 1, 1999, 
these entities may submit their financial reports in accordance with 
this section.
    (e) Limitation on changing fiscal years. To allow for a period of 
consistent assessment of the financial reports submitted to HUD under 
this subpart part, PHAs listed in paragraphs (a)(1) and (a)(2) of this 
section will not be allowed to change their fiscal years for their first 
three full fiscal years following October 1, 1998.
    (f) Responsibility for submission of financial report. The 
responsibility for submission of the financial report due to HUD under 
this section rests with the individuals and entities listed in paragraph 
(a) of this section.

[63 FR 46591, Sept. 1, 1998, as amended at 64 FR 1505, Jan. 11, 1999]


<R03>
PART 6--NONDISCRIMINATION IN PROGRAMS AND ACTIVITIES RECEIVING ASSISTANCE UNDER TITLE I OF THE HOUSING AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT ACT OF 1974--Table of Contents

<R05>


                      Subpart A--General Provisions

Sec.
6.1  Purpose.
6.2  Applicability.
6.3  Definitions.
6.4  Discrimination prohibited.

[[Page 77]]

6.5  Discrimination prohibited--employment.
6.6  Records to be maintained.

                         Subpart B--Enforcement

6.10  Compliance information.
6.11  Conduct of investigations.
6.12  Procedure for effecting compliance.
6.13  Hearings and appeals.

    Authority: 42 U.S.C. 3535(d) 42 U.S.C. 5309.

    Source: 64 FR 3797, Jan. 25, 1999, unless otherwise noted.


<R04>
                      Subpart A--General Provisions


<R05>
Sec. 6.1  Purpose.

    The purpose of this part is to implement the provisions of section 
109 of title I of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974 
(Title I) (42 U.S.C. 5309). Section 109 provides that no person in the 
United States shall, on the ground of race, color, national origin, 
religion, or sex, be excluded from participation in, be denied the 
benefits of, or be subjected to discrimination under any program or 
activity funded in whole or in part with Federal financial assistance. 
Section 109 does not directly prohibit discrimination on the bases of 
age or disability, and the regulations in this part 6 do not apply to 
age or disability discrimination in Title I programs. Instead, section 
109 directs that the prohibitions against discrimination on the basis of 
age under the Age Discrimination Act of 1975 (42 U.S.C. 6101-6107) (Age 
Discrimination Act) and the prohibitions against discrimination on the 
basis of disability under section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 
(29 U.S.C. 794) (Section 504) apply to programs or activities funded in 
whole or in part with Federal financial assistance. Thus, the 
regulations of 24 CFR part 8, which implement Section 504 for HUD 
programs, and the regulations of 24 CFR part 146, which implement the 
Age Discrimination Act for HUD programs, apply to disability and age 
discrimination in Title I programs.


<R05>
Sec. 6.2  Applicability.

    (a) This part applies to any program or activity funded in whole or 
in part with funds under title I of the Housing and Community 
Development Act of 1974, including Community Development Block Grants--
Entitlement, State and HUD-Administered Small Cities, and Section 108 
Loan Guarantees; Urban Development Action Grants; Economic Development 
Initiative Grants; and Special Purpose Grants.
    (b) The provisions of this part and sections 104(b)(2) and 109 of 
Title I that relate to discrimination on the basis of race shall not 
apply to the provision of Federal financial assistance by grantees under 
this title to the Hawaiian Homelands (42 U.S.C. 5309).
    (c) The provisions of this part and sections 104(b)(2) and 109 of 
Title I that relate to discrimination on the basis of race and national 
origin shall not apply to the provision of Federal financial assistance 
to grant recipients under the Native American Housing Assistance and 
Self-Determination Act (25 U.S.C. 4101). See also, 24 CFR 1003.601(a).


<R05>
Sec. 6.3  Definitions.

    The terms Department, HUD, and Secretary are defined in 24 CFR part 
5. Other terms used in this part 6 are defined as follows:
    Act means the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974, as 
amended (42 U.S.C. 5301-5320).
    Assistant Secretary means the Assistant Secretary for Fair Housing 
and Equal Opportunity.
    Award Official means the HUD official who has been delegated the 
Secretary's authority to implement a Title I funded program and to make 
grants under that program.
    Complete complaint means a written statement that contains the 
complainant's name and address, identifies the Recipient against which 
the complaint is made, and describes the Recipient's alleged 
discriminatory action in sufficient detail to inform HUD of the nature 
and date of the alleged violation of section 109. It shall be signed by 
the complainant or by someone authorized to do so on his or her behalf. 
Complaints filed on behalf of classes or third parties shall describe or 
identify (by name, if possible) the alleged victims of discrimination.
    Federal financial assistance means: (1) Any assistance made 
available under title I of the Housing and Community

[[Page 78]]

Development Act of 1974, as amended, and includes income generated from 
such assistance, and any grant, loan, contract, or any other 
arrangement, in the form of:
    (i) Funds;
    (ii) Services of Federal personnel; or
    (iii) Real or personal property or any interest in or use of such 
property, including:
    (A) Transfers or leases of the property for less than fair market 
value or for reduced consideration; and
    (B) Proceeds from a subsequent transfer or lease of the property if 
the Federal share of its fair market value is not returned to the 
Federal Government.
    (2) Any assistance in the form of proceeds from loans guaranteed 
under section 108 of the Act, but does not include assistance made 
available through direct Federal procurement contracts or any other 
contract of insurance or guaranty.
    Program or activity (funded in whole or in part) means all of the 
operations of--
    (1)(i) A department, agency, special purpose district, or other 
instrumentality of a State or local government; or
    (ii) The entity of a State or local government that distributes 
Federal financial assistance, and each department or agency (and each 
State or local government entity) to which the assistance is extended, 
in the case of assistance to a State or local government;
    (2)(i) A college, university, or other post-secondary institution, 
or a public system of higher education; or
    (ii) A local educational agency (as defined in section 198(a)(10) of 
the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965), system of 
vocational education or other school system;
    (3)(i) An entire corporation, partnership, or other private 
organization, or an entire sole proprietorship--
    (A) If assistance is extended to the corporation, partnership, 
private organization, or sole proprietorship as a whole; or
    (B) Which is principally engaged in the business of providing 
education, health care, housing, social services, or parks and 
recreation; or
    (ii) The entire plant or other comparable, geographically separate 
facility to which Federal financial assistance is extended, in the case 
of any other corporation, partnership, private organization, or sole 
proprietorship; or
    (4) Any other entity that is described in paragraphs (1), (2), or 
(3) of this definition, any part of which is extended Federal financial 
assistance.
    Recipient means any State, political subdivision of any State, or 
instrumentality of any State or political subdivision; any public or 
private agency, institution, organization, or other entity; or any 
individual, in any State, to whom Federal financial assistance is 
extended, directly or through another Recipient, for any program or 
activity, or who otherwise participates in carrying out such program or 
activity, including any successor, assign, or transferee thereof. 
Recipient does not include any ultimate beneficiary under any program or 
activity.
    Responsible Official means the Assistant Secretary for Fair Housing 
and Equal Opportunity or his or her designee.
    Section 109 means section 109 of the Housing and Community 
Development Act of 1974, as amended.
    Title I means title I of the Housing and Community Development Act 
of 1974 (42 U.S.C. 5301-5321).


<R05>
Sec. 6.4  Discrimination prohibited.

    (a) Section 109 requires that no person in the United States shall 
be excluded from participation in, be denied the benefits of, or be 
subjected to discrimination under any program or activity funded in 
whole or in part with Federal financial assistance, on the grounds of 
race, color, national origin, religion, or sex.
    (1) A Recipient under any program or activity to which this part 
applies may not, directly or through contractual, licensing, or other 
arrangements, take any of the following actions on the grounds of race, 
color, national origin, religion, or sex:
    (i) Deny any individual any facilities, services, financial aid, or 
other benefits provided under the program or activity;
    (ii) Provide any facilities, services, financial aid, or other 
benefits that are different, or are provided in a different

[[Page 79]]

form, from that provided to others under the program or activity;
    (iii) Subject an individual to segregated or separate treatment in 
any facility, or in any matter of process related to the receipt of any 
service or benefit under the program or activity;
    (iv) Restrict an individual's access to, or enjoyment of, any 
advantage or privilege enjoyed by others in connection with facilities, 
services, financial aid or other benefits under the program or activity;
    (v) Treat an individual differently from others in determining 
whether the individual satisfies any admission, enrollment, eligibility, 
membership, or other requirements or conditions that the individual must 
meet in order to be provided any facilities, services, or other benefit 
provided under the program or activity;
    (vi) Deny an individual an opportunity to participate in a program 
or activity as an employee;
    (vii) Aid or otherwise perpetuate discrimination against an 
individual by providing Federal financial assistance to an agency, 
organization, or person that discriminates in providing any housing, 
aid, benefit, or service;
    (viii) Otherwise limit an individual in the enjoyment of any right, 
privilege, advantage, or opportunity enjoyed by other individuals 
receiving the housing, aid, benefit, or service;
    (ix) Use criteria or methods of administration that have the effect 
of subjecting persons to discrimination or have the effect of defeating 
or substantially impairing accomplishment of the objectives of the 
program or activity with respect to persons of a particular race, color, 
national origin, religion, or sex; or
    (x) Deny a person the opportunity to participate as a member of 
planning or advisory boards.
    (2) In determining the site or location of housing, accommodations, 
or facilities, a Recipient may not make selections that have the effect 
of excluding persons from, denying them the benefits of, or subjecting 
them to discrimination on the ground of race, color, national origin, 
religion, or sex. The Recipient may not make selections that have the 
purpose or effect of defeating or substantially impairing the 
accomplishment of the objectives of section 109 and of this part 6.
    (3)(i) In administering a program or activity in which the Recipient 
has discriminated on the grounds of race, color, national origin, 
religion or sex, the Recipient must take any necessary steps to overcome 
the effects of prior discrimination.
    (ii) In the absence of discrimination, a Recipient, in administering 
a program or activity, may take any steps necessary to overcome the 
effects of conditions that resulted in limiting participation by persons 
of a particular race, color, national origin, religion, or sex.
    (iii) After a finding of noncompliance, or after a Recipient has 
reasonable cause to believe that discrimination has occurred, a 
Recipient shall not be prohibited by this section from taking any action 
eligible under subpart C of 24 CFR part 570 to ameliorate an imbalance 
in benefits, services or facilities provided to any geographic area or 
specific group of persons within its jurisdiction, where the purpose of 
such action is to remedy discriminatory practices or usage.
    (iv)(A) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this part, 
nothing contained in this section shall be construed to prohibit any 
Recipient from maintaining or constructing separate living facilities or 
restroom facilities for the different sexes in order to protect personal 
privacy or modesty concerns. Furthermore, selectivity on the basis of 
sex is not prohibited when institutional or custodial services can, in 
the interest of personal privacy or modesty, only be performed by a 
member of the same sex as those receiving the services.
    (B) Section 109 of the Act does not directly prohibit discrimination 
on the basis of age or disability, but directs that the prohibitions 
against discrimination on the basis of age under the Age Discrimination 
Act and the prohibitions against discrimination on the basis of 
disability under Section 504 apply to Title I programs and activities. 
Accordingly, for programs or activities receiving Federal financial 
assistance, the regulations in this part 6 apply to discrimination on 
the bases of race, color, national origin, religion, or

[[Page 80]]

sex; the regulations at 24 CFR part 8 apply to discrimination on the 
basis of disability; and the regulations at 24 CFR part 146 apply to 
discrimination on the basis of age.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 6.5  Discrimination prohibited--employment.

    (a) General. A Recipient may not, under any program or activity 
funded in whole or in part with Federal financial assistance, directly 
or through contractual agents or other arrangements including contracts 
and consultants, subject a person to discrimination in the terms and 
conditions of employment. Terms and conditions of employment include 
advertising, interviewing, selection, promotion, demotion, transfer, 
recruitment and advertising, layoff or termination, pay or other 
compensation, including benefits, and selection for training.
    (b) Determination of compliance status. The Assistant Secretary will 
follow the procedures set forth in this part and 29 CFR part 1691 and 
look to the substantive guidelines and policy of the Equal Employment 
Opportunity Commission when reviewing employment practices under Section 
109.


<R05>
Sec. 6.6  Records to be maintained.

    (a) General. Recipients shall maintain records and data as required 
by 24 CFR 91.105, 91.115, 570.490, and 570.506.
    (b) Employment. Recipients shall maintain records and data as 
required by the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission at 29 CFR part 
1600.
    (c) Recipients shall make available such records and any supporting 
documentation upon request of the Responsible Official.

(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control numbers 
2506-0117 and 2506-0077.)


<R04>
                         Subpart B--Enforcement


<R05>
Sec. 6.10  Compliance information.

    (a) Cooperation and assistance. The Responsible Official and the 
Award Official will provide assistance and guidance to Recipients to 
help them comply voluntarily with this part.
    (b) Access to data and other sources of information. Each Recipient 
shall permit access by authorized representatives of HUD to its 
facilities, books, records, accounts, minutes and audio tapes of 
meetings, personnel, computer disks and tapes, and other sources of 
information as may be pertinent to a determination of whether the 
Recipient is complying with this part. Where information required of a 
Recipient is in the exclusive possession of any other agency, 
institution, or person, and that agency, institution, or person fails or 
refuses to furnish this information, the Recipient shall so certify in 
any requested report and shall set forth what efforts it has made to 
obtain the information. Failure or refusal to furnish pertinent 
information (whether maintained by the Recipient or some other agency, 
institution, or person) without a credible reason for the failure or 
refusal will be considered to be noncompliance under this part.
    (c) Compliance data. Each Recipient shall keep records and submit to 
the Responsible Official, timely, complete, and accurate data at such 
times and in such form as the Responsible Official may determine to be 
necessary to ascertain whether the Recipient has complied or is 
complying with this part.
    (d) Notification to employees, beneficiaries, and participants. Each 
Recipient shall make available to employees, participants, 
beneficiaries, and other interested persons information regarding the 
provisions of this part and its applicability to the program or activity 
under which the Recipient receives Federal financial assistance and make 
such information available to them in such manner as the Responsible 
Official finds necessary to apprise such persons of the protections 
against discrimination assured them by Section 109 and this part.


<R05>
Sec. 6.11  Conduct of investigations.

    (a) Filing a complaint--(1) Who may file. Any person who believes 
that he or she has been subjected to discrimination prohibited by this 
part may file, or may have an authorized representative file on his or 
her behalf, a complaint with the Responsible Official. Any person who 
believes that any specific class of persons has been subjected to 
discrimination prohibited by this part and who is a member of that

[[Page 81]]

class or who is the authorized representative of a member of that class 
may file a complaint with the Responsible Official.
    (2) Confidentiality. Generally, the Responsible Official shall hold 
in confidence the identity of any person submitting a complaint, unless 
the person submits written authorization otherwise. However, an 
exception to maintaining confidentiality of the identity of the person 
may be required to carry out the purposes of this part, including the 
conduct of any investigation, hearing, or proceeding under this part.
    (3) When to file. Complaints shall be filed within 180 days of the 
alleged act of discrimination, unless the Responsible Official waives 
this time limit for good cause. For purposes of determining when a 
complaint is filed under this part, a complaint mailed to the 
Responsible Official via the U.S. Postal Service will be deemed filed on 
the date it is postmarked. A complaint delivered to the Responsible 
Official in any other manner will be deemed filed on the date it is 
received by the Responsible Official.
    (4) Where to file complaints. Complaints must be in writing, signed, 
addressed to the Responsible Official, and filed with (mailed to or 
otherwise delivered to) the Office of Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity 
at any HUD Office.
    (5) Content of complaints. Each complaint should contain the 
complainant's name, address, and phone number; a description or name, if 
available, of the Recipient alleged to have violated this part; an 
address where the violation occurred; and a description of the 
Recipient's alleged discriminatory action in sufficient detail to inform 
the Responsible Official of the nature and date of the alleged violation 
of this part.
    (6) Amendments to complaints. Amendments to complaints, such as 
clarification and amplification of allegations in a complaint or the 
addition of other Recipients, may be made by the complainant or the 
complainant's authorized representative at any time while the complaint 
is being considered, and any amendment shall be deemed to be made as of 
the original filing date.
    (7) Notification. To the extent practicable, the Responsible 
Official will notify the complainant and the Recipient of the 
Responsible Official's receipt of a complaint within 10 calendar days of 
receipt of a complete complaint. If the Responsible Official receives a 
complaint that is not complete, the Responsible Official will notify the 
complainant and specify the additional information that is needed to 
make the complaint complete. If the complainant fails to complete the 
complaint, the Responsible Official will close the complaint without 
prejudice and notify the complainant. When a complete complaint has been 
received, the Responsible Official, or his or her designee, will assess 
the complaint for acceptance, rejection, or referral to an appropriate 
Federal agency within 20 calendar days.
    (8) Resolution of complaints. After the acceptance of a complete 
complaint, the Responsible Official will investigate the complaint, 
attempt informal resolution, and, if resolution is not achieved, the 
Responsible Official will notify the Recipient and complainant, to the 
extent practicable within 180 days of the receipt of the complete 
complaint, of the results of the investigation in a letter of findings 
sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, containing the 
following:
    (i) Findings of fact and a finding of compliance or noncompliance;
    (ii) A description of an appropriate remedy for each violation 
believed to exist; and
    (iii) A notice of the right of the Recipient and the complainant to 
request a review of the letter of findings by the Responsible Official. 
A copy of the final investigative report will be made available upon 
request.
    (b) Compliance reviews--(1) Periodic compliance reviews. The 
Responsible Official may periodically review the practices of Recipients 
to determine whether they are complying with this part and may conduct 
on-site reviews. The Responsible Official will initiate an on-site 
review by sending to the Recipient a letter advising the Recipient of 
the practices to be reviewed; the programs affected by the review; and 
the opportunity, at any time before a final determination, to submit 
information

[[Page 82]]

that explains, validates, or otherwise addresses the practices under 
review. In addition, the Award Official will include, in normal program 
compliance reviews and monitoring procedures, appropriate actions to 
review and monitor compliance with general or specific program 
requirements designed to implement the requirements of this part.
    (2) Time period of the review. (i) For the Entitlement program, 
compliance reviews will cover the three years before the date of the 
review.
    (ii) For the Urban Development Action Grant (UDAG) program, the 
compliance review is applicable only to UDAG loan repayments or other 
payments or revenues classified as program income. UDAG repayments or 
other payments or revenues classified as miscellaneous revenue are not 
subject to compliance review under this part. (See 24 CFR 570.500(a).) 
The compliance review will cover the time period that program income is 
being repaid.
    (iii) For the State and HUD-Administered Small Cities programs, the 
compliance review will cover the four years before the date of the 
review.
    (iv) For all other programs, the time period covered by the review 
will be four years before the date of the review.
    (v) On a case-by-case basis, at the discretion of the Responsible 
Official, the above time frames for review can be expanded where facts 
or allegations warrant further investigation.
    (3) Early compliance resolution. On the last day of the on-site 
visit, after the compliance review, the Recipient will be given an 
opportunity to supplement the record. Additionally, a prefinding 
conference may be held and a summary of the proposed findings may be 
presented to the Recipient. In those instances where the issue(s) cannot 
be resolved at a prefinding conference or with the supplemental 
information, a meeting will be scheduled to attempt a voluntary 
settlement.
    (4) Notification of findings. (i) The Assistant Secretary will 
notify the Recipient of Federal financial assistance of the results of 
the compliance review in a letter of findings sent by certified mail, 
return receipt requested.
    (ii) Letter of findings. The letter of findings will include the 
findings of fact and the conclusions of law; a description of a remedy 
for each violation found; and a notice that a copy of HUD's final report 
concerning its compliance review will be made available, upon request, 
to the Recipient.
    (c) Right to a review of the letter of findings. (1) Within 30 days 
of receipt of the letter of findings, any party may request that a 
review be made of the letter of findings, by mailing or delivering to 
the Responsible Official, Room 5100, Office of Fair Housing and Equal 
Opportunity, HUD, Washington, DC 20410, a written statement of the 
reasons why the letter of findings should be modified.
    (2) The Responsible Official will send by certified mail, return 
receipt requested, a copy of the request for review to all parties. 
Parties other than the party requesting review and HUD shall have 20 
days from receipt to respond to the request for review.
    (3) The Responsible Official will either sustain or modify the 
letter of findings or require that further investigation be conducted, 
within 60 days of the request for review. The Responsible Official's 
decision shall constitute the formal determination of compliance or 
noncompliance.
    (4) If no party requests that the letter of findings be reviewed, 
the Responsible Official, within 14 calendar days of the expiration of 
the time period in paragraph (a)(9)(i) of this section, will send a 
formal written determination of compliance or noncompliance to all 
parties.
    (d) Voluntary compliance time limits. The Recipient will have 10 
calendar days from receipt of the letter of findings of noncompliance, 
or such other reasonable time as specified in the letter, within which 
to agree, in writing, to come into voluntary compliance or to contact 
the Responsible Official for settlement discussions. If the Recipient 
fails to meet this deadline, HUD will proceed in accordance with 
Secs. 6.12 and 6.13.
    (e) Informal resolution/voluntary compliance--(1) General. It is the 
policy of

[[Page 83]]

HUD to encourage the informal resolution of matters. A complaint or a 
compliance review may be resolved by informal means at any time. If a 
letter of findings is issued, and the letter makes a finding of 
noncompliance, the Responsible Official will attempt to resolve the 
matter through a voluntary compliance agreement.
    (2) Objectives of informal resolution/voluntary compliance. In 
attempting informal resolution, the Responsible Official will attempt to 
achieve a just resolution of the matter and to obtain assurances, where 
appropriate, that the Recipient will satisfactorily remedy any 
violations of the rights of any complainant, and will take such action 
as will assure the elimination of any violation of this part or the 
prevention of the occurrence of such violation in the future. If a 
finding of noncompliance has been made, the terms of such an informal 
resolution shall be reduced to a written voluntary compliance agreement, 
signed by the Recipient and the Responsible Official, and be made part 
of the file. Such voluntary compliance agreements shall seek to protect 
the interests of the complainant (if any), other persons similarly 
situated, and the public.
    (3) Right to file a private civil action. At any time in the 
process, the complainant has the right to file a private civil action. 
If the complainant does so, the Responsible Official has the discretion 
to administratively close the investigation or continue the 
investigation, if he or she decides that it is in the best interests of 
the Department to do so. If the Responsible Official makes a finding of 
noncompliance and an agreement to voluntarily comply is not obtained 
from the Recipient, the procedures at Secs. 6.12 and 6.13 for effecting 
compliance shall be followed.
    (f) Intimidatory or retaliatory acts prohibited. No Recipient or 
other person shall intimidate, threaten, coerce, or discriminate against 
any person for the purpose of interfering with any right or privilege 
secured by this part, or because he or she has made a complaint, 
testified, assisted, or participated in any manner in an investigation, 
compliance review, proceeding, or hearing under this part.


<R05>
Sec. 6.12  Procedure for effecting compliance.

    (a) Whenever the Assistant Secretary determines that a Recipient of 
Federal financial assistance has failed to comply with Section 109(a) or 
this part and voluntary compliance efforts have failed, the Secretary 
will notify the Governor of the State or the Chief Executive Officer of 
the unit of general local government of the findings of noncompliance 
and will request that the Governor or the Chief Executive Officer secure 
compliance. If within a reasonable period of time, not to exceed 60 
days, the Governor or the Chief Executive Officer fails or refuses to 
secure compliance, the Secretary will:
    (1) Refer the matter to the Attorney General with a recommendation 
that an appropriate civil action be instituted;
    (2) Exercise the powers and functions provided by Title VI;
    (3) Terminate or reduce payments under Title I, or limit the 
availability of payments under Title I to programs or activities not 
affected by the failure to comply; or
    (4) Take such other actions as may be provided by law, including but 
not limited to, the initiation of proceedings under 24 CFR part 24 or 
any applicable proceeding under State or local law.
    (b) Termination, reduction, or limitation of the availability of 
Title I payments. No order terminating, reducing, or limiting the 
availability of Title I payments under this part shall become effective 
until:
    (1) The Secretary has notified the Governor of the State or the 
Chief Executive Officer of the unit of general local government of the 
Recipient's failure to comply in accordance with paragraph (a) of this 
section and of the termination, reduction or limitation of the 
availability of Title I payments to be taken;
    (2) The Secretary has determined that compliance cannot be secured 
by voluntary means;
    (3) The Recipient has been extended an opportunity for a hearing in 
accordance with Sec. 6.13(a); and
    (4) A final agency notice or decision has been rendered in 
accordance with paragraph (c) of this section or 24 CFR part 180.

[[Page 84]]

    (c) If a Recipient does not respond to the notice of opportunity for 
a hearing or does not elect to proceed with a hearing within 20 days of 
the issuance of the Secretary's actions listed in paragraphs (b)(1), (2) 
and (3) of this section, then the Secretary's approval of the 
termination, reduction or limitation of the availability of Title I 
payments is considered a final agency notice and the Recipient may seek 
judicial review in accordance with section 111(c) of the Act.


<R05>
Sec. 6.13  Hearings and appeals.

    (a) When a Recipient requests an opportunity for a hearing, in 
accordance with Sec. 6.12(b)(3), the General Counsel will follow the 
notification procedures set forth in 24 CFR 180.415. The hearing, and 
any petition for review, will be conducted in accordance with the 
procedures set forth in 24 CFR part 180.
    (b) After a hearing is held and a final agency decision is rendered 
under 24 CFR part 180, the Recipient may seek judicial review in 
accordance with section 111(c) of the Act.


<R03>
PART 7--EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY; POLICY AND PROCEDURES--Table of Contents

<R05>


 Subpart A--Equal Employment Opportunity Without Regard to Race, Color, 
           Religion, Sex, National Origin, Age, or Disability

                           General Provisions

Sec.
7.1  Policy.
7.2  Definitions.
7.3  Designations.
7.4  Affirmative employment programs.

                            Responsibilities

7.10  Responsibilities of the Director and Deputy Director of EEO.
7.11  Responsibilities of the EEO Officers.
7.12  Responsibilities of the EEO Counselors.
7.13  Responsibilities of the Assistant Secretary for Administration.
7.14  Responsibilities of Human Resources Officers.
7.15  Responsibilities of managers and supervisors.
7.16  Responsibilities of employees.

                         Precomplaint Processing

7.25  Precomplaint processing.

                               Complaints

7.30  Presentation of complaint.
7.31  Who may file a complaint, with whom filed, and time limits.
7.32  Contents.
7.33  Acceptability.
7.34  Processing.
7.35  Hearing.
7.36  Decision by Director of EEO.
7.37  Rights of appeal.
7.38  Relationship to other HUD appellate procedures.

                          Subpart B [Reserved]

    Authority: 42 U.S.C. 3535(d); E.O. 11478, 3 CFR, 1969 Comp. p. 306; 
42 U.S.C. 2000e note.

    Source: 61 FR 14228, Mar. 29, 1996, unless otherwise noted.


<R04>
 Subpart A--Equal Employment Opportunity Without Regard to Race, Color, 
           Religion, Sex, National Origin, Age, or Disability

                           General Provisions


<R05>
Sec. 7.1  Policy.

    In conformity with the policy expressed in Executive Order 11478 (34 
FR 12985, 3 CFR, 1966-1970 Comp., p. 803) and with implementing 
regulations of the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, codified 
under 29 CFR part 1614, it is the policy and the intent of the 
Department of Housing and Urban Development to provide equality of 
opportunity in employment in the Department for all persons; to prohibit 
discrimination because of race, color, religion, sex, national origin, 
age or disability in all aspects of its personnel policies, program, 
practices, and operations and in all its working conditions and 
relationships with employees and applicants for employment; and to 
promote the full realization of equal opportunity in employment through 
continuing programs of affirmative employment at every management level 
within the Department.


<R05>
Sec. 7.2  Definitions.

    For purposes of this subpart A--
    AE means Affirmative Employment.
    EEO means Equal Employment Opportunity.

[[Page 85]]

    Organizational unit means the jurisdictional area of the Office of 
the Secretary, the Assistant to the Deputy Secretary for Field 
Management, each Assistant Secretary, the General Counsel, the Inspector 
General, the President of the Government National Mortgage Association, 
the Chief Financial Officer, the Director of Lead-Based Paint Abatement 
and Poisoning Prevention, and the Office of Federal Housing Enterprise 
Oversight.
    Person with a disability means the same as handicap under EEOC's 
regulations at 29 CFR part 1614.


<R05>
Sec. 7.3  Designations.

    (a) Director of Equal Employment Opportunity. The Director of the 
Office of Departmental Equal Employment Opportunity is designated the 
Director of EEO, except that with respect to complaints naming the 
Director and/or Deputy Director of Departmental EEO as the alleged 
discriminating official(s) and complaints arising in the Office of 
Departmental EEO, the Chief of Staff shall be Director of EEO.
    (b) Deputy Director of Equal Employment Opportunity. The Deputy 
Director of the Office of Departmental Equal Employment Opportunity is 
designated as the Deputy Director of Equal Employment Opportunity and 
acts for the Director of EEO.
    (c) Equal Employment Opportunity Officers. The Director of Equal 
Employment Opportunity shall designate appropriate HUD officials to be 
Equal Employment Opportunity Officers for their respective 
organizational units.


<R05>
Sec. 7.4  Affirmative employment programs.

    The Office of the Secretary, the Assistant to the Deputy Secretary 
for Field Management, each Assistant Secretary, the General Counsel, the 
Inspector General, the President of the Government National Mortgage 
Association, the Chief Financial Officer, the Director of Lead-Based 
Paint Abatement and Poisoning Prevention, and the Director, Office of 
Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight shall establish, maintain and carry 
out a plan of affirmative employment to promote equal opportunity in 
every aspect of employment policy and practice. Each plan shall identify 
instances of under-representation of minorities, women and persons with 
disabilities, recognize situations or barriers that impede equality of 
opportunity, and include objectives and action items targeted to 
eliminate any employment, training, advancement, and retention issues 
which adversely affect minorities, women and persons with disabilities. 
Each plan must be consistent with 29 CFR part 1614 and the governing 
Management Directive issued by the Equal Employment Opportunity 
Commission, and is subject to approval by the Director of Equal 
Employment Opportunity and shall be developed within the framework of 
Departmentwide guidelines published by the Director of EEO.

                            Responsibilities


<R05>
Sec. 7.10  Responsibilities of the Director and Deputy Director of EEO.

    The Director and Deputy Director of EEO are assigned the functions 
of:
    (a) Advising the Secretary with respect to the preparation of plans, 
procedures, regulations, reports, and other matters pertaining to the 
Government's equal employment opportunity policy and the Department's 
EEO/AE programs;
    (b) In coordination with other officials, developing and maintaining 
plans, procedures, and regulations necessary to carry out the 
Department's EEO programs, including a Departmentwide program of 
affirmative employment developed in coordination with other officials; 
approving programs of affirmative employment established throughout the 
Department;
    (c) Evaluating from time to time the sufficiency of the Department's 
EEO/AE programs and reporting thereon to the Secretary with 
recommendations as to any improvement or correction needed, including 
remedial or disciplinary action with respect to managerial or 
supervisory employees who have failed in their responsibility;
    (d) Appraising the Department's personnel operations at regular 
intervals to insure their conformity with the policy of the Government 
and the Department's equal employment opportunity program;

[[Page 86]]

    (e) Making changes in programs and procedures designed to eliminate 
discriminatory practices and improve the Department's EEO/AE programs;
    (f) Selecting EEO Counselors;
    (g) Providing for counseling by an EEO Counselor of an aggrieved 
employee or applicant for employment who believes that he or she has 
been discriminated against because of race, color, religion, sex, 
national origin, age or disability and for attempting to resolve on an 
informal basis or through a formal alternative dispute resolution 
process, the matter raised by the employee or applicant before a 
complaint of discrimination may be filed under Sec. 7.31;
    (h) Providing for the prompt, fair and impartial processing of 
individual complaints involving issues of discrimination within the 
Department subject to 29 CFR part 1614;
    (i) Making the final decision on discrimination complaints and 
ordering such corrective measures as may be necessary, including 
disciplinary action as is warranted by the circumstances when an 
employee has been found to have engaged in a discriminatory practice; 
and
    (j) Executing settlement agreements to resolve EEO complaints.


<R05>
Sec. 7.11  Responsibilities of the EEO Officers.

    Each EEO Officer shall:
    (a) Advise the Director of EEO on all matters affecting the 
implementation of the Department's EEO/AE policies and programs in the 
organizational unit;
    (b) Develop and maintain a program of affirmative employment for the 
organizational unit and insure that it is carried out in an exemplary 
manner;
    (c) Publicize to all employees of the organizational unit the name 
and address of the Director of EEO, the EEO Officer, and the EEO 
Counselor(s), the EEO Discrimination Complaint Manager, the Affirmative 
Employment Program (AEP) Manager, the Diversity Program Manager, and the 
EEO complaint procedures;
    (d) Inform all supervisors in the organizational unit of the 
responsibilities and objectives of the EEO Counselors and the EEO 
complaint process and the importance of cooperating with the Counselors 
to informally find solutions to problems brought to the officer's 
attention by employees and applicants;
    (e) Evaluate the performance by the managers and supervisors in the 
organizational unit in carrying out their responsibilities under this 
subpart and taking appropriate action;
    (f) Seek a resolution of EEO matters alleging discrimination within 
their organization brought to their attention;
    (g) Designate a high level Affirmative Employment Program (AEP) 
Manager in Headquarters responsible for the preparation of the AEP plan; 
the management of the plan; providing advice and guidance to managers 
and supervisors in removing barriers to EEO/AE and in implementing all 
their EEO/AE responsibilities; and reviewing all recruitment and 
personnel actions taken by managers and supervisors to ensure the 
achievement of AEP objectives;
    (h) Designate a senior level EEO Discrimination Complaint Manager in 
Headquarters to manage and direct the organization's EEO 
responsibilities; and
    (i) Designate a senior level Diversity Program Manager in 
Headquarters to manage and direct the organization's Diversity Program 
and provide resources for Diversity activities for its employees.


<R05>
Sec. 7.12  Responsibilities of the EEO Counselors.

    The EEO Counselors are responsible for counseling and attempting 
resolution of matters brought to the counselor's attention pursuant to 
Sec. 7.26 and 29 CFR part 1614 by any employee or applicant for 
employment who believes that he or she has been discriminated against 
because of race, color, religion, sex, national origin, age, or 
disability.


<R05>
Sec. 7.13  Responsibilities of the Assistant Secretary for Administration.

    The Assistant Secretary for Administration shall:
    (a) Provide leadership in developing and maintaining personnel 
management policies, programs, automated

[[Page 87]]

systems and procedures which will promote continuing affirmative 
employment to insure equal opportunity in the recruitment, selection, 
placement, training, awards, recognition and promotion of employees, 
including an applicant flow tracking system;
    (b) Provide positive assistance and guidance to organizational units 
and personnel offices to insure the effective implementation of the 
personnel management policies, programs, automated systems, and 
procedures on equal employment opportunity;
    (c) Participate at the national level with other Government 
departments and agencies, other employers, and other public and private 
groups, in cooperative action to improve employment opportunities and 
community conditions which effect employability;
    (d) Prepare and implement plans for recruitment and reports in 
accordance with the Federal Equal Opportunity Recruitment Program and 
the Disabled Veterans Affirmative Action Program;
    (e) Make reasonable accommodation to the known physical or mental 
limitations of qualified applicants and employees with disabilities 
unless the accommodation would impose an undue hardship on the operation 
of the agency's program; and
    (f) Designate a senior level Disability Program Manager to promote 
EEO/AE for persons with disabilities; to assure the accessibility of all 
HUD facilities and programs; and to manage the resources for providing 
reasonable accommodation.


<R05>
Sec. 7.14  Responsibilities of Human Resources Officers.

    In conformity with guidelines issued by the Assistant Secretary for 
Administration, Human Resources Officers shall:
    (a) Appraise job structure and employment practices to insure 
genuine equality of opportunity for all employees to participate fully 
on the basis of merit in all occupations and levels of responsibility;
    (b) Communicate the Department's equal employment opportunity policy 
and program and its employment needs to all sources of job candidates 
without regard to race, color, religion, sex, national origin, 
disability or age and solicit their recruitment assistance on a 
continuing basis;
    (c) As appropriate, provide personnel information to EEO counselors 
and others who are involved in the decision on a discrimination 
complaint;
    (d) Evaluate hiring methods and practices to insure impartial 
consideration for all job applicants;
    (e) Ensure that new employee orientation programs contain 
appropriate references to the Department's EEO/AE policies and programs;
    (f) Participate in the preparation and distribution of such 
educational materials as may be necessary to inform adequately all 
employees of their rights and responsibilities as described in this 
part, including the Department's directives issued to carry out the 
Equal Employment Opportunity Program;
    (g) In coordination with the Director of the Training Academy, 
develop an on-going training program for various levels of 
administration and supervision, to ensure understanding of the 
Departmental EEO/AE programs, policy and requirements which fosters 
effective teamwork and high morale, and provide communication with 
employees on any matter related to equal employment opportunity;
    (h) Decide all personnel actions on merit principles in a manner 
which will demonstrative affirmative equal employment opportunity for 
the organization;
    (i) Ensure the greatest possible utilization and development of the 
skills and potential ability of all employees;
    (j) Track applicant flow and promptly take or recommend appropriate 
action to overcome any impediment to the achievement of the objectives 
of the EEO/AE programs; and
    (k) Provide recognition to employees, supervisors, managers and 
units demonstrating superior accomplishment in equal employment 
opportunity.


<R05>
Sec. 7.15  Responsibilities of managers and supervisors.

    All managers and supervisors of the Department are responsible for:
    (a) Removing barriers to EEO and ensuring that Affirmative 
Employment objectives are accomplished in their areas of responsibility;

[[Page 88]]

    (b) Evaluating subordinate managers and supervisors on their 
performance of EEO/AE responsibilities;
    (c) Encouraging and taking positive steps to ensure respect for and 
acceptance of minorities, women and persons with disabilities, veterans 
and others of diverse characteristics in the work force;
    (d) Providing for the non-discriminatory treatment of all employees 
and for providing full and fair opportunity for all employees in 
obtaining employment and career advancement, including support for 
F.A.I.R., the Upward Mobility Program, the Mentoring Program and the 
Individual Development Plan;
    (e) Encouraging and authorizing staff participation in the various 
Diversity Program observances;
    (f) Being proactive in addressing EEO/AE issues, and for work 
environments that encourage and support complaint avoidance through 
sound management and personnel practices;
    (g) Resolving complaints of discrimination early in the EEO process 
either independently, or through the use of alternate dispute resolution 
techniques, when it is the right thing to do and when it represents a 
sound business decision; and
    (h) Making reasonable accommodation to the religious and disability 
needs of applicants and employees when those accommodations can be made 
without undue hardship on the business of the agency.


<R05>
Sec. 7.16  Responsibilities of employees.

    All employees of the Department are responsible for:
    (a) Being informed as to the Department's EEO/AE programs;
    (b) Adopting an attitude of full acceptance of minority, female and 
disabled group associates, and support of F.A.I.R.;
    (c) Providing equality of treatment of, and service to, all citizens 
with whom they come in contact in carrying out their job 
responsibilities; and
    (d) Providing assistance to supervisors and managers in carrying out 
their responsibilities in the EEO/AE programs.

                         Precomplaint Processing


<R05>
Sec. 7.25  Precomplaint processing.

    The regulations in 29 CFR 1614.105, concerning precomplaint 
processing shall apply.

                               Complaints


<R05>
Sec. 7.30  Presentation of complaint.

    At any stage in the presentation of a complaint, including the 
counseling stage, the Complainant shall be free from restraint, 
interference, coercion, discrimination, or reprisal and shall have the 
right to be accompanied, represented, and advised by a representative of 
the Complainant's own choosing, except as limited by 29 CFR 1614.605. If 
the Complainant is an employee of the Department, the employee shall 
have a reasonable amount of official time to present the complaint if 
the employee is otherwise in an active duty status. If the Complainant 
is an employee of the Department and designates another employee of the 
Department as Complainant's representative, the representative shall be 
free from restraint, interference, coercion, discrimination, or 
reprisal, and shall have a reasonable amount of official time, if the 
representative is otherwise in an active duty status, to present the 
complaint.


<R05>
Sec. 7.31  Who may file a complaint, with whom filed, and time limits.

    Any aggrieved person (hereafter referred to as the Complainant) who 
has observed the provisions of Sec. 7.25 may file a complaint if the 
matter of discrimination was not resolved to the complainant's 
satisfaction. The complaint must be filed with the Director of EEO 
within fifteen (15) days of receipt of the Notice of Right to File a 
Complaint issued by the EEO Counselor. The Department may accept a 
complaint only if the Complainant has met the appropriate requirements 
contained in 29 CFR 1614.605.


<R05>
Sec. 7.32  Contents.

    (a) The complaint filed should include the following information:
    (1) The specific action or personnel matter which is alleged to be 
discriminatory;

[[Page 89]]

    (2) The date the act or matter occurred;
    (3) The protected basis or bases on which the alleged discrimination 
occurred;
    (4) Facts and other pertinent information to support the allegation 
of discrimination; and
    (5) The relief desired.
    (b) To expedite the processing of complaints of discrimination, the 
Complainant should use HUD EEO-1 form to file the complaint.


<R05>
Sec. 7.33  Acceptability.

    The Director of EEO shall determine whether the complaint comes 
within the purview of the EEO regulations at 29 CFR part 1614 and shall 
advise the Complainant and Complainant's representative in writing of 
the acceptance or dismissal of the allegation(s) of the complaint. 
Should the Director of EEO dismiss the complaint or any allegations 
contained in the complaint, the written decision to the Complainant 
shall inform Complainant of the complainant's right to appeal the 
decision and of the time limit applicable to the right of appeal, if 
Complainant believes the dismissal improper.


<R05>
Sec. 7.34  Processing.

    (a) The Director of EEO will process complaints filed under 29 CFR 
part 1614 for the Department. The Director or the Director's designee 
has jurisdiction of any case.
    (b) The Director of EEO shall provide for the development of a 
complete and impartial record on which to decide the merits of the 
allegations accepted for investigation.
    (1) The person assigned to develop the factual record for the 
complaint shall occupy a position in the Department which is not, 
directly or indirectly, under the jurisdiction of the head of the part 
of the Department in which the complaint arose, or the person shall 
develop the record under a contract with the Department.
    (2) The Department will develop a complete and impartial factual 
record, subject to the requirements of 29 CFR part 1614, upon which to 
make findings on the matters raised in the complaint and accepted for 
processing.
    (3) The Director of EEO will provide the Complainant and the EEO 
Officer a copy of the record developed.


<R05>
Sec. 7.35  Hearing.

    (a) The Director of EEO will notify the Complainant of the 
Complainant's right to request an administrative hearing before the 
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission or a Final Agency Decision from 
the Department and the timeframes for executing the right to request an 
administrative hearing.
    (b) The Director of EEO will notify the appropriate EEOC office of 
Complainant's timely request for a hearing and request the appointment 
of an administrative judge to conduct the hearing pursuant to 29 CFR 
1614.109.


<R05>
Sec. 7.36  Decision by Director of EEO.

    Following consultation with the General Counsel and the Assistant 
Secretary for Administration, the Director of EEO shall make the final 
agency decision for the Department based on the record developed through 
the processing of the complaint. The decision shall require the remedial 
and corrective action necessary to ensure that the Department is in 
compliance with the EEO statutes and to promote the Department's policy 
of equal employment opportunity.


<R05>
Sec. 7.37  Rights of appeal.

    The provisions of 29 CFR part 1614, subpart D, shall govern rights 
of appeal.


<R05>
Sec. 7.38  Relationship to other HUD appellate procedures.

    (a) An aggrieved individual covered by a collective bargaining 
agreement that permits allegations of discrimination to be raised in a 
negotiated grievance procedure can file a complaint under these 
procedures or a negotiated grievance, but not both. An election to 
proceed under this part is indicated only by filing of a written 
complaint. An election to proceed under a negotiated grievance procedure 
is indicated by the filing of a timely grievance.
    (b) An aggrieved individual alleging discrimination on the basis of 
race, color, religion, sex, national origin, age or disability related 
to or stemming

[[Page 90]]

from an action that can be appealed to the Merit Systems Protection 
Board (MSPB) can file a complaint under these procedures, or an appeal 
with the MSPB, but not both. Whichever is filed first, the complaint or 
the appeal, is considered an election to proceed in that forum.


<R04>
                          Subpart B [Reserved]


<R03>
PART 8--NONDISCRIMINATION BASED ON HANDICAP IN FEDERALLY ASSISTED PROGRAMS AND ACTIVITIES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT--Table of Contents

<R05>


                      Subpart A--General Provisions

Sec.
8.1  Purpose.
8.2  Applicability.
8.3  Definitions.
8.4  Discrimination prohibited.
8.5  [Reserved]
8.6  Communications.

                          Subpart B--Employment

8.10  General prohibitions against employment discrimination.
8.11  Reasonable accommodation.
8.12  Employment criteria.
8.13  Preemployment inquiries.

                    Subpart C--Program Accessibility

8.20  General requirement concerning program accessibility.
8.21  Non-housing facilities.
8.22  New construction--housing facilities.
8.23  Alterations of existing housing facilities.
8.24  Existing housing programs.
8.25  Public housing and multi-family Indian housing.
8.26  Distribution of accessible dwelling units.
8.27  Occupancy of accessible dwelling units.
8.28  Housing certificate and housing voucher programs.
8.29  Homeownership programs (sections 235(i) and 235(j), Turnkey III 
          and Indian Housing Mutual Self-Help Programs).
8.30  Rental rehabilitation program.
8.31  Historic properties.
8.32  Accessibility standards.
8.33  Housing adjustments.

                         Subpart D--Enforcement

8.50  Assurances required.
8.51  Self-evaluation.
8.52  Remedial and affirmative action.
8.53  Designation of responsible employee and adoption of grievance 
          procedures.
8.54  Notice.
8.55  Compliance information.
8.56  Conduct of investigations.
8.57  Procedure for effecting compliance.
8.58  Hearings.

    Authority: 29 U.S.C. 794; 42 U.S.C. 3535(d) and 5309.

    Source: 53 FR 20233, June 2, 1988, unless otherwise noted.


<R04>
                      Subpart A--General Provisions


<R05>
Sec. 8.1  Purpose.

    (a) The purpose of this part is to effectuate section 504 of the 
Rehabilitation Act of 1973, as amended (29 U.S.C 794), to the end that 
no otherwise qualified individual with handicaps in the United States 
shall, solely by reason of his or her handicap, be excluded from the 
participation in, be denied the benefits of, or be subjected to 
discrimination under any program or activity receiving Federal financial 
assistance from the Department of Housing and Urban Development. This 
part also implements section 109 of the Housing and Community 
Development Act of 1974, as amended (42 U.S.C. 5309). This part does not 
effectuate section 504 as it applies to any program or activity 
conducted by the Department. Compliance with this part does not assure 
compliance with requirements for accessibility by physically-handicapped 
persons imposed under the Architectural Barriers Act of 1968 (42 U.S.C. 
4151-4157; 24 CFR part 40).
    (b) The policies and standards for compliance established by this 
part are established in contemplation of, and with a view to enforcement 
through, the Department's administration of programs or activities 
receiving Federal financial assistance and the administrative procedures 
described in subparts D and E (including, without limitation, judicial 
enforcement under Sec. 8.57(a)).


<R05>
Sec. 8.2  Applicability.

    This part applies to all applicants for, and recipients of, HUD 
assistance in the operation of programs or activities receiving such 
assistance. Such assistance includes, but is not limited to,

[[Page 91]]

that which is listed in appendix A of this part.


<R05>
Sec. 8.3  Definitions.

    As used in this part:
    Accessible, when used with respect to the design, construction, or 
alteration of a facility or a portion of a facility other than an 
individual dwelling unit, means that the facility or portion of the 
facility when designed, constructed or altered, can be approached, 
entered, and used by individuals with physical handicaps. The phrase 
accessible to and usable by is synonomous with accessible.
    Accessible, when used with respect to the design, construction, or 
alteration of an individual dwelling unit, means that the unit is 
located on an accessible route and when designed, constructed, altered 
or adapted can be approached, entered, and used by individuals with 
physical handicaps. A unit that is on an accessible route and is 
adaptable and otherwise in compliance with the standards set forth in 
Sec. 8.32 is accessible within the meaning of this paragraph. When a 
unit in an existing facility which is being made accessible as a result 
of alterations is intended for use by a specific qualified individual 
with handicaps (e.g., a current occupant of such unit or of another unit 
under the control of the same recipient, or an applicant on a waiting 
list), the unit will be deemed accessible if it meets the requirements 
of applicable standards that address the particular disability or 
impairment of such person.
    Accessible route means a continuous unobstructed path connecting 
accessible elements and spaces in a building or facility that complies 
with the space and reach requirements of applicable standards prescribed 
by Sec. 8.32. An accessible route that serves only accessible units 
occupied by persons with hearing or vision impairments need not comply 
with those requirements intended to effect accessibility for persons 
with mobility impairments.
    Adaptability means the ability of certain elements of a dwelling 
unit, such as kitchen counters, sinks, and grab bars, to be added to, 
raised, lowered, or otherwise altered, to accommodate the needs of 
persons with or without handicaps, or to accommodate the needs of 
persons with different types or degrees of disability. For example, in a 
unit adaptable for a hearing-impaired person, the wiring for visible 
emergency alarms may be installed but the alarms need not be installed 
until such time as the unit is made ready for occupancy by a hearing-
impaired person.
    Alteration means any change in a facility or its permanent fixtures 
or equipment. It includes, but is not limited to, remodeling, 
renovation, rehabilitation, reconstruction, changes or rearrangements in 
structural parts and extraordinary repairs. It does not include normal 
maintenance or repairs, reroofing, interior decoration, or changes to 
mechanical systems.
    Applicant for assistance means one who submits an application, 
request, plan, or statement required to be approved by a Department 
official or by a primary recipient as a condition of eligibility for 
Federal financial assistance. An application means such a request, plan 
or statement.
    Auxiliary aids means services or devices that enable persons with 
impaired sensory, manual, or speaking skills to have an equal 
opportunity to participate in, and enjoy the benefits of, programs or 
activities receiving Federal financial assistance. For example, 
auxiliary aids for persons with impaired vision may include readers, 
Brailled materials, audio recordings, and other similar services and 
devices. Auxiliary aids for persons with impaired hearing may include 
telephone handset amplifiers, telephones compatible with hearing aids, 
telecommunication devices for deaf persons (TDD's), interpreters, 
notetakers, written materials, and other similar services and devices.
    Department or HUD means the Department of Housing and Urban 
Development.
    Facility means all or any portion of buildings, structures, 
equipment, roads, walks, parking lots, rolling stock or other real or 
personal property or interest in the property.
    Federal financial assistance means any assistance provided or 
otherwise made available by the Department through any grant, loan, 
contract or any other arrangement, in the form of:

[[Page 92]]

    (a) Funds;
    (b) Services of Federal personnel; or
    (c) Real or personal property or any interest in or use of such 
property, including:
    (1) Transfers or leases of the property for less than fair market 
value or for reduced consideration; and
    (2) Proceeds from a subsequent transfer or lease of the property if 
the Federal share of its fair market value is not returned to the 
Federal Government.
    Federal financial assistance includes community development funds in 
the form of proceeds from loans guaranteed under section 108 of the 
Housing and Community Development Act of 1974, as amended, but does not 
include assistance made available through direct Federal procurement 
contracts or payments made under these contracts or any other contract 
of insurance or guaranty.
    Handicap means any condition or characteristic that renders a person 
an individual with handicaps.
    Historic preservation programs or activities means programs or 
activities receiving Federal financial assistance that have preservation 
of historic properties as a primary purpose.
    Historic properties means those properties that are listed or are 
eligible for listing in the National Register of Historic Places, or 
such properties designated as historic under a statute of the 
appropriate State or local government body.
    Individual with handicaps means any person who has a physical or 
mental impairment that substantially limits one or more major life 
activities; has a record of such an impairment; or is regarded as having 
such an impairment. For purposes of employment, this term does not 
include: Any individual who is an alcoholic or drug abuser whose current 
use of alcohol or drugs prevents the individual from performing the 
duties of the job in question, or whose employment, by reason of current 
alcohol or drug abuse, would constitute a direct threat to property or 
the safety of others; or any individual who has a currently contagious 
disease or infection and who, by reason of such disease or infection, 
would constitute a direct threat to the health or safety of other 
individuals or who, by reason of the currently contagious disease or 
infection, is unable to perform the duties of the job. For purposes of 
other programs and activities, the term does not include any individual 
who is an alcoholic or drug abuser whose current use of alcohol or drugs 
prevents the individual from participating in the program or activity in 
question, or whose participation, by reason of such current alcohol or 
drug abuse, would constitute a direct threat to property or the safety 
of others. As used in this definition, the phrase:
    (a) Physical or mental impairment includes:
    (1) Any physiological disorder or condition, cosmetic disfigurement, 
or anatomical loss affecting one or more of the following body systems: 
Neurological; musculoskeletal; special sense organs; respiratory, 
including speech organs; cardiovascular; reproductive; digestive; 
genito-urinary; hemic and lymphatic; skin; and endocrine; or
    (2) Any mental or psychological disorder, such as mental 
retardation, organic brain syndrome, emotional or mental illness, and 
specific learning disabilities. The term physical or mental impairment 
includes, but is not limited to, such diseases and conditions as 
orthopedic, visual, speech and hearing impairments, cerebral palsy, 
autism, epilepsy, muscular dystrophy, multiple sclerosis, cancer, heart 
disease, diabetes, mental retardation, emotional illness, drug addiction 
and alcoholism.
    (b) Major life activities means functions such as caring for one's 
self, performing manual tasks, walking, seeing, hearing, speaking, 
breathing, learning and working.
    (c) Has a record of such an impairment means has a history of, or 
has been misclassified as having, a mental or physical impairment that 
substantially limits one or more major life activities.
    (d) Is regarded as having an impairment means:
    (1) Has a physical or mental impairment that does not substantially 
limit one or more major life activities but that is treated by a 
recipient as constituting such a limitation;
    (2) Has a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits 
one or

[[Page 93]]

more major life activities only as a result of the attitudes of others 
toward such impairment; or
    (3) Has none of the impairments defined in paragraph (a) of this 
section but is treated by a recipient as having such an impairment.
    Multifamily housing project means a project containing five or more 
dwelling units.
    Primary recipient means a person, group, organization, State or 
local unit of government that is authorized or required to extend 
Federal financial assistance to another recipient for the purpose of 
carrying out a program or activity.
    Program or activity means all of the operations of:
    (a)(1) A department, agency, special purpose district, or other 
instrumentality of a State or of a local government; or
    (2) The entity of such State or local government that distributes 
such assistance and each such department or agency (and each other State 
or local government entity) to which the assistance is extended, in the 
case of assistance to a State or local government;
    (b)(1) A college, university, or other post-secondary institution, 
or a public system of higher education; or
    (2) A local educational agency (as defined in section 198(a)(10) of 
the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965), system of 
vocational education, or other school system;
    (c)(1) An entire corporation, partnership, or other private 
organization, or an entire sole proprietorship--
    (i) If assistance is extended to such corporation, partnership, 
private organization, or sole proprietorship as a whole; or
    (ii) Which is principally engaged in the business of providing 
education, health care, housing, social services, or parks and 
recreation; or
    (2) The entire plant or other comparable, geographically separate 
facility to which Federal financial assistance is extended, in the case 
of any other corporation, partnership, private organization, or sole 
proprietorship; or
    (d) Any other entity which is established by two or more of the 
entities described in paragraphs (a), (b), or (c) of this section;

any part of which is extended Federal financial assistance.
    Project means the whole of one or more residential structures and 
appurtenant structures, equipment, roads, walks, and parking lots which 
are covered by a single contract for Federal financial assistance or 
application for assistance, or are treated as a whole for processing 
purposes, whether or not located on a common site.
    Qualified individual with handicaps means:
    (a) With respect to employment, an individual with handicaps who, 
with reasonable accommodation, can perform the essential functions of 
the job in question; and
    (b) With respect to any non-employment program or activity which 
requires a person to perform services or to achieve a level of 
accomplishment, an individual with handicaps who meets the essential 
eligibility requirements and who can achieve the purpose of the program 
or activity without modifications in the program or activity that the 
recipient can demonstrate would result in a fundamental alteration in 
its nature; or
    (c) With respect to any other non-employment program or activity, an 
individual with handicaps who meets the essential eligibility 
requirements for participation in, or receipt of benefits from, that 
program or activity. Essential eligibility requirements include stated 
eligibility requirements such as income as well as other explicit or 
implicit requirements inherent in the nature of the program or activity, 
such as requirements that an occupant of multifamily housing be capable 
of meeting the recipient's selection criteria and be capable of 
complying with all obligations of occupancy with or without supportive 
services provided by persons other than the recipient. For example, a 
chronically metally ill person whose particular condition poses a 
significant risk of substantial interference with the safety or 
enjoyment of others or with his or her own health or safety in the 
absence of necessary supportive services may be qualified for occupancy 
in a project where such supportive services are provided by the 
recipient

[[Page 94]]

as part of the assisted program. The person may not be qualified for a 
project lacking such services.
    Recipient means any State or its political subdivision, any 
instrumentality of a State or its political subdivision, any public or 
private agency, institution, organization, or other entity, or any 
person to which Federal financial assistance is extended for any program 
or activity directly or through another recipient, including any 
successor, assignee, or transferee of a recipient, but excluding the 
ultimate beneficiary of the assistance. An entity or person receiving 
housing assistance payments from a recipient on behalf of eligible 
families under a housing assistance payments program or a voucher 
program is not a recipient or subrecipient merely by virtue of receipt 
of such payments.
    Replacement cost of the completed facility means the current cost of 
construction and equipment for a newly constructed housing facility of 
the size and type being altered. Construction and equipment costs do not 
include the cost of land, demolition, site improvements, non-dwelling 
facilities and administrative costs for project development activities.
    Secretary means the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development.
    Section 504 means section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, as 
amended, 29 U.S.C. 794, as it applies to programs or activities 
receiving Federal financial assistance.
    Substantial impairment means a significant loss of the integrity of 
finished materials, design quality, or special character resulting from 
a permanent alteration.

[53 FR 20233, June 2, 1988; 54 FR 8188, Feb. 27, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 8.4  Discrimination prohibited.

    (a) No qualified individual with handicaps shall, solely on the 
basis of handicap, be excluded from participation in, be denied the 
benefits of, or otherwise be subjected to discrimination under any 
program or activity that receives Federal financial assistance from the 
Department.
    (b)(1) A recipient, in providing any housing, aid, benefit, or 
service in a program or activity that receives Federal financial 
assistance from the Department may not, directly or through contractual, 
licensing, or other arrangements, solely on the basis of handicap:
    (i) Deny a qualified individual with handicaps the opportunity to 
participate in, or benefit from, the housing, aid, benefit, or service;
    (ii) Afford a qualified individual with handicaps an opportunity to 
participate in, or benefit from, the housing, aid, benefit, or service 
that is not equal to that afforded to others;
    (iii) Provide a qualified individual with handicaps with any 
housing, aid, benefit, or service that is not as effective in affording 
the individual an equal opportunity to obtain the same result, to gain 
the same benefit, or to reach the same level of achievement as that 
provided to others;
    (iv) Provide different or separate housing, aid, benefits, or 
services to individuals with handicaps or to any class of individuals 
with handicaps from that provided to others unless such action is 
necessary to provide qualified individuals with handicaps with housing, 
aid, benefits, or services that are as effective as those provided to 
others.
    (v) Aid or perpetuate discrimination against a qualified individual 
with handicaps by providing significant assistance to an agency, 
organization, or person that discriminates on the basis of handicap in 
providing any housing, aid, benefit, or service to beneficiaries in the 
recipient's federally assisted program or activity;
    (vi) Deny a qualified individual with handicaps the opportunity to 
participate as a member of planning or advisory boards;
    (vii) Deny a dwelling to an otherwise qualified buyer or renter 
because of a handicap of that buyer or renter or a person residing in or 
intending and eligible to reside in that dwelling after it is sold, 
rented or made available; or
    (viii) Otherwise limit a qualified individual with handicaps in the 
enjoyment of any right, privilege, advantage, or opportunity enjoyed by 
other qualified individuals receiving the housing, aid, benefit, or 
service.

[[Page 95]]

    (2) For purposes of this part, housing, aids, benefits, and 
services, to be equally effective, are not required to produce the 
identical result or level of achievement for individuals with handicaps 
and non-handicapped persons, but must afford individuals with handicaps 
equal opportunity to obtain the same result, to gain the same benefit, 
or to reach the same level of achievement.
    (3) A recipient may not deny a qualified individual with handicaps 
the opportunity to participate in any federally assisted program or 
activity that is not separate or different despite the existence of 
permissibly separate or different programs or activities.
    (4) In any program or activity receiving Federal financial 
assistance from the Department, a recipient may not, directly or through 
contractual or other arrangements, utilize criteria or methods of 
administration the purpose or effect of which would:
    (i) Subject qualified individuals with handicaps to discrimination 
solely on the basis of handicap;
    (ii) Defeat or substantially impair the accomplishment of the 
objectives of the recipient's federally assisted program or activity for 
qualified individuals with a particular handicap involved in the program 
or activity, unless the recipient can demonstrate that the criteria or 
methods of administration are manifestly related to the accomplishment 
of an objective of a program or activity; or
    (iii) Perpetuate the discrimination of another recipient if both 
recipients are subject to common administrative control or are agencies 
of the same State.
    (5) In determining the site or location of a federally assisted 
facility, an applicant for assistance or a recipient may not make 
selections the purpose or effect of which would:
    (i) Exclude qualified individuals with handicaps from, deny them the 
benefits of, or otherwise subject them to discrimination under, any 
program or activity that receives Federal financial assistance from the 
Department, or
    (ii) Defeat or substantially impair the accomplishment of the 
objectives of the program or activity with respect to qualified 
individuals with handicaps.
    (6) As used in this section, the housing, aid, benefit, or service 
provided under a program or activity receiving Federal financial 
assistance includes any housing, aid, benefit, or service provided in or 
through a facility that has been constructed, altered, leased or rented, 
or otherwise acquired, in whole or in part, with Federal financial 
assistance.
    (c)(1) Non-handicapped persons may be excluded from the benefits of 
a program if the program is limited by Federal statute or executive 
order to individuals with handicaps. A specific class of individuals 
with handicaps may be excluded from a program if the program is limited 
by Federal statute or Executive order to a different class of 
individuals.
    (2) Certain Department programs operate under statutory definitions 
of handicapped person that are more restrictive than the definition of 
individual with handicaps contained in Sec. 8.3 (see appendix B). Those 
definitions are not superseded or otherwise affected by this regulation.
    (d) Recipients shall administer programs and activities receiving 
Federal financial assistance in the most integrated setting appropriate 
to the needs of qualified individuals with handicaps.
    (e) The obligation to comply with this part is not obviated or 
alleviated by any State or local law or other requirement that, based on 
handicap, imposes inconsistent or contradictory prohibitions or limits 
upon the eligibility of qualified individuals with handicaps to receive 
services or to practice any occupation or profession.
    (f) The enumeration of specific forms of prohibited discrimination 
in paragraphs (b) through (e) of this section does not limit the general 
prohibition in paragraph (a) of this section.

[53 FR 20233, June 2, 1988; 53 FR 28115, July 26, 1988]


<R05>
Sec. 8.5  [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 8.6  Communications.

    (a) The recipient shall take appropriate steps to ensure effective 
communication with applicants, beneficiaries, and members of the public.
    (1) The recipient shall furnish appropriate auxiliary aids where 
necessary to afford an individual with handicaps

[[Page 96]]

an equal opportunity to participate in, and enjoy the benefits of, a 
program or activity receiving Federal financial assistance.
    (i) In determining what auxiliary aids are necessary, the recipient 
shall give primary consideration to the requests of the individual with 
handicaps.
    (ii) The recipient is not required to provide individually 
prescribed devices, readers for personal use or study, or other devices 
of a personal nature.
    (2) Where a recipient communicates with applicants and beneficiaries 
by telephone, telecommunication devices for deaf persons (TDD's) or 
equally effective communication systems shall be used.
    (b) The recipient shall adopt and implement procedures to ensure 
that interested persons (including persons with impaired vision or 
hearing) can obtain information concerning the existence and location of 
accessible services, activities, and facilities.
    (c) This section does not require a recipient to take any action 
that the recipient can demonstrate would result in a fundamental 
alteration in the nature of a program or activity or in undue financial 
and administrative burdens. If an action would result in such an 
alteration or burdens, the recipient shall take any other action that 
would not result in such an alteration or such burdens but would 
nevertheless ensure that, to the maximum extent possible, individuals 
with handicaps receive the benefits and services of the program or 
activity receiving HUD assistance.


<R04>
                          Subpart B--Employment


<R05>
Sec. 8.10  General prohibitions against employment discrimination.

    (a) No qualified individual with handicaps shall, solely on the 
basis of handicap, be subjected to discrimination in employment under 
any program or activity that receives Federal financial assistance from 
the Department.
    (b) A recipient may not limit, segregate, or classify applicants or 
employees in any way that adversely affects their opportunities or 
status because of handicap.
    (c) The prohibition against discrimination in employment applies to 
the following activities:
    (1) Recruitment, advertising, and the processing of applications for 
employment;
    (2) Hiring, upgrading, promotion, award of tenure, demotion, 
transfer, layoff, termination, right of return from layoff, injury or 
illness, and rehiring;
    (3) Rates of pay or any other form of compensation and changes in 
compensation;
    (4) Job assignments, job classifications, organizational structures, 
position descriptions, lines of progression, and seniority lists;
    (5) Leaves of absence, sick leave, or any other leave;
    (6) Fringe benefits available by virtue of employment, whether or 
not administered by the recipient;
    (7) Selection and financial support for training, including 
apprenticeship, professional meetings, conferences, and other related 
activities, and selection for leaves of absence for training;
    (8) Employer sponsored activities, including social or recreational 
programs; and
    (9) Any other term, condition, or privilege of employment.
    (d) A recipient may not participate in a contractual or other 
relationship that has the effect of subjecting qualified applicants with 
handicaps or employees with handicaps to discrimination prohibited by 
this subpart. The relationships referred to in this paragraph (d) 
include relationships with employment and referral agencies, labor 
unions, organizations providing or administering fringe benefits to 
employees of the recipient, and organizations providing training and 
apprenticeship programs.


<R05>
Sec. 8.11  Reasonable accommodation.

    (a) A recipient shall make reasonable accommodation to the known 
physical or mental limitations of an otherwise qualified applicant with 
handicaps or employee with handicaps, unless the recipient can 
demonstrate that the accommodation would impose an undue hardship on the 
operation of its program.

[[Page 97]]

    (b) Reasonable accommodation may include:
    (1) Making facilities used by employees accessible to and usable by 
individuals with handicaps and
    (2) Job restructuring, job relocation, part-time or modified work 
schedules, acquisitions or modification of equipment or devices, the 
provision of readers or interpreters, and other similar actions.
    (c) In determining, under paragraph (a) of this section, whether an 
accommodation would impose an undue hardship on the operation of a 
recipient's program, factors to be considered include:
    (1) The overall size of the recipient's program with respect to 
number of employees, number and type of facilities, and size of budget;
    (2) The type of the recipient's operation, including the composition 
and structure of the recipient's workforce; and
    (3) The nature and cost of the accommodation needed.
    (d) A recipient may not deny any employment opportunity to a 
qualified handicapped employee or applicant if the basis for the denial 
is the need to make reasonable accommodation to the physical or mental 
limitations of the employee or applicant.


<R05>
Sec. 8.12  Employment criteria.

    (a) A recipient may not use any employment test or other selection 
criterion that screens out or tends to screen out individuals with 
handicaps or any class of individuals with handicaps unless:
    (1) The recipient demonstrates that the test score or other 
selection criterion, as used by the recipient, is job-related for the 
position in question; and
    (2) The appropriate HUD official demonstrates that alternative job-
related tests or criteria that tend to screen out fewer individuals with 
handicaps are unavailable.
    (b) A recipient shall select and administer tests concerning 
employment to ensure that, when administered to an applicant or employee 
who has a handicap that impairs sensory, manual, or speaking skills, the 
test results accurately reflect the applicant's or employee's job 
skills, aptitude, or whatever other factor the test purports to measure, 
rather than the applicant's or employee's impaired sensory, manual, or 
speaking skills (except where those skills are the factors that the test 
purports to measure).


<R05>
Sec. 8.13  Preemployment inquiries.

    (a) Except as provided in paragraphs (b) and (c) of this section, a 
recipient may not make a preemployment inquiry or conduct a 
preemployment medical examination of an applicant to determine whether 
the applicant is an individual with handicaps or the nature or severity 
of a handicap. A recipient may, however, make preemployment inquiry into 
an applicant's ability to perform job-related functions.
    (b) When a recipient is undertaking affirmative action efforts, 
voluntary or otherwise, the recipient may invite applicants for 
employment to indicate whether and to what extent they are handicapped, 
if the following conditions are met:
    (1) The recipient states clearly on any written questionnaire used 
for this purpose, or makes clear orally if no written questionnaire is 
used, that the information requested is intended for use solely in 
connection with its remedial action obligations, or its voluntary or 
affirmative action efforts; and
    (2) The recipient states clearly that the information is being 
requested on a voluntary basis, that it will be kept confidential (as 
provided in paragraph (d) of this section), that refusal to provide the 
information will not subject the applicant or employee to any adverse 
treatment, and that the information will be used only in accordance with 
this part.
    (c) Nothing in this section shall prohibit a recipient from 
conditioning an offer of employment on the results of a medical 
examination conducted before the employee's entrance on duty if all 
entering employees in that category of job classification must take such 
an examination regardless of handicap, and the results of such 
examination are used only in accordance with the requirements of this 
part.

[[Page 98]]

    (d) Information obtained under this section concerning the medical 
condition or history of the applicant is to be collected and maintained 
on separate forms that are accorded confidentiality as medical records, 
except that:
    (1) Supervisors and managers may be informed of restrictions on the 
work or duties of individuals with handicaps and informed of necessary 
accommodations;
    (2) First aid and safety personnel may be informed if the condition 
might require emergency treatment; and
    (3) Government officials investigating compliance with section 504 
shall be provided relevant information upon request.


<R04>
                    Subpart C--Program Accessibility


<R05>
Sec. 8.20  General requirement concerning program accessibility.

    Except as otherwise provided in Secs. 8.21(c)(1), 8.24(a), 8.25, and 
8.31, no qualified individual with handicaps shall, because a 
recipient's facilities are inaccessible to or unusable by individuals 
with handicaps, be denied the benefits of, be excluded from 
participation in, or otherwise be subjected to discrimination under any 
program or activity that receives Federal financial assistance.


<R05>
Sec. 8.21  Non-housing facilities.

    (a) New construction. New non-housing facilities shall be designed 
and constructed to be readily accessible to and usable by individuals 
with handicaps.
    (b) Alterations to facilities. Alterations to existing non-housing 
facilities shall, to the maximum extent feasible, be made to be readily 
accessible to and usable by individuals with handicaps. For purposes of 
this paragraph, the phrase to the maximum extent feasible shall not be 
interpreted as requiring that a recipient make a non-housing facility, 
or element thereof, accessible if doing so would impose undue financial 
and administrative burdens on the operation of the recipient's program 
or activity.
    (c) Existing non-housing facilities--(1) General. A recipient shall 
operate each non-housing program or activity receiving Federal financial 
assistance so that the program or activity, when viewed in its entirety, 
is readily accessible to and usable by individuals with handicaps. This 
paragraph does not--
    (i) Necessarily require a recipient to make each of its existing 
non-housing facilities accessible to and usable by individuals with 
handicaps;
    (ii) In the case of historic preservation programs or activities, 
require the recipient to take any action that would result in a 
substantial impairment of significant historic features of an historic 
property; or
    (iii) Require a recipient to take any action that it can demonstrate 
would result in a fundamental alteration in the nature of its program or 
activity or in undue financial and administrative burdens. If an action 
would result in such an alteration or such burdens, the recipient shall 
take any action that would not result in such an alteration or such 
burdens but would nevertheless ensure that individuals with handicaps 
receive the benefits and services of the program or activity.
    (2) Methods--(i) General. A recipient may comply with the 
requirements of this section in its programs and activities receiving 
Federal financial assistance through such means as location of programs 
or services to accessible facilities or accessible portions of 
facilities, assignment of aides to beneficiaries, home visits, the 
addition or redesign of equipment (e.g., appliances or furnishings) 
changes in management policies or procedures, acquisition or 
construction of additional facilities, or alterations to existing 
facilities on a selective basis, or any other methods that result in 
making its program or activity accessible to individuals with handicaps. 
A recipient is not required to make structural changes in existing 
facilities where other methods are effective in achieving compliance 
with this section. In choosing among available methods for meeting the 
requirements of this section, the recipient shall give priority to those 
methods that offer programs and activities to qualified individuals with 
handicaps in the most integrated setting appropriate.
    (ii) Historic preservation programs or activities. In meeting the 
requirements of Sec. 8.21(c) in historic preservation programs or 
activities, a recipient shall give priority to methods that provide

[[Page 99]]

physical access to individuals with handicaps. In cases where a physical 
alteration to an historic property is not required because of 
Sec. 8.21(c)(1)(ii) or (iii), alternative methods of achieving program 
accessibility include using audio-visual materials and devices to depict 
those portions of an historic property that cannot otherwise be made 
accessible; assigning persons to guide individuals with handicaps into 
or through portions of historic properties that cannot otherwise be made 
accessible; or adopting other innovative methods.
    (3) Time period for compliance. The recipient shall comply with the 
obligations established under this section within sixty days of July 11, 
1988, except that where structural changes in facilities are undertaken, 
such changes shall be made within three years of July 11, 1988, but in 
any event as expeditiously as possible.
    (4) Transition plan. If structural changes to non-housing facilities 
will be undertaken to achieve program accessibility, a recipient shall 
develop, within six months of July 11, 1988, a transition plan setting 
forth the steps necessary to complete such changes. The plan shall be 
developed with the assistance of interested persons, including 
individuals with handicaps or organizations representing individuals 
with handicaps. A copy of the transition plan shall be made available 
for public inspection. The plan shall, at a minimum--
    (i) Identify physical obstacles in the recipient's facilities that 
limit the accessibility of its programs or activities to individuals 
with handicaps;
    (ii) Describe in details the methods that will be used to make the 
facilities accessible;
    (iii) Specify the schedule for taking the steps necessary to achieve 
compliance with this section and, if the time period of the transition 
plan is longer than one year, identify steps that will be taken during 
each year of the transition period;
    (iv) Indicate the official responsible for implementation of the 
plan; and
    (v) Identify the persons or groups with whose assistance the plan 
was prepared.

(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 
2529-0034)

[53 FR 20233, June 2, 1988; 53 FR 28115, July 26, 1988, as amended at 54 
FR 37645, Sept. 12, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 8.22  New construction--housing facilities.

    (a) New multifamily housing projects (including public housing and 
Indian housing projects as required by Sec. 8.25) shall be designed and 
constructed to be readily accessible to and usable by individuals with 
handicaps.
    (b) Subject to paragraph (c) of this section, a minimum of five 
percent of the total dwelling units or at least one unit in a 
multifamily housing project, whichever is greater, shall be made 
accessible for persons with mobility impairments. A unit that is on an 
accessible route and is adaptable and otherwise in compliance with the 
standards set forth in Sec. 8.32 is accessible for purposes of this 
section. An additional two percent of the units (but not less than one 
unit) in such a project shall be accessible for persons with hearing or 
vision impairments.
    (c) HUD may prescribe a higher percentage or number than that 
prescribed in paragraph (b) of this section for any area upon request 
therefor by any affected recipient or by any State or local government 
or agency thereof based upon demonstration to the reasonable 
satisfaction of HUD of a need for a higher percentage or number, based 
on census data or other available current data (including a currently 
effective Housing Assistance Plan or Comprehensive Homeless Assistance 
Plan), or in response to evidence of a need for a higher percentage or 
number received in any other manner. In reviewing such request or 
otherwise assessing the existence of such needs, HUD shall take into 
account the expected needs of eligible persons with and without 
handicaps.

[53 FR 20233, June 2, 1988, as amended at 56 FR 920, Jan. 9, 1991]

[[Page 100]]


<R05>
Sec. 8.23  Alterations of existing housing facilities.

    (a) Substantial alteration. If alterations are undertaken to a 
project (including a public housing project as required by 
Sec. 8.25(a)(2)) that has 15 or more units and the cost of the 
alterations is 75 percent or more of the replacement cost of the 
completed facility, then the provisions of Sec. 8.22 shall apply.
    (b) Other alterations. (1) Subject to paragraph (b)(2) of this 
section, alterations to dwelling units in a multifamily housing project 
(including public housing) shall, to the maximum extent feasible, be 
made to be readily accessible to and usable by individuals with 
handicaps. If alterations of single elements or spaces of a dwelling 
unit, when considered together, amount to an alteration of a dwelling 
unit, the entire dwelling unit shall be made accessible. Once five 
percent of the dwelling units in a project are readily accessible to and 
usable by individuals with mobility impairments, then no additional 
elements of dwelling units, or entire dwelling units, are required to be 
accessible under this paragraph. Alterations to common areas or parts of 
facilities that affect accessibility of existing housing facilities 
shall, to the maximum extent feasible, be made to be accessible to and 
usable by individuals with handicaps. For purposes of this paragraph, 
the phrase to the maximum extent feasible shall not be interpreted as 
requiring that a recipient (including a PHA) make a dwelling unit, 
common area, facility or element thereof accessible if doing so would 
impose undue financial and administrative burdens on the operation of 
the multifamily housing project.
    (2) HUD may prescribe a higher percentage or number than that 
prescribed in paragraph (b)(1) of this section for any area upon request 
therefor by any affected recipient or by any State or local government 
or agency thereof based upon demonstration to the reasonable 
satisfaction of HUD of a need for a higher percentage or number, based 
on census data or other available current data (including a currently 
effective Housing Assistance Plan or Comprehensive Homeless Assistance 
Plan), or in response to evidence of a need for a higher percentage or 
number received in any other manner. In reviewing such request or 
otherwise assessing the existence of such needs, HUD shall take into 
account the expected needs of eligible persons with and without 
handicaps.


<R05>
Sec. 8.24  Existing housing programs.

    (a) General. A recipient shall operate each existing housing program 
or activity receiving Federal financial assistance so that the program 
or activity, when viewed in its entirety, is readily accessible to and 
usable by individuals with handicaps. This paragraph does not--
    (1) Necessarily require a recipient to make each of its existing 
facilities accessible to and usable by individuals with handicaps;
    (2) Require a recipient to take any action that it can demonstrate 
would result in a fundamental alteration in the nature of its program or 
activity or in undue financial and administrative burdens. If an action 
would result in such an alteration or such burdens, the recipient shall 
take any action that would not result in such an alteration or such 
burdens but would nevertheless ensure that individuals with handicaps 
receive the benefits and services of the program or activity.
    (b) Methods. A recipient may comply with the requirements of this 
section through such means as reassignment of services to accessible 
buildings, assignment of aides to beneficiaries, provision of housing or 
related services at alternate accessible sites, alteration of existing 
facilities and construction of new facilities, or any other methods that 
result in making its programs or activities readily accessible to and 
usable by individuals with handicaps. A recipient is not required to 
make structural changes in existing housing facilities where other 
methods are effective in achieving compliance with this section or to 
provide supportive services that are not part of the program. In 
choosing among available methods for meeting the requirements of this 
section, the recipient shall give priority to those methods that offer 
programs and activities to qualified individuals with handicaps in the 
most integrated setting appropriate.

[[Page 101]]

    (c) Time period for compliance. The recipient shall comply with the 
obligations established under this section within sixty days of July 11, 
1988 except that--
    (1) In a public housing program where structural changes in 
facilities are undertaken, such changes shall be made within the 
timeframes established in Sec. 8.25(c).
    (2) In other housing programs, where structural changes in 
facilities are undertaken, such changes shall be made within three years 
of July 11, 1988, but in any event as expeditiously as possible.
    (d) Transition plan and time period for structural changes. Except 
as provided in Sec. 8.25(c), in the event that structural changes to 
facilities will be undertaken to achieve program accessibility, a 
recipient shall develop, within six months of July 11, 1988, a 
transition plan setting forth the steps necessary to complete such 
changes. The plan shall be developed with the assistance of interested 
persons, including individuals with handicaps or organizations 
representing individuals with handicaps. A copy of the transition plan 
shall be made available for public inspection. The plan shall, at a 
minimum--
    (1) Identify physical obstacles in the recipient's facilities that 
limit the accessibility of its programs or activities to individuals 
with handicaps;
    (2) Describe in detail the methods that will be used to make the 
facilities accessible;
    (3) Specify the schedule for taking the steps necessary to achieve 
compliance with this section and, if the time period of the transition 
plan is longer than one year, identify steps that will be taken during 
each year of the transition period;
    (4) Indicate the official responsible for implementation of the 
plan; and
    (5) Identify the persons or groups with whose assistance the plan 
was prepared.

(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 
2529-0034)

[53 FR 20233, June 2, 1988; 53 FR 28115, July 26, 1988, as amended at 54 
FR 37645, Sept. 12, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 8.25  Public housing and multi-family Indian housing.

    (a) Development and alteration of public housing and multi-family 
Indian housing. (1) The requirements of Sec. 8.22 shall apply to all 
newly constructed public housing and multi-family Indian housing.
    (2) The requirements of Sec. 8.23 shall apply to public housing and 
multi-family Indian housing developed through rehabilitation and to the 
alteration of public housing and multi-family Indian housing.
    (3) In developing public housing and multi-family Indian housing 
through the purchase of existing properties PHAs and IHAs shall give 
priority to facilities which are readily accessible to and usable by 
individuals with handicaps.
    (b) Existing public housing and multi-family Indian housing--
general. The requirements of Sec. 8.24(a) shall apply to public housing 
and multi-family Indian housing programs.
    (c) Existing public housing and multi-family Indian housing--needs 
assessment and transition plan. As soon as possible, each PHA (for the 
purpose of this paragraph, this includes an Indian Housing Authority) 
shall assess, on a PHA-wide basis, the needs of current tenants and 
applicants on its waiting list for accessible units and the extent to 
which such needs have not been met or cannot reasonably be met within 
four years through development, alterations otherwise contemplated, or 
other programs administered by the PHA (e.g., Section 8 Moderate 
Rehabilitation or Section 8 Existing Housing or Housing Vouchers). If 
the PHA currently has no accessible units or if the PHA or HUD 
determines that information regarding the availability of accessible 
units has not been communicated sufficiently so that, as a result, the 
number of eligible qualified individuals with handicaps on the waiting 
list is not fairly representative of the number of such persons in the 
area, the PHA's assessment shall include the needs of eligible qualified 
individuals with handicaps in the area. If the PHA determines, on the 
basis of such assessment, that there is no need for additional 
accessible dwelling units or that the need is being or will be met 
within four years through other means,

[[Page 102]]

such as new construction, Section 8 or alterations otherwise 
contemplated, no further action is required by the PHA under this 
paragraph. If the PHA determines, on the basis of its needs assessment, 
that alterations to make additional units accessible must be made so 
that the needs of eligible qualified individuals with handicaps may be 
accommodated proportionally to the needs of non-handicapped individuals 
in the same categories, then the PHA shall develop a transition plan to 
achieve program accessibility. The PHA shall complete the needs 
assessment and transition plan, if one is necessary, as expeditiously as 
possible, but in any event no later than two years after July 11, 1988. 
The PHA shall complete structural changes necessary to achieve program 
accessibility as soon as possible but in any event no later than four 
years after July 11, 1988. The Assistant Secretary for Fair Housing and 
Equal Opportunity and the Assistant Secretary for Public and Indian 
Housing may extend the four year period for a period not to exceed two 
years, on a case-by-case determination that compliance within that 
period would impose undue financial and administrative burdens on the 
operation of the recipient's public housing and multi-family Indian 
housing program. The Secretary or the Undersecretary may further extend 
this time period in extraordinary circumstances, for a period not to 
exceed one year. The plan shall be developed with the assistance of 
interested persons including individuals with handicaps or organizations 
representing individuals with handicaps. A copy of the needs assessment 
and transition plan shall be made available for public inspection. The 
transition plan shall, at a minimum--
    (1) Identify physical obstacles in the PHA's facilities (e.g., 
dwelling units and common areas) that limit the accessibility of its 
programs or activities to individuals with handicaps;
    (2) Describe in detail the methods that will be used to make the 
PHA's facilities accessible. A PHA may, if necessary, provide in its 
plan that it will seek HUD approval, under 24 CFR part 968, of a 
comprehensive modernization program to meet the needs of eligible 
individuals with handicaps;
    (3) Specify the schedule for taking the steps necessary to achieve 
compliance with this section and, if the time of the transition plan is 
longer than one year, identify steps that will be taken during each year 
of the transition period;
    (4) Indicate the official responsible for implementation of the 
plan; and
    (5) Identify the persons or groups with whose assistance the plan 
was prepared.

(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 
2529-0034)

[53 FR 20233, June 2, 1988, as amended at 54 FR 37645, Sept. 12, 1989; 
56 FR 920, Jan. 9, 1991]


<R05>
Sec. 8.26  Distribution of accessible dwelling units.

    Accessible dwelling units required by Sec. 8.22, 8.23, 8.24 or 8.25 
shall, to the maximum extent feasible and subject to reasonable health 
and safety requirements, be distributed throughout projects and sites 
and shall be available in a sufficient range of sizes and amenities so 
that a qualified individual with handicaps' choice of living 
arrangements is, as a whole, comparable to that of other persons 
eligible for housing assistance under the same program. This provision 
shall not be construed to require provision of an elevator in any 
multifamily housing project solely for the purpose of permitting 
location of accessible units above or below the accessible grade level.


<R05>
Sec. 8.27  Occupancy of accessible dwelling units.

    (a) Owners and managers of multifamily housing projects having 
accessible units shall adopt suitable means to assure that information 
regarding the availability of accessible units reaches eligible 
individuals with handicaps, and shall take reasonable nondiscriminatory 
steps to maximize the utilization of such units by eligible individuals 
whose disability requires the accessibility features of the particular 
unit. To this end, when an accessible unit becomes vacant, the owner or 
manager before offering such units to a non-handicapped applicant shall 
offer such unit:

[[Page 103]]

    (1) First, to a current occupant of another unit of the same 
project, or comparable projects under common control, having handicaps 
requiring the accessibility features of the vacant unit and occupying a 
unit not having such features, or, if no such occupant exists, then
    (2) Second, to an eligible qualified applicant on the waiting list 
having a handicap requiring the accessibility features of the vacant 
unit.
    (b) When offering an accessible unit to an applicant not having 
handicaps requiring the accessibility features of the unit, the owner or 
manager may require the applicant to agree (and may incorporate this 
agreement in the lease) to move to a non-accessible unit when available.


<R05>
Sec. 8.28  Housing certificate and housing voucher programs.

    (a) In carrying out the requirements of this subpart, a recipient 
administering a Section 8 Existing Housing Certificate program or a 
housing voucher program shall:
    (1) In providing notice of the availability and nature of housing 
assistance for low-income families under program requirements, adopt 
suitable means to assure that the notice reaches eligible individuals 
with handicaps;
    (2) In its activities to encourage participation by owners, include 
encouragement of participation by owners having accessible units;
    (3) When issuing a Housing Certificate or Housing Voucher to a 
family which includes an individual with handicaps include a current 
listing of available accessible units known to the PHA and, if 
necessary, otherwise assist the family in locating an available 
accessible dwelling unit;
    (4) Take into account the special problem of ability to locate an 
accessible unit when considering requests by eligible individuals with 
handicaps for extensions of Housing Certificates or Housing Vouchers; 
and
    (5) If necessary as a reasonable accommodation for a person with 
disabilities, approve a family request for an exception rent under 
Sec. 982.504(b)(2) for a regular tenancy under the Section 8 certificate 
program so that the program is readily accessible to and usable by 
persons with disabilities.
    (b) In order to ensure that participating owners do not discriminate 
in the recipient's federally assisted program, a recipient shall enter 
into a HUD-approved contract with participating owners, which contract 
shall include necessary assurances of nondiscrimination.

[53 FR 20233, June 2, 1988, as amended at 63 FR 23853, Apr. 30, 1998]


<R05>
Sec. 8.29  Homeownership programs (sections 235(i) and 235(j), Turnkey III and Indian Housing Mutual Self-Help programs).

    Any housing units newly constructed or rehabilitated for purchase or 
single family (including semi-attached and attached) units to be 
constructed or rehabilitated in a program or activity receiving Federal 
financial assistance shall be made accessible upon request of the 
prospective buyer if the nature of the handicap of an expected occupant 
so requires. In such case, the buyer shall consult with the seller or 
builder/sponsor regarding the specific design features to be provided. 
If accessibility features selected at the option of the homebuyer are 
ones covered by the standards prescribed by Sec. 8.32, those features 
shall comply with the standards prescribed in Sec. 8.32. The buyer shall 
be permitted to depart from particular specifications of these standards 
in order to accommodate his or her specific handicap. The cost of making 
a facility accessible under this paragraph may be included in the 
mortgage amount within the allowable mortgage limits, where applicable. 
To the extent such costs exceed allowable mortgage limits, they may be 
passed on to the prospective homebuyer, subject to maximum sales price 
limitations (see 24 CFR 235.320.)


<R05>
Sec. 8.30  Rental rehabilitation program.

    Each grantee or state recipient in the rental rehabilitation program 
shall, subject to the priority in 24 CFR 511.10(l) and in accordance 
with other requirements in 24 CFR part 511, give priority to the 
selection of projects that will result in dwelling units being

[[Page 104]]

made readily accessible to and usable by individuals with handicaps.

[53 FR 20233, June 2, 1988; 53 FR 28115, July 26, 1988]


<R05>
Sec. 8.31  Historic properties.

    If historic properties become subject to alterations to which this 
part applies the requirements of Sec. 4.1.7 of the standards of 
Sec. 8.32 of this part shall apply, except in the case of the Urban 
Development Action Grant (UDAG) program. In the UDAG program the 
requirements of 36 CFR part 801 shall apply. Accessibility to historic 
properties subject to alterations need not be provided if such 
accessibility would substantially impair the significant historic 
features of the property or result in undue financial and administrative 
burdens.


<R05>
Sec. 8.32  Accessibility standards.

    (a) Effective as of July 11, 1988, design, construction, or 
alteration of buildings in conformance with sections 3-8 of the Uniform 
Federal Accessibility Standards (UFAS) shall be deemed to comply with 
the requirements of Secs. 8.21, 8.22, 8.23, and 8.25 with respect to 
those buildings. Departures from particular technical and scoping 
requirements of the UFAS by the use of other methods are permitted where 
substantially equivalent or greater access to and usability of the 
building is provided. The alteration of housing facilities shall also be 
in conformance with additional scoping requirements contained in this 
part. Persons interested in obtaining a copy of the UFAS are directed to 
Sec. 40.7 of this title.
    (b) For purposes of this section, section 4.1.6(1)(g) of UFAS shall 
be interpreted to exempt from the requirements of UFAS only mechanical 
rooms and other spaces that, because of their intended use, will not 
require accessibility to the public or beneficiaries or result in the 
employment or residence therein of individuals with physical handicaps.
    (c) This section does not require recipients to make building 
alterations that have little likelihood of being accomplished without 
removing or altering a load-bearing structural member.
    (d) For purposes of this section, section 4.1.4(11) of UFAS may not 
be used to waive or lower the minimum of five percent accessible units 
required by Sec. 8.22(b) or to apply the minimum only to projects of 15 
or more dwelling units.
    (e) Except as otherwise provided in this paragraph, the provisions 
of Secs. 8.21 (a) and (b), 8.22 (a) and (b), 8.23, 8.25(a) (1) and (2), 
and 8.29 shall apply to facilities that are designed, constructed or 
altered after July 11, 1988. If the design of a facility was commenced 
before July 11, 1988, the provisions shall be followed to the maximum 
extent practicable, as determined by the Department. For purposes of 
this paragraph, the date a facility is constructed or altered shall be 
deemed to be the date bids for the construction or alteration of the 
facility are solicited. For purposes of the Urban Development Action 
Grant (UDAG) program, the provisions shall apply to the construction or 
alteration of facilities that are funded under applications submitted 
after July 11, 1988. If the UDAG application was submitted before July 
11, 1988, the provisions shall apply, to the maximum extent practicable, 
as determined by the Department.

[53 FR 20233, June 2, 1988, as amended at 61 FR 5203, Feb. 9, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 8.33  Housing adjustments.

    A recipient shall modify its housing policies and practices to 
ensure that these policies and practices do not discriminate, on the 
basis of handicap, against a qualified individual with handicaps. The 
recipient may not impose upon individuals with handicaps other policies, 
such as the prohibition of assistive devices, auxiliary alarms, or 
guides in housing facilities, that have the effect of limiting the 
participation of tenants with handicaps in the recipient's federally 
assisted housing program or activity in violation of this part. Housing 
policies that the recipient can demonstrate are essential to the housing 
program or activity will not be regarded as discriminatory within the 
meaning of this section if modifications to them would result in a 
fundamental alteration in the nature of the program or activity or undue 
financial and administrative burdens.

[[Page 105]]


<R04>
                         Subpart D--Enforcement


<R05>
Sec. 8.50  Assurances required.

    (a) Assurances. An applicant for Federal financial assistance for a 
program or activity to which this part applies shall submit an assurance 
to HUD, or in the case of a subrecipient to a primary recipient, on a 
form specified by the responsible civil rights official, that the 
program or activity will be operated in compliance with this part. An 
applicant may incorporate these assurances by reference in subsequent 
applications to the Department.
    (b) Duration of obligation. (1) In the case of Federal financial 
assistance extended in the form of real property or to provide real 
property or structures on the property, the assurance will obligate the 
recipient or, in the case of a subsequent transfer, the transferee, for 
the period during which the real property or structures are used for the 
purpose for which Federal financial assistance is extended or for 
another purpose involving the provision of similar services or benefits.
    (2) In the case of Federal financial assistance extended to provide 
personal property, the assurance will obligate the recipient for the 
period during which it retains ownership or possession of the property.
    (3) In all other cases the assurance will obligate the recipient for 
the period during which Federal financial assistance is extended.
    (c) Covenants. (1) Where Federal financial assistance is provided in 
the form of real property or interest in the property from the 
Department, the instrument effecting or recording this transfer shall 
contain a covenant running with the land to assure nondiscrimination for 
the period during which the real property is used for a purpose for 
which the Federal financial assistance is extended or for another 
purpose involving the provision of similar services or benefits.
    (2) Where no transfer of property is involved but property is 
purchased or improved with Federal financial assistance, the recipient 
shall agree to include the covenant described in paragraph (b)(2) of 
this section in the instrument effecting or recording any subsequent 
transfer of the property.
    (3) Where Federal financial assistance is provided in the form of 
real property or interest in the property from the Department, the 
covenant shall also include a condition coupled with a right to be 
reserved by the Department to revert title to the property in the event 
of a breach of the covenant. If a transferee of real property proposes 
to mortgage or otherwise encumber the real property as security for 
financing construction of new, or improvement of existing, facilities on 
the property for the purposes for which the property was transferred, 
the Secretary may, upon request of the transferee and if necessary to 
accomplish such financing and upon such conditions as he or she deems 
appropriate, agree to forbear the exercise of such right to revert title 
for so long as the lien of such mortgage or other encumbrance remains 
effective.


<R05>
Sec. 8.51  Self-evaluation.

    (a) Each recipient shall, within one year of July 11, 1988, and 
after consultation with interested persons, including individuals with 
handicaps or organizations representing individuals with handicaps:
    (1) Evaluate its current policies and practices to determine 
whether, in whole or in part, they do not or may not meet the 
requirements of this part;
    (2) Modify any policies and practices that do not meet the 
requirements of this part; and
    (3) Take appropriate corrective steps to remedy the discrimination 
revealed by the self-evaluation.
    (b) A recipient that employs fifteen or more persons shall, for at 
least three years following completion of the evaluation required under 
paragraph (a)(1) of this section, maintain on file, make available for 
public inspection, and provide to the responsible civil rights official, 
upon request: (1) A list of the interested persons consulted; (2) a 
description of areas examined and any problems identified; and (3) a 
description of any modifications made and of any remedial steps taken.

(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 
2529-0034)

[53 FR 20233, June 2, 1988, as amended at 54 FR 37645, Sept. 12, 1989]

[[Page 106]]


<R05>
Sec. 8.52  Remedial and affirmative action.

    (a) Remedial action. (1) If the responsible civil rights official 
finds that a recipient has discriminated against persons on the basis of 
handicap in violation of section 504 or this part, the recipient shall 
take such remedial action as the responsible civil rights official deems 
necessary to overcome the effects of the discrimination.
    (2) The responsible civil rights official may, where necessary to 
overcome the effects of discrimination in violation of section 504 or 
this part, require a recipient to take remedial action--
    (i) With respect to individuals with handicaps who are no longer 
participants in the program but who were participants in the program 
when such discrimination occurred or
    (ii) With respect to individuals with handicaps who would have been 
participants in the program had the discrimination not occurred.
    (b) Voluntary action. A recipient may take nondiscriminatory steps, 
in addition to any action that is required by this part, to overcome the 
effects of conditions that resulted in limited participation in the 
recipient's program or activity by qualified individuals with handicaps.


<R05>
Sec. 8.53  Designation of responsible employee and adoption of grievance procedures.

    (a) Designation of responsible employee. A recipient that employs 
fifteen or more persons shall designate at least one person to 
coordinate its efforts to comply with this part.
    (b) Adoption of grievance procedures. A recipient that employees 
fifteen or more persons shall adopt grievance procedures that 
incorporate appropriate due process standards and that provide for the 
prompt and equitable resolution of complaints alleging any action 
prohibited by this part. Such procedures need not be established with 
respect to complaints from applicants for employment or from applicants 
for admission to housing covered by this part.


<R05>
Sec. 8.54  Notice.

    (a) A recipient that employs fifteen or more persons shall take 
appropriate initial and continuing steps to notify participants, 
beneficiaries, applicants, and employees, including those with impaired 
vision or hearing, and unions or professional organizations holding 
collective bargaining or professional agreements with the recipient that 
it does not discriminate on the basis of handicap in violation of this 
part. The notification shall state, where appropriate, that the 
recipient does not discriminate in admission or access to, or treatment 
or employment in, its federally assisted programs and activities. The 
notification shall also include an identification of the responsible 
employee designated pursuant to Sec. 8.53. A recipient shall make the 
initial notification required by this paragraph within 90 days of July 
11, 1988. Methods of initial and continuing notification may include the 
posting of notices, publication in newspapers and magazines, placement 
of notices in recipients' publications, and distribution of memoranda or 
other written communications.
    (b) If a recipient publishes or uses recruitment materials or 
publications containing general information that it makes available to 
participants, beneficiaries, applicants, or employees, it shall include 
in those materials or publications a statement of the policy described 
in paragraph (a) of this section. A recipient may meet the requirement 
of this paragraph either by including appropriate inserts in existing 
materials and publications or by revising and reprinting the materials 
and publications.
    (c) The recipient shall ensure that members of the population 
eligible to be served or likely to be affected directly by a federally 
assisted program who have visual or hearing impairments are provided 
with the information necessary to understand and participate in the 
program. Methods for ensuring participation include, but are not limited 
to, qualified sign language and oral interpreters, readers, or the use 
of taped and Braille materials.


<R05>
Sec. 8.55  Compliance information.

    (a) Cooperation and assistance. The responsible civil rights 
official and the award official shall, to the fullest extent 
practicable, seek the cooperation of recipients in obtaining compliance

[[Page 107]]

with this part and shall provide assistance and guidance to recipients 
to help them comply voluntarily with this part.
    (b) Compliance reports. Each recipient shall keep such records and 
submit to the responsible civil rights official or his or her designee 
timely, complete, and accurate compliance reports at such times, and in 
such form and containing such information, as the responsible civil 
rights official or his or her designee may determine to be necessary to 
enable him or her to ascertain whether the recipient has complied or is 
complying with this part. In general, recipients should have available 
for the Department data showing the extent to which individuals with 
handicaps are beneficiaries of federally assisted programs.
    (c) Access to sources of information. Each recipient shall permit 
access by the responsible civil rights official during normal business 
hours to such of its books, records, accounts, and other sources of 
information, and its facilities, as may be pertinent to ascertain 
compliance with this part. Where any information required of a recipient 
is in the exclusive possession of any other agency, institution, or 
person and this agency, institution, or person shall fail or refuse to 
furnish this information, the recipient shall so certify in its report 
and shall set forth what efforts it has made to obtain the information.
    (d) Information to beneficiaries and participants. Each recipient 
shall make available to participants, beneficiaries, and other 
interested persons such information regarding the provisions of this 
part and its applicability to the program or activity under which the 
recipient receives Federal financial assistance, and make such 
information available to them in such manner as the responsible civil 
rights official finds necessary to apprise such persons of the 
protections against discrimination assured them by this part.

(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 
2529-0034)

[53 FR 20233, June 2, 1988, as amended at 54 FR 37645, Sept. 12, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 8.56  Conduct of investigations.

    (a) Periodic compliance reviews. The responsible civil rights 
official or designee may periodically review the practices of recipients 
to determine whether they are complying with this part and where he or 
she has a reasonable basis to do so may conduct on-site reviews. Such 
basis may include any evidence that a problem exists or that 
programmatic matters exist that justify on-site investigation in 
selected circumstances. The responsible civil rights official shall 
initiate an on-site review by sending to the recipient a letter advising 
the recipient of the practices to be reviewed; the programs affected by 
the review; and the opportunity, at any time prior to receipt of a final 
determination, to make a documentary or other submission that explains, 
validates, or otherwise addresses the practices under review. In 
addition, each award official shall include in normal program compliance 
reviews and monitoring procedures appropriate actions to review and 
monitor compliance with general or specific program requirements 
designed to effectuate the requirements of this part.
    (b) Investigations. The responsible civil rights official shall make 
a prompt investigation whenever a compliance review, report, complaint 
or any other information indicates a possible failure to comply with 
this part.
    (c) Filing a complaint--(1) Who may file. Any person who believes 
that he or she has been subjected to discrimination prohibited by this 
part may by himself or herself or by his or her authorized 
representative file a complaint with the responsible civil rights 
official. Any person who believes that any specific class of persons has 
been subjected to discrimination prohibited by this part and who is a 
member of that class or who is the authorized representative of a member 
of that class may file a complaint with the responsible civil rights 
official.
    (2) Confidentiality. The responsible civil rights official shall 
hold in confidence the identity of any person submitting a complaint, 
unless the person submits written authorization otherwise, and except to 
the extent necessary to carry out the purposes of this part, including 
the conduct of any investigation, hearing, or proceeding under this 
part.

[[Page 108]]

    (3) When to file. Complaints shall be filed within 180 days of the 
alleged act of discrimination, unless the responsible civil rights 
official waives this time limit for good cause shown. For purposes of 
determining when a complaint is filed under this paragraph, a complaint 
mailed to the Department shall be deemed filed on the date it is 
postmarked. Any other complaint shall be deemed filed on the date it is 
received by the Department.
    (4) Where to file complaints. Complaints may be filed by mail with 
the Office of Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity, Department of Housing 
and Urban Development, Washington, DC 20410, or any Regional or Field 
Office of the Department.
    (5) Contents of complaints. Each complaint should contain the 
complainant's name and address, the name and address of the recipient 
alleged to have violated this part, and a description of the recipient's 
alleged discriminatory action in sufficient detail to inform the 
Department of the nature and date of the alleged violation of this part.
    (6) Amendments of complaints. Complaints may be reasonably and 
fairly amended at any time. Amendments to complaints such as 
clarification and amplification of allegations in a complaint or the 
addition of other recipients may be made at any time during the pendency 
of the complaint and any amendment shall be deemed to be made as of the 
original filing date.
    (d) Notification. The responsible civil rights official will notify 
the complainant and the recipient of the agency's receipt of the 
complaint within ten (10) calendar days.
    (e) Complaint processing procedures. After acknowledging receipt of 
a complaint, the responsible civil rights official will immediately 
initiate complaint processing procedures.
    (1) Preliminary investigation.
    (i) Within twenty (20) calendar days of acknowledgement of the 
complaint, the responsible civil rights official will review the 
complaint for acceptance, rejection, or referral to the appropriate 
Federal agency.
    (ii) If the complaint is accepted, the responsible civil rights 
official will notify the complainant and the award official. The 
responsible civil righs official will also notify the applicant or 
recipient complained against of the allegations and give the applicant 
or recipient an opportunity to make a written submission responding to, 
rebutting, or denying the allegations raised in the complaint.
    (iii) The party complained against may send the responsible civil 
rights official a response to the notice of complaint within thirty (30) 
calendar days of receiving it. With leave of the responsible civil 
rights official, an answer may be amended at any time. The responsible 
civil rights official will permit answers to be amended for good cause 
shown.
    (2) Informal resolution. In accordance with paragraph (j) of this 
section, the responsible civil rights official shall attempt to resolve 
complaints informally whenever possible.
    (f) Dismissal of complaint. If the investigation reveals no 
violation of this part, the responsible civil rights offical will 
dismiss the complaint and notify the complainant and recipient.
    (g) Letter of findings. If an informal resolution of the complaint 
is not reached the responsible civil rights official or his or her 
designee shall, within 180 days of receipt of the complaint, notify the 
recipient and the complainant (if any) of the results of the 
investigation in a letter sent by certified mail, return receipt 
requested, containing the following:
    (1) Preliminary findings of fact and a preliminary finding of 
compliance or noncompliance;
    (2) A description of an appropriate remedy for each violation 
believed to exist;
    (3) A notice that a copy of the Final Investigative Report of the 
Department will be made available, upon request, to the recipient and 
the complainant (if any); and
    (4) A notice of the right of the recipient and the complainant (if 
any) to request a review of the letter of findings by the reviewing 
civil rights official.
    (h) Right to review of the letter of findings. (1) A complainant or 
recipient may request that a complete review be made of the letter of 
findings within 30 days of receipt, by mailing or delivering to the 
reviewing civil rights official, Office of Fair Housing and Equal

[[Page 109]]

Opportunity, Washington, DC 20410, a written statement of the reasons 
why the letter of findings should be modified in light of supplementary 
information.
    (2) The reviewing civil rights official shall send by certified 
mail, return receipt requested, a copy of the request for review to the 
other party, if any. Such other party shall have 20 days to respond to 
the request for review.
    (3) The reviewing civil rights official shall either sustain or 
modify the letter of findings within 60 days of the request for review. 
The reviewing civil rights official's decision shall constitute the 
formal determination.
    (4) If neither party requests that the letter of findings be 
reviewed, the responsibile civil rights official shall, within fourteen 
(14) calendar days of the expiration of the time period in paragraph 
(h)(1) of this section, send a formal written determination of 
compliance or noncompliance to the recipient and copies to the award 
official.
    (i) Voluntary compliance time limits. The recipient will have ten 
(10) calendar days from receipt of the formal determination of 
noncompliance within which to come into voluntary compliance. If the 
recipient fails to meet this deadline, HUD shall proceed under 
Sec. 8.57.
    (j) Informal resolution/voluntary compliance--(1) General. It is the 
policy of the Department to encourage the informal resolution of 
matters. The responsible civil rights official may attempt to resolve a 
matter through informal means at any stage of processing. A matter may 
be resolved by informal means at any time. If a letter of findings 
making a preliminary finding of noncompliance is issued, the responsible 
civil rights official shall attempt to resolve the matter by informal 
means.
    (2) Objectives of informal resolution/voluntary compliance. In 
attempting informal resolution, the responsible civil rights official 
shall attempt to achieve a just resolution of the matter and to obtain 
assurances where appropriate, that the recipient will satisfactorily 
remedy any violations of the rights of any complainant and will take 
such action as will assure the elimination of any violation of this part 
or the prevention of the occurrence of such violation in the future. The 
terms of such an informal resolution shall be reduced to a written 
voluntary compliance agreement, signed by the recipient and the 
responsible civil rights official, and be made part of the file for the 
matter. Such voluntary compliance agreements shall seek to protect the 
interests of the complainant (if any), other persons similary situated, 
and the public interest.
    (k) Intimidatory or retaliatory acts prohibited. No recipient or 
other person shall intimidate, threaten, coerce, or discriminate against 
any person for the purpose of interfering with any right or privilege 
secured by this part, or because he or she has made a complaint, 
testified, assisted, or participated in any manner in an investigation, 
proceeding, or hearing under this part. The identity of complainants 
shall be kept confidential except to the extent necessary to carry out 
the purposes of this part, including the conduct of investigation, 
hearing or judicial proceeding arising thereunder.

[53 FR 20233, June 2, 1988; 53 FR 28115, July 26, 1988; 53 FR 34634, 
Sept. 7, 1988]


<R05>
Sec. 8.57  Procedure for effecting compliance.

    (a) General. If there appears to be a failure or threatened failure 
to comply with this part and if the noncompliance or threatened 
noncompliance cannot be corrected by informal means, compliance with 
this part may be effected by the suspension or termination of or refusal 
to grant or to continue Federal financial assistance, or by other means 
authorized by law. Such other means may include, but are not limited to:
    (1) A referral to the Department of Justice with a recommendation 
that appropriate proceedings be brought to enforce any rights of the 
United States under any law of the United States, or any assurance or 
other contractual undertaking;
    (2) The initiation of debarment proceedings pursuant to part 24 of 
this title; and
    (3) Any applicable proceeding under State or local law.
    (b) Noncompliance with Sec. 8.50. If an applicant or a recipient of 
assistance

[[Page 110]]

under a contract which is extended or amended on or after July 11, 1988, 
fails or refuses to furnish an assurance required under Sec. 8.50 or 
otherwise fails or refuses to comply with the requirements imposed by 
that section, Federal financial assistance may be refused under 
paragraph (c) of this section. The Department is not required to provide 
assistance during the pendency of the administrative proceeding under 
such paragraph (c), except where the assistance is due and payable under 
a contract approved before July 11, 1988.
    (c) Termination of or refusal to grant or to continue Federal 
financial assistance. No order suspending, terminating, or refusing to 
grant or continue Federal financial assistance shall become effective 
until:
    (1) The responsible civil rights official has advised the applicant 
or recipient of its failure to comply and has determined that compliance 
cannot be secured by voluntary means;
    (2) There has been an express finding on the record, after 
opportunity for hearing, of a failure by the applicant or recipient to 
comply with a requirement imposed under this part;
    (3) The action has been approved by the Secretary; and
    (4) The expiration of 30 days after the Secretary has filed with the 
committees of the House and Senate having legislative jurisdiction over 
the program or activity involved a full written report of the 
circumstances and the grounds for such action. Any action to suspend or 
terminate, or to refuse to grant or to continue Federal financial 
assistance shall be limited to the particular political entity, or part 
thereof, or other applicant or recipient as to whom such a finding has 
been made and shall be limited in its effect to the particular program, 
or part thereof, in which such noncompliance has been so found.
    (d) Notice to State or local government. Whenever the Secretary 
determines that a State or unit of general local government which is a 
recipient of Federal financial assistance under title I of the Housing 
and Community Development Act of 1974, as amended (42 U.S.C. 5301-5318) 
has failed to comply with a requirement of this part with respect to a 
program or activity funded in whole or in part with such assistance, the 
Secretary shall notify the Governor of the State or the chief executive 
officer of the unit of general local government of the noncompliance and 
shall request the Governor or the chief executive officer to secure 
compliance. The notice shall be given at least sixty days before:
    (1) An order suspending, terminating, or refusing to grant or 
continue Federal financial assistance becomes effective under paragraph 
(c) of this section; or
    (2) Any action to effect compliance by any other means authorized by 
law is taken under paragraph (a) of this section.
    (e) Other means authorized by law. No action to effect compliance by 
any other means authorized by law shall be taken until:
    (1) The responsible civil rights official has determined that 
compliance cannot be secured by voluntary means;
    (2) The recipient or other person has been notified of its failure 
to comply and of the action to be taken to effect compliance; and
    (3) At least 10 days have elapsed since the mailing of such notice 
to the applicant or recipient. During this period, additional efforts 
shall be made to persuade the applicant or recipient to comply with this 
part and to take such corrective action as may be appropriate.

However, this paragraph shall not be construed to prevent an award 
official from utilizing appropriate procedures and sanctions established 
under the program to assure or secure compliance with a specific 
requirement of the program designed to effectuate the objectives of this 
part.

[53 FR 20233, June 2, 1988; 53 FR 28115, July 26, 1988]


<R05>
Sec. 8.58  Hearings.

    (a) Opportunity for hearing. Whenever an opportunity for a hearing 
is required by Sec. 8.57(c), reasonable notice shall be given by 
registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the affected 
applicant or recipient. This notice shall advise the applicant or 
recipient of the action proposed to be taken, the specific provision 
under which the proposed action against it is

[[Page 111]]

to be taken, and the matters of fact or law asserted as the basis for 
this action. The notice shall:
    (1) Fix a date not less than 20 days after the date of the notice 
for the applicant or recipient to request the administrative law judge 
to schedule a hearing, or
    (2) Advise the applicant or recipient that the matter has been 
scheduled for hearing at a stated time and place. The time and place so 
fixed shall be reasonable and shall be subject to change for cause. The 
complainant, if any, shall be advised of the time and place of the 
hearing. An applicant or recipient may waive a hearing and submit 
written information and argument for the record. The failure of an 
applicant or recipient to request a hearing under this paragraph or to 
appear at a hearing for which a date has been set is a waiver of the 
right to a hearing under Sec. 8.57(c) and consent to the making of a 
decision on the basis of available information.
    (b) Hearing procedures. Hearings shall be conducted in accordance 
with 24 CFR part 180.

[53 FR 20233, June 2, 1988, as amended at 61 FR 52218, Oct. 4, 1996]


<R03>
PART 9--ENFORCEMENT OF NONDISCRIMINATION ON THE BASIS OF DISABILITY IN PROGRAMS OR ACTIVITIES CONDUCTED BY THE DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
9.101  Purpose.
9.102  Applicability.
9.103  Definitions.
9.110  Self-evaluation.
9.111  Notice.
9.112--9.129  [Reserved]
9.130  General prohibitions against discrimination.
9.131  Direct threat.
9.132--9.139  [Reserved]
9.140  Employment.
9.141--9.148  [Reserved]
9.149  Program accessibility: discrimination prohibited.
9.150  Program accessibility: existing facilities.
9.151  Program accessibility: new construction and alterations.
9.152  Program accessibility: alterations of Property Disposition 
          Program multifamily housing facilities.
9.153  Distribution of accessible dwelling units.
9.154  Occupancy of accessible dwelling units.
9.155  Housing adjustments.
9.160  Communications.
9.170  Compliance procedures.

    Authority: 29 U.S.C. 794; 42 U.S.C. 3535(d).

    Source: 59 FR 31047, June 16, 1994, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 9.101  Purpose.

    The purpose of this part is to effectuate section 119 of the 
Rehabilitation, Comprehensive Services, and Developmental Disabilities 
Amendments of 1978, which amended section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act 
of 1973 to prohibit discrimination on the basis of disability in 
programs or activities conducted by Executive agencies or the United 
States Postal Service.


<R05>
Sec. 9.102  Applicability.

    This part applies to all programs or activities conducted by the 
agency, except for programs or activities conducted outside the United 
States that do not involve individuals with disabilities in the United 
States.


<R05>
Sec. 9.103  Definitions.

    For purposes of this part:
    Accessible: (1) When used with respect to the design, construction, 
or alteration of a facility or a portion of a facility other than an 
individual dwelling unit, means that the facility or portion of the 
facility when designed, constructed or altered, complies with applicable 
accessibility standards and can be approached, entered, and used by 
individuals with physical disabilities. The phrase ``accessible to and 
usable by'' is synonymous with accessible.
    (2) When used with respect to the design, construction, or 
alteration of an individual dwelling unit, means that the unit is 
located on an accessible route and, when designed, constructed, altered 
or adapted, complies with applicable accessibility standards, and can be 
approached, entered, and used by individuals with physical disabilities. 
A unit that is on an accessible route and is adaptable and otherwise in 
compliance with the standards set forth in Sec. 9.151 is ``accessible'' 
within

[[Page 112]]

the meaning of this definition. When a unit in an existing facility 
which is being made accessible as a result of alterations is intended 
for use by a specific qualified individual with disabilities (e.g., a 
current occupant of such unit or of another unit under the control of 
the same agency, or an applicant on a waiting list), the unit will be 
deemed accessible if it meets the requirements of applicable standards 
that address the particular disability or impairment of such person.
    Accessible route means a continuous unobstructed path connecting 
accessible elements and spaces of a building or facility. Interior 
accessible routes may include corridors, floors, ramps, elevators, 
lifts, and clear floor space at fixtures. Exterior accessible routes may 
include parking access aisles, curb ramps, crosswalks at vehicular ways, 
walks, ramps and lifts.
    ADA means the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (42 U.S.C. 
12101 through 12213)
    ADA Accessibility Guidelines (ADAAG) means the Accessibility 
Guidelines issued under the ADA, and which are codified in the Appendix 
to 39 CFR part 1191.
    Adaptability means the ability of certain building, spaces and 
elements, such as kitchen counters, sinks, and grab bars, to be added or 
altered, to accommodate the needs of persons with or without 
disabilities, or to accommodate the needs of persons with different 
types or degrees of disability. For example, in a unit adaptable for a 
person with impaired hearing, the wiring for visible emergency alarms 
may be installed but the alarms need not be installed until such time as 
the unit is made ready for occupancy by a person with impaired hearing.
    Agency means the Department of Housing and Urban Development.
    Alteration means a change to a building or facility or its permanent 
fixtures or equipment that affects or could affect the usability of the 
building or facility or part thereof. Alterations include, but are not 
limited to, remodeling, renovation, rehabilitation, reconstruction, 
historic restoration, changes or rearrangements of the structural parts 
and changes or rearrangements in the plan configuration of walls and 
full-height partitions. Normal maintenance, re-roofing, painting, or 
wallpapering or changes to mechanical and electrical systems are not 
alterations unless they affect the usability of the building or 
facility.
    Assistant Attorney General means the Assistant Attorney General, 
Civil Rights Division, United States Department of Justice.
    Assistant Secretary means the Assistant Secretary of Housing and 
Urban Development for Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity.
    Auxiliary aids means services or devices that enable persons with 
impaired sensory, manual, or communication skills to have an equal 
opportunity to participate in, and enjoy the benefits of, programs or 
activities conducted by the agency. For example, auxiliary aids useful 
for persons with impaired vision include readers, Brailled materials, 
audio recordings, and other similar services and devices. Auxiliary aids 
useful for persons with impaired hearing include telephone handset 
amplifiers, telephones compatible with hearing aids, telecommunication 
devices for deaf persons (TDD's), interpreters, note takers, written 
materials, and other similar services and devices.
    Complete complaint means a written statement that contains the 
complainant's name and address and describes the agency's alleged 
discriminatory action in sufficient detail to inform the agency of the 
nature and date of the alleged violation of section 504. It shall be 
signed by the complainant or by someone authorized to do so on his or 
her behalf. Complaints filed on behalf of classes or third parties shall 
describe or identify (by name, if possible) the alleged victims of 
discrimination.
    Current illegal use of drugs means illegal use of drugs that 
occurred recently enough to justify a reasonable belief that a person's 
drug use is current or that continuing use is a real and ongoing 
problem.
    Drug means a controlled substance, as defined in schedules I through 
V of section 202 of the Controlled Substances Act (21 U.S.C. 812).
    Facility means all or any portion of buildings, structures, site 
improvements, complexes, equipment, roads,

[[Page 113]]

walks, passageways, parking lots, rolling stock or other conveyances, or 
other real or personal property located on a site.
    Historic properties means those properties that are listed or are 
eligible for listing in the National Register of Historic Places, or 
such properties designated as historic under a statute of the 
appropriate State or local government body.
    Illegal use of drugs means the use of one or more drugs, the 
possession or distribution of which is unlawful under the Controlled 
Substances Act (21 U.S.C. 812). The term ``illegal use of drugs'' does 
not include the use of a drug taken under supervision by a licensed 
health care professional, or other uses authorized by the Controlled 
Substances Act or other provisions of Federal law.
    Individual with disabilities means any person who has a physical or 
mental impairment that substantially limits one or more major life 
activities, has a record of such an impairment, or is regarded as having 
such an impairment. As used in this definition, the phrase:
    (1) ``Physical or mental impairment'' includes:
    (i) Any physiological disorder or condition, cosmetic disfigurement, 
or anatomical loss affecting one or more of the following body systems: 
Neurological; musculoskeletal; special sense organs; respiratory, 
including speech organs; cardiovascular; reproductive; digestive; 
genito-urinary; hemic and lymphatic; skin; and endocrine; or
    (ii) Any mental or psychological disorder, such as mental 
retardation, organic brain syndrome, emotional or mental illness, and 
specific learning disabilities. The term ``physical or mental 
impairment'' includes, but is not limited to, such diseases and 
conditions as orthopedic, visual, speech, and hearing impairments, 
cerebral palsy, autism, epilepsy, muscular dystrophy, multiple 
sclerosis, cancer, heart disease, diabetes, Human Immunodeficiency Virus 
disease (symptomatic or asymptomatic), mental retardation, emotional 
illness, drug addiction and alcoholism.
    (2) The term ``individual with disabilities'' does not include:
    (i) An individual who is currently engaging in the illegal use of 
drugs, when the agency acts on the basis of such use. This exclusion, 
however, does not exclude an individual with disabilities who--
    (A) Has successfully completed a supervised drug rehabilitation 
program, and is no longer engaging in the illegal use of drugs, or has 
otherwise been rehabilitated successfully, and is no longer engaging in 
such use;
    (B) Is participating in a supervised rehabilitation program, and is 
no longer engaging in such use; or
    (C) Is erroneously regarded as engaging in such use, but is not 
engaging in such use.
    (ii) Except that it shall not violate this part for the agency to 
adopt or administer reasonable policies and procedures, including but 
not limited to drug testing, designed to ensure than an individual 
described in paragraphs (2)(i) (A) and (B) of this definition is no 
longer engaging in the illegal use of drugs.
    (iii) Nothing in paragraph (2) of this definition shall be construed 
to encourage, prohibit, restrict or authorize the conduct of testing for 
illegal use of drugs.
    (iv) The agency shall not deny health services provided under titles 
I, II and III of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (29 U.S.C. 701 through 
777f) to an individual with disabilities on the basis of that 
individual's current illegal use of drugs, if the individual is 
otherwise entitled to such services.
    (3) For purposes of employment, the term ``individual with 
disabilities'' does not include:
    (i) An individual who has a currently contagious disease or 
infection and who, by reason of such disease or infection--
    (A) Has been determined, in accordance with the provisions of 
Sec. 9.131, to pose a direct threat to the health or safety of other 
individuals, which threat cannot be eliminated or reduced by reasonable 
accommodation, or
    (B) Is unable to perform the essential duties of the job, with or 
without reasonable accommodation; or
    (ii) An individual who is an alcoholic and whose current use of 
alcohol prevents him or her from performing the

[[Page 114]]

duties of the job in question or whose employment would constitute a 
direct threat to the property or the safety of others by reason of his 
or her current alcohol abuse.
    (4) ``Major life activities'' means functions such as caring for 
one's self, performing manual tasks, walking, seeing, hearing, speaking, 
breathing, learning, and working.
    (5) ``Has a record of such an impairment'' means has a history of, 
or has been misclassified as having, a mental or physical impairment 
that substantially limits one or more major life activities.
    (6) ``Is regarded as having an impairment'' means--
    (i) Has a physical or mental impairment that does not substantially 
limit major life activities but is treated by the agency as constituting 
such a limitation;
    (ii) Has a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits 
major life activities only as a result of the attitudes of others toward 
such impairment; or
    (iii) Has none of the impairments defined in paragraph (1) of this 
definition but is treated by the agency as having such an impairment.
    Multifamily housing project means a project containing five or more 
dwelling units.
    Official or Responsible Official means the Assistant Secretary of 
HUD for Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity.
    PDP housing facility means a housing facility administered under 
HUD's Property Disposition Program.
    Project means the whole of one or more residential structures and 
appurtenant structures, equipment, roads, walks, and parking lots which 
are covered by a single mortgage or contract or otherwise treated as a 
whole by the agency for processing purposes, whether or not located on a 
common site.
    Property Disposition Program (PDP) means the HUD program which 
administers the housing facilities that are either owned by the 
Secretary or where, even though the Secretary has not obtained title, 
the Secretary is mortgagee-in-possession. Such properties are deemed to 
be in the possession or control of the agency.
    Qualified individual with disabilities means:
    (1) With respect to any agency non-employment program or activity 
under which a person is required to perform services or to achieve a 
level of accomplishment, an individual with disabilities who meets the 
essential eligibility requirements and who can achieve the purpose of 
the program or activity without modifications in the program or activity 
that the agency can demonstrate would result in a fundamental alteration 
in its nature; or
    (2) With respect to any other agency non-employment program or 
activity, an individual with disabilities who meets the essential 
eligibility requirements for participation in, or receipt of benefits 
from, that program or activity.
    (3) ``Essential eligibility requirements'' include stated 
eligibility requirements such as income, as well as other explicit or 
implicit requirements inherent in the nature of the program or activity, 
such as requirements that an occupant of a PDP multifamily housing 
facility be capable of meeting selection criteria and be capable of 
complying with all obligations of occupancy with or without supportive 
services provided by persons other than the agency.
    (4) ``Qualified person with disabilities'' as that term is defined 
for purposes of employment in 29 CFR 1613.702(f), which is made 
applicable to this part by Sec. 9.140.
    Replacement cost of the completed facility means the current cost of 
construction and equipment for a newly constructed housing facility of 
the size and type being altered. Construction and equipment costs do not 
include the cost of land, demolition, site improvements, non-dwelling 
facilities and administrative costs for project development activities.
    Secretary means the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development.
    Section 504 means section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, as 
amended (29 U.S.C. 794). As used in this part, section 504 applies only 
to programs or activities conducted by the agency and not to federally 
assisted programs.
    Substantial impairment means a significant loss of the integrity of 
finished

[[Page 115]]

materials, design quality, or special character resulting from a 
permanent alteration.
    UFAS means the Uniform Federal Accessibility Standards, which 
implement the accessibility standards required by the Architectural 
Barriers Act (42 U.S.C. 4151 through 4157), and which are established at 
24 CFR part 40, Appendix A for residential structures, and 41 CFR 101-
19.600 through 101-19.607, and Appendix A to these sections, for non-
residential structures.


<R05>
Sec. 9.110  Self-evaluation.

    (a) The agency shall, within one year of the effective date of this 
part, evaluate its current policies and practices, and the effects of 
those policies and practices, including regulations, handbooks, notices 
and other written guidance, that do not or may not meet the requirements 
of this part. To the extent modification of any such policies is 
required, the agency shall take the necessary corrective actions.
    (b) The agency shall provide an opportunity to interested persons, 
including individuals with disabilities or organizations representing 
individuals with disabilities, to participate in the self-evaluation 
process by submitting comments (both oral and written).
    (c) The agency shall, for at least three years following the 
completion of the self-evaluation, maintain on file and make available 
for public inspection:
    (1) A list of interested persons;
    (2) A description of the areas examined and any problems identified; 
and
    (3) A description of any modifications made or to be made.


<R05>
Sec. 9.111  Notice.

    The agency shall make available to employees, applicants, 
participants, beneficiaries, and other interested persons information 
regarding the provisions of this part and its applicability to the 
programs or activities conducted by the agency. The agency shall make 
such information available to such persons in such manner as the 
Secretary finds necessary to apprise them of the protections against 
discrimination assured them by section 504 and this part. All 
publications and recruitment materials distributed to participants, 
beneficiaries, applicants or employees shall include a statement that 
the agency does not discriminate on the basis of disability. The notice 
shall include the name of the person or office responsible for the 
implementation of section 504.


<R05>
Secs. 9.112-9.129  [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 9.130  General prohibitions against discrimination.

    (a) No qualified individual with disabilities shall, on the basis of 
disability, be excluded from participation in, be denied the benefits 
of, or otherwise be subjected to discrimination under any program or 
activity conducted by the agency.
    (b)(1) The agency, in providing any housing, aid, benefit, or 
service, may not, directly or through contractual, licensing, or other 
arrangements, on the basis of disability--
    (i) Deny a qualified individual with disabilities the opportunity to 
participate in or benefit from the housing, aid, benefit, or service;
    (ii) Afford a qualified individual with disabilities an opportunity 
to participate in or benefit from the housing, aid, benefit, or service 
that is not equal to that afforded others;
    (iii) Provide a qualified individual with disabilities with any 
housing, aid, benefit, or service that is not as effective in affording 
equal opportunity to obtain the same result, to gain the same benefit, 
or to reach the same level of achievement as that provided to others;
    (iv) Provide different or separate housing, aid, benefits, or 
services to individuals with disabilities or to any class of individuals 
with disabilities than is provided to others unless such action is 
necessary to provide qualified individuals with disabilities with 
housing, aid, benefits, or services that are as effective as those 
provided to others;
    (v) Deny a qualified individual with disabilities the opportunity to 
participate as a member of planning or advisory boards;
    (vi) Deny a dwelling to an otherwise qualified buyer or renter 
because of a disability of that buyer or renter or a

[[Page 116]]

person residing in or intending to reside in that dwelling after it is 
sold, rented or made available; or
    (vii) Otherwise limit a qualified individual with disabilities in 
the enjoyment of any right, privilege, advantage, or opportunity enjoyed 
by others receiving the housing, aid, benefit, or service.
    (2) For purposes of this part, housing, aids, benefits, and 
services, to be equally effective, are not required to produce the 
identical result or level of achievement for individuals with 
disabilities and for persons without disabilities, but must afford 
individuals with disabilities equal opportunity to obtain the same 
result, to gain the same benefit, or to reach the same level of 
achievement.
    (3) The agency may not deny a qualified individual with disabilities 
the opportunity to participate in programs or activities that are not 
separate or different, despite the existence of programs or activities 
that are permissibly separate or different for persons with 
disabilities.
    (4) The agency may not, directly or through contractual or other 
arrangements, utilize criteria or methods of administration the purpose 
or effect of which would:
    (i) Subject qualified individuals with disabilities to 
discrimination on the basis of disability; or
    (ii) Defeat or substantially impair accomplishment of the objectives 
of a program or activity with respect to individuals with disabilities.
    (5) The agency may not, in determining the site or location of a 
facility, make selections the purpose or effect of which would:
    (i) Exclude individuals with disabilities from, deny them the 
benefits of, or otherwise subject them to discrimination under any 
program or activity conducted by the agency; or
    (ii) Defeat or substantially impair the accomplishment of the 
objectives of a program or activity with respect to individuals with 
disabilities.
    (6) The agency, in the selection of procurement contractors, may not 
use criteria that subject qualified individuals with disabilities to 
discrimination on the basis of disability.
    (7) The agency may not administer a licensing or certification 
program in a manner that subjects qualified individuals with 
disabilities to discrimination on the basis of disability, nor may the 
agency establish requirements for the programs or activities of 
licensees or certified entities that subject qualified individuals with 
disabilities to discrimination on the basis of disability. However, the 
programs or activities of entities that are licensed or certified by the 
agency are not, themselves, covered by this part.
    (c)(1) Notwithstanding any other provision of this part, persons 
without disabilities may be excluded from the benefits of a program if 
the program is limited by Federal statute or Executive order to 
individuals with disabilities. A specific class of individuals with 
disabilities may be excluded from a program if the program is limited by 
Federal statute or Executive order to a different class of individuals.
    (2) Certain agency programs operate under statutory definitions of 
``persons with disabilities'' that are more restrictive than the 
definition of ``individual with disabilities'' contained in Sec. 9.103. 
Those definitions are not superseded or otherwise affected by this 
regulation.
    (d) The agency shall administer programs and activities in the most 
integrated setting appropriate to the needs of qualified individuals 
with disabilities.
    (e) The obligation to comply with this part is not obviated or 
alleviated by any State or local law or other requirement that, based on 
disability, imposes inconsistent or contradictory prohibitions or limits 
upon the eligibility of qualified individuals with disabilities to 
receive services or to practice any occupation or profession.
    (f) The enumeration of specific forms of prohibited discrimination 
in paragraphs (b) and (d) of this section does not limit the general 
prohibition in paragraph (a) of this section.


<R05>
Sec. 9.131  Direct threat.

    (a) This part does not require the agency to permit an individual to 
participate in, or benefit from the goods, services, facilities, 
privileges, advantages and accommodations of that

[[Page 117]]

agency when that individual poses a direct threat to the health or 
safety of others.
    (b) ``Direct threat'' means a significant risk to the health or 
safety of others that cannot be eliminated by a modification of 
policies, practices, or procedures, or by the provision of auxiliary 
aids or services.
    (c) In determining whether an individual poses a direct threat to 
the health or safety of others, the agency must make an individualized 
assessment, based on reasonable judgment that relies on current medical 
knowledge or on the best available objective evidence to ascertain: the 
nature, duration, and severity of the risk; the probability that the 
potential injury will actually occur; and whether reasonable 
modifications of policies, practices, or procedures will mitigate the 
risk.


<R05>
Secs. 9.132--9.139  [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 9.140  Employment.

    No qualified individual with disabilities shall, on the basis of 
disability, be subjected to discrimination in employment under any 
program or activity conducted by the agency. The definitions, 
requirements, and procedures of section 501 of the Rehabilitation Act of 
1973 (29 U.S.C. 791), as established by the Equal Employment Opportunity 
Commission in 29 CFR part 1613 (subpart G), shall apply to employment in 
federally conducted programs or activities.


<R05>
Secs. 9.141--9.148  [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 9.149  Program accessibility: discrimination prohibited.

    Except as otherwise provided in Sec. 9.150, no qualified individual 
with disabilities shall, because the agency's facilities are 
inaccessible to or unusable by individuals with disabilities, be denied 
the benefits of, be excluded from participation in, or otherwise be 
subjected to discrimination under any program or activity conducted by 
the agency.


<R05>
Sec. 9.150  Program accessibility: existing facilities.

    (a) General. Except as otherwise provided in paragraph (e) of this 
section, the agency shall operate each program or activity so that the 
program or activity, when viewed in its entirety, is readily accessible 
to and usable by individuals with disabilities. This section does not--
    (1) Necessarily require the agency to make each of its existing 
facilities accessible to and usable by individuals with disabilities;
    (2) In the case of historic properties, require the agency to take 
any action that would result in a substantial impairment of significant 
historic features of an historic property; or
    (3) Require the agency to take any action that it can demonstrate 
would result in a fundamental alteration in the nature of a program or 
activity or in undue financial and administrative burdens. In those 
circumstances where agency personnel believe that the proposed action 
would fundamentally alter the program or activity or would result in 
undue financial and administrative burdens, the agency has the burden of 
proving that compliance with Sec. 9.150(a) would result in such 
alteration or burdens. The decision that compliance would result in such 
alteration or burdens must be made by the Secretary or his or her 
designee after considering all agency resources available for use in the 
funding and operation of the conducted program or activity, and must be 
accompanied by a written statement of the reasons for reaching that 
conclusion. If an action would result in such an alteration or such 
burdens, the agency shall take any other action that would not result in 
such an alteration or such burdens but would nevertheless ensure that 
individuals with disabilities receive the benefits and services of the 
program or activity.
    (b) Methods. The agency may comply with the requirements of this 
section through such means as redesign of equipment, reassignment of 
services to accessible buildings, assignment of aides to beneficiaries, 
home visits, delivery of services at alternate accessible sites, 
alteration of existing facilities and construction of new facilities, 
use of accessible rolling stock, or any other methods that result in 
making its programs or activities readily accessible to and usable by 
individuals

[[Page 118]]

with disabilities. The agency is not required to make structural changes 
in existing facilities where other methods are effective in achieving 
compliance with this section. The agency, in making alterations to 
existing buildings, also shall meet accessibility requirements to the 
extent compelled by the Architectural Barriers Act of 1968, as amended 
(42 U.S.C. 4151 through 4157), and any regulations implementing it. In 
choosing among available methods for meeting the requirements of this 
section, the agency shall give priority to those methods that offer 
programs and activities to qualified individuals with disabilities in 
the most integrated setting appropriate.
    (c) Time period for compliance. The agency shall comply with the 
obligations established under this section within sixty days of July 18, 
1994 except that where structural changes in facilities are undertaken, 
such changes shall be made within three years of July 18, 1994, but in 
any event as expeditiously as possible.
    (d) Transition plan. In the event that structural changes to 
facilities will be undertaken to achieve program accessibility, the 
agency shall develop, within six months of July 18, 1994, a transition 
plan setting forth the steps necessary to complete such changes. The 
agency shall provide an opportunity to interested persons, including 
individuals with disabilities or organizations representing individuals 
with disabilities, to participate in the development of the transition 
plan by submitting comments (both oral and written). A copy of the 
transition plan shall be made available for public inspection. The plan 
shall, at a minimum--
    (1) Identify physical obstacles in the agency's facilities that 
limit the accessibility of its programs or activities to individuals 
with disabilities;
    (2) Describe in detail the methods that will be used to make the 
facilities accessible;
    (3) Specify the schedule for taking the steps necessary to achieve 
compliance with this section and, if the time period of the transition 
plan is longer than one year, identify steps that will be taken during 
each year of the transition period; and
    (4) Indicate the official responsible for implementation of the 
plan.
    (e) The requirements of paragraphs (a), (b), and (c) of this section 
shall apply to the Property Disposition Programs. However, this section 
does not require HUD to make alterations to existing facilities that are 
part of the Property Disposition Programs unless such alterations are 
necessary to meet the needs of a current or prospective tenant during 
the time when HUD expects to retain legal possession of the facilities, 
and there is no alternative method to meet the needs of that current or 
prospective tenant. Nothing in this section shall be construed to 
require alterations to make facilities accessible to persons with 
disabilities who are expected to occupy the facilities only after HUD 
relinquishes legal possession.


<R05>
Sec. 9.151  Program accessibility: new construction and alterations.

    Each building or part of a building that is constructed or altered 
by, on behalf of, or for the use of the agency shall be designed, 
constructed, or altered and provide emergency egress so as to be readily 
accessible to and usable by individuals with disabilities. The 
definitions, requirements, and accessibility standards that apply to 
buildings covered by this section are those contained in the UFAS, 
except where the ADAAG provides for greater accessibility for the type 
of construction or alteration being undertaken, and in this case, the 
definitions, requirements and standards of the ADAAG shall apply.


<R05>
Sec. 9.152  Program accessibility: alterations of Property Disposition Program multifamily housing facilities.

    (a) Substantial alteration. If the agency undertakes alterations to 
a PDP multifamily housing project that has 15 or more units and the cost 
of the alterations is 75 percent or more of the replacement cost of the 
completed facility, then the project shall be designed and altered to be 
readily accessible to and usable by individuals with disabilities. 
Subject to paragraph (c) of this section, a minimum of five percent of 
the total dwelling units, or at least one unit, whichever is greater, 
shall be

[[Page 119]]

made accessible for persons with mobility impairments. A unit that is on 
an accessible route and is adaptable and otherwise in compliance with 
the standards set forth in paragraph (d) of this section is accessible 
for purposes of this section. An additional two percent of the units 
(but not less that one unit) in such a project shall be accessible for 
persons with hearing or vision impairments. If state or local 
requirements for alterations require greater action than this paragraph, 
those requirements shall prevail.
    (b) Other alteration. (1) Subject to paragraph (c) of this section, 
alterations to dwelling units in a PDP multifamily housing project 
shall, to the maximum extent feasible, be made to be readily accessible 
to and usable by individuals with disabilities. If alterations of single 
elements or spaces of a dwelling unit, when considered together, amount 
to an alteration of a dwelling unit, the entire dwelling unit shall be 
made accessible. Once five percent of the dwelling units in a project 
are readily accessible to and usable by individuals with mobility 
impairments, then no additional elements of dwelling units, or entire 
dwelling units, are required to be accessible under this paragraph. Once 
two percent of the dwelling units in a project are readily accessible to 
or usable by individuals with hearing or vision impairments, then no 
additional elements of dwelling units, or entire dwelling units, are 
required to be accessible under this paragraph.
    (2) Alterations to common areas or parts of facilities that affect 
accessibility of existing housing facilities, shall, to the maximum 
extent feasible, be made to be accessible to and usable by individuals 
with disabilities.
    (c) The agency may establish a higher percentage or number of 
accessible units than that prescribed in paragraphs (a) or (b) of this 
section if the agency determines that there is a need for a higher 
percentage or number, based on census data or other available current 
data. In making such a determination, HUD shall take into account the 
expected needs of eligible persons with and without disabilities.
    (d) The definitions, requirements, and accessibility standards that 
apply to PDP multifamily housing projects covered by this section are 
those contained in the UFAS, except where the ADAAG provides for greater 
accessibility for the type of alteration being undertaken, and, in this 
case, the definitions, requirements and standards of the ADAAG shall 
apply.
    (e) With respect to multifamily housing projects operated by HUD, 
but in which HUD does not have an ownership interest, alterations under 
this section need not be made if doing so would impose undue financial 
and administrative burdens on the operation of the multifamily housing 
project.


<R05>
Sec. 9.153  Distribution of accessible dwelling units.

    Accessible dwelling units required by Sec. 9.152 shall, to the 
maximum extent feasible, be distributed throughout projects and sites 
and shall be available in a sufficient range of sizes and amenities so 
that a qualified individual with disabilities' choice of living 
arrangements is, as a whole, comparable to that of other persons 
eligible for housing assistance under the same agency conducted program. 
This provision shall not be construed to require (but does allow) the 
provision of an elevator in any multifamily housing project solely for 
the purpose of permitting location of accessible units above or below 
the accessible grade level.


<R05>
Sec. 9.154  Occupancy of accessible dwelling units.

    (a) The agency shall adopt suitable means to assure that information 
regarding the availability of accessible units in PDP housing facilities 
reaches eligible individuals with disabilities, and shall take 
reasonable nondiscriminatory steps to maximize the utilization of such 
units by eligible individuals whose disability requires the 
accessibility features of the particular unit. To this end, when an 
accessible unit becomes vacant, the agency (or its management agent) 
before offering such units to an applicant without disabilities shall 
offer such unit:
    (1) First, to a current occupant of another unit of the same 
project, or comparable projects under common control, having 
disabilities requiring the

[[Page 120]]

accessibility features of the vacant unit and occupying a unit not 
having such features, or, if no such occupant exists, then
    (2) Second, to an eligible qualified applicant on the waiting list 
having a disability requiring the accessibility features of the vacant 
unit.
    (b) When offering an accessible unit to an applicant not having 
disabilities requiring the accessibility features of the unit, the 
agency may require the applicant to agree (and may incorporate this 
agreement in the lease) to move to a non-accessible unit when available.


<R05>
Sec. 9.155  Housing adjustments.

    (a) The agency shall modify its housing policies and practices as 
they relate to PDP housing facilities to ensure that these policies and 
practices do not discriminate, on the basis of disability, against a 
qualified individual with disabilities. The agency may not impose upon 
individuals with disabilities other policies, such as the prohibition of 
assistive devices, auxiliary aids, alarms, or guides in housing 
facilities, that have the effect of limiting the participation of 
tenants with disabilities in any agency conducted housing program or 
activity in violation of this part. Housing policies that the agency can 
demonstrate are essential to the housing program or activity will not be 
regarded as discriminatory within the meaning of this section if 
modifications would result in a fundamental alteration in the nature of 
the program or activity or undue financial and administrative burdens.
    (b) The decision that compliance would result in such alteration or 
burdens must be made by the Secretary or his or her designee after 
considering all agency resources available for use in the funding and 
operation of the conducted program or activity, and must be accompanied 
by a written statement of the reasons for reaching that conclusion. If 
an action required to comply with this section would result in such an 
alteration or such burdens, the agency shall take any other action that 
would not result in such an alteration or such burdens but would 
nevertheless ensure that, to the maximum extent possible, individuals 
with disabilities receive the benefits and services of the program or 
activity.


<R05>
Sec. 9.160  Communications.

    (a) The agency shall take appropriate steps to ensure effective 
communication with applicants, participants, personnel of other Federal 
entities, and members of the public.
    (1) The agency shall furnish appropriate auxiliary aids where 
necessary to afford an individual with disabilities an equal opportunity 
to participate in, and enjoy the benefits of, a program or activity 
conducted by the agency.
    (i) In determining what type of auxiliary aid is necessary, the 
agency shall give primary consideration to the requests of the 
individual with disabilities.
    (ii) The agency need not provide individually prescribed devices, 
readers for personal use or study, or other devices of a personal 
nature.
    (2) Where the agency communicates with applicants and beneficiaries 
or members of the public by telephone, telecommunication devices for 
deaf persons (TDD's) or equally effective telecommunication systems 
shall be used to communicate with persons with impaired hearing.
    (b) The agency shall ensure that interested persons, including 
persons with impaired vision or hearing, can obtain information as to 
the existence and location of accessible services, activities, and 
facilities.
    (c) The agency shall provide signage at a primary entrance to each 
of its inaccessible facilities, directing users to a location at which 
they can obtain information about accessible facilities. The 
international symbol for accessibility shall be used at each primary 
entrance of an accessible facility.
    (d) This section does not require the agency to take any action that 
it can demonstrate would result in a fundamental alteration in the 
nature of a program or activity or in undue financial and administrative 
burdens. In those circumstances where agency personnel believe that the 
proposed action would fundamentally alter the program or activity or 
would result in undue financial and administrative burdens, the agency 
has the burden of proving that compliance with this section

[[Page 121]]

would result in such alteration or burdens. The decision that compliance 
would result in such alteration or burdens must be made by the Secretary 
or his or her designee after considering all agency resources available 
for use in the funding and operation of the conducted program or 
activity and must be accompanied by a written statement of the reasons 
for reaching that conclusion. If an action required to comply with 
Sec. 9.160 would result in such an alteration or such burdens, the 
agency shall take any other action that would not result in such an 
alteration or such burdens but would nevertheless ensure that, to the 
maximum extent possible, individuals with disabilities receive the 
benefits and services of the program or activity.


<R05>
Sec. 9.170  Compliance procedures.

    (a) Except as provided in paragraph (b) of this section, this 
section applies to all allegations of discrimination on the basis of 
disability in programs or activities conducted by the agency.
    (b) The agency shall process complaints alleging violations of 
section 504 with respect to employment according to the procedures 
established by the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission in 29 CFR 
part 1613 under section 501 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (29 U.S.C. 
791).
    (c) The Responsible Official shall coordinate implementation of this 
section.
    (d) Persons may submit complete complaints to the Assistant 
Secretary for Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity, 451 Seventh St., SW., 
Washington, DC 20410, or to any HUD Area Office. The agency shall accept 
and investigate all complete complaints for which the agency has 
jurisdiction. All complete complaints shall be filed within 180 days of 
the alleged act of discrimination. The agency may extend this time 
period for good cause. For purposes of determining when a complaint is 
filed, a complaint mailed to the agency shall be deemed filed on the 
date it is postmarked. Any other complaint shall be deemed filed on the 
date it is received by the agency. The agency shall acknowledge all 
complaints, in writing, within ten (10) working days of receipt of the 
complaint.
    (e) If the agency receives a complaint over which it does not have 
jurisdiction, it shall promptly notify the complainant and shall make 
reasonable efforts to refer the complaint to the appropriate Government 
entity.
    (f) The agency shall notify the Architectural and Transportation 
Barriers Compliance Board upon receipt of any complaint alleging that a 
building or facility that is subject to the Architectural Barriers Act 
of 1968, as amended (42 U.S.C. 4151 through 4157), is not readily 
accessible to and usable by individuals with disabilities. The agency 
shall delete the identity of the complainant from the copy of the 
complaint.
    (g)(1) Within 180 days of the receipt of a complete complaint for 
which it has jurisdiction, the Office of Fair Housing and Equal 
Opportunity shall complete the investigation of the complaint, attempt 
informal resolution, and if no informal resolution is achieved, issue a 
letter of findings. If a complaint is filed against the Office of Fair 
Housing and Equal Opportunity, the Secretary or a designee of the 
Secretary shall investigate and resolve the complaint through informal 
agreement or letter of findings.
    (2) If a complaint is resolved informally, the terms of the 
agreement shall be reduced to writing and made part of the complaint 
file, with a copy of the agreement provided to the complainant and the 
agency. The written agreement may include a finding on the issue of 
discrimination and shall describe any corrective action to which the 
complainant and the respondent have agreed.
    (3) If a complaint is not resolved informally, the Office of Fair 
Housing and Equal Opportunity or a person designated under this 
paragraph shall notify the complainant of the results of the 
investigation in a letter containing--
    (i) Findings of fact and conclusions of law;
    (ii) A description of a remedy for each violation found;
    (iii) A notice of the right to appeal to the Secretary;
    (h)(1) Appeals of the findings of fact and conclusions of law or 
remedies

[[Page 122]]

must be filed by the complainant within 90 days of receipt from the 
agency of the letter required by Sec. 9.170(g). The Assistant Secretary 
or the person designated by the Secretary to decide an appeal of a 
complaint filed against the Office of Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity 
may extend this time for good cause.
    (2) Timely appeals shall be accepted and processed by the Assistant 
Secretary. Decisions on an appeal shall not be issued by the person who 
made the initial determination.
    (i) The Assistant Secretary or the person designated by the 
Secretary to decide an appeal of a complaint filed against the Office of 
Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity shall notify the complainant of the 
results of the appeal within 60 days of the receipt of the request. If 
the agency determines that it needs additional information from the 
complainant, it shall have 60 days from the date it receives the 
additional information to make its determination on the appeal.
    (j) The time limits cited in paragraphs (g) and (i) of this section 
may be extended with the permission of the Assistant Attorney General.
    (k) The agency may delegate its authority for conducting complaint 
investigations to other Federal agencies, except that the authority for 
making the final determination may not be delegated to another agency.


<R03>
PART 10--RULEMAKING: POLICY AND PROCEDURES--Table of Contents

<R05>


                           Subpart A--General

Sec.
10.1  Policy.
10.2  Definitions.
10.3  Applicability.
10.4  Rules docket.

                          Subpart B--Procedures

10.6  Initiation of rulemaking.
10.7  Advance Notice of Proposed Rulemaking.
10.8  Notice of proposed rulemaking.
10.10  Participation by interested persons.
10.12  Additional rulemaking proceedings.
10.14  Hearings.
10.16  Adoption of a final rule.
10.18  Petitions for reconsideration.
10.20  Petition for rulemaking.

    Authority: 42 U.S.C. 3535(d).

    Source: 44 FR 1606, Jan. 5, 1979, unless otherwise noted.


<R04>
                           Subpart A--General


<R05>
Sec. 10.1  Policy.

    It is the policy of the Department of Housing and Urban Development 
to provide for public participation in rulemaking with respect to all 
HUD programs and functions, including matters that relate to public 
property, loans, grants, benefits, or contracts even though such matters 
would not otherwise be subject to rulemaking by law or Executive policy. 
The Department therefore publishes notices of proposed rulemaking in the 
Federal Register and gives interested persons an opportunity to 
participate in the rulemaking through submission of written data, views, 
and arguments with or without opportunity for oral presentation. It is 
the policy of the Department that its notices of proposed rulemaking are 
to afford the public not less than sixty days for submission of 
comments. For some rules the Secretary will employ additional methods of 
inviting public participation. These methods include, but are not 
limited to, publishing Advance Notices of Proposed Rulemaking (ANPR), 
conducting public surveys, and convening public forums or panels. An 
ANPR will be used to solicit public comment early in the rulemaking 
process for significant rules unless the Secretary grants an exception 
based upon legitimate and pressing time constraints. Unless required by 
statute, notice and public procedure will be omitted if the Department 
determines in a particular case or class of cases that notice and public 
procedure are impracticable, unnecessary or contrary to the public 
interest. In a particular case, the reasons for the determination shall 
be stated in the rulemaking document. Notice and public procedure may 
also be omitted with respect to statements of policy, interpretative 
rules, rules governing the Department's organization or its own internal 
practices or procedures, or if a statute expressly so authorizes. A 
final substantive rule will be published not less than 30 days before 
its effective date, unless it grants or recognizes an exemption or

[[Page 123]]

relieves a restriction or unless the rule itself states good cause for 
taking effect upon publication or less than 30 days thereafter. 
Statements of policy and interpretative rules will usually be made 
effective on the date of publication.

[44 FR 1606, Jan. 5, 1979, as amended at 47 FR 56625, Dec. 20, 1982]


<R05>
Sec. 10.2  Definitions.

    (a) Rule or Regulation means all or part of any Departmental 
statement of general or particular applicability and future effect 
designed to: (1) Implement, interpret, or prescribe law or policy, or 
(2) describe the Department's organization, or its procedure or practice 
requirements. The term regulation is sometimes applied to a rule which 
has been published in the Code of Federal Regulations.
    (b) Rulemaking means the Departmental process for considering and 
formulating the issuance, modification, or repeal of a rule.
    (c) Secretary means the Secretary or the Under Secretary of Housing 
and Urban Development, or an official to whom the Secretary has 
expressly delegated authority to issue rules.


<R05>
Sec. 10.3  Applicability.

    (a) This part prescribes general rulemaking procedures for the 
issuance, amendment, or repeal of rules in which participation by 
interested persons is required by 5 U.S.C. or by Department policy.
    (b) The authority to issue rules, delegated by the Secretary, may 
not be redelegated unless expressly permitted.
    (c) This part is not applicable to a determination by HUD under 24 
CFR part 966 (public housing) or 24 CFR part 950 (Indian housing) that 
the law of a jurisdiction requires that, prior to eviction, a tenant be 
given a hearing in court which provides the basic elements of due 
process (``due process determination'').

[44 FR 1606, Jan. 5, 1979, as amended at 61 FR 13273, Mar. 26, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 10.4  Rules docket.

    (a) All documents relating to rulemaking procedures including but 
not limited to advance notices of proposed rulemaking, notices of 
proposed rulemaking, written comments received in response to notices, 
withdrawals or terminations of proposed rulemaking, petitions for 
rulemaking, requests for oral argument in public participation cases, 
requests for extension of time, grants or denials of petitions or 
requests, transcripts or minutes of informal hearings, final rules and 
general notices are maintained in the Rules Docket Room (Room 5218), 
Department of Housing and Urban Development, 451 7th Street, SW., 
Washington, DC 20410. All public rulemaking comments should refer to the 
docket number which appears in the heading of the rule and should be 
addressed to the Rules Docket Clerk, Room 5218, Department of Housing 
and Urban Development, 451 7th Street, SW., Washington, DC 20410.
    (b) Documents relating to rulemaking proceedings are public records. 
After a docket is established, any person may examine docketed material 
at any time during regular business hours, and may obtain a copy of any 
docketed material upon payment of the prescribed fee. (See part 15 of 
this title).


<R04>
                          Subpart B--Procedures


<R05>
Sec. 10.6  Initiation of rulemaking.

    Rulemaking proceedings may be initiated on the Secretary's motion, 
or on the recommendation of a Federal, State, or local government or 
government agency, or on the petition of any interested person.


<R05>
Sec. 10.7  Advance Notice of Proposed Rulemaking.

    An Advance Notice of Proposed Rulemaking issued in accordance with 
Sec. 10.1 of this part is published in the Federal Register and briefly 
outlines:
    (a) The proposed new program or program changes, and why they are 
needed;
    (b) The major policy issues involved;
    (c) A request for comments, both specific and general, as to the 
need for the proposed rule and the provisions that the rule might 
include;
    (d) If appropriate, a list of questions about the proposal that will 
elicit detailed comments;

[[Page 124]]

    (e) If known, an estimate of the reporting or recordkeeping 
requirements, if any, that the rule would impose; and
    (f) Where comments should be addressed and the time within which 
they must be submitted.


<R05>
Sec. 10.8  Notice of proposed rulemaking.

    Each notice of proposed rulemaking required by statute or by 
Sec. 10.1 is published in the Federal Register and includes:
    (a) The substance or terms of the proposed rule or a description of 
the subject matter and issues involved;
    (b) A statement of how and to what extent interested persons may 
participate in the proceeding;
    (c) Where participation is limited to written comments, a statement 
of the time within which such comments must be submitted;
    (d) A reference to the legal authority under which the proposal is 
issued; and
    (e) In a proceeding which has provided Advance Notice of Proposed 
Rulemaking, an analysis of the principal issues and recommendations 
raised by the comments, and the manner in which they have been addressed 
in the proposed rulemaking.


<R05>
Sec. 10.10  Participation by interested persons.

    (a) Unless the notice otherwise provides, any interested person may 
participate in rulemaking proceedings by submitting written data, views 
or arguments within the comment time stated in the notice. In addition, 
the Secretary may permit the filing of comments in response to original 
comments.
    (b) In appropriate cases, the Secretary may provide for oral 
presentation of views in additional proceedings described in Sec. 10.12.


<R05>
Sec. 10.12  Additional rulemaking proceedings.

    The Secretary may invite interested persons to present oral 
arguments, appear at informal hearings, or participate in any other 
procedure affording opportunity for oral presentation of views. The 
transcript or minutes of such meetings, as appropriate, will be kept and 
filed in the Rules Docket.


<R05>
Sec. 10.14  Hearings.

    (a) The provisions of 5 U.S.C. 556 and 557, which govern formal 
hearings in adjudicatory proceedings, do not apply to informal rule 
making proceedings described in this part. When opportunity is afforded 
for oral presentation, such informal hearing is a nonadversary, fact-
finding proceeding. Any rule issued in a proceeding under this part in 
which a hearing is held is not based exclusively on the record of such 
hearing.
    (b) When a hearing is provided, the Secretary will designate a 
representative to conduct the hearing, and if the presence of a legal 
officer is desirable, the General Counsel will designate a staff 
attorney to serve as the officer.


<R05>
Sec. 10.16  Adoption of a final rule.

    All timely comments are considered in taking final action on a 
proposed rule. Each preamble to a final rule will contain a short 
analysis and evaluation of the relevant significant issues set forth in 
the comments submitted, and a clear concise statement of the basis and 
purpose of the rule.


<R05>
Sec. 10.18  Petitions for reconsideration.

    Petitions for reconsideration of a final rule will not be 
considered. Such petitions, if filed, will be treated as peitions for 
rulemaking in accordance with Sec. 10.20.


<R05>
Sec. 10.20  Petition for rulemaking.

    (a) Any interested person may petition the Secretary for the 
issuance, amendment, or repeal of a rule. Each petition shall:
    (1) Be submitted to the Rules Docket Clerk, Room 5218, Department of 
Housing and Urban Development, Washington, DC 20410;
    (2) Set forth the text of substance of the rule or amendment 
proposed or specify the rule sought to be repealed;
    (3) Explain the interest of the petitioner in the action sought; and
    (4) Set forth all data and arguments available to the petitioner in 
support of the action sought.
    (b) No public procedures will be held directly on the petition 
before its disposition. If the Secretary finds that the

[[Page 125]]

petition contains adequate justification, a rulemaking proceeding will 
be initiated or a final rule will be issued as appropriate. If the 
Secretary finds that the petition does not contain adequate 
justification, the petition will be denied by letter or other notice, 
with a brief statement of the ground for denial. The Secretary may 
consider new evidence at any time; however, repetitious petitions for 
rulemaking will not be considered.


<R03>
PART 13--USE OF PENALTY MAIL IN THE LOCATION AND RECOVERY OF MISSING CHILDREN--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
13.1  Purpose.
13.2  Procedures for obtaining and disseminating data.
13.3  Withdrawal of data.
13.4  Reports.

    Authority: 39 U.S.C. 3220(a)(2); 5 U.S.C. 301.

    Source: 51 FR 19830, June 3, 1986, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 13.1  Purpose.

    To support the national effort to locate and recover missing 
children, the Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) joins 
other executive departments and independent establishments of the 
Government of the United States in using penalty mail to disseminate 
photographs and biographical information on hundreds of missing 
children.

[51 FR 19830, June 3, 1986; 51 FR 43608, Dec. 3, 1986]


<R05>
Sec. 13.2  Procedures for obtaining and disseminating data.

    (a) HUD shall insert, manually and via automated inserts, pictures 
and biographical data related to missing children in domestic penalty 
mail directed to members of the public in the United States, its 
territories and possessions. These include:
    (1) Standard letter-size envelopes (4\1/2\" X 9\1/2\");
    (2) Document-size envelopes (9\1/2\" X 12", 9\1/2\" X 11\1/2\", 10" 
X 13"); and
    (3) Other envelopes (miscellaneous size).
    (b) Missing children information shall not be placed on the Penalty 
Indicia, OCR Read Area, Bar Code Read Area, and Return Address areas of 
letter-size envelopes.
    (c) Posters containing pictures and biographical data shall be 
placed on bulletin boards in Headquarters and Field offices.
    (d) HUD shall accept camera-ready and other photographic and 
biographical materials solely from the National Center for Missing and 
Exploited Children (National Center). Photographs that were reasonably 
current as of the time of the child's disappearance shall be the only 
acceptable form of visual media or pictorial likeness used in penalty 
mail or posters.


<R05>
Sec. 13.3  Withdrawal of data.

    HUD shall remove all printed penalty mail envelopes and other 
materials from circulation or other use within a three month period from 
the date the National Center receives information or notice that a 
child, whose picture and biographical information have been made 
available to HUD, has been recovered or that the parent or guardian's 
permission to use the child's photograph and biographical information 
has been withdrawn. The HUD contact person shall be notified immediately 
and in writing by the National Center of the need to withdraw from 
circulation penalty mail envelopes and other materials related to a 
particular child.


<R05>
Sec. 13.4  Reports.

    HUD shall compile and submit to Office of Juvenile Justice and 
Deliquency Prevention (OJJDP), by June 30, 1987, a consolidated report 
on its experience in implementing S. 1195 Official Mail Use in the 
Location and Recovery of Missing Children along with recommendations for 
future Departmental action.


<R03>
PART 14--IMPLEMENTATION OF THE EQUAL ACCESS TO JUSTICE ACT IN ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEEDINGS--Table of Contents

<R05>


                      Subpart A--General Provisions

Sec.
14.50  Definitions.
14.100  Time computation.
14.105  Purpose of these rules.
14.110  When the Act applies.

[[Page 126]]

14.115  Proceedings covered.
14.120  Eligibility of applicants.
14.125  Standards for awards.
14.130  Allowable fees and expenses.
14.135  Rulemaking on maximum rates for attorney fees.
14.140  Awards against other agencies.

             Subpart B--Information Required From Applicants

14.200  Contents of application.
14.205  Net worth exhibit.
14.210  Documentation of fees and expenses.
14.215  When an application may be filed.

           Subpart C--Procedures for Considering Applications

14.300  Jurisdiction of adjudicative officer.
14.305  Filing and service of documents.
14.310  Answer to application.
14.315  Comments by other parties.
14.320  Settlement.
14.325  Extensions of time and further proceedings.
14.330  Decision.
14.335  Departmental review.
14.340  Judicial review.
14.345  Payment of award.

    Authority: Sec. 504(c)(1) of the Equal Access to Justice Act (5 
U.S.C. 504(c)(1); sec. 7(d) of the Department of Housing and Urban 
Development Act (42 U.S.C. 3535(d)).

    Source: 52 FR 27126, July 17, 1987, unless otherwise noted.


<R04>
                      Subpart A--General Provisions


<R05>
Sec. 14.50  Definitions.

    Act. The Equal Access to Justice Act, 5 U.S.C. 504, title II of Pub. 
L. 96-481, as amended by Pub. L. 99-80.
    Adjudicative officer. The hearing examiner, administrative law 
judge, administrative judge of the HUD Board of Contract Appeals, or 
other officer designated by the Secretary or other responsible 
Department official, who presided at the adversary adjudication.
    Adversary adjudication. (a) An adjudication under 5 U.S.C. 554 in 
which the position of the United States is represented by counsel or 
otherwise, but not including an adjudication for the purpose of 
establishing or fixing a rate or for the purpose of granting or renewing 
a license; and
    (b) Appeals of decisions of contracting officers made pursuant to 
section 6 of the Contract Disputes Act of 1978 (41 U.S.C. 605) before 
agency boards of contract appeals as provided in section 8 of that Act 
(41 U.S.C. 607).
    Agency counsel (a) When the position of the Department is being 
represented, the attorney or attorneys designated by the Department's 
General Counsel to represent the Department in a proceeding covered by 
this part, and
    (b) When the position of another agency of the United States is 
being represented, the representative as designated by that agency.
    Department. The Department of Housing and Urban Development, or the 
organizational unit within the Department responsible for conducting an 
adversary adjudication subject to this part.
    Proceeding. An adversary adjudication as defined above.
    Secretary. The Secretary of Housing and Urban Development.


<R05>
Sec. 14.100  Time computation.

    Time periods stated in this part shall be computed in accordance 
with the Department's rules with respect to computation of time which 
apply to the underlying proceeding.


<R05>
Sec. 14.105  Purpose of these rules.

    The Act provides for the award of attorney fees and other expenses 
to eligible individuals and entities who are parties to certain 
administrative proceedings (adversary adjudications) before the 
Department. An eligible party may receive an award when it prevails over 
an agency, unless the agency's position was substantially justified or 
special circumstances make an award unjust. The rules in this part 
described the parties eligible for awards and the proceedings that are 
covered. They also explain how to apply for awards and the procedures 
and standards that the Department will use to make them.


<R05>
Sec. 14.110  When the Act applies.

    The Act applies to any adversary adjudication pending or commenced 
before this Department on or after August 5, 1985. It also applies to 
any adversary adjudication commenced on or after October 1, 1984, and 
finally disposed of before August 5, 1985, provided that an application 
for fees and expenses, as described in subpart B of

[[Page 127]]

these rules, has been filed with the Department no later than 30 days 
after August 5, 1985, and to any adversary adjudication pending on or 
commenced on or after October 1, 1981, in which an application for fees 
and other expenses was timely filed and was dismissed for lack of 
jurisdiction.


<R05>
Sec. 14.115  Proceedings covered.

    (a) The proceedings to which this part applies are adversary 
adjudications conducted by the Department under:
    (1) The Interstate Land Sales Full Disclosure Act, as amended, 15 
U.S.C. 1701 et seq., pursuant to 15 U.S.C. 1715 and 24 CFR part 1720;
    (2) Section 602 of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, 42 U.S.C. 2000d-1, 
and 24 CFR parts 1 and 2;
    (3) Section 505(a) of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, as amended, 29 
U.S.C. 794a, 28 CFR part 41, and any applicable HUD regulations;
    (4) Section 305(a) of the Age Discrimination Act of 1975, 42 U.S.C. 
6104(a), 45 CFR part 90 and any applicable HUD regulations;
    (5) Section 3 of the HUD Act of 1968, 12 U.S.C. 170lu (Employment 
Opportunities for Business and Lower Income Persons in Connection with 
Assisted Projected), and 24 CFR part 135;
    (6) Debt Collection Act of 1982 (Salary Offset), 5 U.S.C. 5514, and 
24 CFR 17.125-.140;
    (7) Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 
42 U.S.C. 5401 et seq., and 24 CFR part 3280;
    (8) Section 111 of title I of the Housing and Community Development 
Act of 1974, 42 U.S.C. 5311, and 24 CFR 570.913;
    (9) Appeals of decisions of contracting officers made pursuant to 
section 6 of the Contract Disputes Act of 1978 (41 U.S.C. 605) before 
the HUD Board of Contract Appeals as provided in section 8 of that Act 
(41 U.S.C. 607); or
    (10) Title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968 (42 U.S.C. 3600-
3620) and 24 CFR part 104.
    (b) The Department's failure to identify a type of proceeding as an 
adversary adjudication shall not preclude the filing of an application 
by a party who believes the proceeding is covered by the Act; whether 
the proceeding is covered will then be an issue for resolution in 
proceedings on the application.
    (c) If a proceeding includes both matters covered by the Act and 
matters specifically excluded from coverage, any award made will include 
only fees and expenses related to covered issues.

[52 FR 27126, July 17, 1987, as amended at 54 FR 3283, Jan. 23, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 14.120  Eligibility of applicants.

    (a) To be eligible for an award of attorney fees and other expenses 
under the Act, the applicant must be a party to the adversary 
adjudication for which it seeks an award. The term party is defined in 5 
U.S.C. 551(3). The applicant must show that it meets all conditions of 
eligibility set out in this subpart and in subpart B.
    (b) The types of eligible applicants are as follows:
    (1) An individual with a net worth of not more than $2 million;
    (2) The sole owner of an unincorporated business who has a net worth 
of not more than $7 million, including both personal and business 
interests, and not more than 500 employees;
    (3) A charitable or other tax-exempt organization described in 
section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code, 26 U.S.C. 501(c)(3), 
with not more than 500 employees;
    (4) A cooperative association as defined in section 15(a) of the 
Agricultural Marketing Act, 12 U.S.C. 1141j(a), with not more than 500 
employees; or
    (5) Any other partnership, corporation, association, unit of local 
government, or organization with a net worth of not more than $7 million 
and not more than 500 employees.
    (c) For the purpose of eligibility, the net worth and number of 
employees of an applicant shall be determined as of the date the 
proceeding was initiated. For the purpose of eligibility of applicants 
before the HUD Board of Contract Appeals, the net worth and number of 
employees of an applicant shall be determined as of the date the 
applicant filed its appeal under 41 U.S.C. 606.
    (d) An applicant who owns an unincorporated business will be 
considered as an individual rather than a sole owner of an 
unincorporated business if the issues on which the application

[[Page 128]]

prevails are related primarily to personal interests rather than to 
business interests.
    (e) The employees of an applicant include all persons who regularly 
perform services for remuneration for the applicant, under the 
applicant's direction and control. Part-time employees shall be included 
on a proportional basis.
    (f) The net worth and number of employees of the applicant and all 
of its affiliates shall be aggregated to determine eligibility. Any 
individual, corporation or other entity that directly or indirectly 
controls or owns a majority of the voting shares or other interests of 
the applicant, or any corporation or other entity of which the applicant 
directly or indirectly owns or controls a majority of the voting shares 
or other interest, will be considered an affiliate for purposes of this 
part, unless the adjudicative officer determines that such treatment 
would be unjust and contrary to the purposes of the Act in light of the 
actual relationship between the affiliated entities. In addition, the 
adjudicative officer may determine that financial relationshsips of the 
applicant other than those described in this paragraph constitute 
special circumstances that would make an award unjust.
    (g) An applicant that participates in a proceeding primarily on 
behalf of one or more other persons or entities that would be ineligible 
is not itself eligible for an award.


<R05>
Sec. 14.125  Standards for awards.

    (a) A prevailing applicant may receive an award for fees and 
expenses incurred in connection with a proceeding, or in a significant 
and discrete substantive portion of the proceeding, unless the position 
of the agency over which the applicant has prevailed was substantially 
justified. The position of the agency includes, in addition to the 
position taken by the agency in the adversary adjudication, the action 
or failure to act by the agency upon which the adversary adjudication is 
based. The burden of proof that an award should not be made to an 
ineligible prevailing applicant because the agency's position was 
substantially justified is on the agency counsel, who may avoid an award 
by showing that its position was reasonable in law and fact.
    (b) An award will be reduced or denied if the applicant has unduly 
or unreasonably protracted the proceeding, if the applicant has 
falsified the application (including documentation) or net worth exhibit 
or if special circumstances make the award sought unjust.


<R05>
Sec. 14.130  Allowable fees and expenses.

    (a) No award for the fee of an attorney or agent under these rules 
may exceed $75.00 per hour. However, an award may also include the 
reasonable expenses of the attorney, agent or witness as a separate 
item, if the attorney, agent or witness ordinarily charges clients 
separately for such expenses.
    (b) In determining the reasonableness of the fee sought for an 
attorney, agent or expert witness, the adjudicative officer shall 
consider the following:
    (1) If the attorney, agent or witness is in private practice, his or 
her customary fee for similar services, or, if an employee of the 
applicant, the fully allocated cost of the services;
    (2) The prevailing rate for the kind and quality of services 
furnished in the community in which the attorney, agent or witness 
ordinarily performs services;
    (3) The time actually spent in the representation of the applicant;
    (4) The time reasonably spent in the light of the difficulty or 
complexity of the issues in the proceeding; and
    (5) Such other factors as may bear on the value of the services 
provided.
    (c) The reasonable cost of any study, analysis, engineering report, 
test, project, or similar matter prepared on behalf of a party may be 
awarded, to the extent that the charge for the services does not exceed 
the prevailing rate for similar services, and the study or other matter 
was necessary for preparation of the applicant's case.


<R05>
Sec. 14.135  Rulemaking on maximum rates for attorney fees.

    Any person may file with the Department a petition for rulemaking to 
increase the maximum rate for attorney fees as provided in 5 U.S.C. 
504(b)(1)(A)(ii), in accordance with 24

[[Page 129]]

CFR part 10. The petition should identify the rate the petitioner 
believes the Department should establish and the types of proceedings in 
which the rate should be used. It should also explain fully the reasons 
why the higher rate is warranted. The Department will respond to the 
petition in accordance with 24 CFR 10.20(b).


<R05>
Sec. 14.140  Awards against other agencies.

    If an applicant is entitled to an award because it prevails over 
another agency of the United States that participates in a proceeding 
before the Department and takes a position that is not substantially 
justified, the award or an appropriate portion of the award shall be 
made against that agency.


<R04>
             Subpart B--Information Required From Applicants


<R05>
Sec. 14.200  Contents of application.

    (a) An application for an award of fees and expenses under the Act 
shall identify the applicant and the proceeding for which an award is 
sought. The application shall show that the applicant has prevailed and 
identify the position of the Department or other agencies that the 
applicant alleges was not substantially justified. Unless the applicant 
is an individual, the application shall also state the number of 
employees of the applicant and describe briefly the type and purpose of 
its organization or business.
    (b) The application shall also include a statement that the 
applicant's net worth does not exceed $2 million (if an individual) or 
$7 million (for all other applicants, including their affiliates). 
However, an applicant may omit this statement if:
    (1) It attaches a copy of a ruling by the Internal Revenue Service 
that it qualifies as an organization described in section 501(c)(3) of 
the Internal Revenue Code, 26 U.S.C. 501(c)(3), or, in the case of a 
tax-exempt organization not required to obtain a ruling from the 
Internal Revenue Service on its exempt status, a statement that 
describes the basis for the applicant's belief that it qualifies under 
such section; or
    (2) It states that it is a cooperative association as defined in 
section 15(a) of the Agricultural Marketing Act, 12 U.S.C. 1141j(a).
    (c) If the applicant is a partnership, corporation, association, or 
organization, or a sole owner of an unincorporated business, the 
applicant shall state that it did not have more than 500 employees at 
the time the proceeding was initiated, giving the number of its 
employees and describing briefly the type and purpose of its 
organization or business.
    (d) The application shall also itemize the amount of fees and 
expenses for which an award is sought.
    (e) The application also may include any other matters that the 
applicant wishes the Department to consider in determining whether and 
in what amount an award should be made.
    (f) The application shall be signed by the applicant or an 
authorized officer with respect to the eligibility of the applicant and 
by the attorney of the applicant with respect to fees and expenses 
sought. The application shall contain or be accompanied by a written 
verification under oath or affirmation under penalty of perjury that the 
information provided in the application and all accompanying material is 
true and complete to the best of the applicant's or authorized officer's 
information and belief.

(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 
2510-0001)


<R05>
Sec. 14.205  Net worth exhibit.

    (a) Each applicant except a qualified tax-exempt organization or a 
qualified cooperative association must submit with its application a 
detailed exhibit showing the net worth of the applicant and any 
affiliates (as defined in Sec. 14.120(f) of this part) when the 
proceeding was initiated. The exhibit may be in any form convenient to 
the applicant that provides full disclosure of the applicant's and its 
affiliates' assets and liabilities, and is sufficient to determine 
whether the applicant qualifies under the standards of the Act and this 
part. The adjudicative officer may require an applicant to file 
additional information to determine its eligibility for an award.
    (b) The net worth exhibit shall describe any transfers of assets 
from, or obligations incurred by, the applicant

[[Page 130]]

or any affiliate, occurring in the one-year period before the date on 
which the proceeding was initiated, that reduced the net worth of the 
applicant and its affiliates below the applicable net worth ceiling. If 
there were no such transactions, the applicant shall so state.
    (c) Ordinarily, the net worth exhibit will be included in the public 
record of the proceeding. However, an applicant that objects to public 
disclosure of information in any portion of the exhibit and believes 
there are legal grounds for withholding it from disclosure may submit 
that portion of the exhibit directly to the adjudicative officer in a 
sealed envelope labeled ``Confidential Financial Information,'' 
accompanied by a motion to withhold the information from public 
disclosure. The motion shall describe the information sought to be 
withheld and explain, in detail, why it falls within one or more of the 
specific exemptions from mandatory disclosure under the Freedom of 
Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552(b) (1)-(9)), why public disclosure of the 
information would adversely affect the applicant, and why disclosure is 
not required in the public interest. The material in question shall be 
served on counsel representing the agency against which the applicant 
seeks an award, but need not be served on any other party to the 
proceeding. If the adjudicative officer finds that the information 
should not be withheld from disclosure, it shall be placed in the public 
record of the proceeding. Otherwise, any request to inspect or copy the 
exhibit shall be disposed of in accordance with the Department's 
established procedures under the Freedom of Information Act, 24 CFR part 
15. In either case, disclosure shall be subject to the provisions of the 
Privacy Act of 1974, 5 U.S.C. 552a, and the Department's procedures 
implementing the Privacy Act of 1974 at 24 CFR part 16.

(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 
2510-0001)


<R05>
Sec. 14.210  Documentation of fees and expenses.

    (a) The application shall be accompanied by full and itemized 
documentation of the fees and expenses, including the cost of any study, 
analysis, engineering report, test, project or similar matter, for which 
an award is sought.
    (b) The documentation shall include an affidavit from any attorney, 
agent or expert witness representing or appearing in behalf of the 
party, stating the actual time expended and the rate at which fees and 
other expenses were computed and describing the specific services 
performed.
    (c) The documentation shall also include a description of any 
expenses for which reimbursement is sought and a statement of the 
amounts paid and payable by the applicant or by any other person or 
entity for the services provided. Vouchers, receipts, logs, or other 
substantiation for any expenses paid or payable shall be provided.
    (d) The adjudicative officer may require the applicant to provide 
additional substantiation for any expenses claimed.

(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 
2510-0001)


<R05>
Sec. 14.215  When an application may be filed.

    (a) An application may be filed whenever the applicant has prevailed 
in the proceeding or in a significant and discrete substantive portion 
of the proceeding, but in no case later than 30 days after the 
Department's final disposition of the proceeding.
    (b) For purposes of this rule, final disposition means the date on 
which a decision or order disposing of the merits of the proceeding or 
any other complete resolution of the proceeding, such as a settlement of 
voluntary dismissal, become final and unappealable, both within the 
Department and to the courts.
    (c) If review or reconsideration (under HUD Board of Contract 
Appeals Rule 29, 24 CFR 20.10) is sought or taken of a decision as to 
which an applicant believes it has prevailed, proceedings for the award 
of fees shall be stayed pending final disposition of the underlying 
controversy. When the United States appeals the underlying merits of an 
adversary adjudication to a court, no decision on an application for 
fees and other expenses in connection with that adversary adjudication 
shall be made until a final and unreviewable decision is rendered by

[[Page 131]]

the court on the appeal or until the underlying merits of the case have 
been finally determined pursuant to the appeal.


<R04>
           Subpart C--Procedures for Considering Applications


<R05>
Sec. 14.300  Jurisdiction of adjudicative officer.

    Any provision in the Department's rules and regulations other than 
this part which limits or terminates the jurisdiction of an adjudicative 
officer upon the effective date of his or her decision in the underlying 
proceeding shall not in any way affect his or her jurisdiction to render 
a decision under this part.


<R05>
Sec. 14.305  Filing and service of documents.

    Any application for an award or other pleading or document related 
to an application shall be filed and served on all parties to the 
proceeding in the same manner as other pleadings in the proceeding, 
except as provided in Sec. 14.205(c) for confidential financial 
information.


<R05>
Sec. 14.310  Answer to application.

    (a) Within 30 days after service of an application, agency counsel 
may file an answer to the application. Agency counsel may request an 
extension of time for filing. If agency counsel fails to answer or 
otherwise fails to contest or settle the application, the adjudicative 
officer, upon a satisfactory showing of entitlement by the applicant, 
may make an award for the applicant's fees and other expenses under the 
Act.
    (b) If agency counsel and the applicant believe that the issues in 
the fee application can be settled, they may jointly file a statement of 
their intent to negotiate a settlement. The filing of this statement 
shall extend the time for filing an answer for an additional 30 days, 
and further extensions may be granted by the adjudicative officer upon 
request by agency counsel and the applicant.
    (c) The answer shall explain in detail any objections to the award 
requested and identify the facts relied on in support of agency 
counsel's position. If the answer is based on any alleged facts not 
already in the record of the proceeding, agency counsel shall include 
with the answer either supporting affidavits or a request for further 
proceedings under Sec. 14.325.


<R05>
Sec. 14.315  Comments by other parties.

    Any party to a proceeding other than the applicant and agency 
counsel may file comments on an application within 30 days after it is 
served, or on an answer within 15 days after it is served. A commenting 
party may not participate further in proceedings on the application 
unless the adjudicative officer determines that the public interest 
requires such participation in order to permit full exploration of 
matters raised in the comments.


<R05>
Sec. 14.320  Settlement.

    The applicant and agency counsel may agree on a proposed settlement 
of the award before final action on the application, either in 
connection with a settlement of the underlying proceeding, or after the 
underlying proceeding has been concluded, in accordance with the 
settlement procedure applicable to the underlying proceeding. If a 
prevailing party and agency counsel agree on a proposed settlement of an 
award before an application has been filed, the application shall be 
filed with the proposed settlement.


<R05>
Sec. 14.325  Extensions of time and further proceedings.

    (a) The adjudicative officer on motion and for good cause shown may 
grant extensions of time other than for filing an application for fees 
and expenses after final disposition in the adversary adjudication.
    (b) Ordinarily, the determination of an award will be made on the 
basis of the written record. However, on request of either the applicant 
or agency counsel, or on his or her own initiative, the adjudicative 
officer may order further proceedings, such as an informal conference, 
oral argument, additional written submissions, or as to issues other 
than substantial justification (such as the applicant's eligibility or 
substantiation of fees and expenses), pertinent discovery or an 
evidentiary hearing. Such further proceedings shall be held only when 
necessary for full

[[Page 132]]

and fair resolution of the issues arising from the application, and 
shall be conducted as promptly as possible. Whether or not the position 
of the agency was substantially justified shall be determined on the 
basis of the administrative record, as a whole, which is made in the 
adversary adjudication for which fees and other expenses are sought.
    (c) A request that the adjudicative officer order further 
proceedings under this section shall specifically identify the 
information sought or the disputed issues and shall explain why the 
additional proceedings are necessary to resolve the issues.


<R05>
Sec. 14.330  Decision.

    The adjudicative officer shall issue an initial decision on the 
application within 30 days after completion of proceedings on the 
application. The decision shall include written findings and conclusions 
on such of the following as are relevant to the decision:
    (a) The applicant's status as a prevailing party;
    (b) The applicant's qualification as a party under 5 U.S.C. 
504(b)(1)(B);
    (c) Whether the agency's position was substantially justified;
    (d) Whether special circumstances make an award unjust;
    (e) Whether the applicant during the course of the proceedings 
engaged in conduct that unduly and unreasonably protracted the final 
resolution of the matter in controversy; and
    (f) The amounts, if any, awarded for fees and other expenses, with 
reasons for any difference between the amount requested and the amount 
awarded.

If the applicant has sought an award against more than one agency, the 
decision shall allocate responsibility for payment of any award made 
among the agencies, and shall explain the reasons for the allocation 
made.


<R05>
Sec. 14.335  Departmental review.

    (a) Either the applicant or agency counsel may seek review of the 
initial decision on the fee application, or the Secretary (or his or her 
delegate, if any) may decide to review the decision on his or her own 
initiative, in accordance with the Department's review or appeals 
procedures applicable to the underlying proceeding. If neither the 
applicant nor agency counsel seeks review and the Secretary (or his or 
her delegate, if any) does not take review on his or her own initiative, 
the initial decision on the application shall become a final decision of 
the Department in the same manner as a decision in the underlying 
proceeding becomes final. Whether to review a decision is a matter 
within the discretion of the Secretary (or his or her delegate, if any). 
If review is taken, the Department will issue a final decision on the 
application or remand the application to the adjudicative officer for 
further proceedings.
    (b) Either party may seek reconsideration of the decision on the fee 
application in accordance with Rule 29, 24 CFR 20.10.


<R05>
Sec. 14.340  Judicial review.

    Judicial review of final departmental decisions on awards may be 
sought as provided in 5 U.S.C. 504(c)(2).


<R05>
Sec. 14.345  Payment of award.

    An applicant seeking payment of an award shall submit a copy of the 
final decision granting the award to: Director, Office of Finance and 
Accounting, Room 2202, Department of Housing and Urban Development, 
Washington, DC 20410, with a copy to: Associate General Counsel for 
Equal Opportunity and Administrative Law, Room 10244, Department of 
Housing and Urban Development, Washington, DC 20410. A statement that 
review of the underlying decision is not being sought in the United 
States courts, or that the process for seeking review of the award, if 
initiated, has been completed, must also be included. The agency will 
pay the amount awarded to the applicant within 60 days, unless judicial 
review of the award or of the underlying decision of the adversary 
adjudication has been sought by the applicant or any other party to the 
proceeding.

[[Page 133]]


<R03>
PART 15--TESTIMONY, PRODUCTION AND DISCLOSURE OF MATERIAL OR INFORMATION BY HUD EMPLOYEES--Table of Contents

<R05>


                      Subpart A--Purpose and Policy

Sec.
15.1  Definitions.
15.2  Purpose and applicability.
15.3  Statement of policy.

             Subpart B--Production and Disclosure of Records

15.11  Publication in the Federal Register.
15.12  Materials not published in Federal Register.
15.13  Records produced upon request when reasonably described.

                          Subpart C--Exemptions

15.14  Fees.
15.15  Fees to be charged--categories of requesters.
15.16  Review of records, aggregating requests and waiving or reducing 
          fees.
15.17  Charges for interest and for unsuccessful searches; Utilization 
          of Debt Collection Act.
15.18  Advance payments.
15.21  Exemptions authorized by 5 U.S.C. 552.

                          Subpart D [Reserved]

         Subpart E--Procedures for Requesting Access to Records

15.41  Requests for records.
15.42  Time limitations.

        Subpart F--Disclosure of Records and Refusal To Disclose

15.51  Authority to release records or copies.
15.52  Authority to deny requests for records.
15.54  Business information.

   Subpart G--Administrative Review of Denial of Requests for Records

15.61  Administrative appeal.

 Subpart H--Production in Response to Subpoenas or Demands of Courts or 
                            Other Authorities

15.71  Purpose and scope.
15.72  Production or disclosure prohibited unless approved by the 
          Secretary.
15.73  Procedure in the event of a demand for production or disclosure.
15.74  Procedure in the event of an adverse ruling.

Subpart I--Testimony of Employees of the Department in Legal Proceedings

15.81  Purpose.
15.82  Testimony in proceedings in which the United States is a party.
15.83  Legal proceedings among private litigants; general rule.
15.84  Legal proceedings among private litigants; subpoenas.
15.85  Legal proceedings among private litigants; expert or opinion 
          testimony.

   Subpart J--Processing Request for Declassification and Release of 
                           Classified Material

15.91  Authority for release or denial of classified material.

    Authority: 5 U.S.C. 552; 42 U.S.C. 3535(d).

    Source: 40 FR 48123, Oct. 14, 1975, unless otherwise noted.


<R04>
                      Subpart A--Purpose and Policy


<R05>
Sec. 15.1  Definitions.

    As used in this part.

    Editorial Note: At 61 FR 5203, Feb. 9, 1996, in Sec. 15.1, the 
following introductory text was added; however, introductory text 
already exists.
    The terms Department, Secretary, and Organizational unit are defined 
in 24 CFR part 5.

    Act means section 552 of title 5 U.S.C., as amended by Pub. L. 90-
23, 81 Stat. 54, June 5, 1967, and Pub. L. 93-502, 88 Stat. 1561, 
November 21, 1974.
    Person means person as defined in 5 U.S.C. 551(2) to include 
corporations and organizations as well as individuals.
    Information center means library, reading room, desk, or other 
facility, or any combination of places established and maintained by the 
Department, where the public may request and obtain information and 
records concerning the Department's operations and business.
    Legal proceeding includes any proceeding before a court of law or 
other authority, i.e., administrative board or commission, hearing 
officer, arbitrator or other body conducting a quasi-judicial or 
legislative proceeding.
    Legal proceeding in which the United States is a party means any 
legal proceeding including as a named party the United States, the 
Department of

[[Page 134]]

Housing and Urban Development, or any other Federal executive or 
administrative agency or department, or any official thereof in his 
official capacity.
    Legal proceeding among private litigants means any legal proceeding 
in which the United States is not a party.

[40 FR 48123, Oct. 14, 1975, as amended at 52 FR 12160, Apr. 15, 1987; 
60 FR 11903, Mar. 3, 1995; 61 FR 5203, Feb. 9, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 15.2  Purpose and applicability.

    (a) This part contains the regulations of the Department 
implementing 5 U.S.C. 552 and prescribing the Department's policies and 
procedures with respect to testimony of its employees as witnesses in 
legal proceedings. It informs the public about where and how the 
Department's records and information may be obtained from its 
organizational units as defined in Sec. 15.1(d), and about the 
Department's policy concerning allowing its employees to testify in 
legal proceedings.
    (b) All subparts of part 15, other than subpart I, apply to all 
organizational units, except that their applicability to the Office of 
Inspector General is subject to the provisions of parts 2002 and 2004 of 
this title, and their applicability to the Office of Interstate Land 
Sales Registration is subject to the provisions of Sec. 1700.30 of this 
title. Subpart I applies to all organizational units other than the 
Office of Inspector General.

[52 FR 12160, Apr. 15, 1987]


<R05>
Sec. 15.3  Statement of policy.

    The Department's policy is one of full and responsible disclosure of 
its identifiable records and information consistent with such competing 
public interests concerning the national security, personal privacy, and 
obligations of confidentiality as are recognized by 5 U.S.C. 552.


<R04>
             Subpart B--Production and Disclosure of Records


<R05>
Sec. 15.11  Publication in the Federal Register.

    Subject to the exemptions in Sec. 15.21, the Department shall 
separately state and currently publish in the Federal Register for the 
guidance of the public:
    (a) Descriptions of its central and field organization and the 
established places at which, the employees from whom and the methods 
whereby, the public may obtain information, make submittals or requests, 
or obtain decisions;
    (b) Statements of the general course and method by which its 
functions are channeled and determined, including the nature and 
requirements of all formal and informal procedures available;
    (c) Rules of procedure, descriptions of forms available or the 
places at which forms may be obtained, and instructions as to the scope 
and contents of all papers, reports, or examinations;
    (d) Substantive rules of general applicability adopted as authorized 
by law, and statements of general policy or interpretations of general 
applicability formulated and adopted by the Department; and
    (e) Each amendment, revision, or repeal of the foregoing.

Except to the extent that a person has actual and timely notice of the 
terms thereof, no person shall in any manner be required to resort to or 
be adversely affected by any matter required to be published in the 
Federal Register and not so published. For purposes of this section, 
matter which is reasonably available to the class of persons affected 
thereby shall be deemed published in the Federal Register when 
incorporated by reference therein with the approval of the Director of 
the Office of the Federal Register, as provided in 1 CFR part 51.


<R05>
Sec. 15.12  Materials not published in Federal Register.

    (a) Subject to the exemptions in Sec. 15.21, the Department, in 
accordance with this part, shall make available for public inspection 
and copying:
    (1) Final opinions, including concurring and dissenting opinions, as 
well as orders, made in the adjudication of cases;
    (2) Statements of policy and interpretations which have been adopted 
by the Department and are not published in the Federal Register; and

[[Page 135]]

    (3) Administrative staff manuals and instructions to staff that 
affect a member of the public.
    (b) To prevent a clearly unwarranted invasion of personal privacy, 
the Department may delete identifying details when it makes available or 
publishes any material. Whenever such deletions are required, the record 
or copy will be made available with the space formerly occupied by such 
identifying details left blank, and the justification for the deletion 
shall be explained fully in writing.
    (c) The Department shall also maintain and make available for public 
inspection and copying current indexes providing identifying information 
for the public as to any matter issued, adopted, or promulgated after 
July 4, 1967, and required by this section to be made available or 
published. The Department shall promptly publish quarterly and 
distribute (by sale or otherwise) copies of each index or supplements 
thereto unless it determines by order published in the Federal Register 
that the publication would be unnecessary and impracticable, in which 
case the Department shall nonetheless provide copies of such index on 
request at a cost not to exceed the direct cost of duplication.


<R05>
Sec. 15.13  Records produced upon request when reasonably described.

    (a) The procedures for requesting access to records are set forth in 
subpart E of this part.
    (b) When a request is made that reasonably describes a record of the 
Department that has been stored in a record center of the National 
Archives and Record Administration, this record will be requested from 
the Records Center by the Department and made available to the requester 
if the record would otherwise be available under this part. Records 
accessioned by the National Archives will not be made available by the 
Department, but may be requested directly from the National Archives.
    (c) Every effort will be made to make a record in use by the staff 
of the Department available when requested, and such availability will 
be deferred only to the extent necessary to avoid serious interference 
with the business of the Department.
    (d) Copies of a requested record need not be furnished if the record 
is published in the Federal Register or is available for purchase from 
the Superintendent of Documents of the Government Printing Office. Such 
records may, however, be examined in one of the Department's information 
centers.

[40 FR 48123, Oct. 14, 1975, as amended at 60 FR 11903, Mar. 3, 1995]


<R04>
                          Subpart C--Exemptions


<R05>
Sec. 15.14  Fees.

    (a) Copies of records. HUD will charge $0.15 per page for 
photocopies of documents. For copies prepared by computer, HUD will 
charge the actual cost of the tape or disk plus $25.00 per minute for 
central processing unit (CPU) time, so as to recoup reasonable direct 
costs of duplicating. For other methods of reproduction or duplication 
of documents, HUD will charge the actual direct costs of producing the 
documents.
    (b) Manual searches for records. HUD will charge $16.35 per hour per 
person for searches/reviews performed by clerical staff, and $37.00 per 
hour per person for searches/reviews performed by professional staff. 
Charges for search/review time will be billed in 1/2 hour segments.
    (c) Computer searches for records. HUD will charge $35.00 per hour 
for computer programming relating to a search, plus $25.00 per minute 
for central processing unit (CPU) time.
    (d) Contract services. HUD will contract with private sector sources 
to locate, reproduce and disseminate records in response to FOIA 
requests when that is the most efficient and least costly method. When 
doing so, however, HUD will ensure that the ultimate cost to the 
requester is no greater than it would be if HUD itself had performed 
these tasks. In no case will HUD contract out responsibilities which the 
FOIA provides that HUD alone may discharge, such as determining the 
applicability of an exemption, or determining whether to waive or reduce 
fees. HUD will ensure that when documents that would be responsive to a 
request are maintained for

[[Page 136]]

distribution by agencies operating statutory-based fee schedule programs 
such as the National Technical Information Service, HUD will inform 
requesters of the steps necessary to obtain records from those sources. 
Information provided routinely in the normal course of business will be 
provided at no charge.
    (e) Restrictions on assessing fees. HUD will provide the first 100 
pages of duplication and the first two hours of search time, manual or 
computer, free of charge to noncommercial use requesters. There is no 
charge to noncommercial use requesters for time needed for review, as 
defined in paragraph (g)(4) of this section. Review time is chargeable 
only to commercial use requesters. HUD will only assess fees for amounts 
in excess of $25.00.
    (f) Payment of fees. Payment of fees under this section and under 
Sec. 15.16(a) shall be made by check or money order, payable to the 
Treasurer of the United States. Cash payments may be made in person at 
Headquarters or the Field Offices. The fees shall be sent to the Office 
of Executive Secretariat at Headquarters or to the appropriate Field 
Office.
    (g) Definitions. As used in this subpart:
    (1) Direct costs means those expenditures which HUD actually incurs 
in searching for and duplicating (and, in the case of commercial 
requesters, reviewing) documents to respond to a FOIA request. Direct 
costs include, for example, the salary of the employee performing work 
(the basic rate of pay for the employee plus 16 percent of that rate to 
cover benefits) and the cost of operating duplicating machinery. Not 
included in direct costs are overhead expenses such as costs of space, 
and heating or lighting the facility in which the records are stored.
    (2) Search includes all time spent looking for material that is 
responsive to a request, including page-by-page or line-by-line 
identification of material within documents. Such activity is 
distinguished from review of material in order to determine whether the 
material is exempt from disclosure.
    (3) Duplication means the process of making a copy of a document 
necessary to respond to a FOIA request. Such copies can take the form of 
paper copy, microform, audio-visual materials, or machine readable 
documentation (e.g., magnetic tape or disk), among others.
    (4) Review means the process of examining a document located in 
response to a request that is for a commercial use to determine whether 
any portion of it may be withheld, excising portions to be withheld and 
otherwise preparing the document for release. Review does not include 
time spent resolving general legal or policy issues regarding the 
application of exemptions.

[53 FR 37547, Sept. 27, 1988, as amended at 60 FR 11903, Mar. 3, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 15.15  Fees to be charged--categories of requesters.

    There are four categories of FOIA requesters: Commercial use 
requesters; educational and non-commercial scientific institutions; 
representatives of the news media; and all other requesters. Specific 
levels of fees are prescribed for each of these categories:
    (a) Commercial use requesters. (1) HUD will assess charges which 
recover the full direct costs of searching for, reviewing for release, 
and duplicating records sought for commercial use. Requesters must 
reasonably describe the records sought. Commercial use requesters are 
not entitled to two hours of free search time or 100 free pages of 
reproduction of documents.
    (2) Commercial use refers to a request from or on behalf of one who 
seeks information for a use or purpose that furthers the commercial, 
trade, or profit interests of the requester or the person on whose 
behalf the request is made. In determining whether a requester properly 
belongs in this category, HUD must determine the use to which a 
requester will put the documents requested. Moreover, where HUD has 
reasonable cause to doubt the use to which a requester will put the 
records sought, or where that use is not clear from the request itself, 
HUD will seek additional clarification before assigning the request to a 
specific category.
    (b) Educational and non-commercial scientific institution 
requesters. (1) HUD will provide documents to educational

[[Page 137]]

and non-commercial scientific institutions for the cost of reproduction 
alone, excluding charges for the first 100 pages. To be eligible for 
inclusion in this category, requesters must show that the request is 
being made as authorized by and under the auspices of a qualifying 
institution and that the records are not sought for a commercial use, 
but are sought for furtherance of scholarly (if the request is from an 
educational institution) or scientific (if the request is from a non-
commerical scientific institution) research. Requesters must reasonably 
describe the records sought.
    (2) Educational institution means a preschool, a public or private 
elementary or secondary school, an institution of graduate higher 
education, an institution of undergraduate higher education, an 
institution of professional education, and an institution of vocational 
education, which operates a program or programs of scholarly research.
    (3) Non-commercial scientific institution means an institution that 
is not operated on a commercial basis as that term is referenced in 
Sec. 15.15(a) and which is operated solely for the purpose of conducting 
scientific research the results of which are not intended to promote any 
particular product or industry.
    (c) Requesters who are representatives of the news media. (1) HUD 
will provide documents to representatives of the news media for the cost 
of reproduction alone, excluding charges for the first 100 pages. In 
reference to this class of requester, a request for records supporting 
the news dissemination function of the requester shall not be considered 
to be a request that is for a commercial use. Requesters must reasonable 
describe the records sought.
    (2) Representative of the news media means any person actively 
gathering news for an entity that is organized and operated to publish 
or broadcast news to the public. The term news means information that is 
about current events or that would be of current interest to the public. 
Examples of news media entities include television or radio stations 
broadcasting to the public at large, and publishers of periodicals (but 
only in those instances when they can qualify as disseminators of news) 
who make their products available for purchase or subscription by the 
general public. Freelance journalists may be regarded as working for a 
news organization if they can demonstrate a solid basis for expecting 
publication through that organization, even though not actually emloyed 
by it. A publication contract would be the clearest proof, but HUD may 
also look to the past publication record of a requester in making this 
determination.
    (d) All other requesters. HUD will charge requesters who do not fit 
into any of the categories above fees which recover the full reasonable 
direct cost of searching for and reproducing records that are responsive 
to the request, except that the first 100 pages of reproduction and the 
first two hours of search time shall be furnished without charge. 
Requests from subjects for records about themselves filed in agencies' 
systems of records will continue to be treated under the fee provisions 
of the Privacy Act of 1974 which permit fees only for reproduction. 
Requesters must reasonably describe the records sought.

[53 FR 37548, Sept. 27, 1988]


<R05>
Sec. 15.16  Review of records, aggregating requests and waiving or reducing fees.

    (a) Review of records. Only requesters who are seeking documents for 
commercial use may be charged for time HUD spends reviewing records to 
determine whether they are exempt from mandatory disclosure. Charges may 
be assessed only for the initial review; i.e., the review undertaken the 
first time HUD analyzes the applicability of a specific exemption to a 
particular record or portion of a record. HUD will not charge for review 
at the administrative appeal level of an exemption already applied. 
However, records or portions of records withheld in full under an 
exemption which is subsequently determined not to apply may be reviewed 
again to determine the applicability of other exemptions not previously 
considered. The costs for such a subsequent review would be properly 
assessable. Review time will be assessed at the same rates established 
for search time in Sec. 15.14.

[[Page 138]]

    (b) Aggregating requests. A requester may not file multiple requests 
at the same time, each seeking portions of a document or documents, 
solely in order to avoid payment of fees. When HUD reasonably believes 
that a requester or a group of requesters acting in concert, is 
attempting to break a request down into a series of requests for the 
purpose of evading the assessment of fees, HUD may aggregate any such 
requests and charge accordingly.
    (c) Waiving or reducing fees. HUD will furnish documents without 
charge or at reduced charge if disclosure of the information is in the 
public interest because it is likely to contribute significantly to 
public understanding of the operations or activities of the government 
and is not primarily in the commercial interest of the requester. The 
official authorized to grant access to records may waive or reduce the 
applicable fee where requested. The determination not to waive or reduce 
the fee will be subject to administrative review as provided in 
Sec. 15.61 after the decision on the request for access has been made. 
Six factors shall be used in determining whether the requirements for a 
fee waiver or reduction are met. These factors are as follows:
    (1) The subject of the request: Whether the subject of the requested 
records concerns the operations or activities of the government;
    (2) The informative value of the information to be disclosed: 
Whether the disclosure is likely to contribute to an understanding of 
government operations or activities;
    (3) The contribution to an understanding of the subject by the 
general public likely to result from disclosure: Whether disclosure of 
the requested information will contribute to public understanding;
    (4) The significance of the contribution to public understanding: 
Whether the disclosure is likely to contribute significantly to public 
understanding of government operations or activities;
    (5) The existence and magnitude of a commercial interest: Whether 
the requester has a commercial interest that would be furthered by the 
requested disclosure; and, if so
    (6) The primary interest in disclosure: Whether the magnitude of the 
identified commercial interest of the requester is sufficiently large, 
in comparison with the public interest in disclosure, that disclosure is 
primarily in the commercial interest of the requester.

[53 FR 37549, Sept. 27, 1988]


<R05>
Sec. 15.17  Charges for interest and for unsuccessful searches; Utilization of Debt Collection Act.

    (a) Charging interest. HUD will begin assessing interest charges on 
an upaid bill starting on the 31st day following the day on which the 
billing was sent. A fee received by HUD, even if not processed, will 
suffice to stay the accrual of interest. Interest will be at the rate 
prescribed in section 3717 of title 31 U.S.C. and will accrue from the 
date of the billing.
    (b) Charge for unsuccessful search. Ordinarily no charge for search 
time will be assessed when the records requested are not found or when 
the records located are withheld as exempt. However, if the requester 
has been notified of the esimated cost of the search time and has been 
advised specifically that the requested records may not exist or may be 
withheld as exempt, fees shall be charged.
    (c) Use of Debt Collection Act of 1982. When a requester has failed 
to pay a fee charged in a timely fashion (i.e., within 30 days of the 
date of the billing), HUD may, under the authority of the Debt 
Collection Act and part 17, subpart C of this title, use consumer 
reporting agencies and collection agencies, where appropriate, to 
recover the indebtedness owed the Department.

[53 FR 37549, Sept. 27, 1988]


<R05>
Sec. 15.18  Advance payments.

    (a) HUD may not require a requester to make an advance payment, 
i.e., payment before work is commenced or continued on a request, 
unless:
    (1) HUD estimates or determines that allowable charges that a 
requester may be required to pay are likely to exceed $250. Then, HUD 
will notify the requester of the likely cost and obtain satisfactory 
assurance of full payment where the requester has a history of prompt 
payment of FOIA fees, or require an advance payment of an amount up to 
the full estimated

[[Page 139]]

charges in the case of requesters with no history of payment; or
    (2) Where a requester has previously failed to pay a fee charged in 
a timely fashion (i.e., within 30 days of the date of the billing), HUD 
may require the requester to pay the full amount owed plus any 
applicable interest as provided by Sec. 15.17(a) or demonstrate that he 
has, in fact, paid the fees, and to make an advance payment of the full 
amount of the estimated fee before HUD begins to process a new request 
or a pending request from that requester.
    (b) When HUD acts under paragraphs (a)(1) or (a)(2) of this section, 
the administrative time limits prescribed in subsection (a)(6) of the 
FOIA (i.e., 10 working days from receipt of initial requests and 20 
working days from receipt of appeals from initial denial, plus 
permissible extensions of these time limits) will begin only after HUD 
has received fee payments described above.
    (c) Where it is anticipated that either the duplication fee 
individually, the search fee individually, or a combination of the two 
exceeds $25.00 over and above the free search time and duplication 
costs, where applicable, and the requesting party has not indicated in 
advance a willingness to pay so high a fee, the requesting party shall 
be promptly informed of the amount of the anticipated fee or such 
portion thereof as can readily be estimated. The notification shall 
offer the requesting party the opportunity to confer with agency 
representatives for the purpose of reformulating the request so as to 
meet that party's needs at a reduced cost.

[53 FR 37549, Sept. 27, 1988]


<R05>
Sec. 15.21  Exemptions authorized by 5 U.S.C. 552.

    A requested record shall not be withheld from inspection or copying 
unless it both: Comes within one of the classes of records exempted by 5 
U.S.C. 552; and there is need in the public interest to withhold it. In 
determining the scope of the classes of records described in paragraph 
(a) of this section, the Attorney General's Memorandum on the Public 
Information Act, June 1967, will be used as a guide.
    (a) The classes of records authorized to be exempted from disclosure 
by 5 U.S.C. 552 are those which concern matters that are:
    (1) Specifically authorized under criteria established by an 
Executive order to be kept secret in the interest of national defense or 
foreign policy and are in fact properly classified pursuant to such 
Executive order;
    (2) Related solely to the internal personnel rules and practices of 
the Department;
    (3) Specifically exempted from disclosure by statute;
    (4) Except as otherwise provided in paragraph (c) of this section, 
trade secrets and commercial or financial information obtained from a 
person and privileged or confidential;
    (5) Interagency or intra-agency memorandums or letters which would 
not be available by law to a party other than an agency in litigation 
with the Department;
    (6) Personnel and medical files and similar files the disclosure of 
which would constitute a clearly unwarranted invasion of personal 
privacy;
    (7) Records or information compiled for law enforcement purposes, 
but only to the extent that the production of such law enforcement 
records or information:
    (i) Could reasonably be expected to interfere with enforcement 
proceedings;
    (ii) Would deprive a person of a right to a fair trial or an 
impartial adjudication;
    (iii) Could reasonably be expected to constitute an unwarranted 
invasion of personal privacy;
    (iv) Could reasonably be expected to disclose the identity of a 
confidential source, including a state, local or foreign agency or 
authority or any private institution which furnished information on a 
confidential basis, and, in the case of a record or information compiled 
by a criminal law enforcement authority in the course of a criminal 
investigation or by an agency conducting a lawful national security 
intelligence investigation, information furnished by a confidential 
source;

[[Page 140]]

    (v) Would disclose techniques and procedures for law enforcement 
investigations or prosecutions, or would disclose guidelines for law 
enforcement investigations or prosecutions if such disclosure could 
reasonably be expected to risk circumvention of the law; or
    (vi) Could reasonably be expected to endanger the life or physical 
safety of any individual.
    (8) Contained in or related to examination, operating, or condition 
reports prepared by, on behalf of, or for the use of the Department in 
connection with its responsibility for the regulation or supervision of 
financial institutions; or
    (9) Geological and geophysical information and data, including maps, 
concerning wells.
    (b) Any reasonably segregable portion of a record shall be provided 
to any person requesting such record after deletion of the portions 
which are exempt under this section.
    (c) Subject to the following conditions, financial and related 
information submitted by a mortgagor and contained in Form HUD-92410 
(Statement of Profit and Loss), or a HUD-approved substitute form that 
the mortgagor may have submitted, may be disclosed to eligible potential 
purchasers of HUD-held multifamily mortgages.
    (1) Information from Form HUD-92410 concerning a project may be made 
available in conjunction with the sale of a HUD-held mortgage covering 
that project conducted under the authority of sections 207 (k) and (l) 
of the National Housing Act, 12 U.S.C. 1713 (k) and (l), or section 
7(i)(3) of the Department of Housing and Urban Development Act, 42 
U.S.C. 3535(i)(3).
    (2) The release of this information by HUD to eligible potential 
purchasers shall be limited to the period specified by HUD for the 
mortgage sale.
    (3) Eligible potential purchasers who have received this information 
shall agree to keep the information confidential, to disclose the 
information only to potential investors in the mortgage, to use the 
information for the sole purpose of their evaluation of the mortgage in 
connection with the mortgage sale, and to follow disclosure procedures 
for that sale that have been established by the Secretary.
    (4) Any disclosure by eligible potential purchasers to potential 
investors in the mortgage shall be limited to the period specified by 
HUD for the mortgage sale. Similar, potential investors in the mortgage 
shall agree to keep the information confidential and to use the 
information for the sole purpose of their evaluation of the mortgage in 
connection with their investment decision. In addition, potential 
investors in the mortgage may not disclose the information to other 
entities, unless the disclosure is necessary for the investor's 
evaluation of the mortgage, is in accordance with disclosure procedures 
for the specific sale that have been established by the Secretary, and 
is limited to the period specified by HUD for the mortgage sale. Any 
potential purchaser is responsible for notifying potential investors in 
the mortgage who receive this information from that entity of the 
investors' obligations under this section.
    (5) Disclosure of information from Form HUD-92410 by an eligible 
potential purchaser or by a potential investor (who has received the 
information from a potential purchaser and has been notified by that 
entity of its obligations under paragraph (c)(3) of this section) that 
is not in accordance with this section is a violation of this regulation 
and may subject the entity making the unauthorized disclosure to 
administrative sanctions under 24 CFR part 24.

(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 
2502-0052)

[40 FR 48123, Oct. 14, 1975, as amended at 51 FR 44286, Dec. 9, 1986; 60 
FR 11903, Mar. 3, 1995]


<R04>
                          Subpart D [Reserved]


<R04>
         Subpart E--Procedures for Requesting Access to Records


<R05>
Sec. 15.41  Requests for records.

    (a) Requests for copies of records may be made in person during 
normal business hours at information centers listed in Sec. 15.31 or by 
mail addressed to such centers. Although oral requests may be honored, a 
requester may be asked to submit his request in writing.

[[Page 141]]

    (b) Each request must reasonably describe the desired record 
including the name, subject matter, and number or date, where possible, 
so that the record may be identified and located. In order to enable the 
Department to comply with the time limitations set forth in Sec. 15.42, 
the envelope containing a written request and the letter itself should 
both clearly indicate that the subject is a Freedom of Information Act 
request.
    (c) The request shall be accompanied by an agreement to pay a fee to 
be determined in accordance with Sec. 15.14. Under the circumstances 
enumerated in Sec. 15.18, the Department may refuse to furnish records 
before receipt of the appropriate fee. A requester may specify a limit 
for fees, above which the requester is not willing to pay without 
advance consultation with the Department.
    (d) Copies of available records shall be made as promptly as 
possible. Copying service shall be limited to not more than 10 copies of 
any single page. Records which are published or available for sale need 
not be reproduced.

[40 FR 48123, Oct. 14, 1975, as amended at 60 FR 11904, Mar. 3, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 15.42  Time limitations.

    (a) Upon receipt of a request for records, the appropriate office 
will determine within ten working days whether to comply with such 
requests. The office will either agree to provide the requested 
documents, or will notify the requester, in writing, of an adverse 
determination, the reasons therefor, and the right to appeal the denial 
to the:
    (1) General Counsel, with respect to a denial issued by the Office 
of the Executive Secretariat or by the offices in which there is a Field 
Assistant General Counsel; or
    (2) Field Assistant General Counsel, with respect to a denial issued 
by the Field Offices.
    (b) When a request for records is misdirected by the requester, the 
office receiving the request shall:
    (1) Promptly refer it to the appropriate office; and
    (2) Advise the requester that the time of receipt by the appropriate 
office will be the time of receipt for processing purposes.
    (c) A determination by the General Counsel or the Field Assistant 
General Counsel with respect to an appeal under Sec. 15.61 shall be made 
within 20 working days after receipt of the appeal, and shall be 
communicated to the appellant, in writing.
    (d) In unusual circumstances, the General Counsel, or the 
appropriate Field Assistant General Counsel, may extend the time limits 
prescribed in paragraphs (a) and (c) of this section, by written notice 
to the requester setting forth the reasons for the extension and the 
date on which a determination is expected to be dispatched. An extension 
shall not exceed ten working days. As used in this paragraph, unusual 
circumstances means that there is a need:
    (1) To search for and collect the requested records from field 
facilities or other establishments that are separate from the office 
processing the request;
    (2) To search for, collect, and examine appropriately a voluminous 
amount of separate and distinct records that are demanded in a single 
request; or
    (3) For consultation, which shall be conducted with all practicable 
speed, with another agency having a substantial interest in the 
determination of the request, or among two or more organizational units 
of the Department having a substantial interest in the subject matter of 
the request.

[60 FR 11904, Mar. 3, 1995]


<R04>
        Subpart F--Disclosure of Records and Refusal To Disclose


<R05>
Sec. 15.51  Authority to release records or copies.

    The Office of the Executive Secretariat in Headquarters and the FOIA 
liaisons in each Field Office are authorized to release copies of any 
Department records upon written request unless disclosure is clearly not 
appropriate under this part.

[60 FR 11904, Mar. 3, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 15.52  Authority to deny requests for records.

    The officers described in Sec. 15.51, or other official designated 
by the Secretary's Representative, may deny a

[[Page 142]]

request for a record only with the concurrence of the appropriate 
program counsel in Headquarters or counsel in the Field Offices. Any 
denial shall:
    (a) Be made in writing, describing the documents denied and, if 
fewer than 21, listing them specifically;
    (b) Contain a simple reason for the denial, stating the appropriate 
exemption used; and
    (c) Advise of the right to appeal the adverse determination, in 
accordance with Sec. 15.61, to the:
    (1) General Counsel, with respect to a denial issued by the Office 
of Executive Secretariat or by offices in which there is a Field 
Assistant General Counsel; and
    (2) Field Assistant General Counsel, with respect to a denial issued 
by Field Offices.

[60 FR 11904, Mar. 3, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 15.54  Business information.

    (a) In general. Business information provided to the Department by a 
submitter shall not be disclosed pursuant to a FOIA request except in 
accordance with this section.
    (b) Definitions. As used in this section:
    Business information means commercial or financial information 
provided to the Department by a submitter that arguably is protected 
from disclosure under Exemption 4 (42 U.S.C. 552(b)(4)) of the Act.
    Submitter means any person or entity who provides business 
information, directly or indirectly, to the Department. The term 
includes, but is not limited to, corporations, State governments, and 
foreign governments.
    (c) Designation of business information. A submitter's claim that 
certain information is confidential or proprietary should be supported 
by a statement or certification by an officer or authorized 
representative of the submitter that the information is, in fact, 
confidential or proprietary and has not been disclosed to the public. 
All information considered confidential or proprietary by a submitter 
should be clearly designated with a prominent stamp, typed legend, or 
other suitable form of notice, stating ``Confidential Treatment 
Requested by [insert name of submitter]'', which should appear on each 
page or segregable portion of the page. If such marking is impractical, 
a cover sheet prominently marked ``Confidential Treatment Requested by 
[insert name of submitter]'' should be securely attached to the 
information for which confidential treatment is requested. These 
designations shall be deemed to have expired 10 years after the date of 
the submission, unless the submitter requests, and provides reasonable 
justification for, a longer period of designation.
    (d) Notice to submitter. To the extent permitted by law, the 
Department shall provide a submitter with prompt written notice of a 
FOIA request or administrative appeal encompassing its business 
information, unless notice is excused under paragraph (h) of this 
section. Such notice shall afford the submitter an opportunity to object 
to disclosure pursuant to paragraph (f) of this section. The notice 
shall either describe the exact nature of the business information 
requested or provide copies of the records or portions thereof 
containing the business information. The Department will provide this 
notice whenever:
    (1) The information has been designated in good faith by the 
submitter as information deemed protected under Exemption 4; or
    (2) The Department has reason to believe that the information may be 
protected from disclosure under Exemption 4.
    (e) Notice to requester. At the same time the Department notifies 
the submitter, the Department shall also notify the requester that the 
request is subject to the provisions of this section and that the 
submitter is being afforded an opportunity to object to disclosure of 
the information.
    (f) Opportunity to object to disclosure. Through the notice 
described in paragraph (d) of this section, the Department shall afford 
a submitter or its designee 10 Federal working days to provide the 
Department a detailed written statement of the submitter's objection to 
disclosure of any portion of the information it submitted to the 
Department. Such statement shall specify all grounds for withholding any 
of the information and shall demonstrate why the information is a

[[Page 143]]

trade secret or commercial or financial information that is privileged 
or confidential. Conclusory statements that particular information would 
be useful to competitors or would impair sales, or similar statements, 
generally will not be considered sufficient to justify confidential 
treatment. Information provided by a submitter or its designee pursuant 
to this paragraph may itself be subject to disclosure under the FOIA.
    (g) Notice of intent to disclose. The Department shall consider 
carefully a submitter's objections and specific grounds for 
nondisclosure, before determining whether to disclose business 
information. If the Department decides to disclose business information 
over the objection of a submitter, the Department shall forward to both 
the submitter and the requester a written notice of intent to disclose. 
The written notice shall be forwarded 10 Federal working days before the 
specified disclosure date and shall include:
    (1) A statement of the reasons for which the submitter's disclosure 
objections were not sustained;
    (2) A description of the business information to be disclosed; and
    (3) A specified disclosure date.
    (h) Exceptions to the notice requirement. The notice requirements of 
paragraphs (d) and (g) of this section shall not apply if:
    (1) The Department determines that the information should not be 
disclosed;
    (2) The information has been published lawfully or has been made 
available officially to the public;
    (3) Disclosure of the information is required by law (other than the 
Act);
    (4) Disclosure of the information is required by a departmental 
regulation that:
    (i) Was adopted pursuant to notice and public comment;
    (ii) Specifies narrow classes of records submitted to the Department 
that are to be released under the FOIA; and
    (iii) Provides for notice in exceptional circumstances when the 
submitter provides, at the time the information is submitted or a 
reasonable time thereafter, written justification that disclosure of the 
information could reasonably be expected to cause substantial 
competitive harm;
    (5) The information requested was not designated by the submitter as 
exempt from disclosure in accordance with paragraph (c) of this section 
at the time of the submission of the information or a reasonable time 
thereafter, unless the Department has substantial reason to believe that 
the disclosure of the information would cause competitive harm; or
    (6) The designation made by the submitter in accordance with 
paragraph (c) of this section appears obviously frivolous. In such 
circumstances, the Department shall forward to the submitter, 10 Federal 
working days before a specified disclosure date, written notice of any 
final administrative decision to disclose business information.
    (i) Notice of FOIA lawsuit. Whenever a requester brings suit seeking 
to compel disclosure of business information, the Department shall 
promptly notify the submitter.
    (j) Determination of confidentiality. HUD will make no determination 
as to the validity of any request for confidentiality until a request 
for disclosure of the information is received.
    (k) Current mailing address for the submitter. Each submitter shall 
provide to the Department:
    (1) A mailing address for receipt of any notices under this section; 
and
    (2) Notice of any change of address.
    (l) Treatment of confidential information by HUD employees. (1) HUD 
officers and employees shall not, directly or indirectly, use or allow 
the use of business information obtained through or in connection with 
Government employment that has not been made available to the general 
public.
    (2) Except as otherwise provided in this section, HUD officers and 
employees may not disclose business information, except to other HUD 
officers or employees who are properly entitled to such information for 
the performance of their official duties.

[60 FR 11904, Mar. 3, 1995]

[[Page 144]]


<R04>
   Subpart G--Administrative Review of Denial of Requests for Records


<R05>
Sec. 15.61  Administrative appeal.

    (a) Appeal shall be available only from a written denial of a 
request issued under Sec. 15.52, and only when the appeal is filed 
within 30 days of issuance of the denial. An appeal from a denial issued 
by the Office of Executive Secretariat or by offices in which there is a 
Field Assistant General Counsel must be mailed to the Assistant General 
Counsel for Training and Administrative Law, Room 10246, 451 Seventh 
Street, SW, Washington, DC, 20410. An appeal from a denial issued by a 
Field Office must be mailed to the appropriate Field Assistant General 
Counsel. An appeal must include a copy of the original request for 
records; a copy of the written denial of access to those records, and a 
statement of the reasons, circumstances, or arguments advanced in 
support of, or in opposition to, disclosure of the records. The envelope 
containing the appeal should be clearly marked as a Freedom of 
Information Act appeal, so that the Department can comply with the time 
limitations set forth in Sec. 15.42.
    (b) When an appeal is misdirected by the requester, the Office 
receiving the appeal shall:
    (1) Promptly refer it to the:
    (i) Assistant General Counsel for Training and Administrative Law, 
if the denial was issued by the Office of Executive Secretariat or by an 
office in which there is a Field Assistant General Counsel, or
    (ii) Appropriate Field Assistant General Counsel, if the denial was 
issued by a Field Office; and
    (2) Advise the appellant that the time of receipt for processing 
purposes will be the time the appeal is received by the appropriate 
office.
    (c) The appeal determination shall be in writing; constitute final 
administrative action by the Department; and, if the denial is upheld in 
full or in part, include notification of the right to judicial review.

[60 FR 11905, Mar. 3, 1995]


<R04>
 Subpart H--Production in Response to Subpoenas or Demands of Courts or 
                            Other Authorities


<R05>
Sec. 15.71  Purpose and scope.

    This subpart contains the regulations of the Department concerning 
procedures to be followed when a subpoena, order, or other demand 
(hereinafter referred to in this subpart as a demand) of a court or 
other authority is issued for the production or disclosure of: (a) Any 
material contained in the files of the Department, (b) any information 
relating to material contained in the files of the Department, or (c) 
any information or material acquired by any person while such person was 
an employee of the Department as a part of the performance of his or her 
official duties or because of his or her official status. For purposes 
of this subpart, the term employee of the Department includes current 
and former officers and employees of the United States appointed by or 
subject to the supervision of the Secretary, but does not include 
officers and employees covered by part 2004 of this title. Also for 
purposes of this subpart, files of the Department do not include files 
of the Office of Inspector General covered by part 2004 of this title.

[49 FR 11160, Mar. 26, 1984, as amended at 60 FR 58456, Nov. 27, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 15.72  Production or disclosure prohibited unless approved by the Secretary.

    (a) Any demand of a court or other authority or any request to an 
employee of the Department to produce any material contained in the 
files of the Department, or to disclose any information relating to 
material contained in the files of the Department, or to disclose any 
information or produce any material acquired as a part of the 
performance of the employee's official duties or because of the 
employee's official status for use in a legal proceeding, shall state 
with particularity the material sought to be obtained or the information 
sought to be disclosed.
    (b) No employee of the Department shall comply with any such demand 
or

[[Page 145]]

request without the prior approval of the Secretary.
    (c) In determining whether to grant approval for an employee of the 
Department to testify in a legal proceeding, the Secretary shall follow 
the standards set forth in subpart I.
    (d) Where the demand or request seeks only the production of 
documents, the Department's procedure for authentricating documents by a 
keeper of the records shall be the Department's method for response. 
That authentication shall be evidence that the documents are true copies 
of documents in the Department's files.

[52 FR 12160, Apr. 15, 1987]


<R05>
Sec. 15.73  Procedure in the event of a demand for production or disclosure.

    (a) Whenever a demand is made upon an employee of the Department for 
the production of material or the disclosure of information described in 
Sec. 15.71, the employee shall immediately notify the Secretary and 
either the General Counsel or the appropriate Regional Counsel. The 
appropriate Regional Counsel shall mean the Regional Counsel for the 
Regional Office having delegated authority over the project or activity 
with respect to which the information is sought. If possible, the 
Secretary shall be notified before the employee concerned replies to or 
appears before the court or other authority.
    (b) If response to the demand is required before the instructions 
from the Secretary are received, the U.S. Attorney or such other 
attorney as may be designated for the purpose, will appear with the 
employee of the Department upon whom the demand has been made, and will 
furnish the court or other authority with a copy of the regulations 
contained in this subpart and inform the court or other authority that 
the demand has been or is being, as the case may be, referred for prompt 
consideration of the Secretary. The court or other authority shall be 
requested respectfully to stay the demand pending receipt of the 
requested instructions from the Secretary.

[52 FR 12160, Apr. 15, 1987]


<R05>
Sec. 15.74  Procedure in the event of an adverse ruling.

    If the court or other authority declines to stay the effect of the 
demand in response to a request made in accordance with Sec. 15.73(b) 
pending receipt of instructions from the Secretary, or if the court or 
other authority rules that the demand must be complied with irrespective 
of the instructions from the Secretary not to produce the material or 
disclose the information sought, the employee upon whom the demand has 
been made shall respectfully decline to comply with the demand (United 
States ex rel. Toughy v. Ragen, 340 U.S. 462).

[52 FR 12161, Apr. 15, 1987]


<R04>
Subpart I--Testimony of Employees of the Department in Legal Proceedings

    Source: 52 FR 12161, Apr. 15, 1987, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 15.81  Purpose.

    (a) This subpart prescribes the policies and procedures of the 
Department with respect to testimony of its employees as witnesses in 
legal proceedings with respect to material contained in the files of the 
Department or information learned as part of the performance of the 
their official duties or because of their official status.
    (b) For purposes of this subpart, the term employee of the 
Department includes current and former officers and employees of the 
United States appointed by or subject to the supervision of the 
Secretary, but does not include officers and employees covered by part 
2004 of this title.

[52 FR 12161, Apr. 15, 1987, as amended at 60 FR 58457, Nov. 27, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 15.82  Testimony in proceedings in which the United States is a party.

    (a) In any legal proceeding in which the United States is a party, 
an employee of the Department may not be called to testify as an expert 
or opinion witness by any party other than the United States, but may be 
called by such non-federal party to testify as to facts.

[[Page 146]]

    (b) Whenever, in any legal proceeding in which the United States is 
a party, the attorney in charge of presenting the case for the United 
States requests it, the Secretary shall arrange for an employee of the 
Department to testify as a witness for the United States.


<R05>
Sec. 15.83  Legal proceedings among private litigants; general rule.

    In any legal proceeding exclusively among private litigants, no 
employee of the Department may testify as an expert or opinion witness 
as to any matter related to his or her duties or the functions of the 
Department, including the meaning of Departmental documents.


<R05>
Sec. 15.84  Legal proceedings among private litigants; subpoenas.

    Whenever, in a legal proceeding exclusively among private litigants, 
an employee of the Department is served with a subpoena or is requested 
to testify, the procedures set forth in Secs. 15.72--15.74 shall be 
applicable.


<R05>
Sec. 15.85  Legal proceedings among private litigants; expert or opinion testimony.

    If, while testifying in a legal proceeding exclusively among private 
litigants, an employee of the Department is asked for expert or opinion 
testimony, the employee shall decline to answer on the grounds that he 
or she is forbidden to do so by this part.


<R04>
   Subpart J--Processing Request for Declassification and Release of 
                           Classified Material


<R05>
Sec. 15.91  Authority for release or denial of classified material.

    (a) All requests by the public, Government employees, or other 
Government agencies, for the release of classified information shall be 
directed to the Inspector General, who will ensure that:
    (1) All requests are acknowledged within 10 working days.
    (2) The request is immediately coordinated with the original 
classification authority to determine whether the association of that 
authority with the classification of the information requires 
protection.
    (3) In those instances when the answer to paragraph (a)(2) of this 
section is no, requests will be referred, along with the requested 
document and if appropriate any recommendations to withhold, for direct 
handling by the original classification authority. The requester shall 
be advised in writing of this action.
    (4) Whenever it is necessary, by either the original classification 
authority or HUD to deny the declassification and release, in whole or 
part, of the requested information, the requester shall be notified, in 
accordance with Executive Order 12356, of:
    (i) The reason for the denial,
    (ii) The requesters' right to appeal the denial, and
    (iii) The name, title, and address of the appellate authority.

[44 FR 54478, Sept. 20, 1979, as amended at 48 FR 15895, Apr. 13, 1983. 
Redesignated at 52 FR 12161, Apr. 15, 1987]


<R03>
PART 16--IMPLEMENTATION OF THE PRIVACY ACT OF 1974--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
16.1  Purpose and statement of policy.
16.2  Definitions.
16.3  Procedures for inquiries.
16.4  Requests for access; requirements.
16.5  Disclosure of requested information to individuals.
16.6  Initial denial of access.
16.7  Administrative review of initial denial of access.
16.8  Request for correction or amendment to record.
16.9  Agency procedures upon request for correction or amendment of 
          record.
16.10  Appeal of initial adverse agency determination on correction or 
          amendment.
16.11  Disclosure of record to person other than the individual to whom 
          it pertains.
16.12  Fees.
16.13  Penalties.
16.14  General exemptions.
16.15  Specific exemptions.

    Authority: 5 U.S.C. 552(a); 42 U.S.C. 3535(d).

    Source: 40 FR 39729, Aug. 28, 1975, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 16.1  Purpose and statement of policy.

    (a) The purpose of this part is to establish policies and procedures 
for implementing the Privacy Act of 1974 (Pub. L. 93-579), 5 U.S.C. 
552(a). The main objectives are to facilitate full

[[Page 147]]

exercise of rights conferred on individuals under the Act and to insure 
the protection of privacy as to individuals about whom the Department 
maintains records in systems of records under the Act. The Department 
accepts the responsibility to act promptly and in accordance with the 
Act upon receipt of any inquiry, request or appeal from a citizen of the 
United States or an alien lawfully admitted for permanent residence into 
the United States, regardless of the age of the individual.
    (b) Further, the Department accepts the obligations to maintain only 
such information on individuals as is relevant and necessary to the 
performance of its lawful functions, to maintain that information with 
such accuracy, relevancy, timeliness and completeness as is reasonably 
necessary to assure fairness in determinations made by the Department 
about the individual, to obtain information from the individual to the 
extent practicable, and to take every reasonable step to protect that 
information from unwarranted disclosure. The Department will maintain no 
record describing how an individual exercises rights guaranteed by the 
First Amendment unless expressly authorized by statute or by the 
individual about whom the record is maintained or unless pertinent to 
and within the scope of an authorized law enforcement activity.
    (c) This part applies to all organizational components in the 
Department in order to assure the maximum amount of uniformity and 
consistency within the Department in its implementation of the Act.
    (d) The Assistant Secretary for Administration shall be responsible 
for carrying out the requirements of this part, for issuing such orders 
and directives internal to the Department as are necessary for full 
compliance with the Act, and for effecting publication of all required 
notices concerning systems of records.
    (e) Requests involving information pertaining to an individual which 
is in a record or file but not within the scope of a System of Records 
Notice published in the Federal Register are outside the scope of this 
part. Requests for departmental records will be considered to determine 
whether processing under this part, part 15, or both is most 
appropriate, notwithstanding the requester's characterization of the 
request, as follows:
    (1) A Privacy Act request from an individual for records about that 
individual and not contained in a Privacy Act Records System shall be 
considered a Freedom of Information Act request and processed under HUD 
Freedom of Information Act regulations (24 CFR part 15) to the extent 
that the requester has provided the Department a reasonable description 
of the documents requested. When a request for records is so considered 
as a Freedom of Information Act request, the Privacy Act Officer shall 
promptly refer it to the head of the appropriate organizational unit in 
accordance with HUD FOIA Regulations and shall advise the requester that 
time of receipt for processing purposes will be the time when it is 
received by the appropriate official.
    (2) A Freedom of Information Act request from an individual for 
records about that individual contained in a Privacy Act Records System 
shall be processed as follows:
    (i) If the request in whole or in part contains a reasonable 
description of any HUD document, processing shall be carried out 
pursuant to HUD FOIA Regulations.
    (ii) If the request in whole or in part does not contain a 
reasonable description of any HUD document, but does provide sufficient 
information under HUD Privacy Act Regulations to undertake a Privacy Act 
Records System search, the Department will provide full access under HUD 
Privacy Act Regulations. In this situation, the Department will comply 
with the deadlines for response set forth in the Privacy Act and HUD 
implementing regulations. In that event, an explanation will be provided 
to the requester advising that the request did not contain a reasonable 
description of a particular document as required under the FOIA and 
offering to process the request under FOIA procedures upon receipt of 
additional information sufficient to constitute a reasonable 
description.
    (3) A Freedom of Information Act request from an individual for 
records about another individual contained in a Privacy

[[Page 148]]

Act Records System shall be processed as follows: When an exemption 
under subsection (b) of FOIA is available, the Privacy Act governs the 
public interest determination under HUD FOIA Regulations (24 CFR 15.21) 
and compels the withholding of such documents unless: (i) The subject of 
those records consents to their release or (ii) disclosure comes within 
one of the subsections of 5 U.S.C. Sec. 552a(b).
    (4) A Privacy Act request from an individual for records about 
another individual shall be processed as follows: Except as expressly 
permitted in this part, requests by persons who are not the subject of a 
record contained in a Privacy Act Records System shall be outside the 
scope of this part. If the request satisfies the Freedom of Information 
Act requirement that requested records be reasonably described, the 
Privacy Act Officer shall consider the requests as a Freedom of 
Information Act request and shall proceed as in Sec. 16.1(e)(1) of this 
section.

[40 FR 39729, Aug. 28, 1975, as amended at 41 FR 13917, Apr. 1, 1976]


<R05>
Sec. 16.2  Definitions.

    (a) The definitions of 5 U.S.C. 552a apply in this part.
    (b) As used in this part:
    (1) Act means the Privacy Act of 1974, Pub. L. 93-579.
    (2) Privacy Act Officer means those officials, identified in 
Appendix A to this part, or their designees, who are authorized to 
receive and act upon inquiries, requests for access, and requests for 
correction or amendment.
    (3) Privacy Appeals Officer means the General Counsel.
    (4) Inquiry means a request by an individual that the Department 
determine whether it has any record in a system of records which 
pertains to that individual.
    (5) Request for access means a request by an individual or guardian 
to inspect and/or copy and/or obtain a copy of a record which is in a 
particular system of records and which pertains to that individual.
    (6) Request for correction or amendment means the request by an 
individual or guardian that the Department change (either by correction, 
addition or deletion) a particular record in a system of records which 
pertains to that individual.
    (7) Appeal means the request by an individual that an initial denial 
of a request for access or correction or amendment by that individual be 
reviewed and reversed.

[40 FR 39729, Aug. 28, 1975, as amended at 41 FR 13917, Apr. 1, 1976; 61 
FR 5204, Feb. 9, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 16.3  Procedures for inquiries.

    (a) Any individual, regardless of age, may submit an inquiry to the 
Department. The inquiry should be made either in person at the office 
of, or by mail addressed to, the appropriate Privacy Act Officer. 
Although oral requests may be honored, a requester may be asked to 
submit his request in writing. The envelope containing the request and 
the letter itself should both clearly indicate that the subject is a 
``PRIVACY ACT INQUIRY''. If an individual believes the Department 
maintains a record pertaining to that individual but does not know which 
system of records might contain such a record and/or which 
organizational component of the Department maintains the system of 
records, assistance in person or by mail will be provided at the first 
address listed in Appendix A to this part.
    (b)(1) An inquiry should contain the following information:
    (i) Name, address and telephone number of the individual making the 
request;
    (ii) Name, address and telephone number of the individual to whom 
the record pertains, if the requesting individual is either the parent 
of a minor or the legal guardian of the individual to whom the record 
pertains;
    (iii) A certified or authenticated copy of documents establishing 
parentage or guardianship;
    (iv) Whether the individual to whom the record pertains is a citizen 
of the United States or an alien lawfully admitted for permanent 
residence in to the United States;
    (v) Name of the system of records, as published in the Federal 
Register;
    (vi) Location of the system of records, as published in the Federal 
Register;
    (vii) Such additional information as the individual knows will or 
believes

[[Page 149]]

might assist the Department in responding to the inquiry (for example, 
the individual's past or present relationship with the Department, e.g. 
mortgagor, contractor, employee, including relevant dates) and in 
verifying the individual's identity (for example, date of birth, place 
of birth, names of parents, place of work, dates of employment, position 
title, etc.);
    (viii) Date of inquiry; and,
    (ix) Individual's signature.

The Department reserves the right to require compliance with the 
identification procedures appearing at Sec. 16.4(d) where circumstances 
warrant.
    (2) In compliance with 5 U.S.C. 552a (e)(3) each individual 
supplying the information in accordance with paragraph (b)(1) of this 
section hereby is informed that:
    (i) The authority authorizing solicitation of the information is 5 
U.S.C. 552a, disclosure is voluntary, and no penalty is attached for 
failure to respond;
    (ii) The principal purpose for which the information is intended to 
be used is processing the inquiry under the Act;
    (iii) The routine uses which may be made of the information are the 
routine uses appearing as a prefatory statement to the Department's 
notice of systems of records published in the Federal Register; and,
    (iv) The effects of not providing all or any part of the information 
may delay, or in some cases make impossible, the Department's processing 
of the action on the request under the Act.
    (3) If, having been made aware of the contents of paragraph (b)(2) 
of this section, an individual submits the information listed in 
paragraph (b)(1) of this section, he or she will be deemed to have made 
the submission on a purely voluntary and consentual basis.
    (c) When an inquiry is misdirected by the requester, or not 
addressed as specified in paragraph (a) of this section, the Department 
official receiving same shall make reasonable effort to identify, and 
promptly refer it to, the appropriate Privacy Act Officer and the time 
of receipt for processing purposes will be the time when it is received 
by the Privacy Act Officer.
    (d) When an inquiry fails to provide necessary information as set 
forth in paragraph (b) of this section, the requester shall be advised 
that the time of receipt for processing purposes will be the time when 
the additional necessary information is received by the Privacy Act 
Officer.
    (e) Each inquiry received shall be acted upon promptly by the 
responsible Privacy Act Officer. Every effort will be made to respond 
within ten days (excluding Saturdays, Sundays and holidays) of the date 
of receipt. If a response cannot be made within ten days, the Privacy 
Act Officer shall send an acknowledgement during that period providing 
information on the status of the inquiry. The Privacy Act Officer may 
indicate that additional information would facilitate processing or that 
further information is necessary to process the inquiry.


<R05>
Sec. 16.4  Requests for access; requirements.

    (a) Any individual, regardless of age, may submit to the Department 
a request for access to records of the Department. The request should be 
made either in person at the Office of, or by mail addressed to, the 
responsible Privacy Act Officer identified in Appendix A to this part. 
Although oral requests may be honored, a requester may be asked to 
submit his request in writing. The envelope containing the request and 
the letter itself should both clearly indicate that the subject is a 
PRIVACY ACT REQUEST FOR ACCESS TO RECORDS.
    (b) When a request for access to records is misdirected by the 
requester, or not addressed as specified in paragraph (a) of this 
section, the Department official receiving same shall promptly refer it 
to the appropriate Privacy Act Officer and the time of receipt for 
processing purposes will be the time when it is received by that 
official.
    (c) When a request for access to records fails to provide necessary 
information as set forth in paragraph (b) of this section the requester 
shall be advised that the time of receipt for processing purposes will 
be the time when the additional necessary information is received by the 
appropriate official.

[[Page 150]]

    (d) The requirements for identification of individuals seeking 
access to records are as follows:
    (1) In person. Each individual making a request in person shall be 
required to present satisfactory proof of identity. The means of proof, 
in the order of preference and priority, are:
    (i) A document bearing the individual's photograph (for example, 
passport or military or civilian identification card);
    (ii) A document bearing the individual's signature (for example, 
driver's license, social security card, unemployment insurance book, 
employer's identification card, national credit card and professional, 
craft or union membership card); and
    (iii) A document bearing neither the photograph nor the signature of 
the individual (for example, a Medicaid card). In the event the 
individual can provide no suitable documentation of identity, the 
Department will require a signed statement asserting the individual's 
identity and stipulating that the individual understands the penalty 
provision of 5 U.S.C. 552a(i)(3). That penalty provision also appears at 
Sec. 16.13(a). In order to avoid any unwarranted disclosure of an 
individual's records, the Department reserves the right to determine to 
its satisfaction whether proof of identity offered by any individual is 
adequate.
    (2) Not in person. If the individual making a request does not 
appear in person before a Privacy Act Officer, the information set forth 
in Sec. 16.3(b)(1) and a certificate of a notary public or equivalent 
officer empowered to administer oaths must accompany the request. The 
certificate within or attached to the letter must be substantially in 
accord with the following text:

City of --------------------
County of --------------------:

    ss -------------------- (name of individual), who affixed (his) 
(her) signature below in my presence, came before me, a ---------------- 
(title), in and for the aforesaid County and State, this ------------ 
day of ------------, 19--, and established (his) (her) identity to my 
satisfaction.

    My commission expires --------------------.

------------------------------------
            (signature)


If the request follows inquiry under Sec. 16.3, this should be indicated 
in the request for access in order to facilitate processing.
    (3) Parents of minors and legal guardians. An individual acting as 
the parent of a minor or the legal guardian of the individual to whom a 
record pertains shall establish his or her personal identity in the same 
manner prescribed in either paragraph (d) (1) or (2) of this section. In 
addition, such other individual shall establish his or her 
representative capacity of parent or legal guardian. In the case of the 
parent of a minor, the proof of identity shall be a certified or 
authenticated copy of the minor's birth certificate. In the case of a 
legal guardian of an individual who has been declared incompetent due to 
physical or mental incapacity or age by a court of competent 
jurisdiction, the proof of identity shall be a certified or 
authenticated copy of the court's order. A parent or legal guardian may 
act only for a living individual, not for a decedent. A parent or legal 
guardian may be accompanied during personal access to a record by 
another individual, provided the provisions of Sec. 16.5(e) are 
satisfied.
    (e) When the provisions of this part are alleged to have the effect 
of impeding an individual in exercising his or her right to access, the 
Department will consider alternative suggestions from an individual 
making a request, regarding proof of identity and access to records.
    (f) An individual shall not be required to state a reason or 
otherwise justify his or her request for access to a record.


<R05>
Sec. 16.5  Disclosure of requested information to individuals.

    (a) Each request received shall be acted upon promptly by the 
responsible Privacy Act Officer. Every effort will be made to respond 
within ten days (excluding Saturdays, Sundays and holidays) of the date 
of receipt. If a response cannot be made within ten days due to unusual 
circumstances, the Privacy Act Officer shall send an acknowledgement 
during that period providing

[[Page 151]]

information on the status of the request and asking for such further 
information as may be necessary to process the request. Unusual 
circumstances shall include circumstances where a search for and 
collection of requested records from inactive storage, field facilities 
or other establishments are required, cases where a voluminous amount of 
data is involved, instances where information on other individuals must 
be separated or expunged from the particular record, and cases where 
consultations with other agencies having a substantial interest in the 
determination of the request are necessary.
    (b) Grant of access--(1) Notification. An individual shall be 
granted access to a record pertaining to him or her, except where the 
provisions of Sec. 16.6 apply. The Privacy Act Officer shall notify the 
individual of such determination and provide the following information:
    (i) The methods of access, as set forth in paragraph (b)(2) of this 
section;
    (ii) The place at which the record may be inspected;
    (iii) The earliest date on which the record may be inspected and the 
period of time that the records will remain available for inspection 
and/or the estimated date by which a copy of the record could be mailed 
and the estimate of fees pursuant to Sec. 16.12;
    (iv) The fact that the individual, if he or she wishes, may be 
accompanied by another individual during personal access, subject to 
procedures set forth in paragraph (e) of this section; and
    (v) Any additional requirements needed to grant access to a specific 
record.
    (2) Methods of access. The following methods of access to records by 
an individual may be available depending on the circumstances of a given 
situation:
    (i) Inspection in person may be had in the office specified by the 
Privacy Act Officer granting access during hours indicated by the 
Privacy Act Officer;
    (ii) Transfer of records to a Federal facility more convenient to 
the individual may be arranged, but only if the Privacy Act Officer 
determines that a suitable facility is available, that the individual's 
access can be properly supervised at the facility, and that transmittal 
of the records to that facility will not unduly interfere with 
operations of the Department or involve unreasonable costs, in terms of 
both money and manpower; and
    (iii) Copies may be mailed at the request of the individual, subject 
to payment of the fees prescribed in Sec. 16.12. The Department, at its 
own initiative, may elect to provide a copy by mail, in which case no 
fee will be charged the individual.
    (c) The Department shall supply such other information and 
assistance at the time of access as to make the record intelligible to 
the individual.
    (d) The Department reserves the right to limit access to copies and 
abstracts of original records, rather than the original records. This 
election would be appropriate, for example, when the record is in an 
automated data media such as tape or disc, when the record contains 
information on other individuals, and when deletion of information is 
permissible under exemptions (for example, 5 U.S.C. 552a(k)(2)). In no 
event shall original records of the Department be made available to the 
individual except under the immediate supervision of the Privacy Act 
Officer or his designee. It is a crime to conceal, mutilate, obliterate, 
or destroy any record filed in a public office, or to attempt to do any 
of the foregoing, Title 18, United States Code, 2701(a).
    (e) Any individual who requests access to a record pertaining to 
that individual may be accompanied by another individual of his or her 
choice. Accompanied includes discussion of the record in the presence of 
the other individual. The individual to whom the record pertains shall 
authorize the presence of the other individual by a signed and dated 
document which includes the name of the other individual and 
specifically describes the record to which access is sought. The other 
individual shall sign the authorization in the presence of the Privacy 
Act Officer. An individual shall not be required to state a reason or 
otherwise justify his or her decision to be accompanied by another 
individual during personal access to a record.

[[Page 152]]


<R05>
Sec. 16.6  Initial denial of access.

    (a) Grounds. Access by an individual to a record which pertains to 
that individual will be denied only upon a determination by the Privacy 
Act Officer that:
    (1) The record is subject to an exemption under Sec. 16.14, 
Sec. 16.15 or to an exemption determined by another agency noticing the 
system of records;
    (2) The record is information compiled in reasonable anticipation of 
a civil action or proceeding; or
    (3) The individual unreasonably has failed to comply with the 
procedural requirements of this part.
    (b) Notification. The Privacy Act Officer shall give notice of 
denial of access to records to the individual in writing and shall 
include the following information:
    (1) The Privacy Act Officer's name and title or position;
    (2) The date of the denial;
    (3) The reasons for the denial, including citation to the 
appropriate section of the Act and/or this part;
    (4) The individual's opportunities, if any, for further 
administrative consideration, including the identity and address of the 
appropriate Privacy Appeals Officer. If no further administrative 
consideration within the Department is available, the notice shall state 
that the denial is administratively final; and,
    (5) If stated to be administratively final; and, within the 
Department, the individual's right to judicial review under 5 U.S.C. 
552a(g)(1), as amended by 5 U.S.C. 552a(g)(5).

[40 FR 39729, Aug. 28, 1975, as amended at 42 FR 20297, Apr. 19, 1977]


<R05>
Sec. 16.7  Administrative review of initial denial of access.

    (a) Review shall be available only from a written denial of a 
request for access issued under Sec. 16.6(a) (2) or (3) and only if a 
written request for review is filed within thirty calendar days after 
the issuance of the written denial.
    (b) A request for review shall be addressed to the Privacy Appeals 
Officer identified in the initial denial, which official is authorized 
to make final determinations. The envelope containing the request for 
review and the letter itself should both clearly indicate that the 
subject is a PRIVACY ACT REQUEST FOR REVIEW.
    (c) When a request for review is misdirected by the requester, or 
not addressed as specified in paragraph (b) of this section, the 
Department official receiving same shall promptly refer it to the 
Privacy Appeals Officer and the time of receipt for processing purposes 
will be the time when it is received by the appropriate official.
    (d) When a request for review fails to provide necessary information 
as set forth in paragraph (e) of this section, the requester shall be 
given reasonable opportunity to amend the request and shall be advised 
that the time of receipt for processing purposes will be the time when 
the additional necessary information is received by the appropriate 
official.
    (e) The filing of a request for review may be accomplished by 
mailing to the Privacy Appeals Officer a copy of the request for access, 
if in writing; a copy of the written denial issued under Sec. 16.6; and 
a statement of the reasons why the initial denial is believed to be in 
error. The appeal shall be signed by the individual.
    (f) No hearing will be allowed in connection with administrative 
review of an initial denial of access.
    (g) The Privacy Appeals Officer shall act upon the appeal and issue 
a final determination in writing not later than thirty days (excluding 
Saturdays, Sundays and holidays) from the date on which the appeal is 
received; provided, that the Privacy Appeals officer may extend the 
thirty days upon deciding that a fair and equitable review cannot be 
made within that period, but only if the individual is advised in 
writing of the reason for the extension and the estimated date by which 
a final determination will issue, which estimated date should not be 
later than the sixtieth day (excluding Saturdays, Sundays and holidays) 
after receipt of the appeal unless there exist unusual circumstances, as 
described in Sec. 16.5(a).
    (h) The decision after review will be in writing, will constitute 
final action of the Department on a request for access, and, if the 
denial of the request is in whole or part upheld, the Department shall 
notify the person making

[[Page 153]]

the request of his right to judicial review under 5 U.S.C. 552a(g)(1), 
as amended by 5 U.S.C. 552a(g)(5).


<R05>
Sec. 16.8  Request for correction or amendment to record.

    (a) Any individual, regardless of age, may submit to the Department 
a request for correction or amendment of a record pertaining to that 
individual. The request should be made either in person at the office 
of, or by mail addressed to, the Privacy Act Officer who processed the 
individual's request for access to the record. Although an oral request 
may be honored, a requester may be asked to submit his or her request in 
writing. The envelope containing the request and the letter itself 
should both clearly indicate that the subject is a PRIVACY ACT REQUEST 
FOR CORRECTION OR AMENDMENT.
    (b) When a request for correction or amendment is misdirected by the 
requester, or not addressed as specified in paragraph (a) of this 
section, the Department official receiving same shall make reasonable 
effort to identify, and promptly refer it to, the appropriate Privacy 
Act Officer and the time of receipt for processing purposes will be the 
time when it is received by the appropriate official.
    (c) When a request for correction or amendment fails to provide 
necessary information as set forth in paragraph (e) of this section, the 
requester shall be given reasonable opportunity to answer the request 
and shall be advised that the time of receipt for processing purposes 
will be the time when the additional necessary information is received 
by the appropriate official.
    (d) Since the request, in all cases, will follow a request for 
access under Sec. 16.4, the individual's identity will be established by 
his or her signature on the request.
    (e) A request for correction or amendment should include the 
following:
    (1) A specific identification of the record sought to be corrected 
or amended (for example, description, title, date, paragraph, sentence, 
line and words);
    (2) The specific wording to be deleted, if any;
    (3) The specific wording to be inserted or added, if any, and the 
exact place at which it is to be inserted or added; and
    (4) A statement of the basis for the requested correction or 
amendment, with all available supporting documents and materials which 
substantiate the statement.
    (f) The provisions of Sec. 16.3(b) (2) and (3) apply to the 
information obtained under paragraph (e) of this section.


<R05>
Sec. 16.9  Agency procedures upon request for correction or amendment of record.

    (a)(1) Not later than ten days (excluding Saturdays, Sundays and 
holidays) after receipt of a request to correct or amend a record, the 
Privacy Act Officer shall send an acknowledgment providing an estimate 
of time within which action will be taken on the request and asking for 
such further information as may be necessary to process the request. The 
estimate of time may take into account unusual circumstances as 
described in Sec. 16.5(a). No acknowledgment will be sent if the request 
can be reviewed, processed, and the individual notified of the results 
of review (either compliance or denial) within the ten days. Requests 
filed in person will be acknowledged at the time submitted.
    (2) Promptly after acknowledging receipt of a request, or after 
receiving such further information as might have been requested, or 
after arriving at a decision within the time prescribed in 
Sec. 16.9(a)(1), the Privacy Act Officer shall either:
    (i) Make the requested correction or amendment and advise the 
individual in writing of such action, providing either a copy of the 
corrected or amended record or a statement as to the means whereby the 
correction or amendment was effected in cases where a copy cannot be 
provided; or,
    (ii) Inform the individual in writing that his or her request is 
denied and provide the following information:
    (A) The Privacy Act Officer's name and title and position;
    (B) The date of the denial;
    (C) The reasons for the denial, including citation to the 
appropriate sections of the Act and this part; and,

[[Page 154]]

    (D) The procedures for appeal of the denial as set forth in 
Sec. 16.10, including the name and address of the Privacy Appeals 
Officer. The term promptly in this Sec. 16.9 means within thirty days 
(excluding Saturdays, Sundays and holidays). If the Privacy Act Officer 
cannot make the determination within thirty days, the individual will be 
advised in writing of the reason therefor and of the estimated date by 
which the determination will be made.
    (b) Whenever an individual's record is corrected or amended pursuant 
to a request by that individual, the Privacy Act Officer shall see to 
the notification of all persons and agencies to which the corrected or 
amended portion of the record had been disclosed prior to its correction 
or amendment, if an accounting of such disclosure was made as required 
by the Act. The notification shall require a recipient agency 
maintaining the record to acknowledge receipt of the notification, to 
correct or amend the record and to appraise any agency or person to 
which it had disclosed the record of the substance of the correction or 
amendment.
    (c) The following criteria will be considered by the Privacy Act 
Officer in reviewing a request for correction or amendment:
    (1) The sufficiency of the evidence submitted by the individual;
    (2) The factual accuracy of the information;
    (3) The relevance and necessity of the information in terms of the 
purpose for which it was collected;
    (4) The timeliness and currency of the information in terms of the 
purpose for which it was collected:
    (5) The completeness of the information in terms of the purpose for 
which it was collected:
    (6) The possibility that denial of the request could unfairly result 
in determinations adverse to the individual;
    (7) The character of the record sought to be corrected or amended; 
and
    (8) The propriety and feasibility of complying with the specific 
means of correction or amendment requested by the individual.
    (d) The Department will not undertake to gather evidence for the 
individual, but does reserve the right to verify the evidence which the 
individual submits.
    (e) Correction or amendment of a record requested by an individual 
will be denied only upon a determination by the Privacy Act Officer 
that:
    (1) There has been a failure to establish, by the evidence 
presented, the propriety of the correction or amendment in light of the 
criteria set forth in paragraph (c) of this section;
    (2) The record sought to be corrected or amended was compiled in a 
terminated judicial, quasi-judicial, legislative or quasi-legislative 
proceeding to which the individual was a party or participant;
    (3) The information in the record sought to be corrected or amended, 
or the record sought to be corrected or amended, is the subject of a 
pending judicial, quasi-judicial or quasi-legislative proceeding to 
which the individual is a party or participant;
    (4) The correction or amendment would violate a duly enacted statute 
or promulgated regulation; or,
    (5) The individual unreasonably has failed to comply with the 
procedural requirements of this part.
    (f) If a request is partially granted and partially denied, the 
Privacy Act Officer shall follow the appropriate procedures of this 
section as to the records within the grant and the records within the 
denial.


<R05>
Sec. 16.10  Appeal of initial adverse agency determination on correction or amendment.

    (a) Appeal shall be available only from a written denial of a 
request for correction or amendment of a record issued under Sec. 16.9, 
and only if a written appeal is filed within thirty calendar days after 
the issuance of the written denial.
    (b) Each appeal shall be addressed to the Privacy Appeals Officer 
identified in the written denial. The envelope containing the appeal and 
the letter itself should both clearly indicate that the subject is 
PRIVACY ACT APPEAL.
    (c) When an appeal is misdirected by the requester, or not addressed 
as specified in paragraph (b) of this section, the Department official 
receiving same shall promptly refer it to the appropriate Privacy 
Appeals Officer and the

[[Page 155]]

time of receipt for processing purposes will be the time when it is 
received by the appropriate official.
    (d) When an appeal fails to provide the necessary information as set 
forth in paragraph (e) of this section, the requester shall be advised 
that the time for receipt for processing purposes will be the time when 
the additional necessary information is received by the appropriate 
official.
    (e) The individual's appeal papers shall include the following: A 
copy of the original request for correction or amendment; a copy of the 
initial denial; and a statement of the reasons why the initial denial is 
believed to be in error. The appeal shall be signed by the individual. 
The record which the individual requests be corrected or amended will be 
supplied by the Privacy Act Officer who issued the initial denial. While 
the foregoing normally will comprise the entire record on appeal, the 
Privacy Appeals Officer may seek additional information necessary to 
assure that the final determination is fair and equitable and, in such 
instances, the additional information will be disclosed to the 
individual to the greatest extent possible and an opportunity provided 
for comment thereon.
    (f) No hearing on appeal will be allowed.
    (g) The Privacy Appeals Officer shall act upon the appeal and issue 
a final Department determination in writing not later than thirty days 
(excluding Saturdays, Sundays and holidays) from the date on which the 
appeal is received; provided, that the Privacy Appeals Officer may 
extend the thirty days upon deciding that a fair and equitable review 
cannot be made within that period, but only if the individual is advised 
in writing of the reason for the extension and the estimated date by 
which a final determination will issue (which estimated date should not 
be later than the sixtieth day (excluding Saturdays, Sundays and 
holidays) after receipt of the appeal unless unusual circumstances, as 
described in Sec. 16.5(a), are met).
    (h) If the appeal is determined in favor of the individual, the 
final determination shall include the specific corrections or amendments 
to be made and a copy thereof shall be transmitted promptly both to the 
individual and to the Privacy Act Officer who issued the initial denial. 
Upon receipt of such final determination, the Privacy Act Officer 
promptly shall take the actions set forth in Sec. 16.9(a)(2)(i) and 
Sec. 16.9(b).
    (i) If the appeal is denied, the final determination shall be 
transmitted promptly to the individual and shall state the reasons for 
the denial. The notice of final determination also shall inform the 
individual of the following information:
    (1) The right of the individual to file a concise statement of 
reasons for disagreeing with the final determination. The statement 
ordinarily should not exceed one page and the Department reserves the 
right to reject a statement of excessive length. Such a statement shall 
be filed with the Privacy Appeals Officer. It should identify the date 
of the final determination and be signed by the individual. The Privacy 
Appeals Officer shall acknowledge receipt of such statement and inform 
the individual of the date on which it was received;
    (2) The fact that any such disagreement statement filed by the 
individual will be noted in the disputed record and that a copy of the 
statement will be provided to persons and agencies to which the record 
is disclosed subsequent to the date of receipt of such statement;
    (3) The fact that prior recipients of the disputed record will be 
provided a copy of any statement of the dispute to the extent that an 
accounting of disclosures, as required by the Act, was made;
    (4) The fact that the Department will append to any such 
disagreement statement filed by the individual, a copy of the final 
determination or summary thereof which also will be provided to persons 
and agencies to which the disagreement statement is disclosed; and,
    (5) The right of the individual to judicial review of the final 
determination under 5 U.S.C. 552a(g)(1)(A), as limited by 5 U.S.C. 
552a(g)(5).
    (j) In making the final determination, the Privacy Appeals Officer 
shall employ the criteria set forth in paragraph 16.9(c) and shall deny 
an appeal

[[Page 156]]

only on the grounds set forth in Sec. 16.9(e).
    (k) If an appeal is partially granted and partially denied, the 
Privacy Appeals Officer shall follow the appropriate procedures of this 
section as to the records within the grant and the records within the 
denial.
    (l) Although a copy of the final determination or a summary thereof 
will be treated as part of the individual's record for purposes of 
disclosure in instances where the individual has filed a disagreement 
statement, it will not be subject to correction or amendment by the 
individual.
    (m) The provisions of Sec. 16.3(b) (2) and (3) apply to the 
information obtained under paragraphs (e) and (i)(1) of this section.


<R05>
Sec. 16.11  Disclosure of record to person other than the individual to whom it pertains.

    (a) The Department may disclose a record pertaining to an individual 
to a person other than the individual only in the following instances:
    (1) Upon written request by the individual, including authorization 
under Sec. 16.5(e);
    (2) With the prior written consent of the individual;
    (3) To a parent or legal guardian under 5 U.S.C. 552a(h); and,
    (4) When required by the Act and not covered explicitly by the 
provisions of 5 U.S.C. 552a(b); and,
    (5) When permitted under 5 U.S.C. 552a(b) (1) through (11), which 
read as follows:

    (1) To those officers and employees of the agency which maintains 
the record who have a need for the record in the performance of their 
duties;
    (2) Required under section 552 of this title;
    (3) For a routine use as defined in subsection (a)(7) of this 
section and described under subsection (e)(4)(D) of this section;
    (4) To the Bureau of the Census for purposes of planning or carrying 
out a census or survey or related activity pursuant to the provisions of 
title 13;
    (5) To a recipient who has provided the agency with advance adequate 
written assurance that the record will be used solely as a statistical 
research or reporting record, and the record is to be transferred in a 
form that is not individually identifiable;
    (6) To the National Archives of the United States as a record which 
has sufficient historical or other value to warrant its continued 
preservation by the United States Government, or for evaluation by the 
Administrator of General Services or his designee to determine whether 
the record has such value;
    (7) To another agency or to an instrumentality of any governmental 
jurisdiction within or under the control of the United States for a 
civil or criminal law enforcement activity if the activity is authorized 
by law, and if the head of the agency or instrumentality has made a 
written request to the agency which maintains the record specifying the 
particular portion desired and the law enforcement activity for which 
the record is sought;
    (8) To a person pursuant to a showing of compelling circumstances 
affecting the health or safety of an individual if upon such disclosure 
notification is transmitted to the last known address of such 
individual;
    (9) To either House of Congress, or, to the extent of matter within 
its jurisdiction, any committee or subcommittee thereof, any joint 
committee of Congress or subcommittee of any such joint committee;
    (10) To the Comptroller General, or any of his authorized 
representatives, in the course of the performance of the duties of the 
General Accounting Office; or
    (11) Pursuant to the order of a court of competent jurisdiction.

    (b) The situations referred to in paragraph (a)(4) of this section 
include the following:
    (1) 5 U.S.C. 552a(c)(4) requires dissemination of a corrected or 
amended record or notation of a disagreement statement by the Department 
in certain circumstances:
    (2) 5 U.S.C. 552(a)(g) authorizes civil action by an individual and 
requires disclosure by the Department or the court;
    (3) Section 5(e)(2) of the Act authorizes release of any records or 
information by the Department to the Privacy Protection Study Commission 
upon request of the Chairman; and
    (4) Section 6 of the Act authorizes the Office of Management and 
Budget to provide the Department with continuing oversight and 
assistance in implementation of the Act.
    (c) The Department shall make an accounting of each disclosure of 
any record contained in a system of records in accordance with 5 U.S.C. 
552a(c) (1) and (2). Except for a disclosure made under 5 U.S.C. 
552a(b)(7), the Privacy Act Officer shall make such accounting available 
to any individual, insofar as

[[Page 157]]

it pertains to that individual, on request submitted in accordance with 
Sec. 16.4. The Privacy Act Officer shall make reasonable efforts to 
notify any individual when any record in a system of records is 
disclosed to any person under compulsory legal process, promptly upon 
being informed that such process has become a matter of public record.


<R05>
Sec. 16.12  Fees.

    (a) The only fees to be charged to or collected from an individual 
under the provisions of this part are for copying records at the request 
of the individual.
    (1) No fees shall be charged or collected for the following: Search 
for and retrieval of the records; review of the records; copying at the 
initiative of the Department without a request from the individual; 
transportation of records and personnel; and first class postage.
    (2) It is the policy of the Department to provide an individual with 
one copy of each record corrected or amended pursuant to his or her 
request without charge as evidence of the correction or amendment.
    (3) As requested by the United States Civil Service Commission in 
its published regulations implementing the Act, the Department will 
charge no fee to an individual who requests copies of a personnel record 
covered by that Commission's Government-wide published notice of systems 
of records. However, when such records are voluminous and the cost of 
copying would be in excess of five dollars ($5) the Department may, in 
its discretion, charge a fee.
    (b) The copying fees prescribed by paragraph (a) of this section 
are:

$0.10 Each copy of each page, up to 8 \1/2\" x 14" made by photocopy or 
similar process.
$0.20 Each page of computer printout without regard to the number of 
carbon copies concurrently printed.

    (c) Payment of fees under this section shall be made in cash, or 
preferably by check or money order payable to the ``Treasurer of the 
United States.'' Payment shall be delivered or sent to the office stated 
in the billing notice or, if none is stated, to the Privacy Act Officer 
processing the request. Payment may be required in the form of a 
certified check in appropriate circumstances. Postage stamps will not be 
accepted.
    (d) A copying fee totaling $1 or less shall be waived, but the 
copying fees for contemporaneous requests by the same individual shall 
be aggregated to determine the total fee. A copying fee shall not be 
charged or collected, or alternatively, it may be reduced when such 
action is determined by the Privacy Act Officer to be in the public 
interest.
    (e) Special and additional services provided at the request of the 
individual, such as certification or authentication, postal insurance 
and special mailing arrangement costs, will be charged to the individual 
in accordance with other published regulations of the Department 
pursuant to statute (for example, 31 U.S.C. 433a).
    (f) This section applies only to individuals making requests under 
this part. All other persons shall remain subject to fees and charges 
prescribed by other and appropriate authorities.

[40 FR 39729, Aug. 28, 1975, as amended at 42 FR 29479, June 9, 1977]


<R05>
Sec. 16.13  Penalties.

    (a) The Act provides, in pertinent part:

    Any person who knowingly and willfully requests or obtains any 
record concerning an individual from an agency under false pretences 
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and fined not more than $5,000. (5 
U.S.C. 552a(i)(3))

    (b) A person who falsely or fraudulently attempts to obtain records 
under the Act may also be subject to prosecution under such other 
criminal statutes as 18 U.S.C. 494, 495 and 1001.


<R05>
Sec. 16.14  General exemptions.

    (a) Individuals may not have access to records maintained by the 
Department but which were provided by another agency which has 
determined by regulation that such information is subject to general 
exemption under 5 U.S.C. 552a(j). If such exempt records are within a 
request for access, the Department will advise the individual of their 
existence and of the name and address of the source agency. For any 
further information concerning the record

[[Page 158]]

and the exemption, the individual must contact that source agency.
    (b) The Secretary of Housing and Urban Development has determined 
that the Office of the Assistant Inspector General for Investigation 
performs, as its principal function, activities pertaining to the 
enforcement of criminal laws. The records maintained by that office in a 
system identified as ``HUD/DEPT-24, Investigation Files,'' primarily 
consist of information compiled for the purpose of criminal 
investigations and are associated with identifiable individuals. 
Therefore, the Secretary has determined that this system of records 
shall be exempt, consistent with 5 U.S.C. 552a(j)(2), from all 
requirements of the Privacy Act except 5 U.S.C. 552a (b), (c) (1) and 
(2), (e)(4) (A) through (F), (e) (6), (7), (9), (10), and (11), and (i) 
unless elsewhere exempted.

[40 FR 39729, Aug. 28, 1975, as amended at 49 FR 20486, May 15, 1984]


<R05>
Sec. 16.15  Specific exemptions.

    Whenever the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development determines 
it to be necessary and proper, with respect to any system of records 
maintained by the Department, to exercise the right to promulgate rules 
to exempt such systems in accordance with the provisions of 5 U.S.C. 
552a(k), each specific exemption, including the parts of each system to 
be exempted, the provisions of the Act from which they are exempted, and 
the justification for each exemption shall be published in the Federal 
Register as part of the Department's Notice of Systems of Records.
    (a) Exempt under 5 U.S.C. 552a(k)(2) from the requirements of 5 
U.S.C. 552a (c)(3), (d), (e)(1), (e)(4) (G), (H), (I), and (f). This 
exemption allows the Department to withhold records compiled for law 
enforcement purposes. The reasons for adopting this exemption are to 
prevent individuals, who are the subjects of investigation, from 
frustrating the investigatory process, to ensure the integrity of the 
investigatory process, to ensure the integrity of law enforcement 
activities, to prevent disclosure of investigative techniques, and to 
protect the confidentiality of sources of information. The names of 
systems correspond to those published in the Federal Register as part of 
the Department's Notice of Systems of Records.
    (1) HUD/DEPT-15. Equal Opportunity Housing Complaints.
    (2) HUD/DEPT-24. Investigation Files in the Office of the Inspector 
General.
    (3) HUD/DEPT-25. Legal Action Files.
    (b) Exempt under 5 U.S.C. 552(k)(5) from the requirements of 5 
U.S.C. 552a (c)(3), (d), (e)(1), (e)(4), (G), (H), and (I), and (f). 
This exemption allows the Department to withhold records compiled solely 
for the purpose of determining suitability, eligibility, or 
qualifications for Federal contracts, or access to classified material. 
The reasons for adopting this exemption are to insure the proper 
functioning of the investigatory process, to insure effective 
determination of suitability, eligibility and qualification for 
employment and to protect the confidentiality of sources of information. 
The names of systems correspond to those published in the Federal 
Register as part of the Department's Notice of Systems of Records.
    (1) HUD/DEPT-24. Investigation Files in the Office of the Inspector 
General.
    (2) HUD/DEPT-25. Legal Action Files.
    (c) The system of records entitled ``HUD/PIH-1. Tenant Eligibility 
Verification Files'' consists in part of investigatory material compiled 
for law enforcement purposes. Relevant records will be used by 
appropriate Federal, state or local agencies charged with the 
responsibility for investigating or prosecuting violations of law. 
Therefore, to the extent that information in the system falls within the 
coverage of subsection (k)(2) of the Privacy Act, 5 U.S.C. 552a(k)(2), 
the system is exempt from the requirements of the following subsections 
of the Privacy Act, for the reasons stated below.
    (1) From subsection (c)(3) because release of an accounting of 
disclosures to an individual who may be the subject of an investigation 
could reveal the nature and scope of the investigation and could result 
in the altering or destruction of evidence, improper influencing of 
witnesses, and other evasive actions that could impede or compromise the 
investigation.

[[Page 159]]

    (2) From subsection (d)(1) because release of the records to an 
individual who may become or has become the subject of an investigation 
could interfere with pending or prospective law enforcement proceedings, 
constitute an unwarranted invasion of the personal privacy of third 
parties, reveal the identity of confidential sources, or reveal 
sensitive investigative techniques and procedures.
    (3) From subsection (d)(2) because amendment or correction of the 
records could interfere with pending or prospective law enforcement 
proceedings, or could impose an impossible administrative and 
investigative burden by requiring the office that maintains the records 
to continuously retrograde its verifications of tenant eligibility 
attempting to resolve questions of accuracy, relevance, timeliness and 
completeness.
    (4) From subsection (e)(1) because it is often impossible to 
determine relevance or necessity of information in pre-investigative 
early stages. The value of such information is a question of judgment 
and timing; what appears relevant and necessary when collected may 
ultimately be evaluated and viewed as irrelevant and unnecessary to an 
investigation. In addition, the Assistant Secretary for Public and 
Indian Housing, or investigators, may obtain information concerning the 
violation of laws other than those within the scope of its jurisdiction. 
In the interest of effective law enforcement, the Assistant Secretary 
for Public and Indian Housing, or investigators, should retain this 
information because it may aid in establishing patterns of unlawful 
activity and provide leads for other law enforcement agencies. Further, 
in obtaining the evidence, information may be provided which relates to 
matters incidental to the main purpose of the inquiry or investigation 
but which may be pertinent to the investigative jurisdiction of another 
agency. Such information cannot readily be identified.
    (d) The system of records entitled ``HUD/PIH-1. Tenant Eligibility 
Verification Files'' consists in part of material that may be used for 
the purpose of determining suitability, eligibility, or qualifications 
for Federal civilian employment or Federal contracts, the release of 
which would reveal the identity of a source who furnished information to 
the Government under an express promise that the identity of the source 
would be held in confidence. Therefore, to the extent that information 
in this system falls within the coverage of subsection (k)(5) of the 
Privacy Act, 5 U.S.C. 552a(k)(5), the system is exempt from the 
requirements of the following subsection of the Privacy Act, for the 
reasons stated below.
    (1) From subsection (d)(1) because release would reveal the identity 
of a source who furnished information to the Government under an express 
promise of confidentiality. Revealing the identity of a confidential 
source could impede future cooperation by sources, and could result in 
harassment or harm to such sources.

[42 FR 49810, Sept. 28, 1977, as amended at 59 FR 9407, Feb. 28, 1994]


<R03>
PART 17--ADMINISTRATIVE CLAIMS--Table of Contents

<R05>


   Subpart A--Claims Against Government Under Federal Tort Claims Act

                           General Provisions

Sec.
17.1  Scope; definitions.

                               Procedures

17.2  Administrative claim; when presented; appropriate HUD office.
17.3  Administrative claim; who may file.
17.4  Administrative claim; evidence and information to be submitted.
17.5  Investigations.
17.6  Claims investigation.
17.7  Authority to adjust, determine, compromise, and settle claims.
17.8  Limitations on authority.
17.9  Referral to Department of Justice.
17.11  Final denial of claim.
17.12  Action on approved claim.

 Subpart B--Claims Under the Military Personnel and Civilian Employees 
                           Claims Act of 1964

17.40  Scope and purpose.
17.41  Claimants.
17.42  Time limitations.
17.43  Allowable claims.
17.44  Restrictions on certain claims.
17.45  Unallowable claims.
17.46  Claims involving carriers or insurers.
17.47  Settlement of claims.
17.48  Computation of amount of award.

[[Page 160]]

17.49  Attorney's fees.
17.50  Claims procedures.

  Subpart C--Procedures for the Collection of Claims by the Government

                           General Provisions

17.60  Scope and definitions.
17.61  Incorporation of joint standards by reference.
17.62  Subdivision and joining of claims.
17.63  Authority of offices to attempt collection of claims.
17.64  Referral of claims to the Assistant Secretary for Administration.
17.65  Authority of offices to compromise claims or suspend or terminate 
          collection action.
17.66  Department claims officer.
17.67  Claims files.
17.68  Monthly report of collection action.
17.69  Accounting control.
17.70  Record retention.
17.71  Suspension or revocation of eligibility.
17.72  Methods of collection and imposition of late charges.
17.73  Standards for compromise of claims.
17.74  Standards for suspension or termination of collection action.
17.75  Referral to GAO or Justice Department.
17.76  Disclosure to a consumer reporting agency.
17.77  Contracts for collection services.

                    Administrative Offset Provisions

17.100  Scope.
17.101  Coordinating administrative offset with another Federal agency.
17.102  Notice requirements before offset.
17.103  Exceptions to notice requirements.
17.104  Review within the Department of a determination of indebtedness.
17.105  Review of departmental records related to the debt.
17.106  Written agreement to repay debt as alternative to administrative 
          offset.
17.107  Stay of offset.
17.108  Types of review.
17.109  Review procedures.
17.110  Determination of indebtedness and appeal from determination.
17.111  Procedures for administrative offset: single debt.
17.112  Procedures for administrative offset: multiple debts.
17.113  Procedures for administrative offset: interagency cooperation.
17.114  Procedures for administrative offset: time limitation.
17.115  Procedures for administrative offset: offset against amounts 
          payable from Civil Service Retirement and Disability Fund.
17.116  Procedures for administrative offset: offset of debtor's 
          judgment against the United States.
17.117  Procedures for administrative offset: imposition of interest.
17.118  Miscellaneous provisions: correspondence with the Department.

                        Salary Offset Provisions

17.125  Scope.
17.126  Coordinating offset with another Federal agency.
17.127  Determination of indebtedness.
17.128  Notice requirements before offset.
17.129  Request for a hearing.
17.130  Result if employee fails to meet deadlines.
17.131  Written decision following a hearing.
17.132  Review of departmental records related to the debt.
17.133  Written agreement to repay debt as alternative to salary offset.
17.134  Procedures for salary offset: when deductions may begin.
17.135  Procedures for salary offset: types of collection.
17.136  Procedures for salary offset: methods of collection.
17.137  Procedures for salary offset: imposition of interest.
17.138  Non-waiver of rights.
17.139  Refunds.
17.140  Miscellaneous provisions: correspondence with the Department.

                    IRS Tax Refund Offset Provisions

17.150  Scope.
17.151  Notice requirements before offset.
17.152  Review within the Department of a determination that an amount 
          is past-due and legally enforceable.
17.153  Determination of the Administrative Judge.
17.154  Postponements, withdrawals and extensions of time.
17.155  Review of departmental records related to the debt.
17.156  Stay of offset.
17.157  Application of offset funds: Single debt.
17.158  Application of offset funds: Multiple debts.
17.159  Application of offset funds: Tax refund insufficient to cover 
          amount of debt.
17.160  Time limitation for notifying the IRS to request offset of tax 
          refunds due.
17.161  Correspondence with the Department.

    Authority: 28 U.S.C. 2672; 31 U.S.C. 3711, 3716-18, 3721, and 5 
U.S.C. 5514; 42 U.S.C. 3535(d).

[[Page 161]]


<R04>
   Subpart A--Claims Against Government Under Federal Tort Claims Act

    Authority: 5 U.S.C. 5514; 28 U.S.C. 2672; 31 U.S.C. 3711, 3716-3718, 
3721; 42 U.S.C. 3535(d).

    Source: 36 FR 24427, Dec. 22, 1971, unless otherwise noted.

                           General Provisions


<R05>
Sec. 17.1  Scope; definitions.

    (a) This subpart applies to claims asserted under the Federal Tort 
Claims Act, as amended, accruing on or after January 18, 1967, for money 
damages against the United States for injury to or loss of property or 
personal injury or death caused by the negligent or wrongful act or 
omission of an officer or employee of the Department while acting within 
the scope of his office or employment.
    (b) This subpart is issued subject to and consistent with applicable 
regulations on administrative claims under the Federal Tort Claims Act 
issued by the Attorney General (31 FR 16616; 28 CFR part 14).
    (c) The terms Department and Organizational unit are defined in 24 
CFR part 5.

[36 FR 24427, Dec. 22, 1971, as amended at 61 FR 5204, Feb. 9, 1996]

                               Procedures


<R05>
Sec. 17.2  Administrative claim; when presented; appropriate HUD office.

    (a) For purposes of this subpart, a claim shall be deemed to have 
been presented when the Department receives, at a place designated in 
paragraph (b) of this section, an executed Claim for Damages or Injury, 
Standard Form 95, or other written notification of an incident, 
accompanied by a claim for money damages in a sum certain for injury to 
or loss of property, for personal injury, or for death alleged to have 
occurred by reason of the incident. A claim which should have been 
presented to the Department, but which was mistakenly addressed to or 
filed with another Federal agency, is deemed to be presented to the 
Department as of the date that the claim is received by the Department. 
If a claim is mistakenly addressed to or filed with the Department, the 
Department shall forthwith transfer it to the appropriate Federal 
agency, if ascertainable, or return it to the claimant.
    (b) A claimant shall mail or deliver his claim to the office of 
employment of the Department employee or employees whose negligent or 
wrongful act or omission is alleged to have caused the loss or injury 
complained of. Where such office of employment is the Department Central 
Office in Washington, or is not reasonably known and not reasonably 
ascertainable, claimant shall file his claim with the Assistant 
Secretary for Administration, Department of Housing and Urban 
Development, 451 Seventh Street SW., Washington, DC 20410. In all other 
cases, claimant shall address his claim to the head of the appropriate 
office, the address of which will generally be found listed in the local 
telephone directory.


<R05>
Sec. 17.3  Administrative claim; who may file.

    (a) A claim for injury to or loss of property may be presented by 
the owner of the property, his duly authorized agent, or his legal 
representative.
    (b) A claim for personal injury may be presented by the injured 
person, his duly authorized agent, or his legal representative.
    (c) A claim based on death may be presented by the executor or 
administrator of the decedent's estate, or by any other person legally 
entitled to assert such a claim in accordance with applicable State law.
    (d) A claim for loss wholly compensated by an insurer with the 
rights of a subrogee may be presented by the insurer. A claim for loss 
partially compensated by an insurer with the rights of a subrogee may be 
presented by the insurer or the insured individually, as their 
respective interests appear, or jointly. Whenever an insurer presents a 
claim asserting the rights of a subrogee, he shall present with his 
claim appropriate evidence that he has the rights of a subrogee.
    (e) A claim presented by an agent or legal representative shall be 
presented in the name of the claimant, be signed by the agent or legal 
representative,

[[Page 162]]

show the title or legal capacity of the person signing, and be 
accompanied by evidence of his authority to present a claim on behalf of 
the claimant as agent, executor, administrator, parent, guardian, or 
other representative.


<R05>
Sec. 17.4  Administrative claim; evidence and information to be submitted.

    (a) Personal injury. In support of a claim for personal injury, 
including pain and suffering, the claimant may be required to submit the 
following evidence or information:
    (1) A written report by his attending physician or dentist setting 
forth the nature and extent of the injury, nature and extent of 
treatment, any degree of temporary or permanent disability, the 
prognosis, period of hospitalization, and any diminished earning 
capacity. In addition, the claimant may be required to submit to a 
physical or mental examination by a physician employed or designated by 
the Department or another Federal agency. A copy of the report of the 
examining physician shall be made available to the claimant upon the 
claimant's written request provided that he has, upon request, furnished 
the report referred to in the first sentence of this subparagraph and 
has made or agrees to make available to the Department any other 
physician's report previously or thereafter made of the physical or 
mental condition which is the subject matter of his claim;
    (2) Itemized bills for medical, dental, and hospital expenses 
incurred, or itemized receipts of payment for such expenses;
    (3) If the prognosis reveals the necessity for future treatment, a 
statement of expected expenses for such treatment;
    (4) If a claim is made for loss of time from employment, a written 
statement from his employer showing actual time lost from employment, 
whether he is a full- or part-time employee, and wages or salary 
actually lost;
    (5) If a claim is made for loss of income and the claimant is self-
employed, documentary evidence showing the amount of earnings actually 
lost;
    (6) Any other evidence or information which may have a bearing on 
either the responsibility of the United States for the personal injury 
or the damages claimed.
    (b) Death. In support of a claim based on death, the claimant may be 
required to submit the following evidence or information:
    (1) An authenticated death certificate or other competent evidence 
showing cause of death, date of death, and age of the decedent;
    (2) Decedent's employment or occupation at time of death, including 
his monthly or yearly salary or earnings (if any), and the duration of 
his last employment or occupation;
    (3) Full names, addresses, birth dates, kinship, and marital status 
of the decedent's survivors, including identification of those survivors 
who were dependent for support upon the decedent at the time of his 
death;
    (4) Degree of support afforded by the decedent to each survivor 
dependent upon him for support at the time of his death;
    (5) Decedent's general physical and mental condition before death;
    (6) Itemized bills for medical and burial expenses incurred by 
reason of the incident causing death, or itemized receipts of payment 
for such expenses;
    (7) If damages for pain and suffering prior to death are claimed, a 
physician's detailed statement specifying the injuries suffered, 
duration of pain and suffering, any drugs administered for pain, and the 
decedent's physical condition in the interval between injury and death;
    (8) Any other evidence or information which may have a bearing on 
either the responsibility of the United States for the death or the 
damages claimed.
    (c) Property damage. In support of a claim for injury to or loss of 
property, real or personal, the claimant may be required to submit the 
following evidence or information:
    (1) Proof of ownership;
    (2) A detailed statement of the amount claimed with respect to each 
item of property;
    (3) An itemized receipt of payment for necessary repairs or itemized 
written estimates of the cost of such repairs;
    (4) A statement listing date of purchase, purchase price, and 
salvage value where repair is not economical;

[[Page 163]]

    (5) Any other evidence or information which may have a bearing on 
either the responsibility of the United States for the injury to or loss 
of property or the damages claimed.


<R05>
Sec. 17.5  Investigations.

    The Department may investigate, or may request any other Federal 
agency to investigate, a claim filed under this subpart.


<R05>
Sec. 17.6  Claims investigation.

    (a) When a claim has been filed with the Department, the head of the 
organizational unit concerned or his designee shall designate one 
employee in that unit who shall act as, and who shall be referred to 
herein as, the Claims Investigating Officer for that particular claim. 
When a claim is received by the head of an organizational unit to which 
this subpart applies, it shall be forwarded with or without comment to 
the designated Claims Investigating Officer, who shall:
    (1) Investigate as completely as is practicable the nature and 
circumstances of the occurrence causing the loss or damage of the 
claimant's property;
    (2) Ascertain the extent of loss or damage to the claimant's 
property;
    (3) Assemble the necessary forms with required data contained 
therein;
    (4) Prepare a brief statement setting forth the facts relative to 
the claim, a statement whether the claim satisfies the requirements of 
this subpart, and a recommendation as to the amount to be paid in 
settlement of the claim;
    (5) Submit such forms, statements, and all necessary supporting 
papers to the head of the organizational unit having jurisdiction over 
the employee involved, who will be responsible for assuring that all 
necessary data has been obtained for the file. The head of the 
organizational unit will transmit the entire file to the General 
Counsel.


<R05>
Sec. 17.7  Authority to adjust, determine, compromise, and settle claims.

    The General Counsel, the Deputy General Counsel, and such employees 
of the Office of the General Counsel as may be designated by the General 
Counsel, are authorized to consider, ascertain, adjust, determine, 
compromise, and settle claims pursuant to the Federal Tort Claims Act, 
28 U.S.C. 2671, and the regulations contained in 28 CFR part 14 and in 
this subpart.


<R05>
Sec. 17.8  Limitations on authority.

    (a) An award, compromise, or settlement of a claim under section 
2672 of Title 28, United States Code, and this subpart in excess of 
$25,000 may be effected only with the prior written approval of the 
Attorney General or his designee. For the purpose of this paragraph, a 
principal claim and any derivative or subrogated claim shall be treated 
as a single claim.
    (b) An administrative claim may be adjusted, determined, 
compromised, or settled only after consultation with the Department of 
Justice when, in the opinion of the General Counsel or his designee:
    (1) A new precedent or a new point of law is involved; or
    (2) A question of policy is or may be involved; or
    (3) The United States is or may be entitled to indemnity or 
contribution from a third party, and the Department is unable to adjust 
the third party claim; or
    (4) The compromise of a particular claim, as a practical matter, 
will or may control the disposition of a related claim in which the 
amount to be paid may exceed $25,000.
    (c) An administrative claim may be adjusted, determined, 
compromised, or settled only after consultation with the Department of 
Justice when the Department is informed or is otherwise aware that the 
United States or an officer, employee, agent, or cost-type contractor of 
the United States is involved in litigation based on a claim arising out 
of the same incident or transaction.


<R05>
Sec. 17.9  Referral to Department of Justice.

    When Department of Justice approval or consultation is required 
under Sec. 17.8, the referral or request shall be transmitted to the 
Department of Justice by the General Counsel of the Department or his 
designee.

[[Page 164]]


<R05>
Sec. 17.11  Final denial of claim.

    Final denial of an administrative claim shall be in writing, and 
notification of denial shall be sent to the claimant, his attorney, or 
legal representative by certified or registered mail. The notification 
of final denial may include a statement of the reasons for the denial 
and shall include a statement that, if the claimant is dissatisfied with 
the Department action, he may file suit in an appropriate U.S. District 
Court not later than 6 months after the date of mailing of the 
notification.


<R05>
Sec. 17.12  Action on approved claim.

    (a) Payment of a claim approved under this subpart is contingent on 
claimant's execution of: (1) A Claim for Damage or Injury, Standard Form 
95; (2) a claims settlement agreement; and (3) a Voucher for Payment, 
Standard Form 1145, as appropriate. When a claimant is represented by an 
attorney, the voucher for payment shall designate both the claimant and 
his attorney as payees, and the check shall be delivered to the 
attorney, whose address shall appear on the voucher.
    (b) Acceptance by the claimant, his agent, or legal representative 
of an award, compromise, or settlement made under section 2672 or 2677 
of Title 28, United States Code, is final and conclusive on the 
claimant, his agent or legal representative, and any other person on 
whose behalf or for whose benefit the claim has been presented, and 
constitutes a complete release of any claim against the United States 
and against any officer or employee of the Government whose act or 
omission gave rise to the claim, by reason of the same subject matter.


<R04>
 Subpart B--Claims Under the Military Personnel and Civilian Employees 
                           Claims Act of 1964

    Authority: Sec. 3, 78 Stat. 767 (31 U.S.C. 3721).

    Source: 36 FR 24427, Dec. 22, 1971, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 17.40  Scope and purpose.

    (a) This subpart applies to all claims filed by or on behalf of 
employees of the Department of Housing and Urban Development for loss of 
or damage to personal property which occurs incident to their service 
with HUD under the Military Personnel and Civilian Employees' Claims Act 
of 1964. A claim must be substantiated and the possession of the 
property determined to be reasonable, useful, or proper. The maximum 
amount that can be paid under any claim under the Act is $25,000 and 
property may be replaced in kind at the option of the Government. 
Nothing in this subpart shall be construed to bar claims payable under 
statutory authority.
    (b) HUD is not an insurer and does not underwrite all personal 
property losses that an employee may sustain. Employees are encouraged 
to carry private insurance to the maximum extent practicable to avoid 
large losses or losses which may not be recoverable from HUD. The 
procedures set forth in this section are designed to enable the claimant 
to obtain the maximum amount of compensation for his loss or damage. 
Failure of the claimant to comply with these procedures may reduce or 
preclude payment of his claim under this subpart.

[36 FR 24427, Dec. 22, 1971, as amended at 48 FR 6536, Feb. 14, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 17.41  Claimants.

    (a) A claim pursuant to this subpart may only be made by:
    (1) An employee of HUD.
    (2) A former employee of HUD whose claim arises out of an incident 
occurring before his separation from HUD.
    (3) Survivors of a person named in paragraph (a) (1) or (2) of this 
section, in the following order of precedence:
    (i) Spouse.
    (ii) Children.
    (iii) Father or mother, or both.
    (iv) Brothers or sisters, or both.
    (4) The authorized agent or legal representative of a person named 
in paragraphs (a) (1), (2), and (3) of this section.
    (b) A claim may not be presented by or for the benefit of a 
subrogee, assignee, conditional vendor, or other third party.

[[Page 165]]


<R05>
Sec. 17.42  Time limitations.

    A claim under this part may be allowed only if:
    (a) Except as provided in paragraph (b) of this section, it is filed 
in writing within 2 years after accrual. For purposes of this part, a 
claim accrues at the time of the accident or incident causing the loss 
or damage, or at such time as the loss or damage should have been 
discovered by the claimant by the exercise of due diligence.
    (b) It cannot be filed within the time limits of paragraph (a) of 
this section, because it accrues in time of war or in time of armed 
conflict in which any armed force of the United States is engaged or if 
such a war or armed conflict intervenes within 2 years after it accrues, 
and if good cause is shown, and if it is filed not later than 2 years 
after that cause ceases to exist, or 2 years after the war or armed 
conflict is terminated, whichever is earlier.


<R05>
Sec. 17.43  Allowable claims.

    (a) A claim may be allowed only if:
    (1) The damage or loss was not caused wholly or partly by the 
negligent or wrongful act of the claimant, his agent, the members of his 
family, or his private employee (the standard to be applied is that of 
reasonable care under the circumstances); and
    (2) The possession of the property lost or damaged and the quantity 
possessed is determined to have been reasonable, useful, or proper under 
the circumstances; and
    (3) The claim is substantiated by proper and convincing evidence.
    (b) Claims which are otherwise allowable under this part shall not 
be disallowed solely because the property was not in the possession of 
the claimant at the time of the damage or loss, or solely because the 
claimant was not the legal owner of the property for which the claim is 
made. For example, borrowed property may be the subject of a claim.
    (c) Subject to the conditions in paragraph (a) of this section, and 
the other provisions of this subpart, any claim for damage to, or loss 
of, personal property incident to service with HUD may be considered and 
allowed. The following are examples of the principal types of claims 
which may be allowed, but these examples are not exclusive and other 
types of claims may be allowed, unless excluded by Secs. 17.44 and 
17.45:
    (1) Property loss or damage in quarters or other authorized places. 
Claims may be allowed for damage to, or loss of, property arising from 
fire, flood, hurricane, other natural disaster, theft, or other unusual 
occurrence, while such property is located at:
    (i) Quarters within the 50 States or the District of Columbia that 
were assigned to the claimant or otherwise provided in kind by the 
United States;
    (ii) Quarters outside the 50 States and the District of Columbia 
that were occupied by the claimant, whether or not they were assigned or 
otherwise provided in kind by the United States, except when the 
claimant is a civilian employee who is a local inhabitant; or
    (iii) Any warehouse, office, working area, or other place (except 
quarters) authorized or apparently authorized for the reception or 
storage of property.
    (2) Transportation or travel losses. Claims may be allowed for 
damage to, or loss of, property incident to transportation or storage 
pursuant to orders, or in connection with travel under orders, including 
property in the custody of a carrier, an agent or agency of the 
Government, or the claimant.
    (3) Manufactured homes. Claims may be allowed for damage to, or loss 
of, manufactured homes and their contents under the provisions of 
paragraph (c)(2) of this section. Claims for structural damage to 
manufactured homes, other than that caused by collision, and damage to 
contents of manufactured homes resulting from such structural damage, 
must contain conclusive evidence that the damage was not caused by 
structural deficiency of the manufactured home and that it was not 
overloaded. Claims for damage to, or loss of, tires mounted on 
manufactured homes will not be allowed, except in cases of collision, 
theft, or vandalism.
    (4) Enemy action or public service. Claims may be allowed for damage 
to, or loss of, property as a direct consequence of:
    (i) Enemy action or threat thereof, or combat, guerrilla, 
brigandage, or other

[[Page 166]]

belligerent activity, or unjust confiscation by a foreign power or its 
nationals;
    (ii) Action by the claimant to quiet a civil disturbance or to 
alleviate a public disaster; or
    (iii) Efforts by the claimant to save human life or Government 
property.
    (5) Property used for benefit of the Government. Claims may be 
allowed for damage to, or loss of, property when used for the benefit of 
the Government at the request of, or with the knowledge and consent of, 
superior authority.
    (6) Clothing and accessories. Claims may be allowed for damage to, 
or loss of, clothing or accessories customarily worn on the person, such 
as eyeglasses, hearing aids, or dentures.

[36 FR 24427, Dec. 22, 1971, as amended at 50 FR 9268, Mar. 7, 1985]


<R05>
Sec. 17.44  Restrictions on certain claims.

    Claims of the type described in this section are only allowable 
subject to the restrictions noted:
    (a) Money or currency. Claims may be allowed for loss of money or 
currency only when lost incident to fire, flood, hurricane, other 
natural disaster, or by theft from quarters (as limited by paragraph (a) 
of Sec. 17.45). In instances of theft from quarters, it must be 
conclusively shown that the quarters were locked at the time of the 
theft. Reimbursement for loss of money or currency is limited to an 
amount which is determined to have been reasonable for the claimant to 
have had in his possession at the time of the loss.
    (b) Government property. Claims may only be allowed for property 
owned by the United States for which the claimant is financially 
responsible to any agency of the Government other than HUD.
    (c) Estimate fees. Claims may include fees paid to obtain estimates 
of repair only when it is clear that an estimate could not have been 
obtained without paying a fee. In that case, the fee may be allowed only 
in an amount determined to be reasonable in relation to the value of the 
property or the cost of the repairs.
    (d) Automobiles and other motor vehicles. Claims may only be allowed 
for damage to, or loss of, automobiles and other motor vehicles if:
    (1) Such motor vehicles were required to be used for official 
Government business (official Government business, as used here, does 
not include travel, or parking incident thereto, between quarters and 
office, or use of vehicles for the convenience of the owner. However, it 
does include travel, and parking incident thereto, between quarters and 
assigned place of duty specifically authorized by the employee's 
supervisor as being more advantageous to the Government); or
    (2) Shipment of such motor vehicles was being furnished or provided 
by the Government, subject to the provisions of Sec. 17.46.


<R05>
Sec. 17.45  Unallowable claims.

    Claims are not allowable for the following:
    (a) Unassigned quarters in United States. Property loss or damage in 
quarters occupied by the claimant within the 50 States or the District 
of Columbia that were not assigned to him or otherwise provided in kind 
by the United States.
    (b) Business property. Property used for business or profit.
    (c) Unserviceable property. Wornout or unserviceable property.
    (d) Illegal possession. Property acquired, possessed, or transported 
in violation of law or in violation of applicable regulations or 
directives.
    (e) Articles of extraordinary value. Valuable articles, such as 
cameras, watches, jewelry, furs, or other articles of extraordinary 
value, when shipped with household goods or as unaccompanied baggage 
(shipment includes storage). This prohibition does not apply to articles 
in the personal custody of the claimant or articles properly checked, 
provided that reasonable protection or security measures have been taken 
by claimant.
    (f) Minimum amount. Loss or damage amounting to less than $10.

[[Page 167]]


<R05>
Sec. 17.46  Claims involving carriers or insurers.

    In the event the property which is the subject of a claim was lost 
or damaged while in the possession of a carrier or was insured, the 
following procedures will apply:
    (a) Whenever property is damaged, lost, or destroyed while being 
shipped pursuant to authorized travel orders, the owner must file a 
written claim for reimbursement with the last commercial carrier known 
or believed to have handled the goods, or the carrier known to be in 
possession of the property when the damage or loss occurred, according 
to the terms of its bill of lading or contract, before submitting a 
claim against the Government under this subpart.
    (1) If more than one bill of lading or contract was issued, a 
separate demand should be made against the last carrier on each such 
document.
    (2) The demand should be made within 9 months of the date that 
delivery was made, or within 9 months of the date that delivery should 
ordinarily have been made.
    (3) If it is apparent that the damage or loss is attributable to 
packing, storage, or unpacking while in the custody of the Government, 
no demand need be made against the carrier.
    (b) Whenever property which is damaged, lost, or destroyed incident 
to the claimant's service is insured in whole or in part, the claimant 
must make demand in writing against the insurer for reimbursement under 
the terms and conditions of the insurance coverage, prior to the filing 
of the concurrent claim against the Government.
    (c) Failure to make a demand on a carrier or insurer or to make all 
reasonable efforts to protect and prosecute rights available against a 
carrier or insurer and to collect the amount recoverable from the 
carrier or insurer may result in reducing the amount recoverable from 
the Government by the maximum amount which would have been recoverable 
from the carrier or insurer, had the claim been timely or diligently 
prosecuted. However, no deduction will be made where the circumstances 
of the claimant's service preclude reasonable filing of such a claim or 
diligent prosecution, or the evidence indicates a demand was 
impracticable or would have been unavailing.
    (d) Following the submission of the claim against the carrier or 
insurer, the claimant may immediately submit his claim against the 
Government in accordance with the provisions of this subpart, without 
waiting until either final approval or denial of his claim is made by 
the carrier or insurer.
    (1) Upon submitting his claim, he will certify in his claim that he 
has or has not gained any recovery from a carrier or insurer, and 
enclose all correspondence pertinent thereto.
    (2) If final action has not been taken by the carrier or insurer on 
his claim, he will immediately notify them to address all correspondence 
in regard to his claim to him, in care of the General Counsel of HUD.
    (3) The claimant shall advise the General Counsel of any action 
taken by the carrier or insurer on his claim and upon request shall 
furnish all correspondence documents, and other evidence pertinent to 
the matter.
    (e) The claimant will assign to the United States to the extent of 
any payment on his claim accepted by him, all his right, title and 
interest in any claim he may have against any carrier, insurer, or other 
party arising out of the incident on which the claim against the United 
States is based. After payment of his claim by the United States, the 
claimant will, upon receipt of any payment from a carrier or insurer, 
pay the proceeds to the United States to the extent of the payment 
received by him from the United States.
    (f) Where a claimant recovers for the loss from the carrier or 
insurer before his claim under this subpart is settled, the amount or 
recovery shall be applied to his claim as follows:
    (1) When the amount recovered from a carrier, insurer, or other 
third party is greater than or equal to the claimant's total loss as 
determined under this part, no compensation is allowable under this 
part.
    (2) When the amount recovered is less than such total loss, the 
allowable amount is determined by deducting the recovery from the amount 
of such total loss.

[[Page 168]]

    (3) For the purpose of this paragraph (f) the claimant's total loss 
is to be determined without regard to the $6,500 maximum set forth 
above. However, if the resulting amount, after making this deduction, 
exceeds $6,500, the claimant will be allowed only $6,500.


<R05>
Sec. 17.47  Settlement of claims.

    (a) The General Counsel, HUD, is authorized to settle (consider, 
ascertain, adjust, determine, and dispose of, whether by full or partial 
allowance or disallowance) any claim under this subpart.
    (b) The General Counsel may formulate such procedures and make such 
redelegations as may be required to fulfill the objectives of this 
subpart.
    (c) The General Counsel shall conduct such investigation as may be 
appropriate in order to determine the validity of a claim.
    (d) The General Counsel shall notify a claimant in writing of action 
taken on his claim, and if partial or full disallowance is made, the 
reasons therefor.
    (e) In the event a claim submitted against a carrier under 
Sec. 17.46 has not been settled before settlement of the claim against 
the Government pursuant to this subpart, the General Counsel shall 
notify such carrier or insurer to pay the proceeds of the claim to HUD 
to the extent HUD has paid such to claimant in settlement.


<R05>
Sec. 17.48  Computation of amount of award.

    (a) The amount allowed for damage to or loss of any item of property 
may not exceed the cost of the item (either the price paid in cash or 
property, or the value at the time of acquisition if not acquired by 
purchase or exchange); and there will be no allowance for replacement 
cost or for appreciation in the value of the property. Subject to these 
limitations, the amount allowable is either:
    (1) The depreciated value, immediately prior to the loss or damage, 
of property lost or damaged beyond economical repair, less any salvage 
value; or
    (2) The reasonable cost of repairs, when property is economically 
repairable, provided that the cost of repairs does not exceed the amount 
allowable under paragraph (a)(1) of this section.
    (b) Depreciation in value is determined by considering the type of 
article involved, its cost, its condition when damaged or lost, and the 
time elapsed between the date of acquisition and the date of damage or 
loss.
    (c) Replacement of lost or damaged property may be made in kind 
whenever appropriate.


<R05>
Sec. 17.49  Attorney's fees.

    No more than 10 per centum of the amount paid in settlement of each 
individual claim submitted and settled under this subpart shall be paid 
or delivered to or received by any agent or attorney on account of 
services rendered in connection with that claim.


<R05>
Sec. 17.50  Claims procedures.

    (a) Claims by, or on behalf of, employees of field offices shall be 
filed in writing with the appropriate Regional Counsel. Claims by, or on 
behalf of, employees of Department Headquarters shall be filed in 
writing with the General Counsel, Department of Housing and Urban 
Development, 451 7th Street, SW., Washington, DC 20410.
    (b) Each written claim shall contain, as a minimum:
    (1) Name, address, place of employment of claimant.
    (2) Place and date of loss or damage.
    (3) A brief statement of the facts and circumstances surrounding 
loss or damage.
    (4) Cost, date, and place of acquisition of each piece of property 
lost or damaged.
    (5) Two itemized repair estimates, or value estimates, whichever is 
applicable.
    (6) Copies of police reports, if applicable.
    (7) With respect to claims involving thefts or losses in quarters or 
other places where the property was reasonably kept, a statement as to 
what security precautions were taken to protect the property involved.
    (8) With respect to claims involving property being used for the 
benefit of the Government, a statement by the employee's supervisor 
evidencing that the claimant was required to provide

[[Page 169]]

such property or that his providing it was in the interest of the 
Government.
    (9) Other evidence as may be required by the General Counsel.

[36 FR 24427, Dec. 22, 1971, as amended at 48 FR 6536, Feb. 14, 1983]


<R04>
  Subpart C--Procedures for the Collection of Claims by the Government

    Authority: 31 U.S.C. 3711, 3716-18, and 5 U.S.C. 5514; 42 U.S.C. 
3535(d).

    Source: 36 FR 24427, Dec. 22, 1971, unless otherwise noted. 
Redesignated at 49 FR 32349, Aug. 14, 1984.

                           General Provisions


<R05>
Sec. 17.60  Scope and definitions.

    (a) Scope. This subpart sets forth the regulations of the Secretary 
of Housing and Urban Development implementing the Federal Claims 
Collection Act of 1966, as amended by the Federal Debt Collection Act of 
1982 (31 U.S.C. 3701 et seq.) (the Act), in conformity with the 
standards jointly promulgated by the Attorney General and the 
Comptroller General in 4 CFR parts 101 through 105. The Act:
    (1) Requires the Secretary or his designee to attempt collection of 
all claims of the United States for money or property arising out of the 
activities of the Department; and
    (2) Authorizes the Secretary or his designee to compromise claims 
that have not been referred to another executive or legislative agency 
for further collection action where the claim does not exceed $100,000 
exclusive of interest, or to suspend or terminate collection action 
where it appears that no person liable on the claim has the present or 
prospective financial ability to pay any significant sum thereon or that 
the cost of collecting the claim is likely to exceed the amount of 
recovery.
    (b) Definitions. As used in this subpart:
    Administrative offset means withholding money payable by the United 
States Government to, or held by the Government for, a person to satisfy 
a debt the person owes the Government
    Agency means:
    (1) An Executive department, military department, Government 
corporation, or independent establishment as defined in 5 U.S.C. 101, 
102, 103, or 104, respectively;
    (2) The United States Postal Service; or
    (3) The Postal Rate Commission.
    Claim means the same as Debt.
    Consumer Reporting Agency means:
    (1) Any person, that for monetary fees, dues, or on a cooperative 
nonprofit basis, regularly engages in whole or in part in the practice 
of assembling or evaluating consumer (individual) credit information or 
other information on consumers for the purpose of providing consumer 
reports to third parties, and that uses any means or facility of 
interstate commerce for the purpose of preparing or furnishing consumer 
reports. (15 U.S.C. 1681a(f)); or
    (2) Any person who, for monetary fees, dues, or on a cooperative 
basis, regularly engages in whole or in part in the practice of (i) 
obtaining credit or other information on consumers for the purpose of 
furnishing such information to consumer reporting agencies (as defined 
in paragraph (1) of this definition), or (ii) serving as a marketing 
agent under arrangements enabling third parties to obtain such 
information from such reporting agencies.
    Debt means an amount owed to the United States and past due, from 
sources which include loans insured or guaranteed by the United States 
and all other amounts due the United States from assigned mortgages or 
deeds of trust, direct loans, advances, repurchase demands, fees, 
leases, rents, royalties, services, sale of real or personal property, 
overpayments, penalties, damages, interest, fines and forfeitures 
(except those arising under the Uniform Code of Military Justice), and 
all other similar sources.
    Debtor means the same as person.
    Department means the Department of Housing and Urban Development.
    Department Claims Officer: (see Sec. 17.66).
    Determination means the point at which the Secretary decides that 
the debt is valid.
    Disposable pay means that part of current basic pay, special pay, 
incentive pay, retired pay, retainer pay, or in the case of an employee 
not entitled

[[Page 170]]

to basic pay, other authorized pay remaining after deductions required 
by law. Deductions from pay include:
    (1) Amounts owed by the individual to the United States;
    (2) Amounts withheld for Federal employment taxes;
    (3) Amounts properly withheld for Federal, State, or local income 
tax purposes, if the withholding of the amount is authorized or required 
by law and if amounts withheld are not greater than would be the case if 
the individual claimed all dependent to which he or she were entitled. 
The withholding of additional amounts under 26 U.S.C. 3402(i) may be 
permitted only when the individual presents evidence of tax obligation 
which supports the additional withholding;
    (4) Amounts deducted as health insurance premiums, including, but 
not limited to, amounts deducted from civil service annuities for 
Medicare where such deductions are requested by the Health Care 
Financing Administration;
    (5) Amounts deducted as normal retirement contributions, not 
including amounts deducted for supplementary coverage. Amounts withheld 
as Survivor Benefit Plan or Retired Serviceman's Family Protection Plan 
payments are considered to be normal retirement contributions. Amounts 
voluntarily contributed toward additional civil service annuity benefits 
are considered to be supplementary;
    (6) Amounts deducted as normal life insurance premiums from salary 
or other remuneration for employment, not including amounts deducted for 
supplementary coverage. Both Servicemen's Group Life Insurance and 
``Basic Life'' Federal Employees' Group Life Insurance premiums are 
considered to be normal life insurance premiums; all optional Federal 
Employees' Group Life Insurance premiums and life insurance premiums 
paid for by allotment, such as National Service Life Insurance, are 
considered to be supplementary;
    (7) Amounts withheld from benefits payable under title II of the 
Social Security Act where the withholding is required by law;
    (8) Amounts mandatorily withheld for the U.S. Soldiers' and Airmen's 
Home; and
    (9) Fines and forfeitures ordered by a court-martial or by a 
commanding officer.
    Employee means a current employee of a Federal agency, including a 
current member of the Armed Forces or Reserve of the Armed Forces of the 
United States.
    Office means the organization of each Assistant Secretary, the 
Government National Mortgage Association (GNMA), the Solar Energy and 
Energy Conservation Bank and each Field Office.
    Pay means basic pay, special pay, income pay, retired pay, retainer 
pay, or, in case of an employee not entitled to basic pay, other 
authorized pay.
    Person means any natural person or persons, profit or nonprofit 
corporations, partnership, association, trust, estate, government or 
government subdivision or other entity which is capable of owing a debt 
to the Government. For purposes of the interest provisions, person does 
not include an agency of the United States Government, a State 
government, or a unit of general local government.
    Salary offset means a deduction from the pay of an employee without 
his or her consent to satisfy a debt. Salary offset is one type of 
administrative offset which may be used by the Department in the 
collection of claims.
    Secretary means the Secretary of the Department of Housing and Urban 
Development or his or her designee.
    United States includes an agency of the United States.
    Waiver means the cancellation, remission, forgiveness, or non-
recovery of a debt allegedly owed by an employee of an agency as 
permitted or required by 5 U.S.C. 5584, 10 U.S.C. 2774, 32 U.S.C. 716, 
or 5 U.S.C. 8346(b), or any other law.

[36 FR 24427, Dec. 22, 1971. Redesignated and amended at 49 FR 32349, 
Aug. 14, 1984; 59 FR 34579, July 6, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 17.61  Incorporation of joint standards by reference.

    All administrative actions to collect claims arising out of the 
activities of the Department shall be performed in

[[Page 171]]

accordance with the applicable standards prescribed in 4 CFR parts 101 
through 105, which are incorporated by reference and supplemented in 
this subpart.


<R05>
Sec. 17.62  Subdivision and joining of claims.

    (a) A debtor's liability arising from a particular transaction or 
contract shall be considered as a single claim in determining whether 
the claim is one not exceeding $100,000 exclusive of interest for the 
purpose of compromise or termination of collection action. Such a claim 
may not be subdivided to avoid the monetary ceiling established by the 
Act.
    (b) Joining of two or more single claims in a demand upon a 
particular debtor for payment totaling more than $100,000 does not 
preclude compromise or termination of collection action with respect to 
any one of such claims that does not exceed $100,000 exclusive of 
interest.

[59 FR 34579, July 6, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 17.63  Authority of offices to attempt collection of claims.

    The head of each office shall designate a claims collection officer, 
who shall attempt to collect in full all claims of the Department for 
money or property arising out of the activities of such office. Each 
claims collection officer shall establish and currently maintain a file 
with regard to each claim for which collection activities are 
undertaken.

[40 FR 28599, July 7, 1975. Redesignated at 49 FR 32349, Aug. 14, 1984]


<R05>
Sec. 17.64  Referral of claims to the Assistant Secretary for Administration.

    (a) Authority of the Assistant Secretary for Administration. The 
Assistant Secretary for Administration shall exercise the powers and 
perform the duties of the Secretary to compromise, or to suspend or 
terminate collection action on all Department claims not exceeding 
$100,000 exclusive of interest, except as provided in Sec. 17.65 and 
paragraph (b) of this section. When initial attempts at collection by 
the office having responsibility for such claims have not been fully 
successful, the claim file shall be forwarded to the Assistant Secretary 
for Administration for further administrative collection procedures. 
Claims shall be referred to the Assistant Secretary for Administration 
well within the applicable statute of limitations (28 U.S.C. 2415 and 
2416), but in no event more than 2 years after the claims accrued.
    (b) Exclusions. There shall be no compromised or terminated 
collection action with respect to any claim: (1) As to which there is an 
indication of fraud, the presentation of a false claim, or 
misrepresentation on the part of the debtor or any other party having an 
interest in the claim; (2) based in whole or in part on conduct in 
violation of the anti-trust laws; (3) based on tax statutes; or (4) 
arising from an exception made by the General Accounting Office in the 
account of an accountable officer. Such claims shall be promptly 
referred to the Justice Department or GAO, as appropriate.

[36 FR 24427, Dec. 22, 1971. Redesignated at 49 FR 32349, Aug. 14, 1984 
(interim), as amended at 59 FR 34580, July 6, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 17.65  Authority of offices to compromise claims or suspend or terminate collection action.

    (a) Small claims. The Assistant Secretary for Administration 
periodically shall establish and disseminate to claims collection 
officers a maximum dollar amount up to which claims collection officers 
are authorized to compromise a claim or suspend or terminate collection 
action on a claim.
    (b) Claims arising under certain programs. (1) The office primarily 
responsible for the following programs of the Department is authorized, 
in those cases where initial collection attempts are not wholly 
successful, to compromise or to suspend or terminate collection action 
on claims not exceeding $100,000 with respect to:
    (i) A claim under title I of the National Housing Act;
    (ii) A claim on a rehabilitation loan account under section 312 of 
the Housing Act of 1964;
    (iii) A claim against tenants or former tenants of properties 
acquired by, or under the custody of, the Secretary or held by him as 
mortgagee in possession; or

[[Page 172]]

    (iv) A claim arising out of the operational (nonadministrative) 
activities of the Government National Mortgage Association (GNMA).
    (2) However, no office shall undertake to compromise or terminate 
any collection action excluded under Sec. 17.64(b).

[36 FR 24427, Dec. 22, 1971. Redesignated at 49 FR 32349, Aug. 14, 1984, 
and amended at 52 FR 35414, Sept. 21, 1987; 59 FR 34580, July 6, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 17.66  Department claims officer.

    The Assistant Secretary for Administration shall designate a 
subordinate official as Department Claims Officer, who shall be 
responsible for the establishment and maintenance of procedures within 
the Department relating to the collection of claims and the co-
ordination of all collection activities in all Department offices.

[40 FR 28599, July 7, 1975. Redesignated at 49 FR 32349, Aug. 14, 1984]


<R05>
Sec. 17.67  Claims files.

    Each claims collection officer is responsible for obtaining current 
credit data about each person against whom a claim is pending in his 
office. The file shall be kept reasonably up to date by the Department 
Claims Officer for claims referred to the Assistant Secretary for 
Administration for collection. Such credit data may take the form of: 
(a) A commercial credit report, (b) an agency investigative report 
showing the debtor's assets and liabilities and his income and expenses, 
(c) the individual debtor's own financial statement executed under 
penalty of perjury reflecting his assets and liabilities and his income 
and expenses, or (d) an audited balance sheet of a corporate debtor. The 
file should also contain a checklist or brief summary of actions taken 
to collect or comprise a claim.


<R05>
Sec. 17.68  Monthly report of collection action.

    The Department Claims Officer shall make a monthly report to the 
Assistant Secretary for Administration and all offices that have 
referred claims for collection. The report should contain the following 
information as a minimum:
    (a) All outstanding claims referred to the Assistant Secretary for 
Administration for administrative collection, including the name and 
address of the debtor, the amount of the claim, the date the claim 
accrued, the basis of the claim, the office referring the claim, and the 
current progress of collection activities.
    (b) All claims compromised or on which collection has been suspended 
or terminated or referred to GAO or Justice for further collection 
action during the month. The collection action taken and the basis for 
the action should be indicated.
    (c) All claims referred to the Department of Justice under 
Sec. 17.64(a).
    (d) Claims returned to this Department by the Justice Department for 
further collection action because Justice's handling was not warranted.


<R05>
Sec. 17.69  Accounting control.

    Each office and the Department Claims Officer shall process all 
claims collections through the appropriate accounting office and report 
the collection, compromise, suspension and termination of all claims to 
the appropriate accounting office for recording.


<R05>
Sec. 17.70  Record retention.

    The file of each claim on which administrative collection action has 
been completed shall be retained by the appropriate office or the 
Assistant Secretary for Administration not less than 1 year after the 
applicable statute of limitations has run.


<R05>
Sec. 17.71  Suspension or revocation of eligibility.

    (a) Where a contractor, grantee, or other participant in programs 
sponsored by the Department fails to pay his debts to the Department 
within a reasonable time after demand, the fact shall be reported by the 
Assistant Secretary for Administration to the Inspector General, who 
shall place such defaulting participant's name on the Department's list 
of debarred, suspended and ineligible contractors and grantees and the 
participant will be so advised.
    (b) The failure of any surety to honor its obligations in accordance 
with 6 U.S.C. 11 is to be reported at once to

[[Page 173]]

the Assistant Secretary for Administration who shall so advise the 
Treasury Department. The Treasury Department will notify this Department 
when a surety's certificate of authority to do business with the 
Government has been revoked or forfeited.


<R05>
Sec. 17.72  Methods of collection and imposition of late charges.

    (a) Demand for payment. Appropriate written demands shall be made 
upon the debtor which shall include information relating to the 
consequences of his failure to cooperate.
    (b) Methods of collection: Administrative and salary offset. The 
Department may use administrative offset and salary offset procedures as 
alternative methods for the collection of money owed the Department from 
those set out in this section. For specific procedures on administrative 
offset see Secs. 17.100 through 17.118. For specific procedures on 
salary offset see Secs. 17.125 through 17.140.
    (c) Method of collection: Liquidation of collateral. Where the 
Department holds security or collateral that may be liquidated and the 
proceeds applied on debts due it through the exercise of a power of sale 
in the security instrument, such procedures will be followed if the 
debtor fails to pay his or her debt within a reasonable time after 
demand, unless the cost of disposing of the collateral will be 
disproportionate to its value, or unless special circumstances require 
judicial foreclosure.
    (d) Collection in installments. Claims with accrued interest should 
be collected in full in one lump sum whenever this is possible. However, 
if the debtor is financially unable to pay the indebtedness in one lump 
sum, payment may be accepted in regular installments.
    (e) Interest. Where prejudgment interest is not mandated by statute, 
contract or regulation, the minimum rate of interest to be charged on 
delinquent debts is the Tax and Loan Account Rate for the U.S. Treasury 
(also known as the Current Value of Funds rate) as prescribed and 
published semiannually by the Secretary of the Treasury in the Federal 
Register, in accordance with 31 U.S.C. 3717. Prejudgment interest may be 
waived as an inducement to voluntary payment. In such cases demand 
letters should inform the debtor that prejudgment interest will be 
collected if suit becomes necessary. When a debt is paid in installments 
and interest is collected, installment payments will first be applied to 
the payment of accrued interest and then to principal unless a different 
rule is prescribed by statute, contract or regulation. Prejudgment 
interest shall not be demanded or collected on civil penalty and 
forfeiture claim unless the statute under which the claim arises 
authorizes the collection of such interest.
    (f) Omission not a defense. Failure of HUD to comply with any 
standard prescribed in 4 CFR parts 101 through 105 or in this subpart 
shall not be available as a defense to any debtor.

[36 FR 24427, Dec. 22, 1971. Redesignated and amended at 49 FR 32349, 
32350, Aug. 14, 1984; 59 FR 34580, July 6, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 17.73  Standards for compromise of claims.

    (a) Compromise offer. An offer to compromise may be accepted: (1) If 
there is real doubt concerning the Department's ability to prove its 
case in court for the full amount claimed; (2) if the cost of collecting 
the claim does not justify the enforced collection of the full amount; 
(3) if in connection with statutory penalties of forfeitures established 
as an aid to enforcement and to compel compliance, the Department's 
enforcement policy will be adequately served by acceptance of the sum to 
be agreed upon, or (4) for other reasons deemed valid by the Assistant 
Secretary for Administration (or other designee) and made a part of the 
claim record.
    (b) Documentary evidence of compromise. No compromise of a claim 
shall be final or binding on the Department unless it is in writing and 
signed by the appropriate officer who has authority to compromise the 
claim pursuant to this subpart.


<R05>
Sec. 17.74  Standards for suspension or termination of collection action.

    (a) Suspension of collection action. Collection action shall be 
suspended temporarily on a claim when the debtor cannot be located after 
diligent effort

[[Page 174]]

but there is reason to believe that future collection action may be 
sufficiently productive to justify periodic review and action on the 
claim, having consideration for its size and the amount which may be 
realized. Collection action may be suspended temporarily on a claim when 
the debtor owns no substantial equity in realty and is presently unable 
to make payment on the Department's claim or effect a compromise, but 
his future prospects justify retention of the claim for periodic review 
and action and (1) the applicable statute of limitations has been tolled 
or started anew or (2) future collection can be effected by offset 
notwithstanding the statute of limitations. Suspension as to a 
particular debtor should not defer the early liquidation of security for 
the debt.
    (b) Termination of collection action. Collection action may be 
terminated and the Department file closed for the following reasons: (1) 
No substantial amount can be collected; (2) the debtor cannot be 
located; (3) the cost will exceed recovery; (4) the claim is legally 
without merit; or (5) the claim cannot be substantiated by evidence.


<R05>
Sec. 17.75  Referral to GAO or Justice Department.

    (a) Claims referred. Claims which cannot be collected, compromised, 
or terminated in accordance with 4 CFR parts 101 to 105 will be referred 
to the General Accounting Office in accordance with 31 U.S.C. 71 or to 
the Department of Justice if this Department has been granted an 
exception from referrals to the General Accounting Office. Also, if 
there is doubt as to whether collection action should be suspended or 
terminated on a claim, the claim may be referred to the General 
Accounting Office for advice. When recovery of a judgment is 
prerequisite to imposition of administrative sanctions, the claim may be 
referred to the Justice Department for litigation even though 
termination of collection activity might otherwise be considered.
    (b) Prompt referral. Such referrals shall be made as early as 
possible consistent with aggressive collection action, and in any event, 
well within the statute of limitations for bringing suit against the 
debtor.


<R05>
Sec. 17.76  Disclosure to a consumer reporting agency.

    (a) Definition. For purposes of this section, individual means a 
natural person.
    (b) Conditions for disclosure. The Secretary may disclose to a 
Consumer Reporting Agency information from a system of records to the 
effect that an individual is responsible for a debt. Before doing so, 
the Secretary will ensure that:
    (1) The notice for the system of records required by the Privacy Act 
of 1974 (5 U.S.C. 552a(e)(4)) indicates that the information in the 
system may be disclosed to a Consumer Reporting Agency;
    (2) There has been Departmental review of the debt and a 
determination that the debt is valid and overdue;
    (3) There has been written notice sent to the individual informing 
the individual:
    (i) That payment of the debt is overdue;
    (ii) That the Department intends to disclose to a Consumer Reporting 
Agency, within not less than 60 days after sending the notice, that the 
individual is responsible for the debt;
    (iii) Of the specific information intended to be disclosed to the 
Consumer Reporting Agency; and
    (iv) Of the rights of the individual to a full explanation of the 
debt, to dispute any information in the records of the Department 
concerning the debt, as determined by the Secretary, and to 
administrative appeal or review with respect to the debt; and
    (4) The individual has neither repaid or agreed to repay the debt 
under a written repayment plan signed by the individual and agreed to by 
the Secretary nor has filed for review of the claim under paragraph (c) 
of this section.
    (c) Limitations on disclosure. The Secretary may not disclose 
information to a Consumer Reporting Agency unless the Department has:
    (1) Obtained satisfactory assurances from each Consumer Reporting 
Agency that the agency is complying with the Fair Credit Reporting Act 
(15 U.S.C. 1681) and any other Federal laws governing the provision of 
consumer credit information;

[[Page 175]]

    (2) Provided, upon request by the individual alleged to be 
responsible for the claim, the opportunity to review the claim, 
including an opportunity for reconsideration of the initial decision on 
the claim; and
    (3) Taken reasonable action to locate an individual for whom the 
Secretary does not have a current address to send a notice under 
paragraph (b)(3) of this section.
    (d) Additional responsibilities of the Department. In providing 
information to a Consumer Reporting Agency, the Department will only 
disclose:
    (1) Information necessary to establish the identity of the 
individual, including name, address and taxpayer identification number;
    (2) The amount, status, and history of the claim; and
    (3) The program under which the claim arose.

In all cases, the Department will notify each Consumer Reporting Agency 
to which the original disclosure was made of any substantial change in 
the condition or amount of the claim. This includes promptly correcting 
or verifying information about the claim requested by the Consumer 
Reporting Agency.

[49 FR 32350, Aug. 14, 1984]


<R05>
Sec. 17.77  Contracts for collection services.

    The Secretary may enter into a contract or contracts for collection 
services to recover indebtedness owed the Department. Any such contract 
will include the following provisions:
    (a) The Secretary retains the authority to resolve a dispute, 
compromise a claim, end collection action or refer a matter to the 
Attorney General to bring civil action;
    (b) The person contracted with by the Secretary is subject to the 
Privacy Act of 1974 to the extent provided for in 5 U.S.C. 552a(m), the 
section on government contractors;
    (c) The person contracted with by the Secretary is subject to State 
and Federal laws governing debt collection practices, such as the Debt 
Collection Practices Act, 15 U.S.C. 1692; and
    (d) The person contracted with agrees to provide to the Secretary, 
if asked to return the file to the Department so that the Secretary may 
refer the account to the Department of Justice for litigation, any data 
contained in the files relating to actions previously taken to collect 
the debt, the current address of the debtor, as well as the current 
credit data of the debtor or any current other information requested and 
available.

[49 FR 32350, Aug. 14, 1984]

                    Administrative Offset Provisions

    Source: Sections 17.100 through 17.118, 49 FR 32351, appear at Aug. 
14, 1984, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 17.100  Scope.

    (a) The standards set forth in Secs. 17.100 through 17.118 are the 
Department's procedures for the collection of money owed to the 
government by means of administrative offset. These procedures apply to 
the collection of debts as authorized by common law, by 31 U.S.C. 3716, 
or under other statutory authority. These procedures will not be used 
when a statute provides its own collection procedure, for procedures for 
grant reduction as a remedial action in grant programs (including the 
CDBG program), when explicitly prohibited by a statute, or when the 
United States has a judgment against the debtor. Unless otherwise 
provided for by statute, these procedures do not apply to an agency of 
the United States, a State government, or unit of general local 
government. In addition, these procedures do not apply to debts arising 
under the Internal Revenue Code of 1954 (26 U.S.C. 1-9602), the Social 
Security Act (42 U.S.C. 301-1397f), or the tariff laws of the United 
States.
    (b) The Secretary will use administrative offset to collect claims 
which are certain in amount in every instance in which collection is 
determined to be feasible and not prohibited by law. The Secretary will 
determine feasibility on a case-by-case basis, exercising sound 
discretion. In determining feasibility the Secretary will consider:
    (1) The debtor's financial condition;
    (2) Whether offset would substantially interfere with or defeat the 
purposes of the program authorizing the payments against which offset is 
contemplated; and

[[Page 176]]

    (3) Whether offset best serves to further and protect all of the 
interests of the United States.


<R05>
Sec. 17.101  Coordinating administrative offset with another Federal agency.

    (a) When HUD is owed the debt. When the Department is owed a debt, 
but another Federal agency is responsible for making the payment to the 
debtor against which administrative offset is sought, the other agency 
shall not initiate the requested administrative offset until the 
Department provides the agency with a written certification that the 
debtor owes the Department a debt (including the amount and basis of the 
debt and the due date of the payment) and that the Department has 
complied with these regulations.
    (b) When another agency is owed the debt. The Department may 
administratively offset money it owes to a person who is indebted to 
another agency if requested to do so by that agency. Such a request must 
be accompanied by a certification by the requesting agency that the 
person owes the debt (including the amount) and that the person has been 
given the procedural rights required by 31 U.S.C. 3716 and 4 CFR part 
102.


<R05>
Sec. 17.102  Notice requirements before offset.

    Except as provided in Sec. 17.103, deductions will be made only 
after the Secretary makes a determination that an amount is owed and 
past due and provides the debtor with a minimum of 30 calendar days 
written notice. This Notice of Intent to Collect by Administrative 
Offset (Notice of Intent) will state:
    (a) The nature and amount of the debt:
    (b) That the Secretary intends to collect the debt by administrative 
offset until the debt and all accumulated interest and other charges are 
paid in full;
    (c) That the debtor has a right to obtain review within the 
Department of the Secretary's initial determination of indebtedness (see 
Sec. 17.104);
    (d) That the debtor has a right to inspect and copy Department 
records related to the debt, as determined by the Secretary, and will be 
informed as to where and when the inspection and copying can be done 
after the Department receives notice from the debtor that inspection and 
copying are requested. (see Sec. 17.105); and
    (e) That the debtor may enter into a written agreement with the 
Secretary to repay the debt, so long as the terms of the repayment 
agreement proposed by the debtor are agreeable to the Secretary (see 
Sec. 17.106).


<R05>
Sec. 17.103  Exceptions to notice requirements.

    (a) In cases where the notice requirements specified in Sec. 17.102 
already have been provided to the debtor in connection with the same 
debt under some other proceeding, the Secretary is not required to 
duplicate those requirements before effecting administrative offset.
    (b) The Secretary may effect administrative offset against a payment 
to be made to a debtor before completion of the procedures required by 
Sec. 17.102 if (1) failure to make the offset would substantially 
prejudice the Government's ability to collect the debt, and (2) the time 
before the payment is to be made does not reasonably permit the 
completion of those procedures. Such prior offset must be followed 
promptly by the completion of those procedures. Amounts recovered by 
offset but later found not to be owed to the Secretary will be refunded 
promptly.


<R05>
Sec. 17.104  Review within the Department of a determination of indebtedness.

    (a) Notification by debtor. A debtor who receives a Notice of Intent 
has the right to request Departmental review of the determination of 
indebtedness. To exercise this right, the debtor must send a letter 
requesting review to the Secretary. The letter must explain why the 
debtor seeks review and must be received by the Secretary within 20 
calendar days of the date of the Department's Notice of Intent.
    (b) Secretary's response. In response to a timely request for review 
of the initial determination of indebtedness, the Secretary will notify 
the debtor whether review will be by review of the record or by hearing. 
The notice to the debtor will include the procedures used for reviewing 
the record or will include

[[Page 177]]

information on the date, location and procedures to be used if review is 
by a hearing.


<R05>
Sec. 17.105  Review of departmental records related to the debt.

    (a) Notification by debtor. A debtor who intends to inspect or copy 
Departmental records related to the debt as determined by the Secretary 
must send a letter to the Secretary stating his or her intention. The 
letter must be received by the Secretary within 20 calendar days of the 
date of the Department's Notice of Intent.
    (b) Secretary's response. In response to timely notification by the 
debtor as described in paragraph (a) of this section, the Secretary will 
notify the debtor of the location and time when the debtor may inspect 
or copy Department records related to the debt.


<R05>
Sec. 17.106  Written agreement to repay debt as alternative to administrative offset.

    (a) Notification by debtor. The debtor may, in response to a Notice 
of Intent, propose a written agreement to repay the debt as an 
alternative to administrative offset. Any debtor who wishes to do this 
must submit a proposed written agreement to repay the debt. This 
proposed written agreement must be received by the Secretary within 20 
calendar days of the date of the Department's Notice of Intent.
    (b) Secretary's response. In response to timely notification by the 
debtor as described in paragraph (a) of this section, the Secretary will 
notify the debtor whether the debtor's proposed written agreement for 
repayment is acceptable. It is within the Secretary's discretion to 
accept a repayment agreement instead of proceeding by offset. In making 
this determination the Secretary will balance the Department's interest 
in collecting the debt against hardship to the debtor. If the debt is 
delinquent and the debtor has not disputed its existence or amount, the 
Secretary will accept a repayment agreement instead of offset only if 
the debtor is able to establish that offset would result in undue 
financial hardship or would be against equity and good conscience.


<R05>
Sec. 17.107  Stay of offset.

    If the debtor timely notifies the Secretary that he or she is 
exercising a right described in Sec. 17.104 or Sec. 17.106, the offset 
will be stayed until the Secretary either makes a determination 
concerning the debtor's proposal to repay the debt or issues a written 
decision following review of the record or, where appropriate, a 
hearing. However, interest continues to run during any stay.


<R05>
Sec. 17.108  Types of review.

    (a) Hearing. The Secretary will provide the debtor with a reasonable 
opportunity for hearing if:
    (1) An applicable statute authorizes or requires the Secretary to 
consider waiver of the indebtedness and the waiver determination turns 
on credibility or veracity; or
    (2) The debtor requests reconsideration of the debt and the 
Secretary determines that the question of the indebtedness cannot be 
resolved by review of the documentary evidence.
    (b) Review of the record. Unless the Secretary determines that a 
hearing is required (see paragraph (a) of this section), the Secretary 
will provide for a review of the record (a review of the documentary 
evidence).


<R05>
Sec. 17.109  Review procedures.

    (a) Hearings. (1) The appropriate Deputy Assistant Secretary (DAS) 
or designee conducts the hearing. The DAS or designee will take steps 
necessary to ensure that the hearing is conducted in a fair and 
expeditious manner. If necessary, the DAS or designee may administer 
oaths of affirmations.
    (2) The DAS or designee does not use the formal rules of evidence 
with regard to admissibility of evidence or the use of evidence once 
admitted. However, parties may object to clearly irrelevant material.
    (3) The DAS or designee records all significant matters discussed at 
the hearing. There is no ``official'' record or transcript provided for 
these hearings.
    (4) A debtor may represent himself or herself or may be represented 
by an attorney or other person. The Secretary is represented by the 
General Counsel or his or her designee.

[[Page 178]]

    (5) The Secretary proceeds first by presenting evidence on the 
relevant issues. The debtor then presents his or her evidence regarding 
these issues. The Secretary then may offer evidence to rebut or clarify 
the evidence introduced by the debtor.
    (b) Review of the record. The appropriate DAS or designee will 
review all material related to the debt which is in the possession of 
the Department. The DAS or designee makes a determination based upon a 
review of this written record, which may include a request for 
reconsideration of the determination of indebtedness, or such other 
relevant material submitted by the debtor.


<R05>
Sec. 17.110  Determination of indebtedness and appeal from determination.

    (a) Following the hearing or the review of the record, the DAS or 
designee will issue a written decision which includes the supporting 
rationale for the decision. The decision of the DAS or designee is the 
final agency action with regard to the particular administrative offset.
    (b) Copies of the DAS decision will be distributed to the debtor and 
the debtor's attorney or other representative, if applicable.

[36 FR 24427, Dec. 22, 1971. Redesignated at 49 FR 32349, Aug. 14, 1984 
(interim), as amended at 59 FR 34580, July 6, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 17.111  Procedures for administrative offset: single debt.

    (a) Offset will commence 31 days after the debtor receives the 
Notice of Intent, unless the debtor has requested a hearing (see 
Sec. 17.104) or has entered into a repayment agreement (see 
Sec. 17.106).
    (b) When there is review of the debt within the Department, offset 
will begin after the DAS determination has been issued under Sec. 17.110 
and a copy of the determination is received by the Department's Office 
of Finance and Accounting.


<R05>
Sec. 17.112  Procedures for administrative offset: multiple debts.

    The Secretary will use the procedures identified in Sec. 17.111 for 
the offset of multiple debts. However, when collecting multiple debts 
the Secretary will apply the recovered amounts to those debts in 
accordance with the best interests of the United States, as determined 
by the facts and circumstances of the particular case, paying special 
attention to applicable statutes of limitations.


<R05>
Sec. 17.113  Procedures for administrative offset: interagency cooperation.

    The Department will make use of all possible methods of cooperating 
with other Federal agencies in effecting collections by offset.


<R05>
Sec. 17.114  Procedures for administrative offset: time limitation.

    (a) The Secretary may not initiate administrative offset to collect 
a debt under 31 U.S.C. 3716 more than 10 years after the Secretary's 
right to collect the debt first accrued, unless facts material to the 
Secretary's right to collect the debt were not known and could not 
reasonably have been known by the officials of the Department who were 
responsible for discovering and collecting such debts.
    (b) When the debt first accrued is determined according to existing 
law regarding the accrual of debts. (See, for example, 28 U.S.C. 2415.)


<R05>
Sec. 17.115  Procedures for administrative offset: offset against amounts payable from Civil Service Retirement and Disability Fund.

    (a) Unless otherwise prohibited by law, the Secretary may request 
that moneys which are due and payble to a debtor from the Civil Service 
Retirement and Disability Fund be administratively offset in one or more 
payments to collect debts owed to the Secretary by the debtor. The 
Secretary submits the request to the appropriate officials of the Office 
of Personnel Management (OPM) in accordance with OPM regulations and 
procedures.
    (b) To request administrative offset under paragraph (a) of this 
section, the Secretary will provide a written certification that:
    (1) The debtor owes the Secretary a debt, including the amount of 
the debt;
    (2) The Secretary has complied with the applicable statutes, 
regulations, and procedures of the Office of Personnel Management; and

[[Page 179]]

    (3) The Secretary has complied with the Department's regulations 
contained in these regulations.
    (c) Once the decision is made to request administrative offset under 
paragraph (a) of this section, the Secretary will make the request as 
soon as practical after completion of the applicable procedures 
necessary for the Office of Personnel Management to identify the 
debtor's account and to add a notation in the debtor's file in 
anticipation of the time when the debtor requests or becomes eligible to 
receive payments from the Fund. (This notation will satisfy any 
requirement that offset be initiated before the applicable statute of 
limitations expires.)
    (d) If, at the time the debtor makes a claim for payments from the 
Fund, at least one year has elapsed since the offset was originally 
made, the debtor may offer a satisfactory repayment plan instead of 
offset upon establishing that changed financial circumstances would 
render the offset unjust.
    (e) If the Department collects part or all of the debt by other 
means before deductions are made or completed under paragraph (a) of 
this section, the Secretary will act promptly to modify or terminate the 
Department's request for offset under paragraph (a) of this section.


<R05>
Sec. 17.116  Procedures for administrative offset: offset of debtor's judgment against the United States.

    Collection by offset against a judgment obtained by a debtor against 
the United States will be accomplished in accordance with 31 U.S.C. 
3728.


<R05>
Sec. 17.117  Procedures for administrative offset: imposition of interest.

    Interest will be charged in accordance with Sec. 17.72.


<R05>
Sec. 17.118  Miscellaneous provisions: correspondence with the Department.

    (a) All correspondence from the debtor to the Secretary shall be 
addressed to the Department Claims Officer, Office of Finance and 
Accounting, Department of HUD, Washington, DC 20410.
    (b) The Department Claims Officer will deliver any correspondence to 
the appropriate Deputy Assistant Secretary within four working days.

                        Salary Offset Provisions

    Source: Sections 17.125 through 17.140, appear at 49 FR 32353, Aug. 
14, 1984, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 17.125  Scope.

    (a) The provisions set forth in Secs. 17.125 through 17.140 are the 
Department's procedures for the collection by salary offset of a Federal 
employee's pay to satisfy certain debts owed the government.
    (b) These regulations apply to collections by the Secretary from:
    (1) Current employees of the Department and other agencies who owe 
debts to the Department; and
    (2) Current employees of the Department who owe debts to other 
agencies.
    (c) These regulations do not apply to debts or claims arising under 
the Internal Revenue Code of 1954 (26 U.S.C. 1-9602); the Social 
Security Act (42 U.S.C. 301-1397f); the tariff laws of the United 
States; or to any case where collection of a debt by salary offset is 
explicitly provided for or prohibited by another statute.
    (d) These regulations identify the types of salary offset available 
to the Department, as well as certain rights provided to the employee, 
which include a written notice before deductions begin, the opportunity 
to petition for a hearing and to receive a written decision if a hearing 
is granted. These employee rights do not apply to any adjustment to pay 
arising out of an employee's election of coverage or a change in 
coverage under a Federal benefits program requiring periodic deductions 
from pay, if the amount to be recovered was accumulated over four pay 
periods or less.
    (e) Nothing in these regulations precludes the compromise, 
suspension or termination of collection actions where appropriate under 
the Department's regulations contained elsewhere in this subpart (see 24 
CFR 17.60 through 17.77).


<R05>
Sec. 17.126  Coordinating offset with another Federal agency.

    (a) When HUD is owed the debt. When the Department is owed a debt by 
an

[[Page 180]]

employee of another agency, the other agency shall not initiate the 
requested offset until the Department provides the agency with a written 
certification that the debtor owes the Department a debt (including the 
amount and basis of the debt and the due date of the payment) and that 
the Department has complied with these regulations.
    (b) When another agency is owed the debt. The Department may use 
salary offset against one of its employees who is indebted to another 
agency if requested to do so by that agency. Such a request must be 
accompanied by a certification by the requesting agency that the person 
owes the debt (including the amount) and that the employee has been 
given the procedural rights required by 5 U.S.C. 5514 and 5 CFR part 
550, subpart K.


<R05>
Sec. 17.127  Determination of indebtedness.

    In determining that an employee is indebted, the Secretary will 
review the debt to make sure that it is valid and past due.


<R05>
Sec. 17.128  Notice requirements before offset.

    Except as provided in Sec. 17.125(d), deductions will not be made 
unless the Secretary first provides the employee with a minimum of 30 
calendar days written notice. This Notice of Intent to Offset Salary 
(Notice of Intent) will state:
    (a) That the Secretary has reviewed the records relating to the 
claim and has determined that a debt is owed, the amount of the debt, 
and the facts giving rise to the debt;
    (b) The Secretary's intention to collect the debt by means of 
deduction from the employee's current disposable pay account until the 
debt and all accumulated interest are paid in full;
    (c) The amount, frequency, approximate beginning date, and duration 
of the intended deductions;
    (d) An explanation of the Department's requirements concerning 
interest, unless such payments are excused in accordance with 
Sec. 17.72;
    (e) The employee's right to inspect and copy Department records 
relating to the debt;
    (f) The employee's right to enter into a written agreement with the 
Secretary for a repayment schedule differing from that proposed by the 
Secretary, so long as the terms of the repayment schedule proposed by 
the employee are agreeable to the Secretary;
    (g) The right to a hearing, conducted by an administrative law judge 
of the Department or a hearing official of another agency, on the 
Secretary's determination of the debt, the amount of the debt, or 
percentage of disposable pay to be deducted each pay period, so long as 
a petition is filed by the employee as prescribed by the Secretary;
    (h) That the timely filing of a petition for hearing will stay the 
collection proceedings; (See Sec. 17.129).
    (i) That a final decision on the hearing will be issued at the 
earliest practical date, but not later than 60 calendar days after the 
filing of the petition requesting the hearing, unless the employee 
requests and the hearing officer grants a delay in the proceedings;
    (j) That any knowingly false or frivolous statements, 
representations, or evidence may subject the employee to:
    (1) Disciplinary procedures appropriate under 5 U.S.C. Ch. 75, 5 CFR 
part 752, or any other applicable statutes or regulations;
    (2) Penalties under the False Claims Act, 31 U.S.C. 3729-3731, or 
any other applicable statutory authority; or
    (3) Criminal penalties under 18 U.S.C. 286, 287, 1001, and 1002 or 
any other applicable statutory authority.
    (k) Any other rights and remedies available to the employee under 
statutes or regulations governing the program for which the collection 
is being made;
    (l) Unless there are applicable contractual or statutory provisions 
to the contrary, that amounts paid on or deducted for the debt which are 
later waived or found not owed to the United States will be promptly 
refunded to the employee; and
    (m) The method and time period for requesting a hearing.


<R05>
Sec. 17.129  Request for a hearing.

    (a) Except as provided in paragraph (d) of this section, an employee 
must file a petition for a hearing, that is received by the Secretary 
not later than

[[Page 181]]

20 calendar days from the date of the Department's notice described in 
Sec. 17.128 if an employee wants a hearing concerning--
    (1) The existence or amount of the debt; or
    (2) The Secretary's proposed offset schedule.
    (b) The petition must be signed by the employee and should admit or 
deny the existence of or the amount of the debt, or any part of the 
debt, briefly setting forth any basis for a denial. If the employee 
objects to the percentage of disposable pay to be deducted from each 
check, the petition should state the objection and the reasons for it. 
The petition should identify and explain with reasonable specificity and 
brevity the facts, evidence and witnesses which the employee believes 
support his or her position.
    (c) Upon receipt of the petition, the Department will send the 
employee a copy of the Salary Offset Hearing Procedures Manual of the 
Department of Housing and Urban Development.
    (d) If the employee files a petition for hearing later than the 20 
calendar days as described in paragraph (a) of this section, the hearing 
officer may accept the request if the employee can show that the delay 
was because of circumstances beyond his or her control or because of 
failure to receive notice of the filing deadline (unless the employee 
has actual notice of the filing deadline).


<R05>
Sec. 17.130  Result if employee fails to meet deadlines.

    An employee waives the right to a hearing, and will have his or her 
disposable pay offset in accordance with the Secretary's offset 
schedule, if the employee:
    (a) Fails to file a petition for a hearing as prescribed in 
Sec. 17.129; or
    (b) Is scheduled to appear and fails to appear at the hearing.


<R05>
Sec. 17.131  Written decision following a hearing.

    Written decisions provided after a request for a hearing will 
include:
    (a) A statement of the facts presented to support the nature and 
origin of the alleged debt;
    (b) The hearing officer's analysis, findings and conclusions, in 
light of the hearing, concerning the employee's or the Department's 
grounds;
    (c) The amount and validity of the alleged debt; and
    (d) The repayment schedule, if applicable.


<R05>
Sec. 17.132  Review of departmental records related to the debt.

    (a) Notification by employee. An employee who intends to inspect or 
copy departmental records related to the debt must send a letter to the 
Secretary stating his or her intention. The letter must be received by 
the Secretary within 20 calendar days of the date of the Notice of 
Intent.
    (b) Secretary's response. In response to timely notice submitted by 
the debtor as described in paragraph (a) of this section, the Secretary 
will notify the employee of the location and time when the employee may 
inspect and copy Department records related to the debt.


<R05>
Sec. 17.133  Written agreement to repay debt as alternative to salary offset.

    (a) Notification by employee. The employee may propose, in response 
to a Notice of Intent, a written agreement to repay the debt as an 
alternative to salary offset. Any employee who wishes to do this must 
submit a proposed written agreement to repay the debt which is received 
by the Secretary within 20 calendar days of the date of the Notice of 
Intent.
    (b) Secretary's response. In response to timely notice by the debtor 
as described in paragraph (a) of this section, the Secretary will notify 
the employee whether the employee's proposed written agreement for 
repayment is acceptable. It is within the Secretary's discretion to 
accept a repayment agreement instead of proceeding by offset. In making 
this determination, the Secretary will balance the Department's interest 
in collecting the debt against hardship to the employee. If the debt is 
delinquent and the employee has not disputed its existence or amount, 
the Secretary will accept a repayment agreement instead of offset only 
if the employee is able to establish that offset would result in undue 
financial

[[Page 182]]

hardship or would be against equity and good conscience.


<R05>
Sec. 17.134  Procedures for salary offset: when deductions may begin.

    (a) Deductions to liquidate an employee's debt will be by the method 
and in the amount stated in the Secretary's Notice of Intent to collect 
from the employee's current pay.
    (b) If the employee filed a petition for hearing with the Secretary 
before the expiration of the period provided for in Sec. 17.129, then 
deductions will begin after the hearing officer has provided the 
employee with a hearing, and the final written decision is in favor of 
the Secretary.
    (c) If an employee retires or resigns before collection of the 
amount of the indebtedness is completed, the remaining indebtedness will 
be collected according to the procedures for administrative offset (see 
Secs. 17.100 through 17.118).


<R05>
Sec. 17.135  Procedures for salary offset: types of collection.

    A debt will be collected in a lump-sum or in installments. 
Collection will be by lump-sum collection unless the employee is 
financially unable to pay in one lump-sum, or if the amount of the debt 
exceeds 15 percent of disposable pay. In these cases, deduction will be 
by installments.


<R05>
Sec. 17.136  Procedures for salary offset: methods of collection.

    (a) General. A debt will be collected by deductions at officially-
established pay intervals from an employee's current pay account, unless 
the employee and the Secretary agree to alternative arrangements for 
repayment. The alternative arrangement must be in writing, signed by 
both the employee and the Secretary.
    (b) Installment deductions. Installment deductions will be made over 
a period not greater than the anticipated period of employment. The size 
and frequency of installment deductions will bear a reasonable relation 
to the size of the debt and the employee's ability to pay. However, the 
amount deducted for any period will not exceed 15 percent of the 
disposable pay from which the deduction is made, unless the employee has 
agreed in writing to the deduction of a greater amount. If possible, the 
installment payment will be sufficient in size and frequency to 
liquidate the debt in three years. Installment payments of less than $25 
per pay period or $50 a month will be accepted only in the most unusual 
circumstances.
    (c) Sources of deductions. The Department will make deductions only 
from basic pay, special pay, incentive pay, retired pay, retainer pay, 
or in the case of an employee not entitled to basic pay, other 
authorized pay.


<R05>
Sec. 17.137  Procedures for salary offset: imposition of interest.

    Interest will be charged in accordance with Sec. 17.72.


<R05>
Sec. 17.138  Non-waiver of rights.

    So long as there are no statutory or contractual provisions to the 
contrary, no employee involuntary payment (of all or a portion of a 
debt) collected under these regulations will be interpreted as a waiver 
of any rights that the employee may have under 5 U.S.C. 5514.


<R05>
Sec. 17.139  Refunds.

    The Department will refund promptly to the appropriate individual 
amounts offset under these regulations when:
    (a) A debt is waived or otherwise found not owing the United States 
(unless expressly prohibited by statute or regulation); or
    (b) The Department is directed by an administrative or judicial 
order to refund amounts deducted from the employee's current pay.


<R05>
Sec. 17.140  Miscellaneous provisions: correspondence with the Department.

    The employee shall file an original and two copies of a request for 
a hearing with the Clerk, Office of the Chief Administrative Law Judge, 
Room 2158, Department of HUD, Washington, DC 20410, on official work 
days between the hours of 8:45 a.m. and 5:15 p.m. All other 
correspondence shall be submitted to the Department Claims Officer, 
Department of Housing and Urban Development, Washington, DC 20410. 
Documents may be filed by personal delivery or mail. All documents shall

[[Page 183]]

be printed, typewritten, or otherwise processed in clear, legible form 
and on letter-size paper.

                    IRS Tax Refund Offset Provisions

    Source: Sections 17.150 through 17.161 appear at 51 FR 39750, Oct. 
31, 1986, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 17.150  Scope.

    (a) The standards set forth in Secs. 17.150 through 17.161 are the 
Department's procedures for requesting the Internal Revenue Service 
(IRS) to offset tax refunds due taxpayers who have a past-due debt 
obligation to the Department. These procedures are authorized by the 
Deficit Reduction Act of 1984 (31 U.S.C. 3720A) and apply to the 
collection of debts as authorized by common law, by 31 U.S.C. 3716, or 
under other statutory authority.
    (b) The Secretary will use the IRS tax refund offset to collect 
claims which are certain in amount, past due and legally enforceable, 
and which are eligible for tax refund offset under regulations issued by 
the Secretary of the Treasury.
    (c) The Secretary will not report debts to the IRS except for the 
purpose of using the offset procedures described in Secs. 17.150 through 
17.161. Debts of less than $100.00, exclusive of interest and other 
charges, will not be reported.
    (d) If not legally enforceable because of lapse of statute of 
limitations but otherwise valid, the debt will be reported to the IRS as 
a forgiven debt on Form 1099G. (Form 1099G is an information return 
which Government agencies file with the IRS to report forgiven debt, and 
the forgiven amount is considered income to the taxpayer.) (See 
Sec. 17.159.)


<R05>
Sec. 17.151  Notice requirements before offset.

    A request for deduction from an IRS tax refund will be made only 
after the Secretary makes a determination that an amount is owed and 
past due and provides the debtor with 65 calendar days written notice. 
This Notice of Intent to Collect by IRS Tax Refund Offset (Notice of 
Intent) will state:
    (a) The nature and amount of the debt;
    (b) That unless the debt is repaid within 65 days from the date of 
the Notice, the Secretary intends to collect the debt by requesting the 
IRS to reduce any amounts payable to the debtor as refunds of Federal 
taxes paid by amount equal to the amount of the debt and all accumulated 
interest and other charges;
    (c) That the debtor has a right to obtain review within the 
Department of the Secretary's initial determination that the debt is 
past due and legally enforceable (see Sec. 17.152);
    (d) That the debtor has a right to inspect and copy departmental 
records related to the debt as determined by the Secretary and will be 
informed as to where and when the inspection and copying can be done 
after the Department receives notice from the debtor that inspection and 
copying are requested. (See Sec. 17.155.)


<R05>
Sec. 17.152  Review within the Department of a determination that an amount is past-due and legally enforceable.

    (a) Notification by debtor. A debtor who receives a Notice of Intent 
has the right to present evidence that all or part of the debt is not 
past-due or not legally enforceable. The debtor should send a copy of 
the Notice of Intent with a letter notifying the HUD Board of Contract 
Appeals within 25 calendar days from the date of the Department's Notice 
of Intent that he or she intends to present evidence. (See 
Sec. 17.161(a) for address of the Board.) Failure to give this advance 
notice will not jeopardize the debtor's right to present evidence within 
the 65 days provided for in paragraph (b) of this section. If the HUD 
Board of Contract Appeals has additional procedures governing the review 
process, a copy of the procedures will be mailed to the debtor after his 
request for review is received and docketed by the Board.
    (b) Submission of evidence. The debtor may submit evidence showing 
that all or part of the debt is not past-due or not legally enforceable 
along with the notification requested by paragraph (a) of this section, 
but in any event the evidence must be submitted to the Board of Contract 
Appeals within 65

[[Page 184]]

calendar days from the date of the Department's Notice of Intent. 
Failure to submit evidence within 65 calendar days will result in a 
dismissal of the request for review by the HUD Board of Contract 
Appeals.
    (c) Review of the record. After a timely submission of evidence by 
the debtor, an Administrative Judge from the HUD Board of Contract 
Appeals will review the evidence submitted by the Department which shows 
that all or part of the debt is past-due and legally enforceable. 
(Administrative Judges are appointed in accordance with 41 U.S.C. 
607(b)(1)). The Administrative Judge shall make a determination based 
upon a review of the written record, except that the Administrative 
Judge may order an oral hearing if he or she finds that:
    (1) An applicable statute authorizes or requires the Secretary to 
consider waiver of the indebtedness and the waiver determination turns 
on credibility or veracity; or
    (2) The question of indebtedness cannot be resolved by review of the 
documentary evidence.
    (d) Previous decision by Board of Contract Appeals. The debtor is 
not entitled to a review of the Department's intent to offset it, in a 
previous year the HUD Board of Contract Appeals has issued a decision on 
the merits that the debt is past-due and legally enforceable, except 
when the debt has become legally unenforceable since the issuance of 
that decision, or the debtor can submit newly discovered material 
evidence that the debt is presently not legally enforceable.


<R05>
Sec. 17.153  Determination of the Administrative Judge.

    (a) Following the hearing or the review of the record, the 
Administrative Judge shall issue a written decision which includes the 
supporting rationale for the decision. The decision of the 
Administrative Judge concerning whether a debt or part of a debt is 
past-due and legally enforceable is the final agency decision with 
respect to the past-due status and enforceability of the debt.
    (b) Copies of the Administrative Judge's decision will be 
distributed to the General Counsel of the Department, the Department's 
Office of Finance and Accounting, the debtor, and the debtor's attorney 
or other representative, if any.
    (c) If the Administrative Judge's decision affirms that all or part 
of the debt is past due and legally enforceable, the Secretary will 
notify the IRS after the Administrative Judge's determination has been 
issued under paragraph (a) of this section and a copy of the 
determination is received by the Department's Office of Finance and 
Accounting. No referral will be made to the IRS if review of the debt by 
the Administrative Judge reverses the initial decision that the debt is 
past due and legally enforceable.


<R05>
Sec. 17.154  Postponements, withdrawals and extensions of time.

    (a) Postponements and withdrawals. The Secretary may, for good 
cause, postpone or withdraw referral of the debt to the IRS. (For 
example, a delay in the mail between the debtor and the Secretary could 
normally warrant a postponement; a mathematical error or computer 
malfunction could be the reason for a withdrawal.)
    (b) Extensions of time. At the discretion of the Administrative 
Judge, time limitations required in these procedures may be extended in 
appropriate circumstances for good cause shown.


<R05>
Sec. 17.155  Review of departmental records related to the debt.

    (a) Notification by debtor. A debtor who intends to inspect or copy 
departmental records related to the debt as determined by the Secretary 
must send a letter to the Title I Representative stating his or her 
intention. The letter must be received by the Title I Representative 
within 25 calendar days from the date of the Department's Notice of 
Intent.
    (b) Department's response. In response to timely notification by the 
debtor as described in paragraph (a) of this section, the Title I 
Representative will notify the debtor of the location and time when the 
debtor may inspect or copy departmental records related to the debt.

[[Page 185]]


<R05>
Sec. 17.156  Stay of offset.

    If the debtor timely notifies the Secretary that he or she is 
exercising a right described in Sec. 17.152(a) and timely submits 
evidence in accordance with Sec. 17.152(b), any notice to the IRS will 
be stayed until the issuance of a written decision by the Administrative 
Judge which determines that a debt or part of a debt is past-due and 
legally enforceable.


<R05>
Sec. 17.157  Application of offset funds: Single debt.

    If the debtor does not timely notify the Secretary that he or she is 
exercising a right described in Sec. 17.152, the Secretary will notify 
the IRS of the debt no earlier than 65 calendar days from the date of 
the Department's Notice of Intent, and will request that the amount of 
the debt be offset against any amount payable by the IRS as refund of 
Federal taxes paid. Normally, recovered funds will be applied first to 
costs of collection, then to any special charges provided for in HUD 
regulations or contracts, then to interest and finally, to the principal 
owed by the debtor.


<R05>
Sec. 17.158  Application of offset funds: Multiple debts.

    The Secretary will use the procedures set out in Sec. 17.157 for the 
offset of multiple debts. However, when collecting on multiple debts the 
Secretary will apply the recovered amounts against the debts in the 
order in which the debts accrued.


<R05>
Sec. 17.159  Application of offset funds: Tax refund insufficient to cover amount of debt.

    If a tax refund is insufficient to satisfy a debt in a given tax 
year, the Secretary will recertify to the IRS the following year to 
collect further on the debt. If, in the following year, the debt has 
become legally unenforceable because of the lapse of the statute of 
limitations, the debt will be reported to the IRS as a forgiven debt in 
accordance with Sec. 17.150(d).


<R05>
Sec. 17.160  Time limitation for notifying the IRS to request offset of tax refunds due.

    (a) The Secretary may not initiate offset of tax refunds due to 
collect a debt for which authority to collect arises under 31 U.S.C. 
3716 more than 10 years after the Secretary's right to collect the debt 
first accrued, unless facts material to the Secretary's right to collect 
the debt were not known and could not reasonably have been known by the 
officials of the Department who were responsible for discovering and 
collecting such debts.
    (b) When the debt first accrued is determined according to existing 
law regarding the accrual of debts. (See, for example, 28 U.S.C. 2415.)


<R05>
Sec. 17.161  Correspondence with the Department.

    (a) All correspondence from the debtor to the Board concerning the 
right to review as described in Sec. 17.152 shall be addressed to the 
HUD Board of Contract Appeals, Room 2131, 451 Seventh Street SW., 
Washington, DC 20410-0500.
    (b) The request for review of Departmental records should be 
addressed to the Title I Representative whose address appears in the 
Notice of Intent of Offset. All requests for review of departmental 
records must be marked: Attention: Records Inspection Request.
    (c) All other correspondence shall be addressed to the Department 
Claims Officer, Office of Finance and Accounting, Department of Housing 
and Urban Development, room 2202, Washington, DC 20410.

[51 FR 39750, Oct. 31, 1986, as amended at 59 FR 59647, Nov. 18, 1994]


<R03>
PART 18--INDEMNIFICATION OF HUD EMPLOYEES--Table of Contents

<R05>


    Authority: 5 U.S.C. 301; 42 U.S.C. 3535(d).

    Source: 62 FR 6096, Feb. 10, 1997, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 18.1  Policy.

    (a) The Department of Housing and Urban Development may indemnify, 
in

[[Page 186]]

whole or in part, a Department employee (which for the purpose of this 
part includes a former Department employee) for any verdict, judgment or 
other monetary award which is rendered against any such employee, 
provided the Secretary or his or her designee determines that:
    (1) The conduct giving rise to the verdict, judgment or award was 
taken within the scope of his or her employment with the Department; and
    (2) Such indemnification is in the interest of the United States.
    (b) The Department of Housing and Urban Development may settle or 
compromise a personal damage claim against a Department employee by the 
payment of available funds, at any time, provided the Secretary or his 
or her designee determines that:
    (1) The alleged conduct giving rise to the personal damage claim was 
taken within the scope of employment; and
    (2) That such settlement or compromise is in the interest of the 
United States.
    (c) Absent exceptional circumstances, as determined by the Secretary 
or his or her designee, the Department will not entertain a request 
either to agree to indemnify or to settle a personal damage claim before 
entry of an adverse verdict, judgment or monetary award.
    (d) When an employee of the Department becomes aware that an action 
has been filed against the employee in his or her individual capacity as 
a result of conduct taken within the scope of his or her employment, the 
employee should immediately notify his or her supervisor that such an 
action is pending. The supervisor shall promptly notify the head of his 
or her operating component and the Associate General Counsel for 
Litigation and Fair Housing Enforcement, if the supervisor is located at 
headquarters, or Field Assistant General Counsel--who shall promptly 
notify the Associate General Counsel for Litigation and Fair Housing 
Enforcement--if the supervisor is located in the field. As used in this 
section, the term ``principal operating component'' means an office in 
the Department headed by an Assistant Secretary, the General Counsel, 
the Inspector General, or an equivalent departmental officer who reports 
directly to the Secretary. Questions regarding representation of the 
employee will be determined by the Department of Justice pursuant to 28 
CFR 50.15 (Representation of Federal officials and employees by 
Department of Justice attorneys or by private counsel furnished by the 
Department in civil, criminal, and congressional proceedings in which 
Federal employees are sued, subpoenaed, or charged in their individual 
capacities).
    (e) The employee may, thereafter, request indemnification to satisfy 
a verdict, judgment or monetary award entered against the employee or to 
compromise a claim pending against the employee. The employee shall 
submit a written request, with appropriate documentation including a 
copy of the verdict, judgment, award or other order or settlement 
proposal, in a timely manner to the head of the employee's principal 
operating component. The head of the employee's principal operating 
component shall submit the written request and accompanying 
documentation, together with a recommended disposition of the request, 
in a timely manner to the General Counsel.
    (f) The General Counsel shall seek the views of the Department of 
Justice on the request. Where the Department of Justice has rendered a 
decision denying representation of the employee pursuant to 28 CFR 
50.15, the General Counsel shall seek the concurrence of the Department 
of Justice on the request. If the Department of Justice does not concur 
in the request, the General Counsel shall so advise the employee and no 
further action on the employee's request shall be taken.
    (g) In all instances except those where the Department of Justice 
has non-concurred in the request, the General Counsel shall forward for 
decision to the Secretary or his or her designee the employee's request, 
the recommendation of the head of the employee's principal operating 
component, the views of the Department of Justice, and the General 
Counsel's recommendation.
    (h) Any payment under this part, either to indemnify a Department 
employee or to settle a personal damage

[[Page 187]]

claim, is contingent upon the availability of appropriated funds of the 
Department that are permitted by law to be utilized for this purpose.


<R03>
PART 20--BOARD OF CONTRACT APPEALS--Table of Contents

<R05>


    Subpart A--Development of Housing and Urban Development Board of 
                            Contract Appeals

Sec.
20.1  Scope of part.
20.2  Establishment of Board.
20.3  Organization and location of the Board.
20.4  Jurisdiction of the Board.
20.5  Board powers.

  Subpart B--Rules of the Department of Housing and Urban Development 
                        Board of Contract Appeals

20.10  Rules.

                         Preliminary Procedures

Rules
1. Appeals, how taken.
2. Notice of appeal, contents of.
3. Docketing of appeals.
4. Preparation, content, organization, forwarding, and status of appeal 
          file.
5. Dismissal for lack of jurisdiction.
6. Pleadings.
7. Amendments of pleadings or record.
8. Hearing election and motions.
9. Prehearing briefs.
10. Prehearing of presubmission conference.
11. Submission without a hearing.
12. Optional small claims (expedited) and accelerated procedures. (These 
          procedures are available solely at the election of the 
          appellant.)
12.1  Elections to utilize small claims (expedited) and accelerated 
          procedure.
12.2  The small claims (expedited) procedure.
12.3  The accelerated procedure.
12.4  Motions for reconsideration in Rule 12 cases.
13. Settling the record.
14. Discovery--depositions.
15. Interrogatories to parties, admission of facts, and production and 
          inspection of documents.
16. Filing and service of papers other than subpoenas.

                                Hearings

17. Where and when held.
18. Notice of hearings.
19. Unexcused absence of a party.
20. Hearings: conduct; examination of witnesses.
21. Subpoenas.
22. Copies of papers.
23. Posthearing briefs.
24. Transcript of proceedings.
25. Withdrawal of exhibits.

                             Representation

26. Appellant.
27. Government.

                                Decisions

28. Decisions.

                       Motion for Reconsideration

29. Motion for reconsideration.

                         Dismissals and Defaults

30. Dismissal without prejudice.
31. Dismissal or default for failure to prosecute or defend.

                                 Remand

32. Remand from court.

                                Sanctions

33. Sanctions.

                        Miscellaneous Procedures

34. Applicability.
35. Time, computation and extensions.
36. Ex parte communications.

    Authority: 41 U.S.C. 601-613; 42 U.S.C. 3535(d).


<R04>
Subpart A--Department of Housing and Urban Development Board of Contract 
                                 Appeals

    Source: 50 FR 45911, Nov. 5, 1985, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 20.1  Scope of part.

    This part establishes a Board of Contract Appeals, sets forth its 
function, policies and procedures regarding matters to be considered by 
the Board, and prescribes the rules of the Board.


<R05>
Sec. 20.2  Establishment of Board.

    There is established in the Office of the Secretary, the Housing and 
Urban Development Board of Contract Appeals (``the Board'').


<R05>
Sec. 20.3  Organization and location of the Board.

    (a) Location. The Board's mailing address is: Board of Contract 
Appeals, U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, Room 2131, 
451 Seventh Street, S.W., Washington, DC 20410-

[[Page 188]]

0001. For items requiring non-postal delivery, the Board is located in 
Room 3229, 1201 Constitution Ave., N.W. 20001. The telephone number of 
the Board is (202) 927-5110. (This is not a toll-free number.) For 
learning- or speech-impaired persons, this number may be accessed via 
TTY by contacting the Federal Information Relay Service at 1-800-877-
8339. The facsimile number is (202) 927-6257.
    (b) Organization. The Board shall be comprised of a Chief 
Administrative Judge, who shall be the Chair, an Administrative Judge, 
who shall be the Vice-Chair, and such other Administrative Judges as may 
be appointed by the Secretary. All members of the Board shall be 
attorneys at law duly licensed by any State, commonwealth, territory, or 
the District of Columbia. All members shall be selected and appointed to 
serve in accordance with section 8(b)(1) of the Contract Disputes Act of 
1978 (41 U.S.C. 608(b)(1)). Except as otherwise provided, appeals are 
assigned to a panel of at least three members who decide the case by a 
majority vote. The Chair shall assign one member of the panel to preside 
over the appeal and to conduct necessary conferences and hearings, 
supervise discovery and the development of the record for the Board, and 
to make such procedural determinations as are necessary to the proper 
disposition of the appeal.

[50 FR 45911, Nov. 5, 1985, as amended at 61 FR 13280, Mar. 26, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 20.4  Jurisdiction of the Board.

    (a) Contract appeals. The Board shall consider and determine appeals 
from decisions of contracting officers under the Contract Disputes Act 
of 1978 (41 U.S.C. 601-613) relating to contracts entered into by (1) 
the Department of Housing and Urban Development or (2) any other 
executive agency when that agency or the Administrator for Federal 
Procurement Policy has designated the Board to decide the appeal.
    (b) Other matters. The Board or its individual members shall have 
jurisdiction over other matters assigned to it by the Secretary or 
designee. Determinations in other matters shall have the finality 
provided by the applicable statute, regulation or agreement.


<R05>
Sec. 20.5  Board powers.

    (a) Board powers. The Board shall employ support personnel, as 
needed, and shall have all powers necessary and incident to the proper 
performance of the duties assigned to it.
    (b) Disqualification. No Administrative Judge may act for the Board 
or participate in a decision if, prior to the time the appeal was filed, 
he or she had participated in the matter in any manner on behalf of an 
interested party.


<R04>
  Subpart B--Rules of the Department of Housing and Urban Development 
                        Board of Contract Appeals

    Source: 50 FR 45912, Nov. 5, 1985, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 20.10  Rules.

    (a) These rules govern the procedure in all matters before the 
Department of Housing and Urban Development Board of Contract Appeals, 
unless otherwise provided by applicable law or regulation. The Federal 
Rules of Civil Procedure may be applied where procedures are not 
otherwise provided in these rules. For applications and proceedings 
involving award of attorney fees and other expenses, the rules set forth 
in 24 CFR part 14 shall apply.
    (b) Filing Requirements. A party shall file with the Board one 
original of any pleading or motion. That party shall simultaneously 
serve upon the other party of record one copy of that pleading or motion 
filed with the Board. Filings may be transmitted to the Board via 
facsimile. However, the original of any document transmitted to the 
Board by facsimile shall simultaneously be mailed to the Board.
    (c) Alternative Disputes Resolution. The Administrative Dispute 
Resolution Act authorizes and encourages Federal agencies to use 
mediation, conciliation, arbitration, and other techniques for the 
prompt and informal resolution of disputes. With the mutual consent of 
the parties, the Board may assist in the resolution of disputes by 
Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR) procedures. The utilization of ADR 
procedures shall not relieve the parties from the filing requirements or 
other orders

[[Page 189]]

of the Board relating to a contract appeal duly docketed before the 
Board.
    (d) Equal Access to Justice Act. The Equal Access to Justice Act 
provides that agencies which conduct adversary adjudications ``shall 
award, to a prevailing party other than the United States, fees and 
other expenses incurred by that party in connection with that 
proceeding, unless the adjudicative officer of the agency finds that the 
position of the agency was substantially justified or that special 
circumstances make an award unjust.'' 5 U.S.C. Sec. 504. Prevailing 
parties in proceedings before the Board may apply for an award under the 
Act following the issuance by the Board of its final decision in the 
appeal.

                         Preliminary Procedures

                       Rule 1. Appeals, how taken.

    (a) General. Notice of an appeal shall be in writing and mailed or 
otherwise furnished to the Board within 90 days from the date of receipt 
of a final written decision of the contracting officer.
    (b) Contracting officer's failure to act-claim of $100,000 or less. 
Where the contractor has submitted a claim of $100,000 or less to the 
contracting officer and has requested a written decision within 60 days 
from receipt of the request, and the contracting officer has not issued 
the decision, the contractor may file a notice of appeal as provided in 
paragraph (a) of this section, citing the failure of the contracting 
officer to issue a decision.
    (c) Contracting officer's failure to act-claim in excess of 
$100,000. Where the contractor has submitted a claim in excess of 
$100,000 to the contracting officer and the contracting officer has 
failed, within 60 days of submission of the claim, to issue a final 
written decision, or to advise the contractor of a date when the final 
written decision will be issued, the contractor may file a notice of 
appeal as provided in paragraph (a) of this section, citing the failure 
to issue a decision.
    (d) Unreasonable delay by contracting officer. A contractor may 
request the Board to direct a contracting officer to issue a final 
written decision within a specified period of time, as determined by the 
Board, in the event of an unreasonable delay on the part of the 
contracting officer.
    (e) Stay of proceedings. Upon docketing of appeals filed under 
paragraph (b) or (c) of this section, the Board may stay further 
proceedings pending issuance of a final decision by the contracting 
officer within the period of time determined by the Board.

                 Rule 2. Notice of appeal, contents of.

    A notice of appeal shall indicate that an appeal is being taken and 
shall identify the contract (by number), the department and agency 
involved in the dispute, the final written decision from which the 
appeal is taken, and the amount in dispute, if known. The notice of 
appeal shall be signed by the appellant (the contractor making the 
appeal), or by the appellant's duly authorized representative or 
attorney. The complaint referred to in Rule 6 may be filed with the 
notice of appeal, or the appellant may designate the notice of appeal as 
a complaint, if it otherwise fulfills the requirements of a complaint. A 
notice of appeal from a final written decision of a contracting officer 
involving a claim in excess of $100,000 shall state that certification 
has been made as required under section 6(c)(1) of the Contract Disputes 
Act of 1978 [41 U.S.C. 606(c)(1)].

                      Rule 3. Docketing of appeals.

    When a notice of appeal in any form has been received by the Board, 
it shall be docketed promptly. A written notice of docketing shall be 
transmitted to the appellant with a copy of these rules, to the 
contracting officer, and to HUD's Office of General Counsel.

 Rule 4. Preparation, content, organization, forwarding, and status of 
                              appeal file.

    (a) Duties of contracting officer. Within 30 days of receipt of 
notice from the Board that an appeal has been docketed, the contracting 
officer shall assemble and transmit to the Board (through HUD's Office 
of General Counsel) three copies of an appeal file consisting of all 
documents relevant to the appeal, including:
    (1) The decision from which the appeal is taken;
    (2) The contract including specifications and relevant amendments, 
plans, and drawings;
    (3) All correspondence between the parties relevant to the appeal, 
including the appellant's letter or letters of claim;
    (4) Transcripts of any testimony and affidavits or statements of any 
witnesses on the matter in dispute made prior to the filing of the 
notice of appeal with the Board; and
    (5) Any additional information considered relevant to the appeal.

Upon receipt of the appeals file, the Board shall furnish the appellant 
and HUD's Office of General Counsel with true and exact copies of the 
appeal file.
    (b) Duties of appellant. Within 30 days after receipt of a copy of 
the appeal file assembled by the contracting officer, the appellant 
shall transmit to the Board any documents not contained in the appeal 
file which are relevant to the appeal, and furnish two copies of these 
documents to the government trial attorney.

[[Page 190]]

    (c) Organization of appeal file. Documents in the appeal file may be 
originals, legible facsimiles, or authenticated copies, and shall be 
arranged in chronological order where practicable, numbered 
sequentially, tabbed, and indexed to identify the contents of the file.
    (d) Unusual documents. Upon request by either party, the Board may 
waive the requirement to furnish to the other party copies of bulky, 
lengthy, or out-of-size documents in the appeal file when inclusion 
would be burdensome. At the time a party files with the Board a document 
for which waiver has been granted, he or she shall notify the other 
party that the document or a copy is available for inspection at the 
offices of the Board or of the party filing the document.
    (e) Status of documents in appeal file. Documents contained in the 
appeal file are, without further action by the parties, part of the 
record upon which the Board will render its decision. However, a party 
may object, for reasons stated, to consideration of a particular 
document or documents within 30 days of receipt, unless good cause is 
shown for later objection. If an objection is made, the Board shall 
remove the document or documents from the appeal file and permit the 
party offering the document to move its admission as evidence in 
accordance with Rules 13 and 20.
    (f) Waiver of filing of documents. Notwithstanding the foregoing, 
the filing of the Rule 4 (a) and (b) documents may be dispensed with by 
the Board either upon request of the appellant in the notice of appeal 
or thereafter upon stipulation of the parties.

               Rule 5. Dismissal for lack of jurisdiction.

    Any motion addressed to the jurisdiction of the Board shall be 
promptly filed. Hearing on the motion shall be afforded on application 
of either party. However, the Board may defer its decision on the motion 
pending hearing on both the merits and the motion. The Board may at any 
time raise the issue of its jurisdiction to proceed with a particular 
case by an appropriate order, affording the parties an opportunity to be 
heard on the issue.

                           Rule 6. Pleadings.

    (a) Appellant. Within 30 days after receipt of notice of docketing 
of the appeal, the appellant shall file a complaint with the Board. The 
complaint shall set forth simple, concise and direct statements of each 
of the appellant's claims. Appellant shall also set forth the basis, 
with appropriate reference to contract provisions, of each claim and the 
dollar amount claimed, to the extent known. This pleading shall fulfill 
the generally recognized requirements of a complaint, although no 
particular form is required. Should the complaint not be received within 
30 days, appellant's notice of appeal may, if in the opinion of the 
Board the issues before the Board are sufficiently defined, be deemed 
its complaint and the Government shall be so notified.
    (b) Government. Within 30 days from receipt of the complaint, the 
Government shall file an answer with the Board. The answer shall set 
forth simple, concise and direct statements of Government's defenses to 
each claim asserted by appellant, including any affirmative defenses 
available.

               Rule 7. Amendments of pleadings or record.

    The Board, upon its own initiative or upon application by a party, 
may order a party to make a more definite statement of the complaint or 
answer, or to reply to an answer. The Board may, within the proper scope 
of the appeal, permit either party to amend its pleading upon conditions 
fair to both parties. When issues within the proper scope of the appeal, 
but not raised by the pleadings, are tried by express or implied consent 
of the parties, with the permission of the Board, they shall be treated 
in all respects as if they have been raised in the pleadings. In such 
instances, motions to amend the pleadings to conform to the proof may be 
entered, but are not required. If evidence is objected to at a hearing 
on the ground that it is not within the issues raised by the pleadings, 
it may be admitted within the proper scope of the appeal, provided, 
however, that the objecting party may be granted a continuance if 
necessary to enable it to meet this evidence.

                  Rule 8. Hearing election and motions.

    (a) Hearing election. After the filing of the Government's answer or 
notice from the Board that it has entered a general denial on behalf of 
the Government, each party shall advise whether it desires a hearing as 
prescribed in Rules 17 through 25, or whether it elects to submit its 
case on the record without a hearing, as prescribed in Rule 11.
    (b) Motions. (1) The Board may entertain any timely motion for an 
appropriate order. Application to the Board for an order shall be by 
motion which, unless made during a hearing, shall be made in writing, 
shall state with particularity the grounds for the motion and shall set 
forth the relief or order sought.
    (2) The Board may, on its own motion, initiate any action by notice 
to the parties.
    (3) Unless otherwise specified by the Board, a party who receives a 
motion shall file any answering material within 20 days after the date 
of receipt of the motion. The Board may require the presentation of 
briefs or arguments. The Board shall issue a decision on each motion 
that is appropriate and just to the parties.
    (4) Affidavits in support of motions shall set forth such facts as 
would be admissible in

[[Page 191]]

evidence and shall show affirmatively that the affiant is competent to 
testify to the matters stated in the affidavit. When a motion is made 
and supported as provided in this rule, a party opposing the motion who 
is represented by counsel may not rest upon the mere allegations or 
denials of his pleading; his response, by affidavits or as otherwise 
provided in this rule, must show that there is a genuine issue of fact 
or of law for decision. Should it appear from the affidavits of a party 
opposing the motion that for reasons stated he cannot present by 
affidavit facts essential to justify his opposition, the Board may deny 
the motion or may order a continuance to permit affidavits to be 
obtained or discovery to be had or may make such order as is just.

                       Rule 9. Prehearing briefs.

    Based on an examination of the pleadings, and its determination of 
whether the arguments and authorities addressed to the issues are 
adequately set forth in the pleadings, the Board may require the parties 
to submit prehearing briefs. If the Board does not require prehearing 
briefs, either party may upon appropriate and sufficient notice to the 
other party, furnish a prehearing brief to the Board. In any case where 
a prehearing brief is submitted, it shall be furnished so as to be 
received by the Board at least 15 days prior to the date set for 
hearing, and a copy shall simultaneously be furnished to the other 
party.

            Rule 10. Prehearing or presubmission conference.

    (a) Conference. Whether the case is to be submitted under Rule 11, 
or heard under Rules 17 through 25, the Board may upon its own 
initiative, or upon the application of either party, arrange a telephone 
conference or call upon the parties to appear before an Administrative 
Judge for a conference to consider:
    (1) Simplification, clarification, or severing of the issues;
    (2) The possibility of obtaining stipulations, admissions, 
agreements and rulings on admissibility of documents, understandings on 
matters already on record, or similar agreements that will avoid 
unnecessary proof;
    (3) Agreements and rulings to facilitate discovery;
    (4) Limitation of the number of expert witnesses or avoidance of 
cumulative evidence;
    (5) The possibility of agreement disposing of any or all of the 
issues in dispute; and
    (6) Such other matters as may aid in the disposition of the appeal.
    (b) Results of conference. The Administrative Judge shall make such 
rulings and orders as may be appropriate to achieve settlement by 
agreement of the parties or to aid in the disposition of the appeal. The 
results of the conference, including any rulings and orders, shall be 
reduced to writing by the Administrative Judge or the conference shall 
be transcribed. The writing or the transcript shall constitute a part of 
the record.

                 Rule 11. Submission without a hearing.

    Either party may elect to waive its right to appear at a hearing and 
to submit its case upon the record before the Board, as settled under 
Rule 13. Submission of a case without hearing does not relieve the 
parties from the necessity of proving the facts supporting their 
allegations or defenses. Affidavits, depositions, admissions, answers to 
interrogatories, and stipulations may be employed to supplement other 
documentary evidence in the record. The Board may permit submissions to 
be supplemented by oral argument, which may be transcribed if requested, 
and by briefs in accordance with Rule 9 or Rule 23.

 Rule 12. Optional small claims (expedited) and accelerated procedures. 
     (These procedures are available solely at the election of the 
                               appellant.)

Rule 12.1 Elections to utilize small claims (expedited) and accelerated 
                               procedure.

    (a) Election-dispute involving $50,000 or less. In appeals where the 
amount in dispute is $50,000 or less, the appellant may elect to have 
the appeal processed under a Small Claims (Expedited) procedure 
requiring decision of the appeal, whenever possible, within 120 days 
after the Board receives written notice of the appellant's election. The 
details of this procedure appear in section 12.2 of this Rule.
    (b) Election-dispute involving $100,000 or less. In appeals where 
the amount in dispute is $100,000 or less, the appellant may elect to 
have the appeal processed under an Accelerated procedure requiring 
decision of the appeal, whenever possible, within 180 days after the 
Board receives written notice of the apellant's election. The details of 
this procedure appear in section 12.3 of this Rule.
    (c) Notice of election. The appellant's election of either the Small 
Claims (Expedited) procedure or the Accelerated procedure may be made by 
written notice within 60 days after receipt of notice of docketing the 
appeal unless this period is extended by the Board for good cause. The 
election may not be withdrawn except with permission of the Board and 
for good cause.
    (d) Determination of amount in dispute. In deciding whether the 
Small Claims (Expedited) procedure or the Accelerated procedure is 
applicable to a given appeal, the Board shall determine the amount in 
dispute.

[[Page 192]]

            Rule 12.2 The small claims (expedited) procedure.

    (a) Document submission and prehearing conference. In cases 
proceeding under the Small Claims (Expedited) procedure, the following 
time periods shall apply: (1) Within ten days from the Government's 
first receipt from either the appellant or the Board of a copy of the 
appellant's notice of election of the Small Claims (Expedited) 
procedure, the Government shall send the Board a copy of the contract, 
the contracting officer's final decision, and the appellant's letter or 
letters of claim, if any; remaining documents required under Rule 4 
shall be submitted in accordance with times specified in that rule 
unless the Board otherwise directs;
    (2) Within 15 days after the Board has acknowledged receipt of 
appellant's notice of election, the assigned Administrative Judge shall 
take the following actions, if feasible, in an informal meeting or a 
telephone conference with both parties: (i) Identify and simplify the 
issues; (ii) establish a simplified procedure appropriate to the 
particular appeal; (iii) determine whether the appellant wants a 
hearing, and if so, fix a time and place for the hearing; (iv) require 
the Government to furnish all the additional documents relevant to the 
appeal, and (v) establish an expedited schedule for resolution of the 
appeal.
    (b) Pleadings, discovery and other prehearing activity. Pleadings, 
discovery and other prehearing activity will be allowed only as 
consistent with the requirement to conduct the hearing on the date 
scheduled, or if no hearing is scheduled, to close the record on a date 
that will allow decisions within the 120-day limit. The Board may impose 
shortened time periods for any actions prescribed or allowed under these 
rules, as necessary to enable the Board to decide the appeal within the 
120-day limit, allowing whatever time, up to 30 days, that the Board 
considers necessary for the preparation of the decision after closing 
the record and the filing of briefs, if any.
    (c) Decision. The written decision by the Board in cases processed 
under the Small Claims (Expedited) procedure will be short and contain 
only summary findings of fact and conclusions. Decisions will be 
rendered for the Board by a single Administrative Judge. If there has 
been a hearing, the Administrative Judge presiding at the hearing may at 
the conclusion of the hearing and after entertaining oral arguments as 
deemed appropriate, render on the record oral summary findings of fact, 
conclusions, and a decision of the Appeal. Whenever an oral decision is 
rendered, the Board will subsequently furnish the parties a typed copy 
of the oral decision (or a copy of the transcript of the hearing) for 
record and payment purposes and to establish the starting date for the 
period for filing a motion for reconsideration under Rule 29.
    (d) Effect of decision. A decision issued under the Small Claims 
(Expedited) procedure shall have no value as precedent and, in the 
absence of fraud shall be final and conclusive and may not be appealed 
or set aside.

                  Rule 12.3  The accelerated procedure.

    (a) Waiver of pleadings, discovery and briefs. In cases proceeding 
under the Accelerated procedure, the parties are encouraged, to the 
extent possible consistent with adequate presentation of their factual 
and legal positions, to waive pleadings, discovery, and briefs.
    (b) Pleadings, discovery, and other prehearing activity. Pleadings, 
discovery and other prehearing activity will be allowed only as 
consistent with the requirement to conduct the hearing on the dates 
scheduled or, if no hearing is scheduled, to close the record on a date 
that will allow decision within the 180-day limit. The Board may shorten 
time periods for any actions prescribed or allowed under these rules, as 
necessary to enable the Board to decide the appeal within the 180-day 
limit, and may reserve up to 30 days for preparation of the decision.
    (c) Decision. Written decisions by the Board in cases processed 
under the Accelerated procedure will normally be short and contain only 
summary findings of fact and conclusions. In cases where the amount in 
dispute is $50,000 or less where the Accelerated procedure has been 
elected and where there has been a hearing, the single Administrative 
Judge presiding at the hearing may, with the concurrence of both 
parties, at the conclusion of the hearing and after entertaining such 
oral arguments as deemed appropriate, render on the record oral summary 
findings of fact, conclusions, and a decision of the appeal. Whenever an 
oral decision is rendered, the Board will subsequently furnish the 
parties a typed copy of the oral decision (or a copy of the transcript 
of the hearing) for record and payment purposes, and to establish the 
starting date for the period for filing a motion for reconsideration 
under Rule 29.

        Rule 12.4  Motions for reconsideration in Rule 12 cases.

    Motions for Reconsideration of cases decided under either the Small 
Claims (Expedited) procedure or the Accelerated procedure need not be 
decided within the original 120-day or 180-day limit, but all such 
motions shall be processed and decided rapidly to fulfill the intent of 
this Rule.

                     Rule 13.  Settling the record.

    (a) Contents of record. The record upon which the Board's decision 
will be rendered consists of the documents in the appeal file furnished 
under Rule 4 or 12 (unless removed

[[Page 193]]

by the Board) and the following items, if any: Pleadings, prehearing 
conference memoranda or orders, prehearing briefs, depositions or 
interrogatories admitted into evidence, admissions, stipulations, 
transcripts of conferences and hearings, exhibits admitted into 
evidence, posthearing briefs, orders of the Board, and documents which 
the Board has specifically designated to be made a part of the record. 
The record will, at all reasonable times, be available for inspection by 
the parties at the office of the Board.
    (b) Closing of record. Except as the Board may otherwise order, no 
proof shall be received in evidence after completion of an oral hearing 
or, in cases submitted on the record, after notification by the Board 
that the case is ready for decision.
    (c) Weight of evidence. The weight to be attached to any evidence of 
record will rest within the sound discretion of the Board. The Board may 
in any case require either party, with appropriate notice to the other 
party, to submit additional evidence on any matter relevant to the 
appeal.

                    Rule 14.  Discovery--depositions.

    (a) General policy and protective orders. The parties are encouraged 
to engage in voluntary discovery procedures. In connection with any 
discovery procedure under this rule or rule 15, the Board may make any 
order required to protect a party or person from annoyance, 
embarrassment, or undue burden or expense. Those orders may include 
limitations on the scope, method, time and place for discovery, and 
provisions for protecting the secrecy of confidential information or 
documents.
    (b) When depositions permitted. After an appeal has been docketed 
and complaint filed, the parties may mutually agree to, or the Board 
may, upon application of either party, order the taking of testimony of 
any person by deposition upon oral examination or written 
interrogatories before any officer authorized to administer oaths at the 
place of examination.
    (c) Orders on depositions. The time, place, and manner of taking 
depositions shall be as mutually agreed by the parties, or failing such 
agreement, governed by order of the Board.
    (d) Use as evidence. No testimony taken by depositions shall be 
considered as part of the evidence in the hearing of an appeal until the 
testimony is offered and received in evidence at the hearing. It will 
not ordinarily be received in evidence if the deponent is present and 
can testify at the hearing. In these instances, however, the deposition 
may be used to contradict or impeach the testimony of the deponent given 
at the hearing. In cases submitted on the record, the Board may receive 
depositions to supplement the record.
    (e) Expenses. Each party shall bear its own expenses associated with 
the taking of any depositions.

Rule 15.  Interrogatories to parties, admission of facts, and production 
                      and inspection of documents.

    After an appeal has been docketed and complaint filed with the 
Board, a party may serve on the other party: (a) Written interrogatories 
to be answered separately in writing, signed under oath and answered or 
objected to within 30 days; (b) a request for the admission of specified 
facts or the authenticity of any documents, to be answered or objected 
to within 30 days after service; the factual statements and the 
authenticity of the documents to be deemed admitted upon failure of a 
party to respond to the request; and (c) a request for the production, 
inspection and copying of any documents or objects not privileged, which 
reasonably may lead to the discovery of admissible evidence.

      Rule 16.  Filing and service of papers other than subpoenas.

    Papers shall be considered filed with the Board when mailed or 
otherwise furnished to the Board. Papers shall be served upon parties 
personally or by mail, addressed to the party upon whom service is to be 
made. Timely filing and service by facsimile transmission (telecopier) 
is permissible provided that the original telecopied document is 
promptly mailed or served thereafter in the manner specified by this 
rule. Except as provided in rule 4(a), the party filing any paper with 
the Board shall simultaneously serve a copy of the paper upon the 
opposing party, and shall file a certificate of service with the Board 
indicating that a copy has been so served. Subpoenas shall be served as 
provided in rule 21.

                                Hearings

                     Rule 17.  Where and when held.

    Hearings will be held at places determined by the Board to best 
serve the interest of the parties and the Board. Hearings will be 
scheduled at the discretion of the Board with due consideration to the 
regular order of appeals, Rule 12 requirements, the convenience of the 
parties, the requirement for just and inexpensive determination of 
appeals without necessary delay, and other pertinent factors. On request 
or motion by either party and for good cause, the Board may adjust the 
date of a hearing.

                      Rule 18.  Notice of hearings.

    Parties shall be given not less than 20 days notice of the time and 
place for hearing, unless otherwise agreed. The notice of hearing shall 
be sent by certified mail (return receipt requested).

[[Page 194]]

                 Rule 19.  Unexcused absence of a party.

    The unexcused absence of a party at the time and place set for 
hearing will not be occasion for delay. Notwithstanding the provisions 
of Rule 31, in the event of an unexcused absence: (a) The appeal will be 
dismissed with prejudice for want of prosecution; or (b) the hearing 
will proceed and the case will be regarded as submitted on the record by 
the absent party.

         Rule 20.  Hearings: conduct; examination of witnesses.

    (a) Conduct of hearings. Hearings shall be as informal as may be 
reasonable and appropriate under the circumstances. Appellant and the 
Government may offer such evidence as would be admissible under the 
Federal Rules of Evidence or as otherwise determined to be reliable and 
relevant by the presiding Administrative Judge. Stipulations of fact 
agreed upon by the parties may be regarded and used as evidence at the 
hearing. The parties may stipulate the testimony that would be given by 
a witness if the witness were present. The Board may require evidence in 
addition to that offered by the parties.
    (b) Examination of witnesses. Oral testimony before the Board shall 
generally be given under oath or affirmation. However, if the testimony 
of a witness is not given under oath or affirmation, the Board shall 
advise the witness that his statements may be subject to the provisions 
of title 18 U.S.C., sections 287 and 1001, and any other provision of 
law imposing penalties for knowingly making false representations in 
connection with claims against the United States or in any matter within 
the jurisdiction of any department or agency.

                          Rule 21.  Subpoenas.

    (a) General. Upon written request of either party filed with the 
Board or on the Administrative Judge's initiative, the Administrative 
Judge to whom a case is assigned or who is otherwise designated by the 
Chairman may issue a subpoena requiring:
    (1) Testimony at a deposition--the deposing of a witness in the city 
or county where he or she resides, is employed or transacts business in 
person, or at another location convenient for the witness that is 
specifically determined by the Board;
    (2) Testimony at a hearing--the attendance of a witness for the 
purpose of taking testimony at a hearing; and
    (3) Production of books and papers--the production by the witness at 
the deposition or hearing of books and papers designated in the 
subpoena.
    (b) Voluntary cooperation. Each party is expected (1) to cooperate 
and make available witnesses and evidence under its control as requested 
by the other party, without issuance of a subpoena, and (2) to secure 
voluntary attendance of desired third-party witnesses and production of 
desired third-party books, papers, documents, or tangible things 
whenever possible.
    (c) Requests for subpoenas. (1) A request for a subpoena shall 
normally be filed at least:
    (i) 15 days before a scheduled deposition where the attendance of a 
witness at a deposition is sought;
    (ii) 30 days before a scheduled hearing where the attendance of a 
witness at a hearing is sought.
    In its discretion the Board may honor requests for subpoenas not 
made within these time limitations.
    (2) A request for a subpoena shall state the reasonable scope and 
general relevance to the case of the testimony and of any books and 
papers sought.
    (d) Requests to quash or modify. Upon written request by the person 
subpoenaed or by a party, made within 10 days after service but in any 
event not later than the time specified in the subpoena for compliance, 
the Board may (1) quash or modify the subpoena if it is unreasonable and 
oppressive or for other good cause shown, or (2) require the person in 
whose behalf the subpoena was issued to advance the reasonable cost of 
producing subpoenaed books and papers. Where circumstances require, the 
Board may act upon such a request at any time after a copy of the 
request has been served upon the opposing party.
    (e) Form; issuance. (1) Every subpoena shall state the name of the 
Board and the title of the appeal, and shall command each person to whom 
it is directed to attend and give testimony, and if appropriate, to 
produce specified books and papers at the time and place specified in 
the subpoena. In issuing a subpoena to a requesting party, the 
Administrative Judge shall sign the subpoena and may, in his discretion, 
enter the name of the witness and otherwise leave it blank. The party to 
whom the subpoena is issued shall complete the subpoena before service.
    (2) Where the witness is located in a foreign county, a letter 
rogatory or subpoena may be issued and served under the circumstances 
and in the manner provided in 28 U.S.C. 1781-1784.
    (f) Service. (1) The party requesting issuance of a subpoena shall 
be responsible for service.
    (2) A subpoena requiring the attendance of a witness at a deposition 
or hearing may be served (i) by sending a copy of the subpoena by 
certified mail (return receipt requested) to the last known address of 
the party named in the subpoena, or (ii) by personal delivery of a copy 
of the subpoena to the party named in the subpoena, by a United States 
marshal or deputy marshal, or by any other person who is not a party and 
not less than 18 years of age. Service shall include the tender of the

[[Page 195]]

fees for one day's attendance and the mileage provided by 28 U.S.C. 1821 
or other applicable law; however, where the subpoena is issued on behalf 
of the Government, money payments need not be tendered in advance of 
attendance.
    (3) The party at whose instance a subpoena is issued shall be 
responsible for the payment of fees and mileage of the witness and for 
the costs of service of the subpoena.
    (g) Contumacy or refusal to obey subpoena. In case of contumacy or 
refusal to obey a subpoena by a person who resides, is found, or 
transacts business within the jurisdiction of a United States District 
Court, the Board will apply to the Court through the Attorney General of 
the United States for an order requiring the person to appear before the 
Board or a member of the Board to give testimony or produce evidence or 
both.

                       Rule 22. Copies of papers.

    When books, records, papers, or documents have been received in 
evidence, a true copy of this evidence or a copy of any material or 
relevant part of this evidence may be substituted during or at the 
conclusion of the hearing.

                      Rule 23. Posthearing briefs.

    The presiding Administrative Judge may order the parties to submit 
post hearing briefs to the Board.

                   Rule 24. Transcript of proceedings.

    Testimony and argument at hearings shall be reported verbatim, 
unless the Board otherwise orders. Extra transcripts or copies of the 
proceedings in the possession of the board may be supplied to the 
parties. Otherwise, the parties may obtain transcripts or copies of the 
proceedings from the hearing reporter.

                    Rule 25. Withdrawal of exhibits.

    After a decision has become final the Board may, upon request and 
after notice to the other party, permit the withdrawal of original 
exhibits, or any part of original exhibits by the party entitled to the 
exhibits. The subsitution of true copies of exhibits or any part of 
exhibits may be required by the Board as a condition of granting 
permission for the withdrawal.

                             Representation

                           Rule 26. Appellant.

    An individual appellant may appear before the Board in person; a 
corporation by one of its duly authorized officers; and a partnership or 
joint venture by one of its duly authorized members; or any of these by 
an attorney at law duly licensed in any State, commonwealth, territory, 
the District of Columbia, or in a foreign country. An attorney 
representing an appellant shall file a written notice of appearance with 
the Board.

                          Rule 27. Government.

    Government counsel may, in accordance with their authority, 
represent the interests of the Government before the Board. They shall 
file notices of appearance with the Board. This notice of appearance 
will be given appellant or appellant's attorney in the form specified by 
the Board from time to time. Whenever an appellant and the Government 
are in agreement as to disposition of the controversy, the Board may 
suspend further processing of the appeal. However, if the Board is 
advised by either party that the controversy has not been disposed of by 
agreement, the case shall be restored to the Board's calendar without 
loss of position.

                                Decisions

                           Rule 28. Decisions.

    Decisions of the Board shall be made in writing. Copies of the 
decision shall be forwarded simultaneously to both parties. The rules of 
the Board and all final orders and decisions (except those required for 
good cause to be held confidential and not cited as precedents) shall be 
open for public inspection at the offices of the Board in Washington, 
DC. Decisions of the Board shall be made solely upon the record, as 
described in Rule 13. Oral decisions shall be rendered in accordance 
with Rules 12.2(c) and 12.3(c).

                       Motion for Reconsideration

                  Rule 29. Motion for reconsideration.

    A motion for reconsideration may be filed by either party. It shall 
set forth specifically the grounds relied upon to sustain the motion. 
The motion shall be filed within 30 days from the date of the receipt of 
a copy of the decision of the Board by the party filing the motion.

                         Dismissals and Defaults

                  Rule 30. Dismissal without prejudice.

    In certain cases, appeals docketed before the Board are required to 
be placed in a suspended status and the Board is unable to proceed with 
disposition for reasons not within the control of the Board. Where the 
suspension has continued, or may continue, for an inordinate length of 
time, the Board may dismiss such appeals from its docket without 
prejudice to their restoration to the docket when the cause of 
suspension has been removed. Unless either party or the Board acts 
within three years to reinstate any appeal dismissed without prejudice, 
the dismissal shall be considered to be with prejudice.

[[Page 196]]

    Rule 31. Dismissal or default for failure to prosecute or defend.

    Whenever a record discloses the failure of either party to file 
documents required by these rules, respond to notices or correspondence 
from the Board, comply with orders of the Board, or otherwise indicates 
an intention not to continue the prosecution or defense of an appeal, 
the Board may, in the case of such a default by the appellant, issue an 
order to show cause why the appeal should not be dismissed with 
prejudice or, in the case of a default by the Government, issue an order 
to show cause why the Board should not act under Rule 33. If good cause 
is not shown, the Board may take appropriate action.

                                 Remand

                       Rule 32. Remand from court.

    Whenever any court remands a case to the Board for further 
proceedings, each of the parties shall, within 20 days of the remand, 
submit a report to the Board recommending procedures to be followed to 
comply with the court's order. The Board shall consider any timely filed 
reports and enter special orders governing the handling of the remanded 
case. To the extent the court's directive and time limitations permit, 
these orders shall conform to these rules.

                                Sanctions

                           Rule 33. Sanctions.

    If any party fails or refuses to obey an order issued by the Board, 
the Board may then make such order as it considers necessary to the just 
and expeditious conduct or dismissal of the appeal.

                        Miscellaneous Procedures

                        Rule 34.  Applicability.

    These rules shall apply to all appeals relating to contracts entered 
into on or after March 1, 1979, and, to appeals relating to earlier 
contracts, with respect to claims pending before the contracting officer 
on March 1, 1979 or initiated thereafter, if the contractor elects to 
proceed under the Act.

              Rule 35.  Time, computation, and extensions.

    (a) General. Where possible, procedural actions should be taken in 
less time than the maximum time allowed. Where appropriate and 
justified, extensions of time shall be granted. All requests for 
extensions of time shall be in writing and shall be filed before the due 
date, unless excused.
    (b) Computation. In computing any period of time, the day of the 
event from which the designated period of time begins to run shall not 
be included, but the last day of the period shall be included unless it 
is a Saturday, Sunday, or a legal holiday, in which event the period 
shall run to the end of the next business day.

                   Rule 36.  Ex parte communications.

    (a) Definition. An ex parte communication is any communication with 
a member of the Board, direct or indirect, oral or written, concerning 
the merits of matters in issue of any pending proceeding which is made 
by a party in the absence of any other party. Ex parte communications do 
not include communications where:
    (1) The purpose and content of the communication have been disclosed 
in advance or simultaneously to all parties;
    (2) The communication is a request for information concerning the 
status of the case; or
    (3) The communication involves the Board's administrative functions 
or procedures.
    (b) Prohibition of ex parte communications. Ex parte communications 
are prohibited.
    (c) Procedure after receipt of ex parte communications. Any member 
of the Board who receives an ex parte communication that the member of 
the Board knows or has reason to believe is unauthorized shall promptly 
place the communication, or its substance, in all files and shall 
furnish copies to all parties. Unauthorized ex parte communications 
shall not be taken into consideration in deciding any matter in issue.

[50 FR 45912, Nov. 5, 1985, as amended at 52 FR 27130, July 17, 1987; 57 
FR 20201, May 12, 1992; 61 FR 13280-13281, Mar. 26, 1996]


<R03>
PART 24--GOVERNMENT DEBARMENT AND SUSPENSION AND GOVERNMENTWIDE REQUIREMENTS FOR DRUG-FREE WORKPLACE (GRANTS)--Table of Contents

<R05>


                           Subpart A--General

Sec.
24.100  Purpose.
24.105  Definitions.
24.110  Coverage.
24.115  Policy.

                       Subpart B--Effect of Action

24.200  Debarment or suspension.
24.205  Ineligible persons.
24.210  Voluntary exclusion.
24.215  Exception provision.
24.220  Continuation of covered transactions.
24.225  Failure to adhere to restrictions.

                          Subpart C--Debarment

24.300  General.
24.305  Causes for debarment.

[[Page 197]]

24.310  Procedures.
24.311  Investigation and referral.
24.312  Notice of proposed debarment.
24.313  Opportunity to contest proposed debarment.
24.314  Debarring official's decision.
24.315  Settlement and voluntary exclusion.
24.320  Period of debarment.
24.325  Scope of debarment.

                          Subpart D--Suspension

24.400  General.
24.405  Causes for suspension.
24.410  Procedures.
24.411  Notice of suspension.
24.412  Opportunity to contest suspension.
24.413  Suspending official's decision.
24.415  Period of suspension.
24.420  Scope of suspension.

       Subpart E--Responsibilities of GSA, Agency and Participants

24.500  GSA responsibilities.
24.505  HUD responsibilities.
24.510  Participants' responsibilities.

          Subpart F--Drug-Free Workplace Requirements (Grants)

24.600  Purpose.
24.605  Definitions.
24.610  Coverage.
24.615  Grounds for suspension of payments, suspension or termination of 
          grants, or suspension or debarment.
24.620  Effect of violation.
24.625  Exception provision.
24.630  Certification requirements and procedures.
24.635  Reporting of and employee sanctions for convictions of criminal 
          drug offenses.

               Subpart G--Limited Denial of Participation

24.700  General.
24.705  Causes for a limited denial of participation.
24.710  Period and scope of a limited denial of participation.
24.711  Notice of limited denial of participation.
24.712  Conference.
24.713  Opportunity to contest the limited denial of participation.
24.714  Reporting of limited denial of participation.

    Authority: 41 U.S.C. 701 et seq.; 42 U.S.C. 3535(d); E.O. 12549, 51 
FR 6370, 3 CFR, 1986 Comp., p. 189; E.O. 12689, 54 FR 34131, 3 CFR, 1989 
Comp., p. 235.

    Source: 53 FR 19182 and 19204, May 26, 1988, unless otherwise noted.

    Cross Reference: See also Office of Management and Budget notice 
published at 55 FR 21679, May 25, 1990, and 60 FR 33036, June 26, 1995.


<R04>
                           Subpart A--General


<R05>
Sec. 24.100  Purpose.

    (a) Executive Order (E.O.) 12549 provides that, to the extent 
permitted by law, Executive departments and agencies shall participate 
in a governmentwide system for nonprocurement debarment and suspension. 
A person who is debarred or suspended shall be excluded from Federal 
financial and nonfinancial assistance and benefits under Federal 
programs and activities. Debarment or suspension of a participant in a 
program by one agency shall have governmentwide effect.
    (b) These regulations implement section 3 of E.O. 12549 and the 
guidelines promulgated by the Office of Management and Budget under 
section 6 of the E.O. by:
    (1) Prescribing the programs and activities that are covered by the 
governmentwide system;
    (2) Prescribing the governmentwide criteria and governmentwide 
minimum due process procedures that each agency shall use;
    (3) Providing for the listing of debarred and suspended 
participants, participants declared ineligible (see definition of 
``ineligible'' in Sec. 24.105), and participants who have voluntarily 
excluded themselves from participation in covered transactions;
    (4) Setting forth the consequences of a debarment, suspension, 
determination of ineligibility, or voluntary exclusion; and
    (5) Offering such other guidance as necessary for the effective 
implementation and administration of the governmentwide system.
    (c) These regulations also implement Executive Order 12689 (3 CFR, 
1989 Comp., p. 235) and 31 U.S.C. 6101 note (Public Law 103-355, sec. 
2455, 108 Stat. 3327) by--
    (1) Providing for the inclusion in the List of Parties Excluded from 
Federal Procurement and Nonprocurement Programs all persons proposed for 
debarment, debarred or suspended under the Federal Acquisition 
Regulation, 48 CFR part 9, subpart 9.4; persons against which 
governmentwide exclusions have

[[Page 198]]

been entered under this part; and persons determined to be ineligible; 
and
    (2) Setting forth the consequences of a debarment, suspension, 
determination of ineligibility, or voluntary exclusion.
    (d) Although these regulations cover the listing of ineligible 
participants and the effect of such listing, they do not prescribe 
policies and procedures governing declarations of ineligibility.
    (e) These regulations also:
    (1) Prescribe policies and procedures governing the debarment and 
suspension of contractors and the limited denial of participation of 
participants and contractors;
    (2) Provide for the listing of debarred, suspended and ineligible 
contractors; and
    (3) Set forth the consequences of such listing.
    (f) Although this part covers the listing of ineligible contractors, 
it does not prescribe policies and procedures governing declarations of 
ineligibility.

[60 FR 33040, 33048, June 26, 1995, as amended at 60 FR 33048, June 26, 
1995]


<R05>
Sec. 24.105  Definitions.

    The following definitions apply to this part:
    Adequate evidence. Information sufficient to support the reasonable 
belief that a particular act or omission has occurred.
    Affiliate. Persons are affiliates of each other if, directly or 
indirectly, either one controls or has the power to control the other, 
or, a third person controls or has the power to control both. Indicia of 
control include, but are not limited to: interlocking management or 
ownership, identity of interests among family members, shared facilities 
and equipment, common use of employees, or a business entity organized 
following the suspension or debarment of a person which has the same or 
similar management, ownership, or principal employees as the suspended, 
debarred, ineligible, or voluntarily excluded person.
    Agency. Any executive department, military department or defense 
agency or other agency of the executive branch, excluding the 
independent regulatory agencies.
    Benefits. Money or any other thing of value provided by, or realized 
because of the Department. Thing of value includes insurance or 
guarantees of any kind.
    Civil judgment. The disposition of a civil action by any court of 
competent jurisdiction, whether entered by verdict, decision, 
settlement, stipulation, or otherwise creating a civil liability for the 
wrongful acts complained of; or a final determination of liability under 
the Program Fraud Civil Remedies Act of 1988 (31 U.S.C. 3801-12).
    Contractor. As used in this part, contractor means any individual or 
other legal entity that:
    (1) Submits offers for, or is awarded, or reasonably may be expected 
to submit offers for or be awarded, a Government contract (or a 
subcontract under a Government contract); or
    (2) Conducts business with the Government as an agent or 
representative of another contractor;
    Conviction. A judgment or conviction of a criminal offense by any 
court of competent jurisdiction, whether entered upon a verdict or a 
plea, including a plea of nolo contendere.
    Debarment. An action taken by a debarring official in accordance 
with these regulations to exclude a person from participating in covered 
transactions. A person so excluded is debarred.
    Debarring official. An official authorized to impose debarment. The 
debarring official is either:
    (1) The agency head, or
    (2) An official designated by the agency head.
    Hearing officer. An Administrative Law Judge or Board of Contract 
Appeals Judge authorized by HUD's Secretary, or by the Secretary's 
designee, to conduct proceedings under this part.
    HUD. Department of Housing and Urban Development.
    Indictment. Indictment for a criminal offense. An information or 
other filing by competent authority charging a criminal offense shall be 
given the same effect as an indictment.
    Ineligible. Excluded from participation in Federal nonprocurement 
programs pursuant to a determination of ineligibility under statutory, 
executive order, or regulatory authority, other

[[Page 199]]

than Executive Order 12549 and its agency implementing regulations; for 
exemple, excluded pursuant to the Davis-Bacon Act and its implementing 
regulations, the equal employment opportunity acts and executive orders, 
or the environmental protection acts and executive orders. A person is 
ineligible where the determination of ineligibility affects such 
person's eligibility to participate in more than one covered 
transaction.
    Legal proceedings. Any criminal proceeding or any civil judicial 
proceeding to which the Federal Government or a State or local 
government or quasi-governmental authority is a party. The term includes 
appeals from such proceedings.
    Limited denial of participation. An action taken by a HUD official, 
in accordance with subpart G of these regulations, that immediately 
excludes or restricts a person from participating in HUD program(s) 
within a defined geographic area.
    List of Parties Excluded from Federal Procurement and Nonprocurement 
Programs. A list compiled, maintained and distributed by the General 
Services Administration (GSA) containing the names and other information 
about persons who have been debarred, suspended, or voluntarily excluded 
under Executive Orders 12549 and 12689 and these regulations or 48 CFR 
part 9, subpart 9.4, persons who have been proposed for debarment under 
48 CFR part 9, subpart 9.4, and those persons who have been determined 
to be ineligible.
    Notice. A written communication served in person or sent by 
certified mail, return receipt requested, or its equivalent, to the last 
known address of a party, its identified counsel, its agent for service 
of process, or any partner, officer, director, owner, or joint venturer 
of the party. Notice, if undeliverable, shall be considered to have been 
received by the addressee five days after being properly sent to the 
last address known by the agency.
    Participant. Any person who submits a proposal for, enters into, or 
reasonably may be expected to enter into a covered transaction. This 
term also includes any person who acts on behalf of or is authorized to 
commit a participant in a covered transaction as an agent or 
representative of another participant.
    Person. Any individual, corporation, partnership, association, unit 
of government or legal entity, however organized, except: foreign 
governments or foreign governmental entities, public international 
organizations, foreign government owned (in whole or in part) or 
controlled entities, and entities consisting wholly or partially of 
foreign governments or foreign governmental entities.
    Preponderance of the evidence. Proof by information that, compared 
with that opposing it, leads to the conclusion that the fact at issue is 
more probably true than not.
    Principal. Officer, director, owner, partner, key employee, or other 
person within a participant with primary management or supervisory 
responsibilities; or a person who has a critical influence on or 
substantive control over a covered transaction, whether or not employed 
by the participant. Persons who have a critical influence on or 
substantive control over a covered transaction are:
    (1) Principal investigators.
    (2) Loan officers;
    (3) Staff appraisers and inspectors;
    (4) Underwriters;
    (5) Bonding companies;
    (6) Borrowers under programs financed by HUD or with loans 
guaranteed, insured or subsidized through HUD programs;
    (7) Purchasers of properties with HUD-insured or Secretary-held 
mortgages;
    (8) Recipients under HUD assistance agreements;
    (9) Ultimate beneficiaries of HUD programs;
    (10) Fee appraisers and inspectors;
    (11) Real estate agents and brokers;
    (12) Management and marketing agents;
    (13) Accountants, consultants, investment bankers, architects, 
engineers, attorneys and others in a business relationship with 
participants in connection with a covered transaction under a HUD 
program;

[[Page 200]]

    (14) Contractors involved in the construction or rehabilitation of 
properties financed by HUD, with HUD insured loans, or acquired 
properties including properties held by HUD as mortgagee-in-possession;
    (15) Closing agents;
    (16) Turnkey developers of projects financed by or with financing 
insured by HUD;
    (17) Title companies;
    (18) Escrow agents;
    (19) Project owners;
    (20) Administrators of nursing homes and projects for the elderly 
financed or insured by HUD;
    (21) Developers, sellers or owners of property financed with loans 
insured under title I or title II of the National Housing Act; and
    (22) Employees or agents of any of the above.
    Procurement List. A list compiled, maintained, and distributed by 
the General Services Administration (GSA) (see Sec. 24.500(c)), 
containing the names and other information regarding contractors 
debarred or suspended or declared ineligible by agencies under the 
procedures of this part as well as under other statutory or regulatory 
authority.
    Proposal. A solicited or unsolicited bid, application, request, 
invitation to consider or similar communication by or on behalf of a 
person seeking to participate or to receive a benefit, directly or 
indirectly, in or under a covered transaction.
    Respondent. A person against whom a debarment or suspension action 
has been initiated.
    (1) A respondent is also a person against whom a limited denial of 
participation has been initiated.
    (2) [Reserved]
    State. Any of the States of the United States, the District of 
Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, any territory or possession 
of the United States, or any agency of a State, exclusive of 
institutions of higher education, hospitals, and units of local 
government. A State instrumentality will be considered part of the State 
government if it has a written determination from a State government 
that such State considers that instrumentality to be an agency of the 
State government.
    Suspending official. An official authorized to impose suspension. 
The suspending official is either:
    (1) The agency head, or
    (2) An official designated by the agency head.
    Suspension. An action taken by a suspending official in accordance 
with these regulations that immediately excludes a person from 
participating in covered transactions for a temporary period, pending 
completion of an investigation and such legal, debarment, or Program 
Fraud Civil Remedies Act proceedings as may ensue. A person so excluded 
is suspended.
    Ultimate beneficiaries. Ultimate beneficiaries of HUD programs 
include, but are not limited to, subsidized tenants and subsidized 
mortgagors such as those assisted under Section 8 Housing Assistance 
Payments Contracts, by Section 236 Rental Assistance, or by Rent 
Supplement payments.
    Voluntary exclusion or voluntarily excluded. A status of 
nonparticipation or limited participation in covered transactions 
assumed by a person pursuant to the terms of a settlement.

[53 FR 19182 and 19204, May 26, 1988, as amended at 53 FR 19182, May 26, 
1988, 53 FR 30051, Aug. 10, 1988; 60 FR 33040, 33048, June 26, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 24.110  Coverage.

    (a) These regulations apply to all persons who have participated, 
are currently participating or may reasonably be expected to participate 
in transactions under Federal nonprocurement programs. For purposes of 
these regulations such transactions will be referred to as covered 
transactions.
    (1) Covered transaction. For purposes of these regulations, a 
covered transaction is a primary covered transaction or a lower tier 
covered transaction. Covered transactions at any tier need not involve 
the transfer of Federal funds.
    (i) Primary covered transaction. Except as noted in paragraph (a)(2) 
of this section, a primary covered transaction is

[[Page 201]]

any nonprocurement transaction between an agency and a person, 
regardless of type, including: grants, cooperative agreements, 
scholarships, fellowships, contracts of assistance, loans, loan 
guarantees, subsidies, insurance, payments for specified use, donation 
agreements and any other nonprocurement transactions between a Federal 
agency and a person. Primary covered transactions also include those 
transactions specially designated by the U.S. Department of Housing and 
Urban Development in such agency's regulations governing debarment and 
suspension.
    (A) Specially designated transactions are:
    (1) Transactions regulated by the Interstate Land Sales Act (15 
U.S.C. 1701);
    (2) Transactions regulated by the National Manufactured Housing 
Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 (42 U.S.C. 5401);
    (3) Any procurement transaction between HUD and a person.
    (ii) Lower tier covered transaction. A lower tier covered 
transaction is:
    (A) Any transaction between a participant and a person other than a 
procurement contract for goods or services, regardless of type, under a 
primary covered transaction.
    (B) Any procurement contract for goods or services between a 
participant and a person, regardless of type, expected to equal or 
exceed the Federal procurement small purchase threshold fixed at 10 
U.S.C. 2304(g) and 41 U.S.C. 253(g) (currently $25,000) under a primary 
covered transaction.
    (C) Any procurement contract for goods or services between a 
participant and a person under a covered transaction, regardless of 
amount, under which that person will have a critical influence on or 
substantive control over that covered transaction. Such persons are:
    (1) Principal investigators.
    (2) Providers of federally-required audit services.
    (3) Bonding companies;
    (4) Borrowers;
    (5) Purchasers of a property with a HUD-insured or Secretary-held 
mortgage;
    (6) Recipients under HUD assistance agreements;
    (7) Ultimate beneficiaries of HUD programs;
    (8) Fee appraisers and inspectors;
    (9) Real estate agents and brokers;
    (10) Management and marketing agents;
    (11) Accountants, consultants, investment bankers; architects, 
engineers, attorneys and others in a business relationship with 
participants in connection with a covered transaction under a HUD 
program;
    (12) Contractors involved in the construction or rehabilitation of 
properties financed by HUD, with HUD insured loans, or acquired 
properties including properties held by HUD as mortgagee-in-possession;
    (13) Closing agents;
    (14) Turnkey developers of projects financed with or insured by HUD;
    (15) Title companies;
    (16) Escrow agents;
    (17) Project owners;
    (18) Administrators of nursing homes and projects for the elderly 
financed or insured by HUD;
    (19) Developers, sellers or owners of property financed with loans 
insured under title I or title II of the National Housing Act; and
    (20) Employees or agents of any of the above.
    (2) Exceptions. The following transactions are not covered:
    (i) Statutory entitlements or mandatory awards (but not subtier 
awards thereunder which are not themselves mandatory), including 
deposited funds insured by the Federal Government;
    (ii) Direct awards to foreign governments or public international 
organizations, or transactions with foreign governments or foreign 
governmental entities, public international organizations, foreign 
government owned (in whole or in part) or controlled entities, entities 
consisting wholly or partially of foreign governments or foreign 
governmental entities;
    (iii) Benefits to an individual as a personal entitlement without 
regard to the individual's present responsibility (but benefits received 
in an individual's business capacity are not excepted);
    (iv) Federal employment;

[[Page 202]]

    (v) Transactions pursuant to national or agency-recognized 
emergencies or disasters;
    (vi) Incidental benefits derived from ordinary governmental 
operations; and
    (vii) Other transactions where the application of these regulations 
would be prohibited by law.
    (3) Other exceptions. (i) Sanctions against participants whose only 
involvement in HUD programs is as ultimate beneficiaries, such as 
subsidized tenants and subsidized mortgagors, may be taken only upon 
commission of one of the offenses set forth in Sec. 24.305(a), unless 
the participant has otherwise been debarred or suspended by another 
Federal agency.
    (ii) Sanctions under this part against mortgagees and lenders 
approved by HUD to participate in Federal Housing Administration 
programs may be initiated only with the approval of the Mortgagee Review 
Board.
    (b) Relationship to other sections. This section describes the types 
of transactions to which a debarment or suspension under the regulations 
will apply. Subpart B, ``Effect of Action,'' Sec. 24.200, ``Debarment or 
suspension,'' sets forth the consequences of a debarment or suspension. 
Those consequences would obtain only with respect to participants and 
principals in the covered transactions and activities described in 
Sec. 24.110(a). Sections 24.325, ``Scope of debarment,'' and 24.420, 
``Scope of suspension,'' govern the extent to which a specific 
participant or organizational elements of a participant would be 
automatically included within a debarment or suspension action, and the 
conditions under which affiliates or persons associated with a 
participant may also be brought within the scope of the action.
    (c) Relationship to Federal procurement activities. In accordance 
with E.O. 12689 and section 2455 of Public Law 103-355, any debarment, 
suspension, proposed debarment or other governmentwide exclusion 
initiated under the Federal Acquisition Regulation (FAR) on or after 
August 25, 1995 shall be recognized by and effective for Executive 
Branch agencies and participants as an exclusion under this regulation. 
Similarly, any debarment, suspension or other governmentwide exclusion 
initiated under this regulation on or after August 25, 1995 shall be 
recognized by and effective for those agencies as a debarment or 
suspension under the FAR.
    (d) These regulations also apply to all persons who have 
participated, are currently participating or may reasonably be expected 
to participate in Federal procurement programs. For purposes of these 
regulations, such persons will be referred to as contractors and such 
transactions will be referred to as procurement contracts. The 
consequences of a debarment or suspension as set forth in Sec. 24.200 
apply to contractors in Federal procurement programs, and Secs. 24.325 
and 24.420 govern the extent to which a specific contractor or its 
organizational elements would be included within a debarment or 
suspension action.
    (e) Retroactivity. Limitations on participation in HUD programs 
proposed or imposed prior to the effective date of these regulations 
under an ancillary procedure shall not be affected by this part. This 
part shall apply to sanctions initiated after the effective date of 
these regulations (October 1, 1988) regardless of the date of the cause 
giving rise to the sanction.

[53 FR 19182 and 19204, May 26, 1988, as amended at 53 FR 19183, May 26, 
1988, 53 FR 30051, Aug. 10, 1988; 60 FR 33041, 33048, June 26, 1995; 62 
FR 20081, Apr. 24, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 24.115  Policy.

    (a) In order to protect the public interest, it is the policy of the 
Federal Government to conduct business only with responsible persons. 
Debarment and suspension are discretionary actions that, taken in 
accordance with Executive Order 12549 and these regulations, are 
appropriate means to implement this policy.
    (b) Debarment and suspension are serious actions which shall be used 
only in the public interest and for the Federal Government's protection 
and not for purposes of punishment. Agencies may impose debarment or 
suspension for the causes and in accordance with the procedures set 
forth in these regulations.
    (c) When more than one agency has an interest in the proposed 
debarment or suspension of a person, consideration shall be given to 
designating one

[[Page 203]]

agency as the lead agency for making the decision. Agencies are 
encouraged to establish methods and procedures for coordinating their 
debarment or suspension actions.

[53 FR 19182 and 19204, May 26, 1988, as amended at 60 FR 33048, June 
26, 1995]


<R04>
                       Subpart B--Effect of Action


<R05>
Sec. 24.200  Debarment or suspension.

    (a) Primary covered transactions. Except to the extent prohibited by 
law, persons who are debarred or suspended shall be excluded from 
primary covered transactions as either participants or principals 
throughout the Executive Branch of the Federal Government for the period 
of their debarment, suspension, or the period they are proposed for 
debarment under 48 CFR part 9, subpart 9.4. Accordingly, no agency shall 
enter into primary covered transactions with such excluded persons 
during such period, except as permitted pursuant to Sec. 24.215.
    (b) Lower tier covered transactions. Except to the extent prohibited 
by law, persons who have been proposed for debarment under 48 CFR part 
9, subpart 9.4, debarred or suspended shall be excluded from 
participating as either participants or principals in all lower tier 
covered transactions (see Sec. 24.110(a)(1)(ii)) for the period of their 
exclusion.
    (c) Exceptions. Debarment or suspension does not affect a person's 
eligibility for--
    (1) Statutory entitlements or mandatory awards (but not subtier 
awards thereunder which are not themselves mandatory), including 
deposited funds insured by the Federal Government;
    (2) Direct awards to foreign governments or public international 
organizations, or transactions with foreign governments or foreign 
governmental entities, public international organizations, foreign 
government owned (in whole or in part) or controlled entities, and 
entities consisting wholly or partially of foreign governments or 
foreign governmental entities;
    (3) Benefits to an individual as a personal entitlement without 
regard to the individual's present responsibility (but benefits received 
in an individual's business capacity are not excepted);
    (4) Federal employment;
    (5) Transactions pursuant to national or agency-recognized 
emergencies or disasters;
    (6) Incidental benefits derived from ordinary governmental 
operations; and
    (7) Other transactions where the application of these regulations 
would be prohibited by law.
    (8) Debarment for any of the causes set forth in Sec. 24.305(f) 
shall have no governmentwide effect.
    (9) Sanctions imposed on an individual participant under this part 
shall not preclude the participant from selling his or her principal 
residence to a purchaser using HUD/FHA financing.
    (d) Relationship to HUD administrative sanction procedures--(1) 
Sanctions provided pursuant to contract provisions. Nothing in this part 
shall impair or limit the right to impose any sanction provided for by 
contract, including guaranty agreements with the Government National 
Mortgage Association.
    (2) Other Departmental sanctions. Where an office of the Department 
is required by statute, regulation, or Executive Order to follow 
administrative sanction procedures that may differ from the requirements 
of this part, the requirements of the statute, regulation, or Executive 
Order shall take precedence. These alternative procedures include, but 
are not limited to: 24 CFR part 200 Previous Participation Review and 
Clearance procedures, 24 CFR part 25 Mortgagee Review Board 
administrative actions, and 24 CFR part 570 Community Development Block 
Grant corrective and remedial actions.

[60 FR 33041, 33048, June 26, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 24.205  Ineligible persons.

    Persons who are ineligible, as defined in Sec. 24.105(i), are 
excluded in accordance with the applicable statutory, executive order, 
or regulatory authority.


<R05>
Sec. 24.210  Voluntary exclusion.

    Persons who accept voluntary exclusions under Sec. 24.315 are 
excluded in accordance with the terms of their settlements. HUD shall, 
and participants may, contact the original action agency to ascertain 
the extent of the exclusion.

[[Page 204]]


<R05>
Sec. 24.215  Exception provision.

    HUD may grant an exception permitting a debarred, suspended, or 
voluntarily excluded person, or a person proposed for debarment under 48 
CFR part 9, subpart 9.4, to participate in a particular covered 
transaction upon a written determination by the agency head or an 
authorized designee stating the reason(s) for deviating from the 
Presidential policy established by Executive Order 12549 and 
Sec. 24.200. However, in accordance with the President's stated 
intention in the Executive Order, exceptions shall be granted only 
infrequently. Exceptions shall be reported in accordance with 
Sec. 24.505(a).

[60 FR 33041, 33048, June 26, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 24.220  Continuation of covered transactions.

    (a) Notwithstanding the debarment, suspension, proposed debarment 
under 48 CFR part 9, subpart 9.4, determination of ineligibility, or 
voluntary exclusion of any person by an agency, agencies and 
participants may continue covered transactions in existence at the time 
the person was debarred, suspended, proposed for debarment under 48 CFR 
part 9, subpart 9.4, declared ineligible, or voluntarily excluded. A 
decision as to the type of termination action, if any, to be taken 
should be made only after thorough review to ensure the propriety of the 
proposed action.
    (b) Agencies and participants shall not renew or extend covered 
transactions (other than no-cost time extensions) with any person who is 
debarred, suspended, proposed for debarment under 48 CFR part 9, subpart 
9.4, ineligible or voluntary excluded, except as provided in 
Sec. 24.215.

[60 FR 33041, 33048, June 26, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 24.225  Failure to adhere to restrictions.

    (a) Except as permitted under Sec. 24.215 or Sec. 24.220, a 
participant shall not knowingly do business under a covered transaction 
with a person who is--
    (1) Debarred or suspended;
    (2) Proposed for debarment under 48 CFR part 9, subpart 9.4; or
    (3) Ineligible for or voluntarily excluded from the covered 
transaction.
    (b) Violation of the restriction under paragraph (a) of this section 
may result in disallowance of costs, annulment or termination of award, 
issuance of a stop work order, debarment or suspension, or other 
remedies as appropriate.
    (c) A participant may rely upon the certification of a prospective 
participant in a lower tier covered transaction that it and its 
principals are not debarred, suspended, proposed for debarment under 48 
CFR part 9, subpart 9.4, ineligible, or voluntarily excluded from the 
covered transaction (See appendix B of these regulations), unless it 
knows that the certification is erroneous. An agency has the burden of 
proof that a participant did knowingly do business with a person that 
filed an erroneous certification.

[60 FR 33041, 33048, June 26, 1995]


<R04>
                          Subpart C--Debarment


<R05>
Sec. 24.300  General.

    The debarring official may debar a person for any of the causes in 
Sec. 24.305, using procedures established in Secs. 24.310 through 
24.314. The existence of a cause for debarment, however, does not 
necessarily require that the person be debarred; the seriousness of the 
person's acts or omissions and any mitigating factors shall be 
considered in making any debarment decision.


<R05>
Sec. 24.305  Causes for debarment.

    Debarment may be imposed in accordance with the provisions of 
Secs. 24.300 through 24.314 for:
    (a) Conviction of or civil judgment for:
    (1) Commission of fraud or a criminal offense in connection with 
obtaining, attempting to obtain, or performing a public or private 
agreement or transaction;
    (2) Violation of Federal or State antitrust statutes, including 
those proscribing price fixing between competitors, allocation of 
customers between competitors, and bid rigging;
    (3) Commission of embezzlement, theft, forgery, bribery, 
falsification or destruction of records, making false statements, 
receiving stolen property,

[[Page 205]]

making false claims, or obstruction of justice; or
    (4) Commission of any other offense indicating a lack of business 
integrity or business honesty that seriously and directly affects the 
present responsibility of a person.
    (b) Violation of the terms of a public agreement or transaction so 
serious as to affect the integrity of an agency program, such as:
    (1) A willful failure to perform in accordance with the terms of one 
or more public agreements or transactions;
    (2) A history of failure to perform or of unsatisfactory performance 
of one or more public agreements or transactions; or
    (3) A willful violation of a statutory or regulatory provision or 
requirement applicable to a public agreement or transaction.
    (c) Any of the following causes:
    (1) A nonprocurement debarment by any Federal agency taken before 
October 1, 1988, the effective date of these regulations, or a 
procurement debarment by any Federal agency taken pursuant to 48 CFR 
subpart 9.4;
    (2) Knowingly doing business with a debarred, suspended, ineligible, 
or voluntarily excluded person, in connection with a covered 
transaction, except as permitted in Sec. 24.215 or Sec. 24.220;
    (3) Failure to pay a single substantial debt, or a number of 
outstanding debts (including disallowed costs and overpayments, but not 
including sums owed the Federal Government under the Internal Revenue 
Code) owed to any Federal agency or instrumentality, provided the debt 
is uncontested by the debtor or, if contested, provided that the 
debtor's legal and administrative remedies have been exhausted;
    (4) Violation of a material provision of a voluntary exclusion 
agreement entered into under Sec. 24.315 or of any settlement of a 
debarment or suspension action; or
    (5) Violation of any requirement of subpart F of this part, relating 
to providing a drug-free workplace, as set forth in Sec. 24.615 of this 
part.
    (d) Any other cause of so serious or compelling a nature that it 
affects the present responsibility of a person.
    (e) Debarment of a contractor may be imposed for any of the causes 
in paragraphs (a), (b), and (d). For purposes of this section, agreement 
is deemed to include contracts or subcontracts.
    (f) In addition to the causes set forth above, HUD may debar a 
person from participating in any programs or activities of the 
Department for material violation of a statutory or regulatory provision 
or program requirement applicable to a public agreement or transaction 
including applications for grants, financial assistance, insurance or 
guarantees, or to the performance of requirements under a grant, 
assistance award or conditional or final commitment to insure or 
guarantee.

[53 FR 19182 and 19204, May 26, 1988, as amended at 53 FR 19184, May 26, 
1988, 54 FR 4950 and 4957, Jan. 31, 1989; 60 FR 33049, June 26, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 24.310  Procedures.

    HUD shall process debarment actions as informally as practicable, 
consistent with the principles of fundamental fairness, using the 
procedures in Secs. 24.311 through 24.314.


<R05>
Sec. 24.311  Investigation and referral.

    Information concerning the existence of a cause for debarment from 
any source shall be promptly reported, investigated, and referred, when 
appropriate, to the debarring official for consideration. After 
consideration, the debarring official may issue a notice of proposed 
debarment.


<R05>
Sec. 24.312  Notice of proposed debarment.

    A debarment proceeding shall be initiated by notice to the 
respondent advising:
    (a) That debarment is being considered;
    (b) Of the reasons for the proposed debarment in terms sufficient to 
put the respondent on notice of the conduct or transaction(s) upon which 
it is based;
    (c) Of the cause(s) relied upon under Sec. 24.305 for proposing 
debarment;
    (d) Of the provisions of Sec. 24.311 through Sec. 24.314, and any 
other HUD procedures, if applicable, governing debarment decisionmaking; 
and
    (e) Of the potential effect of a debarment.

[[Page 206]]


<R05>
Sec. 24.313  Opportunity to contest proposed debarment.

    (a) Submission in opposition. Within 30 days after receipt of the 
notice of proposed debarment, the respondent may submit, in person, in 
writing, or through a representative, information and argument in 
opposition to the proposed debarment.
    (1) The information and argument should be addressed to the 
Debarment Docket Clerk, Department of Housing and Urban Development, 451 
Seventh Street, SW., Washington, DC 20410.
    (2) If the respondent does not contest the proposed debarment within 
the 30 day period, the proposed debarment shall become final.
    (3) If the respondent desires a hearing, it shall submit a written 
request to the Debarment Docket Clerk within the 30-day period following 
receipt of the notice of proposed debarment.
    (4) The parties may agree to engage in an alternative dispute 
resolution, including informal conference, mediation, conciliation, 
summary trial with binding decision, minitrial, or use of a settlement 
judge.
    (b) Additional proceedings as to disputed material facts. (1) In 
actions not based upon a conviction or civil judgment, if the debarring 
official finds that the respondent's submission in opposition raises a 
genuine dispute over facts material to the proposed debarment, 
respondent(s) shall be afforded an opportunity to appear with a 
representative, submit documentary evidence, present witnesses, and 
confront any witness the agency presents.
    (2) A transcribed record of any additional proceedings shall be made 
available at cost to the respondent, upon request, unless the respondent 
and the agency, by mutual agreement, waive the requirement for a 
transcript.
    (i) Upon the agreement of the parties, the additional proceedings 
may be recorded using audiotape without transcription. The audiotape 
shall be made available at cost to the respondent.
    (ii) [Reserved]

[60 FR 33049, June 26, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 24.314  Debarring official's decision.

    (a) No additional proceedings necessary. In actions based upon a 
conviction or civil judgment, or in which there is no genuine dispute 
over material facts, the debarring official shall make a decision on the 
basis of all the information in the administrative record, including any 
submission made by the respondent. The decision shall be made within 45 
days after receipt of any information and argument submitted by the 
respondent, unless the debarring official extends this period for good 
cause.
    (1) The debarring official may, in his or her discretion, refer 
actions based upon a conviction or civil judgment, or in which there is 
no genuine dispute over material facts, to a hearing officer or other 
official for review of the administrative record and appropriate 
findings. The hearing officer or other official shall issue such 
findings within 45 days after the referral, and the debarring official 
shall issue a decision within 15 days after the date of the findings, 
unless such periods are extended for good cause.
    (2) [Reserved]
    (b) Additional proceedings necessary. (1) In actions in which 
additional proceedings are necessary to determine disputed material 
facts, written findings of fact shall be prepared. The debarring 
official shall base the decision on the facts as found, together with 
any information and argument submitted by the respondent and any other 
information in the administrative record.
    (2) The debarring official may refer disputed material facts to 
another official for findings of fact. The debarring official may reject 
any such findings, in whole or in part, only after specifically 
determining them to be arbitrary and capricious or clearly erroneous.
    (i) The debarring official may refer disputed material facts and 
issues of law to a hearing officer for findings of fact and conclusions 
of law.
    (A) No appeal to the Secretary may be taken under Secs. 26.24 
through 26.26 of this title with respect to any order or decision by a 
hearing officer or other official.
    (B) The debarring official shall provide the hearing officer or 
other official with all the information in the administrative record, 
including any information and argument submitted by

[[Page 207]]

the respondent. The administrative record and any documents admitted at 
the hearing shall constitute the exhibits in evidence.
    (ii) Unless the parties mutually agree to extend this period, a 
proceeding before a hearing officer or other official shall commence 
within 45 days after referral of the case by the debarring official. The 
hearing officer or other official shall issue findings of fact within 30 
days after the conclusion of such additional proceedings. The time 
limitations of this subparagraph may be extended upon issuance, by the 
debarring official, hearing officer or other official, of a written 
notice describing good cause for such extension.
    (3) The debarring official's decision shall be made after the 
conclusion of the proceedings with respect to the disputed facts.
    (i) Such decision shall be made within 15 days after the hearing 
officer or other official issues findings of fact.
    (ii) [Reserved]
    (c)(1) Standard of proof. In any debarment action, the cause for 
debarment must be established by a preponderance of the evidence. Where 
the proposed debarment is based upon a conviction or civil judgment, the 
standard shall be deemed to have been met.
    (2) Burden of proof. The burden of proof is on the agency proposing 
debarment.
    (d) Notice of debarring official's decision. (1) If the debarring 
official decides to impose debarment, the respondent shall be given 
prompt notice:
    (i) Referring to the notice of proposed debarment;
    (ii) Specifying the reasons for debarment;
    (iii) Stating the period of debarment, including effective dates; 
and
    (iv) Advising that the debarment is effective for covered 
transactions throughout the executive branch of the Federal Government 
unless an agency head or an authorized designee makes the determination 
referred to in Sec. 24.215.
    (A) Where a debarment is based solely on Sec. 24.305(f), the notice 
of the debarring official's decision shall advise that the debarment is 
effective for programs or activities of the Department.
    (B) [Reserved]
    (2) If the debarring official decides not to impose debarment, the 
respondent shall be given prompt notice of that decision. A decision not 
to impose debarment shall be without prejudice to a subsequent 
imposition of debarment by any other agency.

[60 FR 33049, June 26, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 24.315  Settlement and voluntary exclusion.

    (a) When in the best interest of the Government, HUD may, at any 
time, settle a debarment or suspension action.
    (b) If a participant and the agency agree to a voluntary exclusion 
of the participant, such voluntary exclusion shall be entered on the 
Nonprocurement List (see subpart E).


<R05>
Sec. 24.320  Period of debarment.

    (a) Debarment shall be for a period commensurate with the 
seriousness of the cause(s). If a suspension precedes a debarment, the 
suspension period shall be considered in determining the debarment 
period.
    (1) Debarment for causes other than those related to a violation of 
the requirements of subpart F of this part generally should not exceed 
three years. Where circumstances warrant, a longer period of debarment 
may be imposed.
    (2) In the case of a debarment for a violation of the requirements 
of subpart F of this part (see Sec. 24.305(c)(5)), the period of 
debarment shall not exceed five years.
    (b) The debarring official may extend an existing debarment for an 
additional period, if that official determines that an extension is 
necessary to protect the public interest. However, a debarment may not 
be extended solely on the basis of the facts and circumstances upon 
which the initial debarment action was based. If debarment for an 
additional period is determined to be necessary, the procedures of 
Secs. 24.311 through 24.314 shall be followed to extend the debarment.
    (c) The respondent may request the debarring official to reverse the 
debarment decision or to reduce the period or scope of debarment. Such a 
request shall be in writing and supported by documentation. The 
debarring official

[[Page 208]]

may grant such a request for reasons including, but not limited to:
    (1) Newly discovered material evidence;
    (2) Reversal of the conviction or civil judgment upon which the 
debarment was based;
    (3) Bona fide change in ownership or management;
    (4) Elimination of other causes for which the debarment was imposed; 
or
    (5) Other reasons the debarring official deems appropriate.
    (d) Where respondent's request to reduce the period or scope of 
debarment is based on reasons set forth in paragraphs (c)(4) or (5) of 
this section, such request may not be submitted earlier than six months 
after the final decision to debar. In no event may more than one such 
request be submitted within any 12-month period.

[53 FR 19182 and 19204, May 26, 1988, as amended at 53 FR 19185, May 26, 
1988, 54 FR 4950 and 4957, Jan 31, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 24.325  Scope of debarment.

    (a) Scope in general. (1) Debarment of a person under these 
regulations constitutes debarment of all its divisions and other 
organizational elements from all covered transactions, unless the 
debarment decision is limited by its terms to one or more specifically 
identified individuals, divisions or other organizational elements or to 
specific types of transactions.
    (2) The debarment action may include any affiliate of the 
participant that is specifically named and given notice of the proposed 
debarment and an opportunity to respond (see Secs. 24.311 through 
24.314).
    (3) Debarment of a contractor under these regulations, or by another 
Federal agency pursuant to 48 CFR subpart 9.4, constitutes debarment of 
all its divisions and other organizational elements from all Federal 
procurement, unless the debarment is limited by its terms to one or more 
specifically identified individuals, divisions, or other organizational 
elements or to specific types of contracts. The debarment may be 
extended to include any affiliates of the contractor, if they are 
specifically named, given written notice of the proposed debarment, and 
provided with an opportunity to respond.
    (b) Imputing conduct. For purposes of determining the scope of 
debarment, conduct may be imputed as follows:
    (1) Conduct imputed to participant. The fraudulent, criminal or 
other seriously improper conduct of any officer, director, shareholder, 
partner, employee, or other individual associated with a participant may 
be imputed to the participant when the conduct occurred in connection 
with the individual's performance of duties for or on behalf of the 
participant, or with the participant's knowledge, approval, or 
acquiescence. The participant's acceptance of the benefits derived from 
the conduct shall be evidence of such knowledge, approval, or 
acquiescence.
    (2) Conduct imputed to individuals associated with participant. The 
fraudulent, criminal, or other seriously improper conduct of a 
participant may be imputed to any officer, director, shareholder, 
partner, employee, or other individual associated with the participant 
who participated in, knew of, or had reason to know of the participant's 
conduct.
    (3) Conduct of one participant imputed to other participants in a 
joint venture. The fraudulent, criminal, or other seriously improper 
conduct of one participant in a joint venture, grant pursuant to a joint 
application, or similar arrangement may be imputed to other participants 
if the conduct occurred for or on behalf of the joint venture, grant 
pursuant to a joint application, or similar arrangement may be imputed 
to other participants if the conduct occurred for or on behalf of the 
joint venture, grant pursuant to a joint application, or similar 
arrangement or with the knowledge, approval, or acquiescence of these 
participants. Acceptance of the benefits derived from the conduct shall 
be evidence of such knowledge, approval, or acquiescence.
    (4) The provisions of paragraphs (b)(1) through (3) of this section 
are also applicable for purposes of imputing conduct to a contractor.

[53 FR 19182 and 19204, May 26, 1988, as amended at 53 FR 19185, May 26, 
1988]

[[Page 209]]


<R04>
                          Subpart D--Suspension


<R05>
Sec. 24.400  General.

    (a) The suspending official may suspend a person for any of the 
causes in Sec. 24.405 using procedures established in Secs. 24.410 
through 24.413.
    (b) Suspension is a serious action to be imposed only when:
    (1) There exists adequate evidence of one or more of the causes set 
out in Sec. 24.405, and
    (2) Immediate action is necessary to protect the public interest.
    (c) In assessing the adequacy of the evidence, the agency should 
consider how much information is available, how credible it is given the 
circumstances, whether or not important allegations are corroborated, 
and what inferences can reasonably be drawn as a result. This assessment 
should include an examination of basic documents such as grants, 
cooperative agreements, loan authorizations, and contracts.

[53 FR 19182 and 19204, May 26, 1988, as amended at 60 FR 33050, June 
26, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 24.405  Causes for suspension.

    (a) Suspension may be imposed in accordance with the provisions of 
Secs. 24.400 through 24.413 upon adequate evidence:
    (1) To suspect the commission of an offense listed in 
Sec. 24.305(a); or
    (2) That a cause for debarment under Sec. 24.305 may exist.
    (b) Indictment shall constitute adequate evidence for purposes of 
suspension actions.


<R05>
Sec. 24.410  Procedures.

    (a) Investigation and referral. Information concerning the existence 
of a cause for suspension from any source shall be promptly reported, 
investigated, and referred, when appropriate, to the suspending official 
for consideration. After consideration, the suspending official may 
issue a notice of suspension.
    (b) Decisionmaking process. HUD shall process suspension actions as 
informally as practicable, consistent with principles of fundamental 
fairness, using the procedures in Sec. 24.411 through Sec. 24.413.

[53 FR 19182 and 19204, May 26, 1988, as amended at 60 FR 33050, June 
26, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 24.411  Notice of suspension.

    When a respondent is suspended, notice shall immediately be given:
    (a) That the suspension has been imposed;
    (b) That the suspension is based on an indictment, conviction, or 
other adequate evidence that the respondent has committed irregularities 
seriously reflecting on the propriety of further Federal Government 
dealings with the respondent;
    (c) Describing any such irregularities in terms sufficient to put 
the respondent on notice without disclosing the Federal Government's 
evidence;
    (d) Of the cause(s) relied upon under Sec. 24.405 for imposing 
suspension;
    (e) That the suspension is for a temporary period pending the 
completion of an investigation or ensuing legal, debarment or Program 
Fraud Civil Remedies Act proceedings;
    (f) Of the provisions of Secs. 24.411 through 24.413 and any other 
HUD procedures, if applicable, governing suspension decisionmaking; and
    (g) Of the effect of the suspension.

[60 FR 33050, June 26, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 24.412  Opportunity to contest suspension.

    (a) Submission in opposition. Within 30 days after receipt of the 
notice of suspension, the respondent may submit, in person, in writing, 
or through a representative, information and argument in opposition to 
the suspension.
    (1) The information and argument should be addressed to the 
Debarment Docket Clerk, Department of Housing and Urban Development, 451 
Seventh Street, SW., Washington, DC 20410.
    (2) If the respondent does not contest the suspension within the 30 
day period, the suspension shall become final.
    (3) If the respondent desires a hearing, it shall submit a written 
request to the Debarment Docket Clerk within the 30-day period following 
receipt of the notice of suspension.

[[Page 210]]

    (4) The parties may agree to engage in an alternative dispute 
resolution, including informal conference, mediation, conciliation, 
summary trial with binding decision, minitrial, or use of a settlement 
judge.
    (b) Additional proceedings as to disputed material facts. (1) If the 
suspending official finds that the respondent's submission in opposition 
raises a genuine dispute over facts material to the suspension, 
respondent(s) shall be afforded an opportunity to appear with a 
representative, submit documentary evidence, present witnesses, and 
confront any witnesses the agency presents, unless:
    (i) The action is based on an indictment, conviction or civil 
judgment; or
    (ii) A determination is made, on the basis of Department of Justice 
advice, that the substantial interests of the Federal Government in 
pending or contemplated legal proceedings based on the same facts as the 
suspension would be prejudiced.
    (2) A transcribed record of any additional proceedings shall be 
prepared and made available at cost to the respondent, unless the 
respondent and the agency, by mutual agreement, waive the requirement 
for a transcript.
    (i) Upon the agreement of the parties, the additional proceedings 
may be recorded using audiotape without transcription. The audiotape 
shall be made available at cost to the respondent.
    (ii) [Reserved]

[60 FR 33050, June 26, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 24.413  Suspending official's decision.

    The suspending official may modify or terminate the suspension (see 
Sec. 24.320(c) for reasons for reducing the period or scope of 
debarment) or may leave it in force. However, a decision to modify or 
terminate the suspension shall be without prejudice to the subsequent 
imposition of suspension by any other agency or debarment by any agency. 
The decision shall be rendered in accordance with the following 
provisions:
    (a) No additional proceedings necessary. In actions based upon an 
indictment, conviction, or civil judgment, in which there is no genuine 
dispute over material facts, or in which additional proceedings to 
determine disputed material facts have been denied on the basis of 
Department of Justice advice, the suspending official shall make a 
decision on the basis of all the information in the administrative 
record, including any submission made by the respondent. The decision 
shall be made within 45 days after receipt of any information and 
argument submitted by the respondent, unless the suspending official 
extends this period for good cause.
    (1) The suspending official may, in his or her discretion, refer 
actions based upon an indictment, conviction or civil judgment, or in 
which there is no genuine dispute over material facts, to a hearing 
officer or other official for review of the administrative record and 
appropriate findings. The hearing officer or other official shall issue 
such findings within 45 days after the referral, and the suspending 
official shall issue a decision within 15 days after the date of such 
findings, unless such periods are extended for good cause.
    (2) [Reserved]
    (b) Additional proceedings necessary. (1) In actions in which 
additional proceedings are necessary to determine disputed material 
facts, written findings of fact shall be prepared. The suspending 
official shall base the decision on the facts as found, together with 
any information and argument submitted by the respondent and any other 
information in the administrative record.
    (2) The suspending official may refer matters involving disputed 
material facts to another official for findings of fact. The suspending 
official may reject any such findings, in whole or in part, only after 
specifically determining them to be arbitrary or capricious or clearly 
erroneous.
    (3) The suspending official may refer disputed material facts and 
issues of law to a hearing officer for findings of fact and conclusions 
of law.
    (i) No appeal to the Secretary may be taken under Secs. 26.24 
through 26.26 of this title with respect to any order or decision by a 
hearing officer or other official.
    (ii) The suspending official shall provide the hearing officer or 
other official with all the information in the administrative record, 
including any information and argument submitted by

[[Page 211]]

the respondent. The administrative record and any documents admitted at 
the hearing shall constitute the exhibits in evidence.
    (4) Unless the parties mutually agree to extend this period, a 
proceeding before a hearing officer or other official shall commence 
within 45 days after referral of disputed material facts and issues of 
law by the suspending official. The hearing officer or other official 
shall issue findings of fact within 30 days after the conclusion of such 
additional proceedings. The time limitations of this subparagraph may be 
extended upon issuance, by the suspending official, other official or 
hearing officer, of a written notice describing good cause for such 
extension.
    (5) The suspending official's decision shall be made within 15 days 
after the hearing officer or other official issues findings of fact.
    (c) Notice of suspending official's decision. Prompt written notice 
of the suspending official's decision shall be sent to the respondent.

[60 FR 33050, June 26, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 24.415  Period of suspension.

    (a) Suspension shall be for a temporary period pending the 
completion of an investigation or ensuing legal, debarment, or Program 
Fraud Civil Remedies Act proceedings, unless terminated sooner by the 
suspending official or as provided in paragraph (b) of this section.
    (b) If legal or administrative proceedings are not initiated within 
12 months after the date of the suspension notice, the suspension shall 
be terminated unless an Assistant Attorney General or United States 
Attorney requests its extension in writing, in which case it may be 
extended for an additional six months. In no event may a suspension 
extend beyond 18 months, unless such proceedings have been initiated 
within that period.
    (c) The suspending official shall notify the Department of Justice 
of an impending termination of a suspension, at least 30 days before the 
12-month period expires, to give that Department an opportunity to 
request an extension.

[53 FR 19182 and 19204, May 26, 1988, as amended at 60 FR 33051, June 
26, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 24.420  Scope of suspension.

    The scope of a suspension is the same as the scope of a debarment 
(see Sec. 24.325), except that the procedures of Secs. 24.410 through 
24.413 shall be used in imposing a suspension.


<R04>
       Subpart E--Responsibilities of GSA, Agency and Participants


<R05>
Sec. 24.500  GSA responsibilities.

    (a) In accordance with the OMB guidelines, GSA shall compile, 
maintain, and distribute a list of all persons who have been debarred, 
suspended, or voluntarily excluded by agencies under Executive Order 
12549 and these regulations, and those who have been determined to be 
ineligible.
    (b) At a minimum, this list shall indicate:
    (1) The names and addresses of all debarred, suspended, ineligible, 
and voluntarily excluded persons, in alphabetical order, with cross-
references when more than one name is involved in a single action;
    (2) The type of action;
    (3) The cause for the action;
    (4) The scope of the action;
    (5) Any termination date for each listing; and
    (6) The agency and name and telephone number of the agency point of 
contact for the action.
    (c) In accordance with 48 CFR 9.404, GSA shall compile and 
distribute a list of contractors who are debarred, suspended or 
ineligible.

[53 FR 19182 and 19204, May 26, 1988, as amended at 53 FR 19186, May 26, 
1988]


<R05>
Sec. 24.505  HUD responsibilities.

    (a) The agency shall provide GSA with current information concerning 
debarments, suspension, determinations of ineligibility, and voluntary 
exclusions it has taken. Until February 18, 1989, the agency shall also 
provide GSA and OMB with information concerning all transactions in 
which HUD has granted exceptions under Sec. 24.215 permitting 
participation by debarred,

[[Page 212]]

suspended, or voluntarily excluded persons.
    (b) Unless an alternative schedule is agreed to by GSA, the agency 
shall advise GSA of the information set forth in Sec. 24.500(b) and of 
the exceptions granted under Sec. 24.215 within five working days after 
taking such actions.
    (c) The agency shall direct inquiries concerning listed persons to 
the agency that took the action.
    (d) Agency officials shall check the Nonprocurement List before 
entering covered transactions to determine whether a participant in a 
primary transaction is debarred, suspended, ineligible, or voluntarily 
excluded (Tel. -).
    (e) Agency officials shall check the Nonprocurement List before 
approving principals or lower tier participants where agency approval of 
the principal or lower tier participant is required under the terms of 
the transaction, to determine whether such principals or participants 
are debarred, suspended, ineligible, or voluntarily excluded.
    (f) The agency shall notify GSA within 5 working days after 
modifying or rescinding an action;
    (g) The agency shall, in accordance with internal retention 
procedures, maintain records relating to each suspension or debarment 
action taken by the agency;
    (h) Contracting Officers shall check the Procurement List before 
entering into any contract or before approving any subcontract to 
determine whether a contractor is debarred, suspended, ineligible or 
voluntarily excluded.

[53 FR 19182 and 19204, May 26, 1988, as amended at 53 FR 19186, May 26, 
1988]


<R05>
Sec. 24.510  Participants' responsibilities.

    (a) Certification by participants in primary covered transactions. 
Each participant shall submit the certification in appendix A to this 
part for it and its principals at the time the participant submits its 
proposal in connection with a primary covered transaction, except that 
States need only complete such certification as to their principals. 
Participants may decide the method and frequency by which they determine 
the eligibility of their principals. In addition, each participant may, 
but is not required to, check the Nonprocurement List for its principals 
(Tel. -). Adverse information on the certification will not necessarily 
result in denial of participation. However, the certification, and any 
additional information pertaining to the certification submitted by the 
participant, shall be considered in the administration of covered 
transactions.
    (b) Certification by participants in lower tier covered 
transactions. (1) Each participant shall require participants in lower 
tier covered transactions to include the certification in appendix B to 
this part for it and its principals in any proposal submitted in 
connection with such lower tier covered transactions.
    (2) A participant may rely upon the certification of a prospective 
participant in a lower tier covered transaction that it and its 
principals are not debarred, suspended, ineligible, or voluntarily 
excluded from the covered transaction by any Federal agency, unless it 
knows that the certification is erroneous. Participants may decide the 
method and frequency by which they determine the eligiblity of their 
principals. In addition, a participant may, but is not required to, 
check the Nonprocurement List for its principals and for participants 
(Tel. -).
    (c) Changed circumstances regarding certification. A participant 
shall provide immediate written notice to HUD if at any time the 
participant learns that its certification was erroneous when submitted 
or has become erroneous by reason of changed circumstances. Participants 
in lower tier covered transactions shall provide the same updated notice 
to the participant to which it submitted its proposals.


<R04>
          Subpart F--Drug-Free Workplace Requirements (Grants)

    Source: 55 FR 21688, 21695, May 25, 1990, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 24.600  Purpose.

    (a) The purpose of this subpart is to carry out the Drug-Free 
Workplace Act of 1988 by requiring that--
    (1) A grantee, other than an individual, shall certify to the agency 
that it will provide a drug-free workplace;

[[Page 213]]

    (2) A grantee who is an individual shall certify to the agency that, 
as a condition of the grant, he or she will not engage in the unlawful 
manufacture, distribution, dispensing, possession or use of a controlled 
substance in conducting any activity with the grant.
    (b) Requirements implementing the Drug-Free Workplace Act of 1988 
for contractors with the agency are found at 48 CFR subparts 9.4, 23.5, 
and 52.2.


<R05>
Sec. 24.605  Definitions.

    (a) Except as amended in this section, the definitions of 
Sec. 24.105 apply to this subpart.
    (b) For purposes of this subpart--
    (1) Controlled substance means a controlled substance in schedules I 
through V of the Controlled Substances Act (21 U.S.C. 812), and as 
further defined by regulation at 21 CFR 1308.11 through 1308.15;
    (2) Conviction means a finding of guilt (including a plea of nolo 
contendere) or imposition of sentence, or both, by any judicial body 
charged with the responsibility to determine violations of the Federal 
or State criminal drug statutes;
    (3) Criminal drug statute means a Federal or non-Federal criminal 
statute involving the manufacture, distribution, dispensing, use, or 
possession of any controlled substance;
    (4) Drug-free workplace means a site for the performance of work 
done in connection with a specific grant at which employees of the 
grantee are prohibited from engaging in the unlawful manufacture, 
distribution, dispensing, possession, or use of a controlled substance;
    (5) Employee means the employee of a grantee directly engaged in the 
performance of work under the grant, including:
    (i) All direct charge employees;
    (ii) All indirect charge employees, unless their impact or 
involvement is insignificant to the performance of the grant; and,
    (iii) Temporary personnel and consultants who are directly engaged 
in the performance of work under the grant and who are on the grantee's 
payroll.

This definition does not include workers not on the payroll of the 
grantee (e.g., volunteers, even if used to meet a matching requirement; 
consultants or independent contractors not on the payroll; or employees 
of subrecipients or subcontractors in covered workplaces);
    (6) Federal agency or agency means any United States executive 
department, military department, government corporation, government 
controlled corporation, any other establishment in the executive branch 
(including the Executive Office of the President), or any independent 
regulatory agency;
    (7) Grant means an award of financial assistance, including a 
cooperative agreement, in the form of money, or property in lieu of 
money, by a Federal agency directly to a grantee. The term grant 
includes block grant and entitlement grant programs, whether or not 
exempted from coverage under the grants management government-wide 
common rule on uniform administrative requirements for grants and 
cooperative agreements. The term does not include technical assistance 
that provides services instead of money, or other assistance in the form 
of loans, loan guarantees, interest subsidies, insurance, or direct 
appropriations; or any veterans' benefits to individuals, i.e., any 
benefit to veterans, their families, or survivors by virtue of the 
service of a veteran in the Armed Forces of the United States;
    (8) Grantee means a person who applies for or receives a grant 
directly from a Federal agency (except another Federal agency);
    (9) Individual means a natural person;
    (10) State means any of the States of the United States, the 
District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, any territory or 
possession of the United States, or any agency of a State, exclusive of 
institutions of higher education, hospitals, and units of local 
government. A State instrumentality will be considered part of the State 
government if it has a written determination from a State government 
that such State considers the instrumentality to be an agency of the 
State government.

[[Page 214]]


<R05>
Sec. 24.610  Coverage.

    (a) This subpart applies to any grantee of the agency.
    (b) This subpart applies to any grant, except where application of 
this subpart would be inconsistent with the international obligations of 
the United States or the laws or regulations of a foreign government. A 
determination of such inconsistency may be made only by the agency head 
or his/her designee.
    (c) The provisions of subparts A, B, C, D and E of this part apply 
to matters covered by this subpart, except where specifically modified 
by this subpart. In the event of any conflict between provisions of this 
subpart and other provisions of this part, the provisions of this 
subpart are deemed to control with respect to the implementation of 
drug-free workplace requirements concerning grants.


<R05>
Sec. 24.615  Grounds for suspension of payments, suspension or termination of grants, or suspension or debarment.

    A grantee shall be deemed in violation of the requirements of this 
subpart if the agency head or his or her official designee determines, 
in writing, that--
    (a) The grantee has made a false certification under Sec. 24.630;
    (b) With respect to a grantee other than an individual--
    (1) The grantee has violated the certification by failing to carry 
out the requirements of paragraphs (A)(a)-(g) and/or (B) of the 
certification (Alternate I to appendix C) or
    (2) Such a number of employees of the grantee have been convicted of 
violations of criminal drug statutes for violations occurring in the 
workplace as to indicate that the grantee has failed to make a good 
faith effort to provide a drug-free workplace.
    (c) With respect to a grantee who is an individual--
    (1) The grantee has violated the certification by failing to carry 
out its requirements (Alternate II to appendix C); or
    (2) The grantee is convicted of a criminal drug offense resulting 
from a violation occurring during the conduct of any grant activity.


<R05>
Sec. 24.620  Effect of violation.

    (a) In the event of a violation of this subpart as provided in 
Sec. 24.615, and in accordance with applicable law, the grantee shall be 
subject to one or more of the following actions:
    (1) Suspension of payments under the grant;
    (2) Suspension or termination of the grant; and
    (3) Suspension or debarment of the grantee under the provisions of 
this part.
    (b) Upon issuance of any final decision under this part requiring 
debarment of a grantee, the debarred grantee shall be ineligible for 
award of any grant from any Federal agency for a period specified in the 
decision, not to exceed five years (see Sec. 24.320(a)(2) of this part).


<R05>
Sec. 24.625  Exception provision.

    The agency head may waive with respect to a particular grant, in 
writing, a suspension of payments under a grant, suspension or 
termination of a grant, or suspension or debarment of a grantee if the 
agency head determines that such a waiver would be in the public 
interest. This exception authority cannot be delegated to any other 
official.


<R05>
Sec. 24.630  Certification requirements and procedures.

    (a)(1) As a prior condition of being awarded a grant, each grantee 
shall make the appropriate certification to the Federal agency providing 
the grant, as provided in appendix C to this part.
    (2) Grantees are not required to make a certification in order to 
continue receiving funds under a grant awarded before March 18, 1989, or 
under a no-cost time extension of such a grant. However, the grantee 
shall make a one-time drug-free workplace certification for a non-
automatic continuation of such a grant made on or after March 18, 1989.
    (b) Except as provided in this section, all grantees shall make the 
required certification for each grant. For mandatory formula grants and 
entitlements that have no application process, grantees shall submit a 
one-time

[[Page 215]]

certification in order to continue receiving awards.
    (c) A grantee that is a State may elect to make one certification in 
each Federal fiscal year. States that previously submitted an annual 
certification are not required to make a certification for Fiscal Year 
1990 until June 30, 1990. Except as provided in paragraph (d) of this 
section, this certification shall cover all grants to all State agencies 
from any Federal agency. The State shall retain the original of this 
statewide certification in its Governor's office and, prior to grant 
award, shall ensure that a copy is submitted individually with respect 
to each grant, unless the Federal agency has designated a central 
location for submission.
    (d)(1) The Governor of a State may exclude certain State agencies 
from the statewide certification and authorize these agencies to submit 
their own certifications to Federal agencies. The statewide 
certification shall name any State agencies so excluded.
    (2) A State agency to which the statewide certification does not 
apply, or a State agency in a State that does not have a statewide 
certification, may elect to make one certification in each Federal 
fiscal year. State agencies that previously submitted a State agency 
certification are not required to make a certification for Fiscal Year 
1990 until June 30, 1990. The State agency shall retain the original of 
this State agency-wide certification in its central office and, prior to 
grant award, shall ensure that a copy is submitted individually with 
respect to each grant, unless the Federal agency designates a central 
location for submission.
    (3) When the work of a grant is done by more than one State agency, 
the certification of the State agency directly receiving the grant shall 
be deemed to certify compliance for all workplaces, including those 
located in other State agencies.
    (e)(1) For a grant of less than 30 days performance duration, 
grantees shall have this policy statement and program in place as soon 
as possible, but in any case by a date prior to the date on which 
performance is expected to be completed.
    (2) For a grant of 30 days or more performance duration, grantees 
shall have this policy statement and program in place within 30 days 
after award.
    (3) Where extraordinary circumstances warrant for a specific grant, 
the grant officer may determine a different date on which the policy 
statement and program shall be in place.


<R05>
Sec. 24.635  Reporting of and employee sanctions for convictions of criminal drug offenses.

    (a) When a grantee other than an individual is notified that an 
employee has been convicted for a violation of a criminal drug statute 
occurring in the workplace, it shall take the following actions:
    (1) Within 10 calendar days of receiving notice of the conviction, 
the grantee shall provide written notice, including the convicted 
employee's position title, to every grant officer, or other designee on 
whose grant activity the convicted employee was working, unless a 
Federal agency has designated a central point for the receipt of such 
notifications. Notification shall include the identification number(s) 
for each of the Federal agency's affected grants.
    (2) Within 30 calendar days of receiving notice of the conviction, 
the grantee shall do the following with respect to the employee who was 
convicted.
    (i) Take appropriate personnel action against the employee, up to 
and including termination, consistent with requirements of the 
Rehabilitation Act of 1973, as amended; or
    (ii) Require the employee to participate satisfactorily in a drug 
abuse assistance or rehabilitation program approved for such purposes by 
a Federal, State, or local health, law enforcement, or other appropriate 
agency.
    (b) A grantee who is an individual who is convicted for a violation 
of a criminal drug statute occurring during the conduct of any grant 
activity shall report the conviction, in writing, within 10 calendar 
days, to his or her Federal agency grant officer, or other designee, 
unless the Federal agency has designated a central point for the receipt 
of such notices. Notification shall include the identification number(s)

[[Page 216]]

for each of the Federal agency's affected grants.

(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 
0991-0002)


<R04>
               Subpart G--Limited Denial of Participation

    Source: 53 FR 19186, May 26, 1988. Redesignated at 54 FR 4950 and 
4957, Jan. 31, 1989, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 24.700  General.

    Officials who may order a limited denial of participation. HUD 
officials, as designated by the Secretary, are authorized to order a 
limited denial of participation affecting any participant or contractor 
and its affiliates, except HUD-FHA approved mortgagees. In each case, 
even if the offense or violation is of a criminal, fraudulent or other 
serious nature, the decision to order a limited denial of participation 
shall be discretionary and in the best interests of the Government.

[59 FR 18482, Apr. 19, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 24.705  Causes for a limited denial of participation.

    (a) Causes. A limited denial of participation shall be based upon 
adequate evidence of any of the following causes:
    (1) Approval of an applicant for insurance would constitute an 
unsatisfactory risk;
    (2) Irregularities in a participant's or contractor's past 
performance in a HUD program;
    (3) Failure of a participant or contractor to maintain the 
prerequisites of eligibility to participate in a HUD program;
    (4) Failure to honor contractual obligations or to proceed in 
accordance with contract specifications or HUD regulations;
    (5) Failure to satisfy, upon completion, the requirements of an 
assistance agreement or contract;
    (6) Deficiencies in ongoing construction projects;
    (7) Falsely certifying in connection with any HUD program, whether 
or not the certification was made directly to HUD;
    (8) Commission of an offense listed in Sec. 24.305;
    (9) Violation of any law, regulation, or procedure relating to the 
application for financial assistance, insurance or guarantee, or to the 
performance of obligations incurred pursuant to a grant of financial 
assistance or pursuant to a conditional or final commitment to insure or 
guarantee.
    (10) Making or procuring to be made any false statement for the 
purpose of influencing in any way an action of the Department.
    (11) Imposition of a limited denial of participation by any other 
HUD regional or field office.
    (12) Debarment or suspension by another Federal agency for any cause 
substantially the same as provided in Sec. 24.305.
    (b) Indictment. Indictment or Information shall constitute adequate 
evidence for the purpose of limited denial of participation actions.
    (c) Limited denial of participation. Imposition of a limited denial 
of participation by any other HUD office shall constitute adequate 
evidence for a concurrent limited denial of participation. Where such a 
concurrent limited denial of participation is imposed, participation may 
be restricted on the same basis without the need for additional 
conference or further hearing.

[53 FR 19186, May 26, 1988. Redesignated at 54 FR 4950 and 4957, Jan. 
31, 1989, as amended at 60 FR 33051, June 26, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 24.710  Period and scope of a limited denial of participation.

    (a) The scope of a limited denial of participation shall be as 
follows:
    (1) A limited denial of participation generally extends only to 
participation in the program under which the cause arose, except: Where 
it is based on an indictment, conviction, or suspension or debarment by 
another agency, it need not be based on offenses against HUD and it may 
apply to all programs.
    (2) For purposes of this subpart, participation includes receipt of 
any benefit or financial assistance through grants or contractual 
arrangements; benefits or assistance in the form of loan guarantees or 
insurance; and awards of procurement contracts, notwithstanding any quid 
pro quo given and whether the Department gives anything in return. 
Program may, in the

[[Page 217]]

discretion of the authorized official, include any or all of the 
functions within the jurisdiction of an Assistant Secretary.
    (3) The sanction may be imposed for a period not to exceed 12 
months, is limited to specific HUD programs, and shall be effective 
within the geographic jurisdiction of the office imposing it, unless the 
sanction is imposed by an Assistant Secretary or Deputy Assistant 
Secretary in which case the sanction may be imposed on a nationwide 
basis or a more restricted basis.
    (b) Effectiveness. This sanction shall be effective immediately upon 
issuance, and shall remain effective up to 12 months thereafter. If the 
cause for the limited denial of participation is resolved before the 
expiration of the 12-month period, the official who imposed the sanction 
may terminate it. The imposition of a limited denial of participation 
shall not affect the right of the Department to suspend or debar any 
person under this part.
    (c) Affiliates. An affiliate or organizational element may be 
included in a limited denial of participation solely on the basis of its 
affiliation, and regardless of its knowledge of or participation in the 
acts providing cause for the sanction. The burden of proving that a 
particular affiliate or organizational element is currently responsible 
and not controlled by the primary sanctioned party (or by an entity that 
itself is controlled by the primary sanctioned party) is on the 
affiliate or organizational element.

[53 FR 19186, May 26, 1988. Redesignated at 54 FR 4950 and 4957, Jan. 
31, 1989, as amended at 57 FR 58339, Dec. 9, 1992; 60 FR 33051, June 26, 
1995]


<R05>
Sec. 24.711  Notice of limited denial of participation.

    A limited denial of participation shall be made effective by 
advising the participant or contractor, and any specifically named 
affiliate, by mail, return receipt requested:
    (a) That the limited denial of participation is being imposed;
    (b) Of the cause(s) under Sec. 24.705 for the sanction;
    (c) Of the potential effect of the sanction, including the length of 
the sanction and the HUD program(s) and geographic area affected by the 
sanction;
    (d) Of the right to request, in writing, within 30 days of receipt 
of the notice, a conference under Sec. 24.712; and
    (e) Of the right to contest the limited denial of participation 
under Sec. 24.713.

[60 FR 33051, June 26, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 24.712  Conference.

    Within 30 days after receiving a notice of limited denial of 
participation, the respondent may request a conference with the official 
who issued such notice. If the respondent does not request a conference, 
the respondent shall nevertheless have the right to contest the limited 
denial of participation under the provisions of Sec. 24.713. The 
conference shall be held within 15 days after the Department's receipt 
of the request for a conference, unless the respondent waives this time 
limit. The official who imposed the sanction, or his or her designee, 
shall preside. At the conference, the respondent may appear with a 
representative and may present all relevant information and materials to 
the official or designee. Within 20 days after the conference, or within 
20 days after any agreed upon extension of time for submission of 
additional materials by the respondent, the official or designee shall, 
in writing, advise the respondent of the decision to terminate, modify, 
or affirm the limited denial of participation. If all or a portion of 
the remaining period of exclusion is affirmed, the notice of affirmation 
shall advise the respondent of the opportunity to contest the notice 
pursuant to Sec. 24.713. If the official or designee does not issue a 
decision within the 20-day period, the respondent may contest the 
sanction under Sec. 24.713.

[60 FR 33051, June 26, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 24.713  Opportunity to contest the limited denial of participation.

    (a) Submission in opposition. (1) The respondent may request a 
hearing before a hearing officer:
    (i) Within 30 days after receipt of a notice of affirmation of all 
or a portion of the remaining period of exclusion under a limited denial 
of participation; or

[[Page 218]]

    (ii) Within 30 days after receipt of a notice of a limited denial of 
participation where the respondent elects not to request a conference 
under Sec. 24.712.
    (2) The request must be addressed to the Debarment Docket Clerk, 
Department of Housing and Urban Development, 451 Seventh Street, SW., 
Washington, DC 20410.
    (3) If the respondent does not submit the request within the 30-day 
period, the sanction shall become final.
    (b) Procedures. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with 
the procedures of Secs. 24.313 and 24.314 Within 15 days of the hearing 
officer's issuance of findings of fact and a recommended decision, the 
official who issued the limited denial of participation shall issue a 
decision.
    (c) Effect of suspension or debarment on limited denial of 
participation. If a respondent has submitted a request for a hearing 
pursuant to paragraph (a) of this section, and if the respondent has 
also received, pursuant to subpart C or D of this part, a notice of 
proposed debarment or suspension that is based on the same 
transaction(s) or conduct as the limited denial of participation, the 
following rules shall apply:
    (1) If the respondent has not contested the proposed debarment 
pursuant to Sec. 24.313(a) or the suspension pursuant to Sec. 24.412(a), 
the final imposition of the debarment or suspension shall also 
constitute a final decision with respect to the limited denial of 
participation to the extent that the debarment or suspension is based on 
the same transaction(s) or conduct as the limited denial of 
participation.
    (2) If the respondent has contested the proposed debarment pursuant 
to Sec. 24.313(a), or the suspension pursuant to Sec. 24.412(a), the 
proceedings shall be consolidated and the debarring or suspending 
official shall issue a final decision as to both the limited denial of 
participation and the debarment or suspension.

[60 FR 33051, June 26, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 24.714  Reporting of limited denial of participation.

    When a limited denial of participation has been made final, or the 
period for requesting a conference pursuant to Sec. 24.712 has expired 
without receipt of such a request, the official imposing the limited 
denial of participation shall notify the Director of the Participation 
and Compliance Division in the Office of Housing of the scope of the 
limited denial of participation.

[60 FR 33051, June 26, 1995]


<R03>
PART 25--MORTGAGEE REVIEW BOARD--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
25.1  Scope of rules in this part.
25.2  Establishment of Board.
25.3  Definitions.
25.4  Operation of the Mortgagee Review Board.
25.5  Administrative actions.
25.6  Notice of violation.
25.7  Notice of administrative action.
25.8  Hearings and hearing request.
25.9  Grounds for an administrative action.
25.10  Publication in Federal Register of actions.
25.11  Notification to other agencies.
25.12  Civil money penalties.
25.13  Notifying GNMA of withdrawal actions.
25.14  Prohibition against modification of Board orders.
25.15  Retroactive application of board regulations.
25.17  [Reserved]

    Authority: 12 U.S.C. 1708(c), 1708(d), 1709(s), 1715b and 1735(f)-
14; 42 U.S.C. 3535(d).

    Source: 57 FR 31051, July 13, 1992, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 25.1  Scope of rules in this part.

    The rules in this part are applicable to the operation of the 
Mortgagee Review Board and to proceedings arising from administrative 
actions of the Mortgagee Review Board.


<R05>
Sec. 25.2  Establishment of Board.

    The Mortgagee Review Board (the Board) was established in the 
Federal Housing Administration, which is in the Office of the Assistant 
Secretary for Housing--Federal Housing Commissioner, by section 
202(c)(1) of the National Housing Act (12 U.S.C. 1708(c)(1)), as added 
by section 142 of the Department of Housing and Urban Development Reform 
Act of 1989 (Pub. L. 101-235, approved December 15, 1989). Except as 
limited by this part, the Board shall exercise all of the functions of 
the Secretary with respect to

[[Page 219]]

administrative actions against mortgagees and lenders and such other 
functions as are provided in this part. The Board may, in its 
discretion, approve the initiation of a suspension or debarment action 
against a mortgagee or lender by any Suspending or Debarring Official 
under part 24 of this subtitle A. The Board shall have all powers 
necessary and incident to the performance of these functions. The Board 
may redelegate its authority to review submissions and conduct hearings 
under Sec. 25.8. The Board may also redelegate its authority to impose 
administrative sanctions on the grounds specified in Secs. 25.9 (e), 
(h), and (u), and to take all other nondiscretionary acts. With respect 
to actions taken against Title I lenders and loan correspondents, the 
Board may redelegate its authority to take administrative actions for 
failure to remain in compliance with the requirements for approval in 24 
CFR 202.5(i), 202.5(n), 202.7(b)(4), 202.8(b)(1) and 202.8(b)(3).

[60 FR 39237, Aug. 1, 1995, as amended at 62 FR 20081, Apr. 24, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 25.3  Definitions.

    Adequate evidence. Information sufficient to support the reasonable 
belief that a particular act or omission has occurred.
    Board. The Mortgagee Review Board.
    Hearing officer. An Administrative Law Judge or Board of Contract 
Appeals judge authorized by the Secretary, or by the Secretary's 
designee, to issue findings of fact or other appropriate findings under 
Sec. 25.8(d)(2).
    Hearing official. An official designated by the Board to conduct 
hearings under Sec. 25.8.
    Lender. A financial institution as defined in paragraphs (a) and (b) 
of the definition of lender in Sec. 202.2 of this title.
    Loan correspondent. A financial institution as defined in paragraph 
(c) of the definition of lender in Sec. 202.2 of this title.
    Mortgagee. For purposes of the regulations in this part, the term 
``mortgagee'' includes:
    (1) The original lender
    under the mortgage, as that term is defined at sections 201(a) and 
207(a)(1) of the National Housing Act (12 U.S.C. 1707(a), 1713(a)(1));
    (2) A lender or loan correspondent as defined in this section;
    (3) A branch office or subsidiary of the mortgagee, lender, or loan 
correspondent; or
    (4) Successors and assigns of the mortgagee, lender, or loan 
correspondent, as are approved by the Commissioner.
    Person. Any individual, corporation, partnership, association, unit 
of government or legal entity, however organized.
    Secretary. The Secretary of the Department of Housing and Urban 
Development or a person designated by the Secretary.

[57 FR 31051, July 13, 1992; 57 FR 37085, Aug. 18, 1992, as amended at 
60 FR 13835, Mar. 14, 1995; 60 FR 39237, Aug. 1, 1995; 61 FR 685, Jan. 
9, 1996; 62 FR 20081, Apr. 24, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 25.4  Operation of the Mortgagee Review Board.

    (a) Members. The Board consists of the following voting members: The 
Assistant Secretary for Housing--Federal Housing Commissioner who serves 
as chairperson; the General Counsel; the President of the Government 
National Mortgage Association (GNMA); the Assistant Secretary for 
Administration; the Chief Financial Officer of the Department; and, in 
cases involving violations of nondiscrimination requirements, the 
Assistant Secretary for Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity; or their 
designees.
    (b) Advisors. The Inspector General or his or her designee, and the 
Director of the Office of Lender Activities and Land Sales Registration 
(or such other position as may be assigned such duties), and such other 
persons as the Board may appoint, shall serve as nonvoting advisors to 
the Board.
    (c) Quorum. Four members of the Board or their designees shall 
constitute a quorum.
    (d) Determination by the Board. Any administrative action taken by 
the Board shall be determined by a majority vote of the quorum.

[57 FR 31051, July 13, 1992; 57 FR 37085, Aug. 18, 1992]

[[Page 220]]


<R05>
Sec. 25.5  Administrative actions.

    (a) General. The Board is authorized to take the following 
administrative actions: letter of reprimand, probation, suspension, 
withdrawal, or settlement agreement. These actions are described at 12 
U.S.C. 1708(c)(3), and as further set out in this section.
    (b) Letter of reprimand. A letter of reprimand shall be effective 
upon receipt of the letter by the mortgagee. Failure to comply with a 
directive in the letter of reprimand may result in any other 
administrative action under this part that the Board finds appropriate.
    (c) Probation. Probation shall be effective upon receipt of the 
notice of probation by the mortgagee. Failure to comply with the terms 
of probation may result in any other administrative action under this 
part that the Board finds appropriate.
    (d) Suspension. A suspension shall be based upon adequate evidence 
and shall be effective upon receipt of the notice of suspension by the 
mortgagee. During the period of suspension, HUD will not endorse any 
mortgage originated by the suspended mortgagee unless prior to the date 
of suspension a firm commitment has been issued relating to any such 
mortgage, or a Direct Endorsement underwriter has approved the mortgagor 
for any such mortgage. During the period of suspension, a lender or loan 
correspondent may not originate new title I loans under their Title I 
Contracts of Insurance or apply for a new Contract of Insurance.
    (e)(1) Withdrawal. During the period of withdrawal, HUD will not 
endorse any mortgage originated by the withdrawn mortgagee unless prior 
to the date of withdrawal a firm commitment has been issued relating to 
any such mortgage, or a Direct Endorsement underwriter has approved the 
mortgagor for any such mortgage. During the period of withdrawal, a 
lender or loan correspondent may not originate new title I loans under 
their Title I Contracts of Insurance or apply for a new Contract of 
Insurance. The Board may limit the geographical extent of the 
withdrawal, or limit its scope (e.g., to either the single family or 
multifamily activities of a withdrawn mortgagee). Upon the expiration of 
the period of withdrawal, the mortgagee may file a new application for 
approval under 24 CFR part 202.
    (2) Effective date of withdrawal. (i) If the Board determines that 
immediate action is in the public interest or in the best interests of 
the Department, then withdrawal shall be effective upon receipt of the 
Board's notice of withdrawal.
    (ii) If the Board does not determine that immediate action is 
necessary according to paragraph (e)(2)(i) of this section, then 
withdrawal shall be effective either:
    (A) Upon the expiration of the 30-day period specified in Sec. 25.8, 
if the mortgagee has not requested a hearing; or
    (B) Upon receipt of the Board's decision under Sec. 25.8, if the 
mortgagee requests a hearing.

[60 FR 685, Jan. 9, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 25.6  Notice of violation.

    (a) General. The Chairperson of the Board, or the Chairperson's 
designee, shall issue a written notice to the mortgagee at least thirty 
days prior to taking any probation, suspension or withdrawal action 
against a mortgagee. The notice shall state the specific violations that 
have been alleged, and shall direct the mortgagee to reply in writing to 
the Board within thirty days after receipt of the notice by the 
mortgagee. The notice shall also provide the address to which the 
response shall be sent. If the mortgagee fails to reply during such time 
period, the Board may make a determination without considering any 
comments of the mortgagee.
    (b) Mortgagee's response. The mortgagee's response to the Board 
shall be in a format prescribed by the Secretary and shall not exceed 15 
double-spaced typewritten pages. The response shall include an executive 
summary, a statement of the facts surrounding the matter, an argument 
and a conclusion. A more lengthy submission, including documents and 
other exhibits, may be simultaneously submitted to Board staff for 
review.

(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under Control Number 
2502-0450)

[[Page 221]]


<R05>
Sec. 25.7  Notice of administrative action.

    Whenever the Board takes an action to issue a letter of reprimand, 
to place a mortgagee on probation, or to suspend or withdraw a 
mortgagee's approval, the Board shall promptly notify the mortgagee in 
writing of the determination. Except for a letter of reprimand, the 
notice shall describe the nature and duration of the administrative 
action, shall specifically state the violations, and shall set forth the 
findings of the Board. The notice shall inform the mortgagee of its 
right to a hearing, pursuant to Sec. 25.8, regarding the administrative 
action (except for a letter of reprimand) and of the manner and time in 
which to request a hearing. A supplemental notice may be issued in the 
discretion of the Board to add or modify the reasons for the action.

[60 FR 39237, Aug. 1, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 25.8  Hearings and hearing request.

    (a) Hearing request. A mortgagee that is issued a probation, 
suspension, or withdrawal action is entitled to a hearing on the record. 
The mortgagee shall submit its request for a hearing within 30 days of 
receiving the Board's notice of administrative action. The request shall 
be addressed to the Board Docket Clerk, Department of Housing and Urban 
Development, 451 7th Street SW., Washington, DC 20410. The request shall 
specifically respond to the violations set forth in the notice of 
administrative action. If the mortgagee fails to request a hearing 
within 30 days after receiving the notice of administrative action, the 
Board's action shall become final.
    (b) Procedural rules. The hearing official shall hold a de novo 
hearing within 30 days of HUD's receipt of the mortgagee's request, 
unless the mortgagee requests a later hearing date. The mortgagee or its 
representative shall be afforded an opportunity to appear, submit 
documentary evidence, present witnesses, and confront any witness the 
agency presents. The parties shall not be allowed to present members of 
the Board as witnesses. At the mortgagee's request, a transcribed record 
of the hearing shall be made available at cost to the mortgagee.
    (c) Hearing location. The hearing shall generally be held in 
Washington, DC However, upon a showing of undue hardship or other cause, 
the hearing official may, in his or her discretion, order the hearing to 
be held in a location other than Washington, DC.
    (d) Hearing official's recommendation. (1) The hearing official 
shall issue written findings and a recommended decision to the Board 
within 45 days after the conclusion of the hearing, unless the hearing 
official extends this period for good cause or refers a matter for 
findings of fact or other appropriate findings pursuant to paragraph 
(d)(2)(i) of this section. The findings and recommendation shall be 
based upon the facts as found, together with any information and 
argument submitted by the parties and any other information in the 
administrative record.
    (2) Referral to a hearing officer or other independent official. (i) 
The hearing official may, at his or her discretion, refer disputed 
material facts to a hearing officer or other independent official for 
findings of fact. The hearing official may also, at his or her 
discretion, refer other issues to a hearing officer or other independent 
official for appropriate findings. The hearing official shall provide 
the parties with notice of the referral. The hearing official may reject 
the findings, in whole or in part, only after specifically determining 
them to be arbitrary and capricious or clearly erroneous.
    (ii) The provisions of part 26 of this subtitle A shall be 
applicable to proceedings before a hearing officer, with the following 
limitations:
    (A) No appeal to the Secretary may be taken under Secs. 26.24 
through 26.26 of this subtitle A with respect to any order or decision 
by the hearing officer.
    (B) Discovery shall be limited to exclude requests for answers to 
interrogatories, requests for admissions, and production of documents 
that either do not pertain to the appealing mortgagee, or pertain to 
reviews or audits by the Department or administrative actions by the 
Board against mortgagees other than the appealing mortgagee. Members of 
the Board shall not be subject to deposition, nor shall they be required 
to testify at any hearing.

[[Page 222]]

    (iii) Proceedings before a hearing officer or other independent 
official shall commence within 45 days after referral by the hearing 
official, unless the parties agree to an extension of time. The hearing 
officer or other independent official shall issue the requested findings 
of fact or other appropriate findings to the hearing official within 30 
days after the conclusion of such proceedings. The time limitations of 
this paragraph may be extended upon issuance of a written notice 
describing good cause for such extension.
    (iv) The hearing official shall provide a recommended decision to 
the Board within 15 days after the findings are issued.
    (v) [Reserved]
    (e) Decision by the Board. The Board shall issue its decision within 
15 days after the hearing official issues the recommended decision. The 
Board's decision shall be mailed to the mortgagee, and shall serve as 
the final agency action concerning the mortgagee.

[60 FR 39238, Aug. 1, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 25.9  Grounds for an administrative action.

    One or more of the following violations by a mortgagee may result in 
an administrative action by the Board under Sec. 25.5. Except in cases 
where the Board's authority has been delegated in accordance with 
Sec. 25.2, the Board will consider, among other factors, the seriousness 
and extent of the violations, the degree of mortgagee responsibility for 
the occurrences and any mitigating factors, in determining which 
administrative action, if any, is appropriate. Any administrative action 
imposed under Sec. 25.5 shall be based upon one or more of the following 
grounds:
    (a) The transfer of an insured mortgage to non-approved mortgagee, 
except pursuant to 24 CFR 203.433 or 203.435;
    (b) The failure of a mortgagee to segregate all escrow funds 
received from mortgagors on account of ground rents, taxes, assessments 
and insurance premiums, or failure to deposit these funds with one or 
more financial institutions in a special account or accounts that are 
fully insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation or by the 
National Credit Union Administration except as otherwise provided in 
writing by the Assistant Secretary for Housing--Federal Housing 
Commissioner;
    (c) The use of escrow funds for any purpose other than that for 
which they are received;
    (d) The termination of a mortgagee's supervision by a governmental 
agency;
    (e) The failure of a nonsupervised mortgagee to submit the required 
annual audit report of its financial condition prepared in accordance 
with instructions issued by the Secretary within 90 days of the close of 
its fiscal year, or such longer period as the Assistant Secretary of 
Housing--Federal Housing Commissioner may authorize in writing prior to 
the expiration of 90 days;
    (f) The payment by a mortgagee of a referral fee to any person or 
organization; or payment of any thing of value, directly or indirectly, 
in connection with any insured mortgage transaction or transactions to 
any person, including but not limited to an attorney, escrow agent, 
title company, consultant, mortgage broker, seller, builder or real 
estate agent, if that person has received any other compensation from 
the mortgagor, the seller, the builder or any other person for services 
related to such transactions or from or related to the purchase or sale 
of the mortgaged property, except compensation paid for the actual 
performance of such services as may be approved by the Assistant 
Secretary for Housing--Federal Housing Commissioner;
    (g) Failure to comply with any agreement, certification, 
undertaking, or condition of approval listed on either a mortgagee's 
application for approval or on an approved mortgagee's branch office 
notification;
    (h) Failure of an approved mortgagee to meet or maintain the 
applicable net worth, liquidity or warehouse line of credit requirements 
of 24 CFR part 202 pertaining to net worth, liquid assets, and warehouse 
line of credit or other acceptable funding plan;
    (i) Failure or refusal of an approved mortgagee to comply with an 
order of the Board, the Secretary, the hearing official, hearing officer 
or other independent official to whom matters are referred under 
Sec. 25.8(d)(2).

[[Page 223]]

    (j) Violation of the requirements of any contract with the 
Department, or violation of the requirements set forth in any statute, 
regulation, handbook, mortgagee letter, or other written rule or 
instruction;
    (k) Submission of false information to HUD in connection with any 
HUD/FHA insured mortgage transaction;
    (l) Failure of a mortgagee to respond to inquiries from the Board;
    (m) Indictment or conviction of a mortgagee or any of its officers, 
directors, principals or employees for an offense which reflects upon 
the responsibility, integrity, or ability of the mortgagee to 
participate in HUD/FHA programs as an approved mortgagee;
    (n) Employing or retaining:
    (1) An officer, partner, director or principal at such time when 
such person was suspended, debarred, ineligible, or subject to a limited 
denial of participation under 24 CFR part 24 or otherwise prohibited 
from participation in HUD programs, where the mortgagee knew or should 
have known of the prohibition;
    (2) An employee who is not an officer, partner, director, or 
principal and who is or will be working on HUD/FHA program matters at a 
time when such person was suspended, debarred, ineligible, or subject to 
a limited denial of participation under 24 CFR part 24 or otherwise 
prohibited from participation in HUD programs, where the mortgagee knew 
or should have known of the prohibition;
    (o) Violation by an approved mortgagee of the nondiscrimination 
requirements of the Equal Credit Opportunity Act (15 U.S.C. 1691-1691f), 
Fair Housing Act (42 U.S.C. 3601-3619), Executive Order 11063 (27 FR 
11527), and all regulations issued pursuant thereto;
    (p) Business practices which do not conform to generally accepted 
practices of prudent mortgagees or which demonstrate irresponsibility;
    (q) Failure to cooperate with an audit or investigation by the 
Department's Office of Inspector General or an inquiry by HUD/FHA into 
the conduct of the mortgagee's HUD/FHA insured business or any other 
failure to provide information to the Secretary or a representative 
related to the conduct of the mortgagee's HUD/FHA business;
    (r) Violation by an approved mortgagee of the requirements or 
prohibitions of the Real Estate Settlement Procedures Act (12 U.S.C. 
2601-2617);
    (s) Without regard to the date of the insurance of the mortgage, 
failure to service an insured mortgage in accordance with the 
regulations and any other requirements of the Secretary which are in 
effect at the time the act or omission occurs;
    (t) Failure to administer properly an assistance payment contract 
under section 235 of the National Housing Act (12 U.S.C. 1715z);
    (u) Failure to pay the application and annual fees required by 24 
CFR part 202;
    (v) The failure of a coinsuring mortgagee:
    (1) To properly perform underwriting, servicing or property 
disposition functions in accordance with instructions and standards 
issued by the Commissioner;
    (2) To make full payment to an investing mortgagee as required by 24 
CFR part 204;
    (3) To discharge responsibilities under a contract for coinsurance;
    (4) To comply with restrictions concerning the transfer of a 
coinsured mortgage to an agency not approved under 24 CFR part 250;
    (5) To maintain additional net worth requirements, as applicable;
    (w) Failure to remit, or timely remit, mortgage insurance premiums, 
loan insurance charges, late charges, or interest penalties to the 
Department;
    (x) Failure to submit a report required under 24 CFR 202.12(c) 
within the time determined by the Commissioner, or to commence or 
complete a plan for corrective action under that section within the time 
agreed upon by the Commissioner.
    (y) Failure to properly perform underwriting functions in accordance 
with instructions and standards issued by the Department;
    (z) Failure to fund mortgage loans or any other misuse of mortgage 
loan proceeds;
    (aa) Permitting the use of strawbuyer mortgagors in an insured

[[Page 224]]

mortgage transaction where the mortgagee knew or should have known of 
such use of strawbuyers;
    (bb) Breach by the mortgagee of a fiduciary duty owed by it to any 
person as defined in Sec. 25.3, including GNMA and the holder of any 
mortgage-backed security guaranteed by GNMA, with respect to an insured 
loan or mortgage transaction.
    (cc) Violation by a Title I lender or loan correspondent of any of 
the applicable provisions of this section or 24 CFR 202.11(a)(2).
    (dd) Failure to pay any civil money penalty, but only after all 
administrative appeals requested by the mortgagee have been exhausted.
    (ee) Any other reason the Board or the Secretary determines to be so 
serious as to justify an administrative sanction.

(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under Control Number 
2502-0450)

[57 FR 31051, July 13, 1992; 57 FR 37085, Aug. 18, 1992, as amended at 
57 FR 58339, Dec. 9, 1992; 60 FR 13836, Mar. 14, 1995; 60 FR 39238, Aug. 
1, 1995; 61 FR 685, Jan. 9, 1996; 62 FR 20081, Apr. 24, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 25.10  Publication in Federal Register of actions.

    The Secretary shall publish, in the Federal Register, a description 
of and the cause for each administrative action taken by the Board 
against a mortgagee. Such publication shall be made quarterly or more 
frequently in the discretion of the Secretary.


<R05>
Sec. 25.11  Notification to other agencies.

    Whenever the Board has taken any discretionary action to suspend 
and/or withdraw the approval of a mortgagee, the Secretary shall provide 
prompt notice of the action and a statement of the reasons for the 
action to the Secretary of Veterans Affairs; the chief executive officer 
of the Federal National Mortgage Association; the chief executive 
officer of the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation; the Administrator 
of the Farmers Home Administration; the Comptroller of the Currency, if 
the mortgagee is a National Bank or District Bank or subsidiary or 
affiliate of such a bank; the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 
System, if the mortgagee is a State bank that is a member of the Federal 
Reserve System or a subsidiary or affiliate of such a bank, or a bank 
holding company or a subsidiary or affiliate of such a company; the 
Board of Directors of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation if the 
mortgagee is a State bank that is not a member of the Federal Reserve 
System, or is a subsidiary or affiliate of such a bank; and the Director 
of the Office of Thrift Supervision, if the mortgagee is a Federal or 
State savings association or a subsidiary or affiliate of a savings 
association.


<R05>
Sec. 25.12  Civil money penalties.

    The Board is authorized pursuant to section 536 of the National 
Housing Act (12 U.S.C. 1735(f)-14) to impose civil money penalties on 
mortgagees and Title I lenders, as set forth in 24 CFR part 30. The 
violations for which a civil money penalty may be imposed are listed at 
24 CFR 30.320. Hearings to challenge the imposition of civil money 
penalties shall be conducted according to the applicable rules of 24 CFR 
part 30.

[57 FR 31051, July 13, 1992; 57 FR 37085, Aug. 18, 1992. Redesignated at 
61 FR 685, Jan. 9, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 25.13  Notifying GNMA of withdrawal actions.

    When the Board issues a notice of violation that could lead to 
withdrawal of a mortgagee's approval, or is notified by GNMA of an 
action that could lead to withdrawal of GNMA approval, the Board shall 
proceed in accordance with 12 U.S.C. 1708(d).

(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under Control Number 
2502-0450)

[61 FR 685, Jan. 9, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 25.14  Prohibition against modification of Board orders.

    No hearing official, hearing officer, or other independent official 
before whom proceedings are conducted under Sec. 25.8 shall modify or 
otherwise disturb in any way an order or notice by the Board.

[60 FR 39238, Aug. 1, 1995. Redesignated at 61 FR 685, Jan. 9, 1996]

[[Page 225]]


<R05>
Sec. 25.15  Retroactive application of board regulations.

    Limitations on participation in HUD mortgage insurance programs 
proposed or imposed prior to August 12, 1992, under an ancillary 
procedure shall not be affected by this part. This part shall apply to 
sanctions initiated after the effective date of the Department of 
Housing and Urban Development Reform Act of 1989 (December 15, 1989) 
regardless of the date of the cause giving rise to the sanction.

[57 FR 31051, July 13, 1992. Redesignated at 61 FR 685, Jan. 9, 1996]


<R05>
25.17  [Reserved]


<R03>
PART 26--HEARING PROCEDURES--Table of Contents

<R05>


               Subpart A--Hearings Before Hearing Officers

Sec.
26.1  Purpose.

                             Hearing Officer

26.2  Hearing officer, powers and duties.
26.3  Failure to comply with an order of the hearing officer.
26.4  Ex parte communications.
26.5  Disqualification of hearing officer.

                      Representation of the Parties

26.6  Department representative.
26.7  Respondent's representative.
26.8  Standards of practice.

                          Pleadings and Motions

26.9  Notice of administrative action.
26.10  Complaint.
26.11  Answer.
26.12  Amendments and supplemental pleadings.
26.13  Motions.
26.14  Form and filing requirements.
26.15  Service.
26.16  Time computation.

                                Discovery

26.17  Discovery.
26.18  Depositions.
26.19  Request for production of documents.
26.20  Admissions as to facts and documents.
26.21  Prehearing conference.

                                Hearings

26.22  Public nature and timing of hearings, transcripts.
26.23  Rules of evidence.
26.24  Hearing officer's determination and order.

                           Secretarial Review

26.25  Review of determination of hearing officers.
26.26  Interlocutory rulings.

    Subpart B--Hearings Pursuant to the Administrative Procedure Act

                                 General

26.27  Purpose and scope.
26.28  Definitions.
26.29  Powers and duties of the Administrative Law Judge (ALJ).
26.30  Ex parte contacts.
26.31  Disqualification of ALJ.
26.32  Parties to the hearing.
26.33  Separation of functions.
26.34  Time computations.
26.35  Service and filing.
26.36  Sanctions.

                          Prehearing Procedures

26.37  Commencement of action.
26.38  Motions.
26.39  Default.
26.40  Prehearing conferences.
26.41  Discovery.
26.42  Subpoenas.
26.43  Protective order.

                                Hearings

26.44  General.
26.45  Witnesses.
26.46  Evidence.
26.47  The record.
26.48  Posthearing briefs.
26.49  Initial decision.
26.50  Appeal to the Secretary.
26.51  Exhaustion of administrative remedies.
26.52  Judicial review.
26.53  Collection of civil penalties and assessments.
26.54  Right to administrative offset.

    Authority: 42 U.S.C. 3535(d).

    Source: 48 FR 43304, Sept. 23, 1983, unless otherwise noted.


<R04>
               Subpart A--Hearings Before Hearing Officers


<R05>
Sec. 26.1  Purpose.

    This part sets forth rules of procedure in certain proceedings of 
the Department of Housing and Urban Development presided over by a 
hearing officer. These rules of procedure apply to hearings with respect 
to determinations by the Multifamily Participation Review Committee 
pursuant to 24 CFR

[[Page 226]]

part 200, subpart H, to hearings conducted pursuant to referrals by 
debarring or suspending officials under 24 CFR part 24, and to hearings 
conducted pursuant to referrals by a hearing official under 24 CFR part 
25, unless such regulations at 24 CFR parts 24, 25, or 200, provide 
otherwise. They also apply in any other case where a hearing is required 
by statute or regulation, to the extent that rules adopted under such 
statute or regulation are not inconsistent.

[48 FR 43304, Sept. 23, 1983, as amended at 60 FR 39239, Aug. 1, 1995]

                             Hearing Officer


<R05>
Sec. 26.2  Hearing officer, powers and duties.

    (a) Hearing officer. Proceedings conducted under these rules shall 
be presided over by a hearing officer who shall be an Administrative Law 
Judge or Board of Contract Appeals Judge authorized by the Secretary or 
designee to conduct proceedings under this part.
    (b) Time and place of hearing. The hearing officer shall set the 
time and place of any hearing and shall give reasonable notice to the 
parties.
    (c) Powers of hearing officers. The hearing officer shall conduct a 
fair and impartial hearing and take all action necessary to avoid delay 
in the disposition of proceeding and to maintain order. The hearing 
officer shall have all powers necessary to those ends, including but not 
limited to the power:
    (1) To administer oaths and affirmations;
    (2) To cause subpoenas to be issued as authorized by law;
    (3) To rule upon offers of proof and receive evidence;
    (4) To order or limit discovery as the interests of justice may 
require;
    (5) To regulate the course of the hearing and the conduct of the 
parties and their counsel;
    (6) To hold conferences for the settlement or simplification of the 
issues by consent of the parties;
    (7) To consider and rule upon all procedural and other motions 
appropriate in adjudicative proceedings;
    (8) To take notice of any material fact not appearing in evidence in 
the record which is properly a matter of judicial notice; and
    (9) To make and file determinations.


<R05>
Sec. 26.3  Failure to comply with an order of the hearing officer.

    If a party refuses or fails to comply with an order of the hearing 
officer, the hearing officer may enter any appropriate order necessary 
to the disposition of the hearing including a determination against the 
noncomplying party.


<R05>
Sec. 26.4  Ex parte communications.

    (a) Definition. An ex parte communication is any communication with 
a hearing officer, direct or indirect, oral or written, concerning the 
merits of procedures of any pending proceeding which is made by a party 
in the absence of any other party.
    (b) Prohibition of ex parte communications. Ex parte communications 
are prohibited except where:
    (1) The purpose and content of the communication have been disclosed 
in advance or simultaneously to all parties; or
    (2) The communication is a request for information concerning the 
status of the case.
    (c) Procedure after receipt of ex parte communication. Any hearing 
officer who receives an ex parte communication which the hearing officer 
knows or has reason to believe is unauthorized shall promptly place the 
communication, or its substance, in all files and shall furnish copies 
to all parties. Unauthorized ex parte communications shall not be taken 
into consideration in deciding any matter in issue.

[48 FR 43304, Sept. 23, 1983; 48 FR 46980, Oct. 17, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 26.5  Disqualification of hearing officer.

    When a hearing officer believes there is a basis for 
disqualification in a particular proceeding, the hearing officer shall 
withdraw by notice on the record and shall notify the Secretary and the 
official initiating the action under appeal. Whenever any party believes 
that the hearing officer should be disqualified from presiding in a 
particular proceeding, the party may file a motion with the hearing 
officer requesting the

[[Page 227]]

hearing officer to withdraw from presiding over the proceedings. This 
motion shall be supported by affidavits setting forth the alleged 
grounds for disqualification. If the hearing officer does not withdraw, 
a written statement of his or her reasons shall be incorporated in the 
record and the hearing shall proceed.

                      Representation of the Parties


<R05>
Sec. 26.6  Department representative.

    In each case heard before a hearing officer under this part, the 
Department shall be represented by the General Counsel or designee.


<R05>
Sec. 26.7  Respondent's representative.

    The party against whom the administrative action is taken may be 
represented at hearing as follows:
    (a) Individuals may appear on their own behalf;
    (b) A member of a partnership or joint venture may appear on behalf 
of the partnership or joint venture;
    (c) A bona fide officer may appear on behalf of a corporation or 
association upon a showing of adequate authorization;
    (d) An attorney who files a notice of appearance with the hearing 
officer may represent any party. For purposes of this paragraph, an 
attorney is defined as a member of the bar of a Federal court or of the 
highest court of any State; or
    (e) An individual not included within paragraphs (a) through (d) of 
this section may represent the respondent upon an adequate showing, as 
determined by the hearing officer, that the individual possesses the 
legal, technical or other qualifications necessary to advise and assist 
in the presentation of the case.


<R05>
Sec. 26.8  Standards of practice.

    Attorneys shall conform to the standards of professional and ethical 
conduct required of practitioners in the courts of the United States and 
by the bars of which the attorneys are members. Any attorney may be 
prohibited by the Hearing Officer from representing a party if the 
attorney is not qualified under Sec. 26.7 or if such action is necessary 
to maintain order in or the integrity of the pending proceeding.

                          Pleadings and Motions


<R05>
Sec. 26.9  Notice of administrative action.

    In every case, there shall be a notice of administrative action. The 
notice shall be in writing and inform the party of the determination. 
The notice shall state the reasons for the proposed or imposed action 
except where general terms are permitted by 24 CFR part 24. The notice 
shall inform the party of any right to a hearing to challenge the 
determination, and the manner and time in which to request such hearing. 
A supplemental notice may be issued in the discretion of the initiating 
official to add to or modify the reasons for the action.


<R05>
Sec. 26.10  Complaint.

    (a) Respondent. A complaint shall be served upon the party against 
whom an administrative action is taken, who shall be called the 
respondent.
    (b) Grounds. The complaint shall state the grounds upon which the 
administrative action is based. The grounds set forth in the complaint 
may not contain allegations beyond the scope of the notice of 
administrative action or any amendment thereto.
    (c) Notice of administrative action as complaint. A notice of 
administrative action may serve as a complaint provided the notice 
states it is also a complaint and complies with paragraph (b) of this 
section.
    (d) Timing. When the notice does not serve as a complaint, the 
complaint shall be served on or before the thirtieth day after a request 
for hearing is made.


<R05>
Sec. 26.11  Answer.

    Respondent shall file an answer within thirty days of receipt of the 
complaint. The answer shall respond specifically to each factual 
allegation. A general denial shall not be permitted. Where a respondent 
intends to rely on an affirmative defense it shall be pleaded 
specifically. Allegations are admitted when not specifically denied in 
respondent's answer.

[[Page 228]]


<R05>
Sec. 26.12  Amendments and supplemental pleadings.

    (a) Amendments. (1) By right: The Department may amend its complaint 
without leave at any time within thirty days of the date the complaint 
is filed or at any time before respondent's responsive pleading is 
filed, whichever is later. Respondent may amend its answer at any time 
within thirty days of filing of its answer. A party shall plead in 
response to an amended pleading within fifteen days of receipt of the 
amended pleading.
    (2) By leave: Upon conditions as are necessary to avoid prejudicing 
the public interest and the rights of the parties, the hearing officer 
may allow amendments to pleadings upon motion of any party.
    (3) Conformance to evidence: When issues not raised by the pleadings 
but reasonably within the scope of the proceeding initiated by the 
complaint are tried by express or implied consent to the parties, they 
shall be treated in all respects as if they had been raised in the 
pleadings, and amendments of the pleadings necessary to make them 
conform to the evidence shall be allowed at any time.
    (b) Supplemental pleadings. The hearing officer may, upon reasonable 
notice, permit service of a supplemental pleading concerning 
transactions, occurrences, or events which have happened or been 
discovered since the date of prior pleadings.


<R05>
Sec. 26.13  Motions.

    (a) Motions. All motions after the commencement of the action until 
decision shall be addressed to the hearing officer.
    (b) Content. All written motions shall state the particular order, 
ruling, or action desired and the grounds for granting the motion.
    (c) Answers. Within seven (7) days after receipt of any written 
motion, or within any other period as may be designated by the hearing 
officer, the opposing party shall answer the motion. Failure to make a 
timely answer shall constitute a party's consent to the granting of the 
motion. The moving party shall have no right to reply, except as 
permitted by the hearing officer.
    (d) Oral argument. The hearing officer may order oral argument on 
any motion.
    (e) Motions for extensions. The hearing officer may waive the 
requirements of this section as to motions for extensions of time.
    (f) Rulings on motions for dismissal. When a motion to dismiss the 
proceeding is granted, the hearing officer shall make and file a 
determination and order in accordance with the provisions of Sec. 26.24.


<R05>
Sec. 26.14  Form and filing requirements.

    (a) Filing. An original and two copies of a request for a hearing 
shall be filed with the Docket Clerk, Department of Housing and Urban 
Development, 451 Seventh Street, SW., Washington, DC 20410, on official 
business days between 8:45 a.m. and 5:15 p.m. The Clerk shall assign the 
docket number and designate a hearing officer. An original and two 
copies of all other pleadings, submissions and documents should be filed 
directly with the appropriate hearing officer. A document is considered 
timely filed if postmarked on or before the date due or delivered to the 
appropriate person by close of business on the date due.
    (b) Title. Documents shall show clearly the title of the action and 
the docket number.
    (c) Form. Except as otherwise permitted, all documents shall be 
printed or typewritten in clear, legible form.


<R05>
Sec. 26.15  Service.

    (a) Method of service. Pleadings, motions, and other documents 
required or permitted under these rules shall be served upon all 
parties. Whenever these rules require or permit service to be made upon 
a party represented by an attorney, the service shall be made upon the 
attorney unless service upon the party is ordered by the hearing 
officer. Service shall be made by delivering a copy to the person to be 
served or by mailing it to that person at the last known address. 
Delivery of a copy within this rule means: handing it to the person to 
be served; or leaving it at that person's office with a clerk or other 
person in charge; or, if there is no one in charge, leaving it in a 
conspicuous place in the office; or, if the

[[Page 229]]

office is closed or the person to be served has no office, leaving it at 
that person's residence of usual place of abode with some person of 
suitable age and discretion who resides there. Service by mail is 
complete upon deposit in a mail box or upon posting.
    (b) Proof of service. Proof of service shall not be required unless 
the fact of service is put in issue by appropriate motion or objection 
on the part of the person allegedly served. In these cases, service may 
be established by written receipt signed by or on behalf of the person 
to be served, or may be established prima facie by affidavit or 
certificate of service of mailing.


<R05>
Sec. 26.16  Time computation.

    (a) Generally. Computation of any period of time prescribed or 
allowed by this part shall begin with the first business day following 
the day on which the act, event, development or default initiating the 
period of time occurred. When the last day of the period computed is a 
Saturday, Sunday, or national holiday, or other day on which the 
Department of Housing and Urban Development is closed, the period shall 
run until the end of the next following business day. Except when any 
prescribed or allowed period of time is seven days or less, each of the 
Saturdays, Sundays, and national holidays shall be included in the 
computation of the prescribed or allowed period.
    (b) Extensions of time periods. The hearing officer (or in the case 
of a review under Sec. 26.25, the Secretary or designee) may upon motion 
enlarge the time within which any act required by these rules must be 
performed where necessary to avoid prejudicing the public interest or 
the rights of the parties.

                                Discovery


<R05>
Sec. 26.17  Discovery.

    The parties are encouraged to engage in voluntary discovery 
procedures. Parties may seek an order compelling discovery only upon 
good cause shown. Discovery shall not be permitted where it will unduly 
delay the hearing, thereby resulting in prejudice to the public interest 
or the rights of the parties. Every request for discovery, objection to 
request for discovery, and request for admissions shall be in the form 
of a motion addressed to the hearing officer. In connection with any 
discovery procedure, the hearing officer may make any order required to 
protect a party or other person from annoyance, embarrassment, 
oppression, or undue burden or expense. Those orders may include 
limitations on the scope, methods, time and place for discovery, and 
provisions for protecting privileged information or documents. Where a 
party refuses to honor an order for discovery, the hearing officer may 
issue such orders in regard to the refusal as justice shall require. 
Each party shall bear its own expenses associated with discovery.


<R05>
Sec. 26.18  Depositions.

    (a) General. A party may take the oral deposition of any person. 
Upon refusal and, after a showing of good cause, a hearing officer may 
issue an order compelling a party or its agents to appear for 
deposition.
    (b) Procedure. Reasonable written notice of deposition shall be 
served upon the opposing party and the deponent. The attendance of a 
deponent may be compelled by subpoena where authorized by law.
    (c) Objections. Each person testifying on oral deposition shall be 
placed under oath by the person before whom the deposition is taken. The 
deponent may be examined and cross-examined. Objection may be made at 
hearing to receiving in evidence any deposition or part of it for any 
reason which would require the exclusion if the witness were then 
present and testifying. The questions and the answers, together with all 
objections made, shall be recorded by the person before whom the 
deposition is to be taken, or under that person's direction.
    (d) Submission to deponent. A transcript of the deposition shall be 
submitted to the deponent for examination and signature, unless 
submission is waived. Any changes in form or substance which the 
deponent desires to make shall be entered upon the transcript by the 
person before whom the deposition was taken, with a statement of reasons 
given by the deponent for making them. The transcript shall then be 
signed by the deponent, unless

[[Page 230]]

the parties by stipulation waive the signing or the deponent is ill, 
cannot be found, or refuses to sign. If the transcript is not signed, 
the person before whom the deposition was taken shall sign it and state 
on the record the reason that it is not signed.
    (e) Certification and filing. The person before whom the deposition 
was taken shall certify on the transcript as to its accuracy. The 
original transcript and exhibits shall be sent by mail to the hearing 
officer unless otherwise directed in the order authorizing the taking of 
the deposition. Interested parties shall make their own arrangements 
with the person recording the testimony for copies of the testimony and 
the exhibits.
    (f) Deposition as evidence. Subject to appropriate rulings by the 
hearing officer on objections, the deposition or any part may be 
introduced into evidence for any purpose if the deponent is unavailable. 
Only that part of a deposition which is received in evidence at a 
hearing shall constitute a part of the record in the proceeding upon 
which a decision may be based. Nothing in this rule is intended to limit 
the use of a deposition for impeachment purposes.
    (g) Payment of fees. Fees shall be paid by the person upon whose 
application the deposition is taken.


<R05>
Sec. 26.19  Request for production of documents.

    (a) Request to produce. At any time after a request for hearing has 
been filed, any party may serve upon any other party a written request 
to produce, and permit the party making the request to inspect and copy, 
any relevant designated documents (including writings, drawings, graphs, 
charts, and other data compilations). The request shall set forth the 
items to be inspected either by individual item or by category with 
reasonable particularity. The request shall specify a reasonable time, 
place, and manner of making the inspection and performing the related 
acts.
    (b) Response to request to produce. The party upon whom the request 
is served shall serve a written response within twenty days after 
service of the request unless the Hearing Officer determines that a 
shorter or longer period is appropriate under the circumstances. The 
response shall state, with respect to each item or category, that 
inspection and related activities will be permitted as requested, unless 
the request is objected to, in which case the reasons for the objection 
shall be stated. If objection is made to part of an item or category, 
the part shall be specified. The party submitting the request may move 
for an order under Sec. 26.17 with respect to any objection to or other 
failure to respond to the request or any part thereof, or any failure to 
permit inspection as requested.


<R05>
Sec. 26.20  Admissions as to facts and documents.

    (a) Request for admissions. At any time after an answer has been 
filed, any party may serve upon any other party a written request for 
the admission of the genuineness of any relevant documents described in 
the request or of the truth of any relevant matters of fact. Copies of 
documents shall be delivered with the request unless copies have already 
been furnished. No order of the hearing officer is necessary.
    (b) Objection. Each requested admission shall be considered admitted 
unless, within fifteen days after service of the request, the party from 
whom the admission is sought serves upon the party making the request 
either (1) a statement denying specificallly the relevant matters of 
which an admission is requested or setting forth in detail the reasons 
why the party can neither truthfully admit nor deny them, or (2) written 
objections on the ground that some or all of the matters involved are 
previleged or irrelevant. Answers on matters to which objections are 
made may be deferred until the objections are ruled upon, but if written 
objections are made only to a part of a request, the remainder of the 
request shall be answered.
    (c) Limitation. Admissions obtained pursuant to this procedure may 
be used in evidence only for the purposes of the pending action to the 
same extent and subject to the same objections as other evidence.


<R05>
Sec. 26.21  Prehearing conference.

    (a) Prehearing conference. The hearing officer may, on the hearing 
officer's

[[Page 231]]

own motion or at the request of any party, direct counsel for all 
parties to confer with the hearing officer before the hearing for the 
purpose of considering:
    (1) Simplification and clarification of the issues;
    (2) Stipulations and admissions of fact and of the contents and 
authenticity of documents;
    (3) The disclosure of the names of witnesses;
    (4) Matters of which official notice will be taken;
    (5) Other matters as may aid in the orderly disposition of the 
proceeding, including disclosure of the documents or other physical 
exhibits which will be introduced in evidence in the course of the 
proceeding.
    (b) Recordation of prehearing conference. The prehearing conference 
shall, at the request of any party, be recorded or transcribed.
    (c) Order on prehearing conference. The hearing officer shall enter 
in the record an order which states the rulings upon matters considered 
during the conference, together with appropriate directions to the 
parties. The order shall control the subsequent course of the 
proceeding, subject to modifications upon good cause shown.

                                Hearings


<R05>
Sec. 26.22  Public nature and timing of hearings, transcripts.

    (a) Public hearings. All hearings in adjudicative proceedings shall 
be public.
    (b) Conduct of hearing. Hearings shall proceed with all reasonable 
speed. The hearing officer may order recesses for good cause, stated on 
the record. The hearing officer may, for convenience of the parties or 
in the interests of justice, order that hearings be conducted outside 
Washington, DC, and, if necessary, at more than one place.
    (c) Transcripts. Hearings shall be recorded and transcribed only by 
a reporter designated by the Department under the supervision of the 
hearing officer. The original transcript shall be a part of the record 
and shall constitute the sole official transcript. Respondents and the 
public, at their own expense, may obtain copies of transcripts from the 
reporter.


<R05>
Sec. 26.23  Rules of evidence.

    (a) Evidence. Every party shall have the right to present its case 
or defense by oral and documentary evidence, unless otherwise limited by 
law or regulation, to submit rebuttal evidence and to conduct such 
cross-examination as may be required for a full and true disclosure of 
the facts. Irrelevant, immaterial, privileged, or unduly repetitious 
evidence shall be excluded.

Unless otherwise provided for in this part, the Federal Rules of 
Evidence shall provide guidance for the conduct of proceedings under 
this part. Parties may object to clearly irrelevant material, but 
technical objections to testimony as used in a court of law will not be 
sustained.
    (b) Testimony under oath or affirmation. All witnesses shall testify 
under oath or affirmation.
    (c) Objections. Objections to the admission or exclusion of evidence 
shall be in short form, stating the grounds of objections. Rulings on 
objections shall be a part of the transcript. Failure to object to 
admission or exclusion of evidence or to any evidentiary ruling shall be 
considered a waiver of objection, but no exception to a ruling on an 
objection is necessary in order to preserve it for appeal.
    (d) Authenticity of documents. Unless specifically challenged, it 
shall be presumed that all relevant documents are authentic. An 
objection to the authenticity of a document shall not be sustained 
merely on the basis that it is not the original.
    (e) Stipulations. The parties may stipulate as to any relevant 
matters of fact. Stipulations may be received in evidence at a hearing, 
and when received shall be binding on the parties with respect to the 
matters stipulated.
    (f) Official notice. All matters officially noticed by the hearing 
officer shall appear on the record.
    (g) Burden of proof. The burden of proof shall be upon the proponent 
of an action or affirmative defense unless otherwise provided by law or 
regulation.


<R05>
Sec. 26.24  Hearing officer's determination and order.

    (a) Scope of review. The hearing officer shall conduct a de novo 
review of

[[Page 232]]

the administrative action to determine whether it is supported by a 
preponderance of the evidence unless a different standard of proof is 
required by law or regulation. Each and every charge alleged by the 
Department need not be proven to support the administrative action. The 
hearing officer may modify or vacate the administrative action under 
review only upon a particularized finding of facts which justifies a 
deviation from the administrative action.
    (b) Closing of hearing. At the discretion of the hearing officer, 
the closing of the record may be postponed in order to permit the 
admission of other evidence into the record. In the event further 
evidence is admitted, each party shall be given an opportunity to 
respond to such evidence.
    (c) Briefs. Upon conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer may 
request the parties to file proposed findings of fact and legal briefs. 
The hearing officer shall make a written determination and order based 
upon evidence and arguments presented by the parties. The determination 
shall be founded upon reliable and probative evidence. This 
determination and order shall be served upon all parties.
    (d) Bench decisions. Where the parties agree and where appropriate 
in the judgment of the hearing officer, a bench decision will be issued.
    (e) Time period for issuance of decision. The hearing officer shall 
endeavor to issue a determination within sixty days from the date of the 
closing of the record.
    (f) Finality of decision. The determination and order shall be final 
unless a party timely appeals the decision and within forty days the 
Secretary decides to review the determination in accordance with 
Sec. 26.25, or to have the determination reviewed by a designee.

                           Secretarial Review


<R05>
Sec. 26.25  Review of determination of hearing officers.

    (a) Petition for review. Any party may request review of the hearing 
officer's determination or order by filing a written petition for review 
with the Secretary within fifteen days of receipt of the hearing 
officer's determination or order. A petition for review may be granted 
or denied in the discretion of the Secretary or designee. This petition 
shall not exceed ten pages and shall specifically state the issues and 
basis upon which the party seeks review. This petition shall be served 
on all parties and the Secretary simultaneously, in accordance with 
Sec. 26.15.
    (b) Briefs by opposing parties. Opposing parties may submit briefs, 
not to exceed ten pages, opposing review. These briefs must be filed 
within fifteen days of the party's receipt of a petition for review.
    (c) Secretarial action. Upon granting any petition for review, the 
Secretary or designee, may require further briefs. Secretarial review 
shall be limited to the factual record produced before the hearing 
officer. The Secretary, or designee, shall issue a written determination 
and shall serve it upon the parties and the hearing officer.


<R05>
Sec. 26.26  Interlocutory rulings.

    (a) Interlocutory rulings by the hearing officer. A party seeking 
review of an interlocutory ruling shall file a motion with the hearing 
officer within ten days of the ruling requesting certification of the 
ruling for review by the Secretary. Certification may be granted if the 
hearing officer believes that (1) it involves an important issue of law 
or policy as to which there is substantial ground for difference of 
opinion and (2) an immediate appeal from the order may materially 
advance the ultimate termination of the litigation.
    (b) Petition for review. Any party may file a petition for review of 
an interlocutory ruling within ten days of the hearing officer's 
determination regarding certification.
    (c) Secretarial review. The Secretary, or designee, shall review a 
certified ruling. The Secretary, or designee, has the discretion to 
grant or deny a petition for review from an uncertified ruling.
    (d) Continuation of hearing. Unless otherwise ordered by the hearing 
officer or the Secretary, or designee, the hearing shall proceed pending 
the determination of any interlocutory appeal and the order or ruling of 
the hearing officer shall be effective pending review.

[[Page 233]]


<R04>
    Subpart B--Hearings Pursuant to the Administrative Procedure Act

    Source: 61 FR 50210, Sept. 24, 1996, unless otherwise noted.

                                 General


<R05>
Sec. 26.27  Purpose and scope.

    Unless otherwise specified in this title, the rules in this subpart 
B of this part apply to hearings that HUD is required by statute to 
conduct pursuant to the Administrative Procedure Act (5 U.S.C. 554 et 
seq.).


<R05>
Sec. 26.28  Definitions.

    The following definitions apply to subpart B of this part:
    Chief Docket Clerk means the Chief Docket Clerk of the Office of 
Administrative Law Judges at the following address: 409 3rd Street, 
S.W., Suite 320, Washington, DC 20024.
    Complaint means the notice from HUD alleging violations of a HUD 
statute and/or regulation, citing the legal authority upon which it is 
issued, stating the relief HUD seeks, and informing a respondent of his 
or her right to submit a response to a designated office and to request 
an opportunity for a hearing before an administrative law judge.
    Response means the written response to a complaint, admitting or 
denying the allegations in the complaint and setting forth any 
affirmative defense and/or any mitigating factors or extenuating 
circumstances. The response shall be submitted to the Office of General 
Counsel that initiates the complaint or to such other office as may be 
designated in the complaint. A response is deemed a request for a 
hearing.


<R05>
Sec. 26.29  Powers and duties of the Administrative Law Judge (ALJ).

    The ALJ shall conduct a fair and impartial hearing, avoid delay, 
maintain order, and ensure that a record of the proceeding is made. The 
ALJ is authorized to:
    (a) Set and change the date, time, and place of the hearing upon 
reasonable notice to the parties;
    (b) Continue or recess the hearing in whole or in part for a 
reasonable period of time;
    (c) Hold conferences to identify or simplify the issues, or to 
consider other matters that may aid in the expeditious disposition of 
the proceeding;
    (d) Administer oaths and affirmations;
    (e) Issue subpoenas requiring the attendance of witnesses and the 
production of documents at depositions or at hearings;
    (f) Rule on motions and other procedural matters;
    (g) Regulate the scope and timing of discovery;
    (h) Regulate the course of the hearing and the conduct of 
representatives and parties;
    (i) Examine witnesses;
    (j) Receive, rule on, exclude, or limit evidence;
    (k) Upon motion of a party, take official notice of facts;
    (l) Upon motion of a party, decide cases, in whole or in part, by 
summary judgment where there is no disputed issue of material fact;
    (m) Conduct any conference, argument, or hearing on motions in 
person or by telephone; and
    (n) Exercise such other authority as is necessary to carry out the 
responsibilities of the ALJ under subpart B of this part.


<R05>
Sec. 26.30  Ex parte contacts.

    No party or person (except employees of the ALJ's office) shall 
communicate in any way with the ALJ on any matter at issue in a case, 
unless on notice and opportunity for all parties to participate. This 
provision does not prohibit a person or party from inquiring about the 
status of a case or asking routine questions concerning administrative 
functions or procedures.


<R05>
Sec. 26.31  Disqualification of ALJ.

    (a) An ALJ in a particular case may disqualify himself or herself.
    (b) A party may file with the ALJ a motion for the ALJ's 
disqualification. The motion shall be accompanied by an affidavit 
alleging the grounds for disqualification.

[[Page 234]]

    (c) Upon the filing of a motion and affidavit, the ALJ shall proceed 
no further in the case until the matter of disqualification is resolved.


<R05>
Sec. 26.32  Parties to the hearing.

    (a) General. The parties to the hearing shall be the respondent and 
HUD.
    (b) Rights of parties. Except as otherwise limited by subpart B of 
this part, all parties may:
    (1) Be accompanied, represented, and advised by a representative;
    (2) Participate in any conference held by the ALJ;
    (3) Conduct discovery;
    (4) Agree to stipulations of fact or law, which shall be made part 
of the record;
    (5) Present evidence relevant to the issues at the hearing;
    (6) Present and cross-examine witnesses;
    (7) Present oral arguments at the hearing as permitted by the ALJ; 
and
    (8) Submit written briefs and proposed findings of fact and 
conclusions of law after the hearing, as permitted by the ALJ.


<R05>
Sec. 26.33  Separation of functions.

    No officer, employee, or agent of the Federal Government engaged in 
the performance of investigative, conciliatory, or prosecutorial 
functions in connection with the proceeding shall, in that proceeding or 
any factually related proceeding under subpart B of this part, 
participate or advise in the decision of the administrative law judge, 
except as a witness or counsel during the proceeding, or in its 
appellate review.


<R05>
Sec. 26.34  Time computations.

    (a) In computing any period of time under subpart B of this part, 
the time period begins the day following the act, event, or default, and 
includes the last day of the period, unless the last day is a Saturday, 
Sunday, or legal holiday observed by the Federal Government, in which 
case the time period includes the next business day. When the prescribed 
time period is seven days or less, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays, and 
legal holidays shall be excluded from the computation.
    (b) Entry of orders. In computing any time period involving the date 
of the issuance of an order or decision by an administrative law judge, 
the date of issuance is the date the order or decision is served by the 
Chief Docket Clerk.
    (c) Service by mail. If a document is served by mail, 3 days shall 
be added to the time permitted for a response.


<R05>
Sec. 26.35  Service and filing.

    (a) Filing. All documents shall be filed with the Chief Docket 
Clerk, at the address listed in Sec. 26.28. Filing may be by first class 
mail, delivery, facsimile transmission, or electronic means; however, 
the ALJ may place appropriate limits on filing by facsimile transmission 
or electronic means. All documents shall clearly designate the docket 
number and title of the proceeding.
    (b) Service. One copy of all documents filed with the Chief Docket 
Clerk shall be served upon each party by the persons filing them and 
shall be accompanied by a certificate of service stating how and when 
such service has been made. Service may be made by delivery, first class 
mail, facsimile transmission, or electronic means; however, the ALJ may 
place appropriate limits on service by facsimile transmission or 
electronic means. Documents shall be served upon a party's address of 
residence or principal place of business, or, if the party is 
represented by counsel, upon counsel of record at the address of 
counsel. Service is complete when handed to the person or delivered to 
the person's office or residence and deposited in a conspicuous place. 
If service is by first-class mail, facsimile transmission, or electronic 
means, service is complete upon deposit in the mail or upon electronic 
transmission.


<R05>
Sec. 26.36  Sanctions.

    (a) The ALJ may sanction a person, including any party or 
representative, for failing to comply with an order, rule, or procedure 
governing the proceeding; failing to prosecute or defend an action; or 
engaging in other misconduct that interferes with the speedy, orderly, 
or fair conduct of the hearing.

[[Page 235]]

    (b) Any sanction, including but not limited to those listed in 
paragraphs (c), (d), and (e) of this section, shall reasonably relate to 
the severity and nature of the failure or misconduct.
    (c) Failure to comply with an order. When a party fails to comply 
with an order, including an order compelling discovery, the ALJ may:
    (1) Draw an inference in favor of the requesting party with regard 
to the information sought;
    (2) In the case of requests for admission, regard each matter about 
which an admission is requested to be admitted;
    (3) Prohibit the party failing to comply with the order from 
introducing evidence concerning, or otherwise relying upon, testimony 
relating to the information sought; or
    (4) Strike any part of the pleadings or other submissions of the 
party failing to comply with the order.
    (d) If a party fails to prosecute or defend an action brought under 
subpart B of this part, the ALJ may dismiss the action or may issue an 
initial decision against the respondent.
    (e) The ALJ may refuse to consider any motion, request, response, 
brief, or other document that is not filed in a timely fashion.

                          Prehearing Procedures


<R05>
Sec. 26.37  Commencement of action.

    An action under subpart B of this part shall commence with the 
Government's filing of a complaint, together with the response thereto, 
as those terms are defined in Sec. 26.28, with the Chief Docket Clerk. 
If the respondent fails to submit a response to the Office of General 
Counsel or such other office as designated in the complaint, then the 
Government may file a motion for a default judgment, together with a 
copy of the complaint, in accordance with Sec. 26.39.


<R05>
Sec. 26.38  Motions.

    (a) General. All motions shall state the specific relief requested 
and the basis therefor and, except during a conference or the hearing, 
shall be in writing. Written motions shall be filed and served in 
accordance with Sec. 26.35.
    (b) Response to motions. Unless otherwise ordered by the ALJ, a 
response to a written motion may be filed within 7 days after service of 
the motion. A party failing to respond timely to a motion shall be 
deemed to have waived any objection to the granting of the motion.


<R05>
Sec. 26.39  Default.

    (a) General. The respondent may be found in default, upon motion, 
for failure to file a timely response to the Government's complaint. The 
motion shall include a copy of the complaint and a proposed default 
order, and shall be served upon all parties. The respondent shall have 7 
days from such service to respond to the motion.
    (b) Default order. The ALJ shall issue a decision on the motion 
within 15 days after the expiration of the time for filing a response to 
the default motion. If a default order is issued, it shall constitute 
the final agency action.
    (c) Effect of default. A default shall constitute an admission of 
all facts alleged in the Government's complaint and a waiver of 
respondent's right to a hearing on such allegations. The penalty 
proposed in the complaint shall be set forth in the default order and 
shall be immediately due and payable by respondent without further 
proceedings.


<R05>
Sec. 26.40  Prehearing conferences.

    (a) The ALJ may schedule prehearing conferences as appropriate.
    (b) Upon the motion of any party, the ALJ shall schedule at least 
one prehearing conference at a reasonable time in advance of the 
hearing.
    (c) The ALJ may consider the following at a prehearing conference:
    (1) Simplification of the issues;
    (2) Stipulations of fact and of the authenticity, accuracy, and 
admissibility of documents;
    (3) Submission of the case on briefs in lieu of an oral hearing;
    (4) Limitation of the number of witnesses;
    (5) The exchange of witness lists and of proposed exhibits;
    (6) Discovery;
    (7) The time and place for the hearing; and

[[Page 236]]

    (8) Such other matters as may tend to expedite the fair and just 
disposition of the proceedings.


<R05>
Sec. 26.41  Discovery.

    (a) Parties may obtain discovery regarding any matter, not 
privileged, that is relevant to the subject matter involved in the 
adjudication, whether it relates to the case or defense of the party 
seeking discovery or to the case or defense of any other party. It is 
not grounds for objection that the information sought will be 
inadmissible at the hearing, if such information appears reasonably 
calculated to lead to the discovery of admissible evidence.
    (b) Discovery in Program Fraud Civil Remedies actions (24 CFR part 
28), unless agreed to by the parties, shall be available only as ordered 
by the ALJ. The party opposing discovery shall have 10 days to respond 
to a motion for discovery. The ALJ shall grant a motion for discovery 
only if he or she finds that discovery is necessary for the expeditious, 
fair, and reasonable consideration of the issues, is not unduly costly 
or burdensome, will not unduly delay the proceeding, and does not seek 
privileged information. The ALJ may grant discovery subject to a 
protective order under Sec. 26.43. The request for approval sent to the 
Attorney General from the General Counsel or designee, as described in 
Sec. 28.20 of this title, is not discoverable under any circumstances.
    (c) The following types of discovery are authorized:
    (1) Requests for production of documents for inspection and copying. 
Nothing contained herein shall be interpreted to require the creation of 
a document.
    (2) Requests for admissions.
    (3) Written interrogatories. Such interrogatories shall be limited 
in number to 25, unless otherwise ordered by the ALJ.
    (4) Depositions.
    (d) Motions to compel. A party may file a motion to compel 
discovery. The motion shall describe the information sought, cite the 
opposing party's objection, and provide arguments supporting the motion. 
The opposing party may file a response to the motion, including a 
request for a protective order. The ALJ may issue an order compelling a 
response, issue sanctions pursuant to Sec. 26.36, or issue a protective 
order. For purposes of paragraph (d) of this section, an evasive or 
incomplete answer to a request for discovery is treated as a failure to 
answer.
    (e) Each party shall bear its own costs of discovery.


<R05>
Sec. 26.42  Subpoenas.

    (a) General. Upon written request of a party, the ALJ may issue a 
subpoena requiring the attendance of a witness at a deposition or 
hearing, and/or the production of documents. The request shall specify 
any documents to be produced and shall list the names and addresses of 
the witnesses.
    (b) Time of request. A request for a subpoena in aid of discovery 
shall be filed in time to permit the conclusion of discovery 15 days 
before the date fixed for the hearing. A request for a subpoena to 
testify at the hearing shall be filed at least 3 days prior to the 
hearing, unless otherwise allowed by the ALJ for good cause shown.
    (c) Content. The subpoena shall specify the time and place at which 
the witness is to appear and any documents the witness is to produce.
    (d) Service and fees. Subpoenas shall be served, and fees and costs 
paid to subpoenaed witnesses, in accordance with Rule 45(b)(1) of the 
Federal Rules of Civil Procedure.
    (e) Motion to quash. The individual to whom the subpoena is directed 
or a party may file a motion to quash the subpoena within 10 days after 
service, or on or before the time specified in the subpoena for 
compliance if it is less than 10 days after service.


<R05>
Sec. 26.43  Protective order.

    (a) A party, a prospective witness, or a deponent may file a motion 
for a protective order with respect to discovery sought by an opposing 
party or with respect to the hearing, seeking to limit the availability 
or disclosure of evidence.
    (b) In issuing a protective order, the ALJ may issue any order that 
justice requires to protect a party or person from annoyance, 
embarrassment, oppression, or undue burden or expense,

[[Page 237]]

as provided in Rule 26(c) of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure.

                                Hearings


<R05>
Sec. 26.44  General.

    (a) Time of hearing. The hearing shall commence not later than 90 
days following the Government's filing of the complaint and response 
under Sec. 26.37, unless the time is extended for good cause. The ALJ 
shall provide written notice to all parties of the reasons for any 
extension of time.
    (b) Location of hearing. The hearing shall be held where the 
respondent resides or transacts business, or in such other place as may 
be agreed upon by the parties and the ALJ. Hearings for Program Fraud 
Civil Remedies Act cases shall be located in accordance with 31 U.S.C. 
3803(g)(4).
    (c) Notice of hearing. The ALJ shall issue a notice of hearing to 
all parties specifying the time and location of the hearing, the matters 
of fact and law to be heard, the legal authority under which the hearing 
is to be held, a description of the procedures for the conduct of the 
hearing, and such other matters as the ALJ determines to be appropriate.
    (d) Limitations for Program Fraud Civil Remedies Act cases. The 
notice of hearing must be served upon the respondent within 6 years 
after the date on which the claim or statement is made. If the 
respondent fails to file a timely response to the Government's 
complaint, service of a default judgment under Sec. 26.39 shall be 
regarded as a notice of hearing for purposes of this section. The 
statute of limitations may be waived by agreement of the parties.
    (e) Burden and standard of proof. HUD shall prove the respondent's 
liability and any aggravating factors by a preponderance of the 
evidence. Respondent shall prove any affirmative defenses and any 
mitigating factors by a preponderance of the evidence.
    (f) Public hearings. Unless otherwise ordered by the ALJ for good 
cause shown, the hearing shall be open to the public.


<R05>
Sec. 26.45  Witnesses.

    (a) Except as provided in paragraph (b) of this section, testimony 
at the hearing shall be given orally by witnesses under oath or 
affirmation.
    (b) At the discretion of the ALJ, testimony may be admitted in the 
form of a written statement or deposition. In order to be admissible, 
any written statement must be provided to all other parties along with 
the last known address of the witness, in a manner that allows 
sufficient time for other parties to subpoena the witness for cross-
examination at the hearing.


<R05>
Sec. 26.46  Evidence.

    The ALJ shall admit any relevant oral or documentary evidence that 
is not privileged. The ALJ may, however, exclude evidence if its 
probative value is substantially outweighed by confusion of the issues, 
or by considerations of undue delay, waste of time, or needless 
presentation of cumulative evidence.


<R05>
Sec. 26.47  The record.

    The hearing will be recorded and transcribed. The transcript of 
testimony, exhibits, and other evidence admitted at the hearing and all 
papers and requests filed in the proceeding constitute the record for 
the decision by the ALJ and the Secretary or designee.


<R05>
Sec. 26.48  Posthearing briefs.

    Posthearing briefs shall be filed only upon order by the ALJ.


<R05>
Sec. 26.49  Initial decision.

    (a) The ALJ shall issue an initial decision based only on the 
record, which shall contain findings of fact, conclusions of law, and 
the relief granted.
    (b) The ALJ shall serve the initial decision on all parties within 
60 days after either the close of the record or the expiration of time 
permitted for submission of posthearing briefs, whichever is later. The 
initial decision shall include a statement of each party's right to file 
a request for Secretarial review. The ALJ may extend the 60-day period 
for serving the initial decision in writing for good cause.
    (c) If no appeal is timely filed with the Secretary or designee, the 
initial decision shall become the final agency action.

[[Page 238]]


<R05>
Sec. 26.50  Appeal to the Secretary.

    (a) Except as otherwise set forth in paragraph (b) of this section, 
either party may file with the Secretary a petition for review within 30 
days after the ALJ issues an initial decision. The Secretary or designee 
may extend the 30-day period for good cause. If the Secretary or 
designee does not act upon the petition for review within 90 days of its 
service, then the initial decision shall become final.
    (b) Appeals of Program Fraud Civil Remedies Act decisions (24 CFR 
part 28). Only the respondent may file a petition for Secretarial 
review. The petition must be filed within 30 days after the ALJ issues 
the initial decision. The Secretary or designee may extend the 30-day 
period for good cause. If the Secretary or designee does not act upon 
the petition for review within 30 days of its service, then the initial 
decision shall become final.
    (c) Brief in support of petition. The petition for review shall be 
accompanied by a written brief, not to exceed 10 pages, specifying 
exceptions to the initial decision and reasons supporting the 
exceptions.
    (d) Service. The party submitting the petition for review shall 
serve a copy of the petition and brief in support of the petition on the 
other parties and on the Chief Docket Clerk.
    (e) Forwarding of the record. Upon request by the Office of the 
Secretary, the ALJ shall forward the record of the proceeding to the 
Secretary or designee.
    (f) Brief in opposition. Any opposing party may file a brief 
opposing review, not to exceed 10 pages, within 20 days of receiving the 
petition for review and accompanying brief. The brief in opposition 
shall be served on all parties.
    (g) Additional briefs. If the petition is granted, then the 
Secretary or designee may order the filing of additional briefs.
    (h) There is no right to appear personally before the Secretary or 
designee.
    (i) There is no right to appeal any interlocutory ruling by the ALJ.
    (j) In reviewing the initial decision, the Secretary or designee 
shall not consider any objection that was not raised before the ALJ 
unless a demonstration is made of extraordinary circumstances causing 
the failure to raise the objection.
    (k) The Secretary or designee shall consider only evidence contained 
in the record forwarded by the ALJ. However, if any party demonstrates 
to the satisfaction of the Secretary or designee that additional 
evidence not presented at the hearing is material and that there were 
reasonable grounds for the failure to present such evidence at such 
hearing, the Secretary or designee shall remand the matter to the ALJ 
for consideration of such additional evidence.
    (l) The prohibitions of ex parte contacts in Sec. 26.30 shall apply 
to contacts with the Secretary or designee.
    (m) The Secretary or designee may affirm, reduce, reverse, 
compromise, remand, or settle any relief granted in the initial 
decision. The Secretary or designee shall consider, and include in any 
final determination, such factors as may be set forth in applicable 
statutes or regulations.
    (n) The Secretary or designee shall promptly serve each party to the 
appeal with a copy of his or her decision and a statement describing the 
right to seek judicial review.
    (o) Judicial review. A party must generally file a petition for 
judicial review within 20 days of service of the Secretary's 
determination, or the Secretary's determination shall become final and 
not subject to judicial review. In Program Fraud Civil Remedies Act 
matters (24 CFR part 28), the respondent shall have 60 days from the 
date that the determination is sent to the respondent in which to file a 
petition. See also Sec. 26.52.


<R05>
Sec. 26.51  Exhaustion of administrative remedies.

    In order to fulfill the requirement of exhausting administrative 
remedies, a party must seek Secretarial review under Sec. 26.50 prior to 
seeking judicial review of any initial decision issued under subpart B 
of this part.


<R05>
Sec. 26.52  Judicial review.

    Judicial review shall be in accordance with applicable statutory 
procedures and the procedures of the appropriate Federal court. The 
Government

[[Page 239]]

may not seek judicial review of an adverse determination of a Program 
Fraud Civil Remedies Act matter.


<R05>
Sec. 26.53  Collection of civil penalties and assessments.

    Collection of civil penalties and assessments shall be in accordance 
with applicable statutory provisions.


<R05>
Sec. 26.54  Right to administrative offset.

    The amount of any penalty or assessment that has become final under 
Sec. 26.49, or for which a judgment has been entered after action under 
Secs. 26.52 or 26.53, or agreed upon in a compromise or settlement among 
the parties, may be collected by administrative offset under 31 U.S.C. 
3716 or other applicable law. In Program Fraud Civil Remedies Act 
matters, an administrative offset may not be collected against a refund 
of an overpayment of Federal taxes then or later owing by the United 
States to the respondent.


<R03>
PART 27--NONJUDICIAL FORECLOSURE OF MULTIFAMILY AND SINGLE FAMILY MORTGAGES--Table of Contents

<R05>


       Subpart A--Nonjudicial Foreclosure of Multifamily Mortgages

Sec.
27.1  Purpose.
27.2  Scope and applicability.
27.3  Definitions.
27.5  Prerequisites to foreclosure.
27.10  Designation of a foreclosure commissioner.
27.15  Notice of default and foreclosure sale.
27.20  Conditions of foreclosure sale.
27.25  Termination or adjournment of foreclosure sale.
27.30  Conduct of the sale.
27.35  Foreclosure costs.
27.40  Disposition of sale proceeds.
27.45  Transfer of title and possession.
27.50  Management and disposition by the Secretary.

      Subpart B--Nonjudicial Foreclosure of Single Family Mortgages

27.100  Purpose, scope and applicability.
27.101  Definitions.
27.102  Designation of foreclosure commissioner and substitute 
          commissioner.
27.103  Notice of default and foreclosure sale.
27.105  Service of Notice of Default and Foreclosure Sale.
27.107  Presale reinstatement.
27.109  Conduct of sale.
27.111  Adjournment or cancellation of sale.
27.113  Foreclosure costs.
27.115  Disposition of sales proceeds.
27.117  Transfer of title and possession.
27.119  Redemption rights.
27.121  Record of foreclosure and sale.
27.123  Deficiency judgment.

    Authority: 12 U.S.C. 1715b, 3701-3717, 3751-3768; 42 U.S.C. 1452b, 
3535(d).

    Source: 61 FR 48548, Sept. 13, 1996, unless otherwise noted.


<R04>
       Subpart A--Nonjudicial Foreclosure of Multifamily Mortgages


<R05>
Sec. 27.1  Purpose.

    The purpose of this subpart is to implement requirements for the 
administration of the Multifamily Mortgage Foreclosure Act of 1981 (the 
Act) (12 U.S.C. 3701-3717), that clarify, or are in addition to, the 
requirements contained in the Act, which are not republished here and 
must be consulted in conjunction with the requirements of this subpart. 
The Act creates a uniform Federal remedy for foreclosure of multifamily 
mortgages. Under a delegation of authority published on February 5, 1982 
(47 FR 5468), the Secretary has delegated to the HUD General Counsel his 
powers under the Act to appoint a foreclosure commissioner or 
commissioners and to substitute therefor, to fix the compensation of 
commissioners, and to promulgate implementing regulations.


<R05>
Sec. 27.2  Scope and applicability.

    (a) Under the Act and this subpart, the Secretary may foreclose on 
any defaulted Secretary-held multifamily mortgage encumbering real 
estate in any State. The Secretary may use the provisions of these 
regulations to foreclose on any multifamily mortgage regardless of when 
the mortgage was executed.
    (b) The Secretary may, at the Secretary's option, use other 
procedures to foreclose defaulted multifamily mortgages, including 
judicial foreclosure in Federal court and nonjudicial foreclosure under 
State law. This subpart applies only to foreclosure procedures 
authorized by the Act and not to any other foreclosure procedures the 
Secretary may use.

[[Page 240]]


<R05>
Sec. 27.3  Definitions.

    The definitions contained in the Act (at 12 U.S.C. 3702) shall apply 
to this subpart, in addition to and as further clarified by the 
following definitions. As used in this subpart:
    General Counsel means the General Counsel of the Department of 
Housing and Urban Development;
    Multifamily mortgage does not include a mortgage covering a property 
on which there is located a one- to four-family residence, except when 
the one- to four-family residence is subject to a mortgage pursuant to 
section 202 of the Housing Act of 1959 (12 U.S.C. 1701q), or section 811 
(42 U.S.C. 8013) of the National Affordable Housing Act. The definition 
of multifamily mortgage also includes a mortgage taken by the Secretary 
in connection with the previous sale of the project by the Secretary 
(purchase money mortgage).


<R05>
Sec. 27.5  Prerequisites to foreclosure.

    Before commencement of a foreclosure under the Act and this subpart, 
HUD will provide to the mortgagor an opportunity informally to present 
reasons why the mortgage should not be foreclosed. Such opportunity may 
be provided before or after the designation of the foreclosure 
commissioner but before service of the notice of default and 
foreclosure.


<R05>
Sec. 27.10  Designation of a foreclosure commissioner.

    (a) When the Secretary determines that a multifamily mortgage should 
be foreclosed under the Act and this subpart, the General Counsel will 
select and designate one or more foreclosure commissioners to conduct 
the foreclosure and sale. The method of selection and determination of 
the qualifications of the foreclosure commissioner shall be at the 
discretion of the General Counsel, and the execution of a designation 
pursuant to paragraph (b) of this section shall be conclusive evidence 
that the commissioner selected has been determined to be qualified by 
the General Counsel.
    (b) After selection of a foreclosure commissioner, the General 
Counsel shall designate the commissioner in writing to conduct the 
foreclosure and sale of the particular multifamily mortgage. The written 
designation shall be duly acknowledged and shall state the name and 
business or residential address of the commissioner and any other 
information the General Counsel deems necessary. The designation shall 
be effective upon execution by the General Counsel or his designate. 
Upon receipt of the designation, the commissioner shall demonstrate 
acceptance by signing the designation and returning a signed copy to the 
General Counsel.
    (c) The General Counsel may at any time, with or without cause, 
designate a substitute commissioner to replace a previously designated 
commissioner. Designation of a substitute commissioner shall be in 
writing and shall contain the same information and be made effective in 
the same manner as the designation of the original commissioner. Upon 
designation of a substitute commissioner, the substitute commissioner 
shall serve a copy of the written notice of designation upon the persons 
listed at sections 369(1) (A) through (C) of the Act (12 U.S.C. 3708(1) 
(A) through (C)) either by mail, in accordance with section 369(1) of 
the Act (12 U.S.C. 3708(1)), except that the time limitations in that 
section will not apply, or by any other manner which in the substitute 
commissioner's discretion is conducive to giving timely notice of 
substitution.


<R05>
Sec. 27.15  Notice of default and foreclosure sale.

    (a) Within 45 days after accepting his or her designation to act as 
commissioner, the commissioner shall commence the foreclosure by serving 
a Notice of Default and Foreclosure Sale.
    (b) The Notice of Default and Foreclosure Sale shall contain the 
following information:
    (1) The Notice shall state that all deposits and the balance of the 
purchase price shall be paid by certified or cashier's check. The Notice 
shall state that no deposit will be required of the Secretary when the 
Secretary bids at the foreclosure sale.
    (2) Any terms and conditions to which the purchaser at the 
foreclosure sale must agree under Sec. 27.20. The Notice need not 
describe at length each

[[Page 241]]

and every pertinent term and condition, including any required use 
agreements and deed covenants, if it describes these terms and 
conditions in a general way and if it states that the precise terms will 
be available from the commissioner upon request.
    (c) The Notice need not be mailed to mortgagors who have been 
released from all obligations under the mortgage.
    (d) In deciding which newspaper or newspapers to select as general 
circulation newspapers for purposes of publication of the required 
notice, the commissioner need not select the newspaper with the largest 
circulation.
    (e) In addition to Notice posting requirements included in the Act, 
the Notice shall also be posted in the project office and in such other 
appropriate conspicuous places as the commissioner deems appropriate for 
providing notice to all tenants. Posting shall not be required if the 
commissioner in his or her discretion finds that the act of posting is 
likely to lead to a breach of the peace or may result in the increased 
risk of vandalism or damage to the property. Any such finding will be 
made in writing. Entry on the premises by the commissioner for the 
purpose of posting shall be privileged as against all other persons.
    (f) When service of the Notice of Default and Foreclosure Sale is 
made by mail, the commissioner shall at the same time and in the same 
manner serve a copy of the instrument by which the General Counsel, 
under Sec. 27.10(b), has designated him or her to act as commissioner.
    (g) At least 7 days before the foreclosure sale, the commissioner 
will record both the instrument designating him or her to act as 
commissioner and the Notice of Default and Foreclosure Sale in the same 
office or offices in which the mortgage was recorded.


<R05>
Sec. 27.20  Conditions of foreclosure sale.

    (a) The requirements of section 367(b)(2)(A) of the Act (12 U.S.C. 
3706(b)(2)(A)) apply if a majority of the residential units in a 
property subject to foreclosure sale pursuant to the Act and this 
subpart are occupied by residential tenants either on the date of the 
foreclosure sale or on the date on which the General Counsel designates 
the foreclosure commissioner.
    (b) Terms which the Secretary may find appropriate to require 
pursuant to section 367(b) of the Act (12 U.S.C. 3706(b)), and such 
other provisions of law as may be applicable, may include provisions 
relating to use and ownership of the project property, tenant admission 
standards and procedures, rent schedules and increases, and project 
operation and maintenance. In determining terms which may be appropriate 
to require, the Secretary shall consider:
    (1) The history of the project, including the purposes of the 
program under which the mortgage insurance or assistance was provided, 
and any other program of HUD under which the project was developed or 
otherwise assisted and the probable causes of project failure resulting 
in its default;
    (2) A financial analysis of the project, including an appraisal of 
the fair market value of the property for its highest and best use;
    (3) A physical analysis of the project, including the condition of 
the structure and grounds, the need for rehabilitation or repairs, and 
the estimated costs of any such rehabilitation or repairs;
    (4) The income levels of the occupants of the project;
    (5) Characteristics, including rental levels, of comparable housing 
in the area, with particular reference to whether current conditions and 
discernible trends in the area fairly indicate a likelihood that, for 
the foreseeable future after foreclosure and sale, the project will 
continue to provide rental or cooperative housing and market rentals 
obtainable in the project will be affordable by low- or moderate-income 
persons;
    (6) The availability of or need for rental housing for low- and 
moderate-income persons in the area, including actions being taken or 
projected to be taken to address such needs and the impact of such 
actions on the project;
    (7) An assessment of the number of occupants who might be displaced 
as a result of the manner of disposition;
    (8) The eligibility of the occupants of the property for rental 
assistance under any program administered by

[[Page 242]]

HUD and the availability of funding for such assistance if necessary in 
order that the units occupied by such occupants will remain available to 
and affordable by such persons, or if necessary in order to assure the 
financial feasibility of the project after foreclosure and sale subject 
to the terms to be required by the Secretary; and
    (9) Such other factors relating to the project as the Secretary 
shall consider appropriate.
    (c) Terms which the Secretary may require to be agreed to by the 
purchaser pursuant to section 367(b) of the Act (12 U.S.C. 3706(b)) 
shall generally not be more restrictive, or binding for a longer 
duration, than the terms by which the mortgagor was bound prior to the 
foreclosure. For example: If the mortgage being foreclosed was held by 
the Secretary under section 312 of the Housing Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 
1452b), any terms required by the Secretary pursuant to this section 
shall be in effect no longer than five years after the completion of the 
rehabilitation work funded by the section 312 loan. No terms shall be 
required pursuant to this section if the foreclosure sale occurs more 
than five years after the completion of such rehabilitation work 
(signified by the due date for commencement of amortization payments in 
the section 312 loan note).
    (d) The limitation contained in paragraph (c) of this section 
applies only to such terms as the Secretary may require the purchaser to 
agree to, as a condition and term of the sale, under paragraph (a) of 
this section. Nothing contained in paragraph (c) of this section shall 
prevent the Secretary and the purchaser from entering into a subsidy 
agreement under any program administered by the Secretary containing 
terms binding upon either party which are longer in duration than would 
be permitted to be required by paragraph (c) of this section.
    (e) Any terms required by the Secretary to be agreed to by the 
purchaser as a condition and term of sale under this section and section 
367(b) of the Act (12 U.S.C. 3706(b)) shall be embodied in a use 
agreement to be executed by the Secretary and the purchaser. Such terms 
also may be included, or referred to, in appropriate covenants contained 
in the deed to be delivered by the foreclosure commissioner under 
Sec. 27.45. Terms required by the Secretary pursuant to this section 
shall be stated or described in the Notice of Default and Foreclosure 
Sale under Sec. 27.15.


<R05>
Sec. 27.25  Termination or adjournment of foreclosure sale.

    (a) Before withdrawing the security property from foreclosure under 
section 369A(a) of the Act (12 U.S.C. 3709(a)), the commissioner shall 
notify the Secretary of the proposed withdrawal by telephone or telegram 
and shall provide the Secretary with a written statement of the reasons 
for the proposed withdrawal along with all documents submitted by the 
mortgagor in support of the proposed withdrawal. Upon receipt of this 
statement, the Secretary shall have 10 days within which to demonstrate 
orally or in writing why the security property should not be withdrawn 
from foreclosure. The Secretary shall provide the mortgagor with a copy 
of any statement prepared by the Secretary in opposition to the proposed 
withdrawal at the same time the statement is submitted to the 
commissioner. If the Secretary receives the commissioner's written 
statement less than 10 days before the scheduled foreclosure sale, the 
sale shall automatically be postponed for 14 days. Under these 
circumstances, notice of the rescheduled sale shall be served as 
described in section 369B(c) of the Act (12 U.S.C. 3710(c)).
    (b) The commissioner may not withdraw the security property from 
foreclosure under section 369A(a) of the Act (12 U.S.C. 3709(a)) more 
than once unless the Secretary consents in writing to such withdrawal.
    (c) The commissioner shall, in the case of a sale adjourned to a 
later date, mail a copy of the revised Notice of Default and Foreclosure 
Sale to the Secretary at least seven days before the date to which the 
sale has been adjourned.
    (d) If upon application by the mortgagor, the commissioner refuses 
to withdraw the property from foreclosure under section 369A(a) of the 
Act (12 U.S.C. 3709(a)), the commissioner shall

[[Page 243]]

provide the mortgagor and the Secretary with a written statement of the 
reasons for the refusal.


<R05>
Sec. 27.30  Conduct of the sale.

    (a) The commissioner shall accept written one-price sealed bids from 
any party including the Secretary so long as those bids conform to the 
requirements described in the Notice of Default and Foreclosure Sale. 
The commissioner shall announce the name of each such bidder and the 
amount of the bid. The commissioner shall accept oral bids from any 
party, including parties who submitted one-price sealed bids, if those 
oral bids conform to the requirements described in the Notice of Default 
and Foreclosure Sale. The commissioner will announce the amount of the 
high bid and the name of the successful bidder before the close of the 
sale.
    (b) Relatives of the commissioner who may not bid at the foreclosure 
sale include parents, siblings, spouses and children. Related business 
entities which may not bid include entities or concerns whose 
relationship with the commissioner at the time the commissioner is 
designated is such that, directly or indirectly, one concern or 
individual formulates, directs, or controls the other concern; or has 
the power to formulate, direct, or control the other concern; or has the 
responsibility and authority either to prevent in the first instance, or 
promptly to correct, the offensive conduct of the other concern. 
Business concerns are also affiliates of each other when a third party 
is similarly situated with respect to both concerns.
    (c) If the commissioner employs an auctioneer to conduct the 
foreclosure sale, the auctioneer must be a licensed auctioneer, an 
officer of State or local government, or any other person who commonly 
conducts foreclosure sales in the area in which the security property is 
located.


<R05>
Sec. 27.35  Foreclosure costs.

    Pursuant to section 369C(5) of the Act (12 U.S.C. 3711(5)), a 
commission to the foreclosure commissioner for the conduct of the 
foreclosure will be paid in an amount to be determined by the General 
Counsel. A commission may be allowed to the commissioner notwithstanding 
termination of the sale or appointment of a substitute commissioner 
before the sale takes place.


<R05>
Sec. 27.40  Disposition of sale proceeds.

    (a) The priority of the Secretary's lien shall be determined by the 
Federal first-in-time first-in-right rule. State laws affording priority 
to liens recorded after the mortgage are preempted.
    (b) If there is more than one party holding a lien or assessment 
payable from sales proceeds, the claim of each party holding the same 
kind of lien or assessment will be given the relative priority to which 
it would be entitled under the law of the State in which the security 
property is located.
    (c) The commissioner will keep such records as will permit the 
Secretary to verify the costs claimed under section 369C of the Act (12 
U.S.C. 3711), and otherwise to audit the commissioner's disposition of 
the sale proceeds.


<R05>
Sec. 27.45  Transfer of title and possession.

    (a) If the Secretary is the successful bidder, the foreclosure 
commissioner shall issue a deed to the Secretary upon receipt of the 
amount needed to pay the costs listed in sections 369D (1) through (3) 
of the Act (12 U.S.C. 3712(1) through (3)). If the Secretary is not the 
successful bidder, the foreclosure commissioner shall issue a deed to 
the purchaser upon receipt of the entire purchase price and execution by 
the Secretary and the purchaser of any use agreement referred to in 
Sec. 27.20(e). Any covenants reflecting terms required by Sec. 27.20 
shall be contained in the commissioner's deed.
    (b) Subject to any terms required to be agreed to by Sec. 27.20, any 
commercial tenant and any residential tenant remaining in possession 
after the expiration of his or her lease or after the passage of one 
year, whichever event occurs first, shall be deemed a tenant at 
sufferance and may be evicted in accordance with applicable State or 
local law.


<R05>
Sec. 27.50  Management and disposition by the Secretary.

    When the Secretary is the purchaser of the security property, the 
Secretary

[[Page 244]]

shall manage and dispose of it in accordance with section 203 of the 
Housing and Community Development Amendments of 1978, as amended, 12 
U.S.C. 1701z-11, and in accordance with 24 CFR part 290.


<R04>
      Subpart B--Nonjudicial Foreclosure of Single Family Mortgages


<R05>
Sec. 27.100  Purpose, scope and applicability.

    (a) Purpose. The purpose of this subpart is to implement 
requirements for the administration of the Single Family Mortgage 
Foreclosure Act of 1994 (the Statute), 12 U.S.C. 3751-3768, that 
clarify, or are in addition to, the requirements contained in the 
Statute, which are not republished here and must be consulted in 
conjunction with the requirements of this subpart.
    (b) Scope. The Secretary may foreclose on any defaulted single 
family mortgage described in the Statute regardless of when the mortgage 
was executed.
    (c) Applicability. The Secretary may, at the Secretary's option, use 
other procedures to foreclose defaulted single family mortgages, 
including judicial foreclosure in State or Federal Court, and 
nonjudicial foreclosures under State law or any other Federal law. This 
subpart applies only to foreclosure procedures authorized by the Statute 
and not to any other foreclosure procedures the Secretary may use.


<R05>
Sec. 27.101  Definitions.

    The definitions contained in the Statute (at 12 U.S.C. 3752) shall 
apply to this subpart, in addition to and as further clarified by the 
following definitions. As used in this subpart:
    County means a political subdivision of a State or Territory of the 
United States, created to aid in the administration of State law for the 
purpose of local self government, and includes a parish or any other 
equivalent subdivision.
    Mortgage is as defined in the Statute except that the reference to 
property as ``(real, personal or mixed)'' means ``any property (real or 
mixed real and personal).''
    Mortgage agreement is as defined in the Statute, and also means any 
other similar instrument or instruments creating the security interest 
in the real estate for the repayment of the note or debt instrument.
    Mortgagor is as defined in the Statute, except that the reference to 
``trustee'' means ``trustor.''
    Record; Recorded means to enter or entered in public land record 
systems established under State statutes for the purpose of imparting 
constructive notice to purchasers of real property for value and without 
knowledge, and includes ``register'' and ``registered'' in the instance 
of registered land, and ``file'' and its variants in the context of 
entering documents in public land records.
    Secretary means the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development, 
acting by and through any authorized designee exclusive of the 
foreclosure commissioner.
    Security Property is as defined in the statute except that the 
reference to property as ``(real, personal or mixed)'' means ``any 
property (real or mixed real and personal).''


<R05>
Sec. 27.102  Designation of foreclosure commissioner and substitute commissioner.

    (a) The Secretary may designate foreclosure commissioners, including 
substitute commissioners, as set forth in the Statute.
    (b) The method of selection and determination of the qualifications 
of the foreclosure commissioner shall be at the discretion of the 
Secretary. The execution of a designation pursuant to this section shall 
be conclusive evidence that the commissioner selected has been 
determined to be qualified by the Secretary. The designation is 
effective upon execution.


<R05>
Sec. 27.103  Notice of default and foreclosure sale.

    (a) The foreclosure commissioner shall commence the foreclosure 
under the procedures set forth in the Statute.
    (b) The Notice of Default and Foreclosure Sale (Notice) shall 
include, in addition to the provisions as required by the Statute:

[[Page 245]]

    (1) The foreclosure commissioner's telephone number;
    (2) A description of the security property sufficient to identify 
the property to be sold;
    (3) The date the mortgage was recorded;
    (4) Identification of the failure to make payment, including the 
entire amount delinquent as of a date specified, a statement generally 
describing the other costs that must be paid if the mortgage is to be 
reinstated, the due date of the earliest principal installment payment 
remaining wholly unpaid as of the date on which the notice is issued 
upon which the foreclosure is based, or a description of any other 
default or defaults upon which foreclosure is based, and the 
acceleration of the secured indebtedness; and
    (5) The bidding and payment requirements for the foreclosure sale, 
including the time and method of payment of the balance of the 
foreclosure purchase price, that all deposits and the balance of the 
purchase price shall be paid by certified or cashier's check, and that 
no deposit will be required of the Secretary when the Secretary bids at 
the foreclosure sale.


<R05>
Sec. 27.105  Service of Notice of Default and Foreclosure Sale.

    (a) The Notice of Default and Foreclosure Sale shall be served in 
accordance with the provisions of the Statute. When notice is sent by 
mail, multiple mailings are not required to be sent to any party with 
multiple capacities, e.g., an original mortgagor who is the security 
property owner and lives in one of the units. The date of the receipt 
for the postage paid for the mailing may serve as proof of the date of 
mailing of the notice.
    (b) Notice need not be mailed to any mortgagors who have been 
released from all obligations under the mortgage.


<R05>
Sec. 27.107  Presale reinstatement.

    (a) The foreclosure commissioner shall withdraw the security 
property from foreclosure and cancel the foreclosure sale only in 
accordance with the provisions of the Statute and as more fully provided 
in paragraphs (b) and (c) of this section in regard to presale 
reinstatements.
    (b) To obtain a presale reinstatement in cases involving a monetary 
default, there must be tendered to the foreclosure commissioner before 
public auction is completed all amounts which would be due under the 
mortgage agreement if payments under the mortgage had not been 
accelerated and all costs of foreclosure incurred for which payment from 
the proceeds of foreclosure is provided in the Statute, and the 
foreclosure commissioner must find that there are no nonmonetary 
defaults; provided, however, that the Secretary may refuse to cancel a 
foreclosure sale pursuant to this subparagraph if the current mortgagor 
or owner of record has, on one or more previous occasions, caused a 
foreclosure of the mortgage, commenced pursuant to the Statute and this 
subpart or otherwise, to be canceled by curing a default.
    (c) To obtain a presale reinstatement in cases involving a 
nonmonetary default:
    (1) The foreclosure commissioner, upon application of the mortgagor 
before the date of foreclosure sale, must find that all nonmonetary 
defaults are cured and that there are no monetary defaults; and
    (2) There must be tendered to the foreclosure commissioner before 
public auction is completed all amounts due under the mortgage agreement 
(excluding all amounts which would be due under the mortgage agreement 
if the mortgage payments had been accelerated), including all amounts of 
expenditures secured by the mortgage and all costs of foreclosure 
incurred for which payment would be made from the proceeds of 
foreclosure as provided in the Statute.
    (d) Before withdrawing the security property from foreclosure, the 
foreclosure commissioner shall notify the Secretary of the proposed 
withdrawal by telephone or other telecommunication device and shall also 
provide the Secretary with a written statement of the reasons for the 
proposed withdrawal along with all documents submitted by the mortgagor 
in support of the proposed withdrawal. Upon receipt of this statement, 
the Secretary shall

[[Page 246]]

have ten (10) days in which to demonstrate why the security property 
should not be withdrawn from foreclosure, and if the Secretary makes 
this demonstration, the property shall not be withdrawn from 
foreclosure. The Secretary shall provide the mortgagor with a copy of 
any statement prepared by the Secretary in opposition to the proposed 
withdrawal at the same time the statement is submitted to the 
foreclosure commissioner. If the Secretary receives the foreclosure 
commissioner's written statement less than 10 days before the scheduled 
foreclosure sale, the sale shall automatically be adjourned for 14 days, 
during which time it may be cancelled. Notice of the re-scheduled sale, 
if any, shall be served as described in Sec. 27.111.


<R05>
Sec. 27.109  Conduct of sale.

    (a) The foreclosure sale shall be conducted in a manner and at a 
time and place as identified in the Notice of Default and Foreclosure 
Sale and in accordance with the provisions of the Statute.
    (b) In addition to bids made in person at the sale, the foreclosure 
commissioner shall accept written one-price sealed bids from any party, 
including the Secretary, for entry by announcement at the sale so long 
as those bids conform to the requirements described in the Notice of 
Default and Foreclosure Sale. The foreclosure commissioner shall 
announce the name of each such bidder and the amount of the bid. The 
commissioner shall accept oral bids from any party, including parties 
who submitted one-price sealed bids, if those oral bids conform to the 
requirements in the Notice of Default and Foreclosure Sale. Before the 
close of the sale the commissioner shall announce the amount of the high 
bid and the name of the successful bidder. If the successful bidder 
fails to comply with the terms of the sale, the HUD Field Office 
representative will provide instructions to the commissioner about 
offering the property to the second highest bidder, or having a new 
sale, or other instruction at the discretion of the HUD representative.
    (c) Prohibited participants. Relatives of the foreclosure 
commissioner who may not bid include parents, siblings, spouses and 
children. A related business entity that may not bid or whose employees 
may not bid is one whose relationship (at the time the foreclosure 
commissioner is designated and during the term of service as foreclosure 
commissioner) with the entity of the foreclosure commissioner is such 
that, directly or indirectly, one entity formulates, directs, or 
controls the other entity; or has the power to formulate, direct, or 
control the other entity; or has the responsibility and authority to 
prevent, or promptly to correct, the offensive conduct of the other 
entity.
    (d) Auctioneers. If the commissioner employs an auctioneer to 
conduct the foreclosure sale, the auctioneer must be a licensed 
auctioneer, an officer of State or local government, or any other person 
who commonly conducts foreclosure sales in the area in which the 
security property is located.


<R05>
Sec. 27.111  Adjournment or cancellation of sale.

    (a) The foreclosure commissioner may, before or at the time of the 
foreclosure sale, adjourn or cancel the foreclosure sale in accordance 
with the provisions of the Statute. The publication of the Notice of 
Default and Foreclosure Sale, revised pursuant to the Statute, may be 
made on any of three separate days before the revised date of 
foreclosure sale. If there is no newspaper of general circulation that 
would permit publication on any of three separate days before the 
revised date of foreclosure sale, the Notice of Default and Foreclosure 
Sale must be posted, not less than nine days before the date to which 
the sale has been adjourned, at the courthouse of any county or counties 
in which the property is located, and at the place where the sale is to 
be held. The commissioner must also, in the case of a sale adjourned to 
a later date, mail a copy of the revised Notice of Default and 
Foreclosure Sale to the Secretary at least seven days before the date to 
which the sale has been adjourned.
    (b) When a substitute commissioner is designated by the Secretary to 
replace a previously designated foreclosure commissioner, the sale shall 
continue without prejudice unless the substitute commissioner finds, in 
that

[[Page 247]]

commissioner's sole discretion, that continuation of the foreclosure 
sale will unfairly affect the interests of the mortgagor. Any such 
finding shall be in writing. If the substitute commissioner makes such a 
finding, the substitute commissioner shall cancel or adjourn the sale.


<R05>
Sec. 27.113  Foreclosure costs.

    A commission may be allowed to the foreclosure commissioner 
notwithstanding termination of the sale or appointment of a substitute 
commissioner before the sale takes place.


<R05>
Sec. 27.115  Disposition of sales proceeds.

    The foreclosure commissioner will keep such records as will permit 
the Secretary to verify the costs claimed, and otherwise to enable the 
Secretary to audit the foreclosure commissioner's disposition of the 
sale proceeds.


<R05>
Sec. 27.117  Transfer of title and possession.

    (a) If the Secretary is the successful bidder, the foreclosure 
commissioner shall issue a deed to the Secretary upon receipt of the 
amount needed to pay the costs of tax liens and prior liens, as set 
forth in 12 U.S.C. 3762(a)(2) and (a)(3). If the Secretary is not the 
successful bidder, the foreclosure commissioner shall issue a deed to 
the purchaser or purchasers upon receipt of the entire purchase price in 
accordance with the terms of the sale as provided in the Notice of 
Default and Foreclosure Sale.
    (b) The register of deeds or other appropriate official in the 
county where the property is located shall, upon tendering of the 
customary recording fees, accept all instruments pertaining to the 
foreclosure which are submitted by the foreclosure commissioner for 
recordation. The instruments to be accepted shall include, but not be 
limited to, the foreclosure commissioner's deed. If the foreclosure 
commissioner elects to include the recitations required under the 
Statute (12 U.S.C. 3764) in an affidavit or an addendum to the deed, the 
affidavit or addendum shall be accepted along with the deed for 
recordation. The Clerk of the Court or other appropriate official shall 
cancel all liens as requested by the foreclosure commissioner.


<R05>
Sec. 27.119  Redemption rights.

    Only for purposes of redemption rights under the Statute, a 
foreclosure shall be considered completed upon the date and at the time 
of the foreclosure sale.


<R05>
Sec. 27.121  Record of foreclosure and sale.

    The statements regarding the foreclosed mortgage required to 
establish a sufficient record shall include the date the mortgage was 
recorded. The statements regarding the service of the Notice of Default 
and Foreclosure Sale shall include the names and addresses of the 
persons to whom the Notice was mailed and the date on which the Notice 
was mailed, the name of the newspaper in which the Notice was published 
and the dates of publication, and the date on which service by posting, 
if required, was accomplished.


<R05>
Sec. 27.123  Deficiency judgment.

    If the price at which the security property is sold at the 
foreclosure sale is less than the unpaid balance of the debt secured by 
such property after disposition of sale proceeds in accordance with the 
order of priority provided under the Statute, the Secretary may refer 
the matter to the Attorney General who may commence an action or actions 
against any and all debtors to recover the deficiency, unless such an 
action is specifically prohibited by the mortgage.


<R03>
PART 28--IMPLEMENTATION OF THE PROGRAM FRAUD CIVIL REMEDIES ACT OF 1986--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
28.1  Purpose.
28.5  Definitions.
28.10  Basis for civil penalties and assessments.
28.15  Investigation.
28.20  Request for approval by the Department of Justice.
28.25  Complaint.
28.30  Response.
28.35  Disclosure of documents.
28.40  Hearings.
28.45  Settlements.


[[Page 248]]


    Authority: 28 U.S.C. 2461 note; 31 U.S.C. 3801; 42 U.S.C. 3535(d).

    Source: 61 FR 50213, Sept. 24, 1996, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 28.1  Purpose.

    This part:
    (a) Establishes administrative procedures for imposing civil 
penalties and assessments against persons who make, submit, or present, 
or cause to be made, submitted, or presented, false, fictitious, or 
fraudulent claims or written statements to Federal authorities or to 
their agents; and
    (b) Specifies the hearing and appeal rights of persons subject to 
allegations of liability for such penalties and assessments. Hearings 
under this part shall be conducted pursuant to 24 CFR part 26, subpart 
B.


<R05>
Sec. 28.5  Definitions.

    The terms ALJ and HUD are defined in 24 CFR part 5.
    Benefit means anything of value, including, but not limited to, any 
advantage, preference, privilege, license, permit, favorable decision, 
ruling, status, or loan insurance or guarantee.
    Claim means any request, demand, or submission:
    (1) Made to HUD for property, services, or money (including money 
representing grants, loans, insurance, or benefits);
    (2) Made to a recipient of property, services, or money from HUD, or 
to a party to a contract with HUD, for property or services provided by 
the U.S. Government, purchased with Government funds, or for which the 
Government will reimburse the recipient or party; or
    (3) Made to HUD that has the effect of decreasing an obligation to 
pay or account for property, services, or money.
    Knows or has reason to know means that a person has actual knowledge 
that a claim or statement is false, fictitious, or fraudulent; acts in 
deliberate ignorance of the truth or falsity of the claim or statement; 
or acts in reckless disregard of the truth or falsity of the claim or 
statement.
    Person means any individual, partnership, corporation, association, 
private organization, or entity.
    Respondent means any person alleged to be liable for a civil penalty 
or assessment under Sec. 28.25.
    Statement means any representation, certification, affirmation, 
document, record, or accounting or bookkeeping entry made:
    (1) With respect to a claim, to obtain approval or payment of a 
claim, or relating to eligibility to make a claim; or
    (2) With respect to or relating to eligibility for a contract, bid, 
or proposal for a contract with; or a grant or cooperative agreement, 
loan, or benefit from; HUD, any State, any political subdivision of a 
State, or other party, if the United States Government provides any 
portion of the money or property under the contract or the grant or 
cooperative agreement, loan, or benefit, or if the Government will 
reimburse the State, political subdivision, or party for any portion of 
the money or property under the contract or for the grant or cooperative 
agreement, loan, or benefit.


<R05>
Sec. 28.10  Basis for civil penalties and assessments.

    (a) Claims. (1) A civil penalty of not more than $5,500 may be 
imposed upon a person who makes a claim that the person knows or has 
reason to know:
    (i) Is false, fictitious, or fraudulent;
    (ii) Includes or is supported by a written statement that either 
contains a material fact that is false, fictitious, or fraudulent; or 
omits a material fact that the person has a duty to include and is 
false, fictitious, or fraudulent as a result of the omission; or
    (iii) Is for payment for the provision of property or services that 
the person has not provided as claimed.
    (2) Each voucher, invoice, claim form, or other individual request 
or demand for property, services, or money constitutes a separate claim.
    (3) A claim shall be considered made to HUD, to a recipient, or to a 
party when the claim actually is made to an agent, fiscal intermediary, 
or other entity, including any State or political subdivision of a 
State, acting for or on behalf of HUD, the recipient, or the party.
    (4) Each claim for property, services, or money is subject to a 
civil penalty

[[Page 249]]

without regard to whether the property, services, or money actually is 
delivered or paid.
    (5) Liability under this part shall not lie if the amount of money 
or value of property or services claimed exceeds $150,000 as to each 
claim that a person submits. For purposes of paragraph (a) of this 
section, a group of claims submitted simultaneously as part of a single 
transaction shall be considered a single claim.
    (6) If the Government has made any payment, transferred property, or 
provided services on a claim, then the Government may assess a person 
found liable up to twice the amount of the claim or portion of the claim 
that is determined to be in violation of paragraph (a)(1) of this 
section.
    (b) Statements. (1) A civil penalty of up to $5,500 may be imposed 
upon a person who makes a written statement that:
    (i) The person knows, or has reason to know, contains a material 
fact that is false, fictitious, or fraudulent; or omits a material fact 
that the person has a duty to include and is false, fictitious, or 
fraudulent because of that omission; and
    (ii) Contains or is accompanied by an express certification or 
affirmation of the truthfulness and accuracy of the contents of the 
statement.
    (2) Each written representation, certification, or affirmation 
constitutes a separate statement.
    (3) A statement shall be considered made to HUD when the statement 
is actually made to an agent, fiscal intermediary, or other entity, 
including any State or political subdivision of a State, acting for or 
on behalf of HUD.
    (c) Limit on liability. If the claim or statement relates to low-
income housing benefits or housing benefits for the elderly or 
handicapped, then a person may be held liable only if he or she has made 
the claim or statement in the course of applying for such benefits, with 
respect to his or her eligibility, or family's eligibility, to receive 
such benefits. For purposes of paragraph (c) of this section, ``housing 
benefits'' means any instance wherein funds administered by the 
Secretary directly or indirectly permit low-income families or elderly 
or handicapped persons to reside in housing that otherwise would not be 
available to them.
    (d) Specific intent. No proof of specific intent to defraud is 
required to establish liability under this section.
    (e) Joint and several liability. A civil penalty or assessment may 
be imposed jointly and severally if more than one person is determined 
to be liable.


<R05>
Sec. 28.15  Investigation.

    (a) General. HUD may initiate a Program Fraud Civil Remedies Act (31 
U.S.C. 3801) case against a respondent only upon an investigation by the 
Inspector General or his or her designee.
    (b) Subpoena. Pursuant to 31 U.S.C. 3804(a), the Inspector General 
or designee may require by subpoena the production of records and other 
documents. The subpoena shall state the authority under which it is 
issued, identify the records sought, and name the person designated to 
receive the records. The recipient of the subpoena shall provide a 
certification that the documents sought have been produced, that the 
documents are not available and the reasons they are not available, or 
that the documents, suitably identified, have been withheld based upon 
the assertion of an identified privilege.
    (c) Investigation report. If the Inspector General or designee 
concludes that an action under the Program Fraud Civil Remedies Act may 
be warranted, her or she shall submit a report containing the findings 
and conclusions of the investigation to the General Counsel or his or 
her designee.
    (d) The Inspector General may refer allegations directly to the 
Department of Justice for suit under the False Claims Act (31 U.S.C. 
3730) or for other civil relief, or may postpone submitting a report to 
the General Counsel to avoid interference with a criminal investigation 
or prosecution. The Inspector General shall report violations of 
criminal law to the Attorney General.


<R05>
Sec. 28.20  Request for approval by the Department of Justice.

    (a) If the General Counsel or designee determines that the 
investigation report supports an action under this part, he or she must 
submit a written request to the Department of Justice for approval to 
issue a notice under Sec. 28.25.

[[Page 250]]

    (b) The request shall include a description of the claims or 
statements at issue; the evidence supporting the notice; an estimate of 
the amount of money or the value of property, services, or other 
benefits requested or demanded in violation of Sec. 28.10; any 
exculpatory or mitigating circumstances that may relate to the claims or 
statements; and a statement that there is a reasonable prospect of 
collecting an appropriate amount of penalties and assessments.


<R05>
Sec. 28.25  Complaint.

    (a) General. Upon obtaining approval from the Department of Justice, 
the General Counsel or designee may issue a complaint to the respondent. 
The complaint shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, 
or shall be personally served.
    (b) The complaint shall include:
    (1) The allegations of liability against the respondent, including 
the statutory basis for liability, the claims or statements at issue, 
and the reasons why liability arises from those claims or statements;
    (2) The amount of penalties and assessments for which the respondent 
may be held liable;
    (3) That the respondent may request a hearing by submitting a 
written response to the complaint;
    (4) The address to which a response must be sent; and
    (5) That failure to submit an answer within 30 days of receipt of 
the complaint may result in the imposition of the maximum amount of 
penalties and assessments sought without right of appeal.
    (c) A copy of this part 28 and of 24 CFR part 26, subpart B shall be 
included with the complaint.


<R05>
Sec. 28.30  Response.

    (a) The respondent may submit a written response to HUD within 30 
days of service of the complaint. The response shall be deemed to be a 
request for hearing. The response should include the admission or denial 
of each allegation of liability made in the complaint; any defense on 
which the respondent intends to rely; any reasons why the penalties and 
assessments should be less than the amount set forth in the complaint; 
and the name, address, and telephone number of the person who will act 
as the respondent's representative, if any.
    (b) Filing with the administrative law judges. HUD shall file the 
complaint and response with the Chief Docket Clerk, Office of 
Administrative Law Judges, in accordance with Sec. 26.37 of this title. 
If no response is submitted, then HUD may file a motion for default 
judgment, together with a copy of the complaint, in accordance with 
Sec. 26.39 of this title.


<R05>
Sec. 28.35  Disclosure of documents.

    Upon receipt of a complaint, the respondent may, upon written 
request to the General Counsel or designee, review any relevant and 
material nonprivileged documents, including any exculpatory documents, 
that relate to the allegations set out in the complaint. Exculpatory 
information that is contained in a privileged document must be 
disclosed.


<R05>
Sec. 28.40  Hearings.

    (a) General. Hearings under this part shall be conducted in 
accordance with the procedures in 24 CFR part 26, subpart B.
    (b) Factors to consider in determining amount of penalties and 
assessments. In determining an appropriate amount of civil penalties and 
assessments, the administrative law judge (ALJ) and, upon appeal, the 
Secretary shall consider and state in their opinions any mitigating or 
aggravating circumstances. Because of the intangible costs of fraud, the 
expense of investigating fraudulent conduct, and the need for 
deterrence, ordinarily double damages and a significant civil penalty 
should be imposed. The ALJ and the Secretary shall consider the 
following factors in determining the amount of penalties and assessments 
to be imposed:
    (1) The number of false, fictitious, or fraudulent claims or 
statements;
    (2) The time period over which such claims or statements were made;
    (3) The degree of the respondent's culpability with respect to the 
misconduct;
    (4) The amount of money or the value of the property, services, or 
benefit falsely claimed;

[[Page 251]]

    (5) The value of the Government's actual loss as a result of the 
misconduct, including foreseeable consequential damages and the cost of 
investigation;
    (6) The relationship of the civil penalties to the amount of the 
Government's loss;
    (7) The potential or actual impact of the misconduct upon national 
defense, public health or safety, or public confidence in the management 
of Government programs and operations, including particularly the impact 
on the intended beneficiaries of such programs;
    (8) Whether the respondent has engaged in a pattern of the same or 
similar misconduct;
    (9) Whether the respondent attempted to conceal the misconduct;
    (10) The degree to which the respondent has involved others in the 
misconduct or in concealing it;
    (11) If the misconduct of employees or agents is imputed to the 
respondent, the extent to which the respondent's practices fostered or 
attempted to preclude the misconduct;
    (12) Whether the respondent cooperated in or obstructed an 
investigation of the misconduct;
    (13) Whether the respondent assisted in identifying and prosecuting 
other wrongdoers;
    (14) The complexity of the program or transaction, and the degree of 
the respondent's sophistication with respect to it, including the extent 
of the respondent's prior participation in the program or in similar 
transactions;
    (15) Whether the respondent has been found, in any criminal, civil, 
or administrative proceeding, to have engaged in similar misconduct or 
to have dealt dishonestly with the Government of the United States or of 
a State, directly or indirectly;
    (16) The need to deter the respondent and others from engaging in 
the same or similar misconduct; and
    (17) Any other factors that in any given case may mitigate or 
aggravate the offense for which penalties and assessments are imposed.
    (c) Stays ordered by the Department of Justice. If at any time the 
Attorney General of the United States or an Assistant Attorney General 
designated by the Attorney General notifies the Secretary in writing 
that continuation of HUD's case may adversely affect any pending or 
potential criminal or civil action related to the claim or statement at 
issue, the ALJ or the Secretary shall stay the process immediately. The 
case may be resumed only upon receipt of the written authorization of 
the Attorney General.


<R05>
Sec. 28.45  Settlements.

    (a) HUD and the respondent may enter into a settlement agreement at 
any time prior to the issuing of a notice of final determination under 
Sec. 26.50 of this title.
    (b) Failure of the respondent to comply with a settlement agreement 
shall be sufficient cause for resuming an action under this part, or for 
any other judicial or administrative action.


<R03>
PART 30--CIVIL MONEY PENALTIES: CERTAIN PROHIBITED CONDUCT--Table of Contents

<R05>


                           Subpart A--General

Sec.
30.1  Purpose and scope.
30.5  Effective dates.
30.10  Definitions.
30.15  Application of other remedies.

                          Subpart B--Violations

30.20  Ethical violations by HUD employees.
30.25  Violations by applicants for assistance.
30.30  Urban Homestead violations.
30.35  Mortgagees and lenders.
30.40  Loan guarantees for Indian housing.
30.45  Multifamily and Section 202 mortgagors.
30.50  GNMA issuers and custodians.
30.55  Interstate Land Sales violations.
30.60  Dealers or loan correspondents.
30.65  Failure to disclose lead-based paint hazards.

                          Subpart C--Procedures

30.70  Prepenalty notice.
30.75  Response to prepenalty notice.
30.80  Factors in determining appropriateness and amount of civil money 
          penalty.
30.85  Complaint.
30.90  Response to the complaint.
30.95  Hearings.
30.100  Settlements.

    Authority: 12 U.S.C. 1701q-1, 1703, 1723i, 1735f-14, 1735f-15; 15 
U.S.C. 1717a; 28 U.S.C. 2461 note; 42 U.S.C. 3535(d).

    Source: 61 FR 50215, Sept. 24, 1996, unless otherwise noted.

[[Page 252]]


<R04>
                           Subpart A--General


<R05>
Sec. 30.1  Purpose and scope.

    Unless provided for elsewhere in this title or under separate 
authority, this part implements HUD's civil money penalty provisions. 
The procedural rules for hearings under this part are set forth in 24 
CFR part 26, subpart B.


<R05>
Sec. 30.5  Effective dates.

    (a) Under Sec. 30.20, a civil money penalty may be imposed for 
violations occurring on or after May 22, 1991.
    (b) Under Secs. 30.25, 30.35, 30.45, 30.50, 30.55, and 30.60, a 
civil money penalty may be imposed for any violations that occur on or 
after December 15, 1989.
    (c) Under Sec. 30.30, a civil money penalty may be imposed with 
respect to any property transferred for use under section 810 of the 
Housing and Community Development Act of 1974, as amended (12 U.S.C. 
1706e), after January 1, 1981, to a state, a unit of general local 
government, or a public agency or qualified community organization 
designated by a unit of general local government, or a transferee of any 
such entity.
    (d) Under Sec. 30.40, concerning loan guarantees for Indian housing, 
a civil money penalty may be imposed for violations occurring on or 
after October 28, 1992.
    (e) Under Sec. 30.65, a civil money penalty may be imposed for 
violations occurring on or after the following dates:
    (1) September 6, 1996, for owners of more than four residential 
dwellings; or
    (2) December 6, 1996, for owners of one to four residential 
dwellings.


<R05>
Sec. 30.10  Definitions.

    Since this part is primarily procedural, terms not defined in this 
section shall have the meanings given them in relevant program 
regulations. Comprehensive definitions are in 24 CFR part 4 (HUD Reform 
Act). The terms ALJ, Department, HUD, and Secretary are defined in 24 
CFR part 5.
    Agent. Any person, including an officer, director, partner, or 
trustee, who acts on behalf of another person.
    Dealer. A seller, contractor or supplier of goods or services having 
a direct or indirect financial interest in the transaction between the 
borrower and the lender, and who assists the borrower in preparing the 
credit application or otherwise assists the borrower in obtaining the 
loan from the lender.
    Knowing or Knowingly. Having actual knowledge of or acting with 
deliberate ignorance of or reckless disregard for the prohibitions under 
subpart B of this part or under 24 CFR part 4.
    Loan correspondent. A lender or loan correspondent as defined at 
Sec. 202.2 of this title.
    Material or Materially. In some significant respect or to some 
significant degree.
    Person. An individual, corporation, company, association, authority, 
firm, partnership, society, State, local government or agency thereof, 
or any other organization or group of people.
    Respondent. A person against whom a civil money penalty action is 
initiated.


<R05>
Sec. 30.15  Application of other remedies.

    A civil money penalty may be imposed in addition to other 
administrative sanctions or any other civil remedy or criminal penalty.


<R04>
                          Subpart B--Violations


<R05>
Sec. 30.20  Ethical violations by HUD employees.

    (a) General. The General Counsel, or his or her designee, may 
initiate a civil money penalty action against HUD employees who 
improperly disclose information pursuant to section 103 of the HUD 
Reform Act of 1989 (42 U.S.C. 3537a(c)) and 24 CFR part 4, subpart B.
    (b) Maximum penalty. The maximum penalty is $11,000 for each 
violation.


<R05>
Sec. 30.25  Violations by applicants for assistance.

    (a) General. The General Counsel, or his or her designee, may 
initiate a civil money penalty action against applicants for assistance, 
as defined in 24 CFR part 4, subpart A, who knowingly and materially 
violate the provisions of subsections (b) or (c) of section 102 of the 
HUD Reform Act of 1989 (42 U.S.C. 3545).
    (b) Maximum penalty. The maximum penalty for each violation is 
$11,000.

[[Page 253]]


<R05>
Sec. 30.30  Urban Homestead violations.

    (a) General. The Assistant Secretary for Community Planning and 
Development, or his or her designee, or the Director of the Office of 
Technical Assistance and Management may initiate a civil money penalty 
action against persons who knowingly and materially violate section 810 
of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974, as amended (12 
U.S.C. 1706e), or the provisions of 24 CFR part 590, in the use or 
conveyance of property made available under the Urban Homestead Program.
    (b) Maximum penalty. The maximum penalty is either twice the amount 
of the gross profit realized from any impermissible use or conveyance of 
the property, or the amount of section 810 funds used to reimburse HUD, 
the Department of Veterans Affairs, the Resolution Trust Corporation, or 
the Farmers Home Administration (or its successor agency under Public 
Law 103-354) for the property, whichever is greater. If the property is 
still held by the violator, the gross profit shall include any 
appreciation between the amount the violator paid for the property and 
its current value as determined by an independent, HUD-qualified 
appraiser.


<R05>
Sec. 30.35  Mortgagees and lenders.

    (a) General. The Mortgagee Review Board may initiate a civil money 
penalty action against any mortgagee or lender who knowingly and 
materially:
    (1) Violates the provisions listed in 12 U.S.C. 1735f-14(b);
    (2) Fails to comply with the requirements of Sec. 201.27(a) of this 
title regarding approval and supervision of dealers;
    (3) Approves a dealer that has been suspended, debarred, or 
otherwise denied participation in HUD's programs;
    (4) Makes a payment that is prohibited under Sec. 202.5(l).
    (5) Fails to remit, or timely remit, mortgage insurance premiums, 
loan insurance charges, or late charges or interest penalties;
    (6) Permits loan documents for an FHA insured loan to be signed in 
blank by its agents or any other party to the loan transaction unless 
expressly approved by the Secretary;
    (7) Fails to follow the mortgage assignment procedures set forth in 
Secs. 203.650 through 203.664 of this title or in Secs. 207.255 through 
207.258b of this title.
    (8) Fails to timely submit documents that are complete and accurate 
in connection with a conveyance of property or a claim for insurance 
benefits, in accordance with Secs. 203.365, 203.366, or 203.368 of this 
title;
    (9) Fails to:
    (i) Process requests for formal release of liability under an FHA 
insured mortgage;
    (ii) Obtain a credit report, issued not more than 90 days prior to 
approval of a person as a borrower, as to the person's creditworthiness 
to assume an FHA insured mortgage;
    (iii) Timely submit proper notification of a change in mortgagor or 
mortgagee as required by Sec. 203.431 of this title;
    (iv) Timely submit proper notification of mortgage insurance 
termination as required by Sec. 203.318 of this title;
    (v) Timely submit proper notification of a change in mortgage 
servicing as required by Sec. 203.502 of this title; or
    (vi) Report all delinquent mortgages to HUD, as required by 
Sec. 203.332 of this title;
    (10) Fails to service FHA insured mortgages, in accordance with the 
requirements of 24 CFR parts 201, 203, and 235;
    (11) Fails to fund loans that it originated, or otherwise misuses 
loan proceeds;
    (12) Fails to comply with the conditions relating to the assignment 
or pledge of mortgages;
    (13) Fails to comply with the provisions of the Real Estate 
Settlement Procedures Act (12 U.S.C. 2601 et seq.), the Equal Credit 
Opportunity Act (15 U.S.C. 1691 et seq.), or the Fair Housing Act (42 
U.S.C. 3601 et seq.);
    (14) Fails to comply with the terms of a settlement agreement with 
HUD.
    (b) Continuing violation. Each day that a violation continues shall 
constitute a separate violation.
    (c) Amount of penalty. The maximum penalty is $5,500 for each 
violation, up to a limit of $1,100,000 for all violations committed 
during any one-year period.

[[Page 254]]

Each violation shall constitute a separate violation as to each mortgage 
or loan application.

[61 FR 50215, Sept. 24, 1996, as amended at 63 FR 9742, Feb. 26, 1998]


<R05>
Sec. 30.40  Loan guarantees for Indian housing.

    (a) General. The Secretary may initiate a civil money penalty action 
against any mortgagee or holder of a guarantee certificate who knowingly 
and materially violates the provisions of 12 U.S.C. 1715z-13a(g)(2) 
concerning loan guarantees for Indian housing;
    (b) Continuing violation. Each day that a violation continues shall 
constitute a separate violation.
    (c) Amount of penalty. The maximum penalty is $5,000 for each 
violation, up to a limit of $1,100,000 for all violations committed 
during any one-year period. Each violation shall constitute a separate 
violation as to each mortgage or loan application.


<R05>
Sec. 30.45  Multifamily and Section 202 mortgagors.

    (a) General. The Assistant Secretary for Housing-Federal Housing 
Commissioner, or his or her designee, may initiate a civil money penalty 
action against any mortgagor of property that includes five or more 
living units and is subject to a mortgage insured, coinsured, or held by 
the Secretary, who knowingly and materially commits a violation listed 
at 12 U.S.C. 1735f-15 (b) or (c), or 12 U.S.C. 1701q-1 (b) or (c).
    (b) Maximum penalty. The maximum penalty for each violation of 12 
U.S.C. 1735f-15(b) and 12 U.S.C. 1701q-1(b) is the amount of loss that 
the Secretary incurs at a foreclosure sale, or a sale after foreclosure, 
with respect to the property involved. The maximum penalty for each 
violation of 12 U.S.C. 1735f-15(c) and 12 U.S.C. 1701q-1(c) is $27,500.


<R05>
Sec. 30.50  GNMA issuers and custodians.

    (a) General. The President of GNMA, or his or her designee, may 
initiate a civil money penalty action against a GNMA issuer or custodian 
that knowingly and materially violates any provision of 12 U.S.C. 
1723i(b), title III of the National Housing Act, or any implementing 
regulation, handbook, guaranty agreement, or contractual agreement, or 
participant letter issued by GNMA, or fails to comply with the terms of 
a settlement agreement with GNMA.
    (b) Continuing violation. Each day that a violation continues shall 
constitute a separate violation.
    (c) Amount of penalty. The maximum penalty is $5,500 for each 
violation, up to a limit of $1,100,000 during any one-year period. Each 
violation shall constitute a separate violation with respect to each 
pool of mortgages.


<R05>
Sec. 30.55  Interstate Land Sales violations.

    (a) General. The Assistant Secretary for Housing-Federal Housing 
Commissioner, or his or her designee, may initiate a civil money penalty 
action against any person who knowingly and materially violates any 
provision of the Interstate Land Sales Full Disclosure Act (15 U.S.C. 
1701 et seq.); the rules and regulations set forth at 24 CFR parts 1710, 
1715, and 1720; or any order issued thereunder.
    (b) Continuing violation. Each day that a violation continues shall 
constitute a separate violation.
    (c) Maximum penalty. The maximum penalty is $1,100 for each 
violation, up to a limit for any particular person of $1,100,000 during 
any one-year period. Each violation shall constitute a separate 
violation as to each sale or lease or offer to sell or lease.


<R05>
Sec. 30.60  Dealers or loan correspondents.

    (a) General. The Assistant Secretary for Housing-Federal Housing 
Commissioner, or his or her designee, may initiate a civil money penalty 
action against any dealer or loan correspondent who violates section 
2(b)(7) of the National Housing Act (12 U.S.C. 1703). Such violations 
include, but are not limited to:
    (1) Falsifying information on an application for dealer approval or 
reapproval submitted to a lender;
    (2) Falsifying statements on a HUD credit application, improvement 
contract, note, security instrument, completion certificate, or other 
loan document;
    (3) Failing to sign a credit application if the dealer or loan 
correspondent

[[Page 255]]

assisted the borrower in completing the application;
    (4) Falsely certifying to a lender that the loan proceeds have been 
or will be spent on eligible improvements;
    (5) Falsely certifying to a lender that the property improvements 
have been completed;
    (6) Falsely certifying that a borrower has not been given or 
promised any cash payment, rebate, cash bonus, or anything of more than 
nominal value as an inducement to enter into a loan transaction;
    (7) Making a false representation to a lender with respect to the 
creditworthiness of a borrower or the eligibility of the improvements 
for which a loan is sought.
    (b) Continuing violation. Each day that a violation continues shall 
constitute a separate violation.
    (c) Amount of penalty. The maximum penalty is $5,500 for each 
violation, up to a limit for any particular person of $1,100,000 during 
any one-year period.


<R05>
Sec. 30.65  Failure to disclose lead-based paint hazards.

    (a) General. The Director of the Office of Lead Hazard Control, or 
his or her designee, may initiate a civil money penalty action against 
any person who knowingly violates 42 U.S.C. 4852d(b)(1).
    (b) Amount of penalty. The maximum penalty is $11,000 for each 
violation.


<R04>
                          Subpart C--Procedures


<R05>
Sec. 30.70  Prepenalty notice.

    Whenever HUD intends to seek a civil money penalty, the official 
designated in subpart B of this part, or his or her designee (or the 
chairperson of the Mortgagee Review Board, or his or her designee, in 
actions under Sec. 30.35), shall issue a written notice to the 
respondent. This prepenalty notice shall include the following:
    (a) That HUD is considering seeking a civil money penalty;
    (b) The specific violations alleged;
    (c) The maximum civil money penalty that may be imposed;
    (d) The opportunity to reply in writing to the designated program 
official within 30 days after receipt of the notice; and
    (e) That failure to respond within the 30-day period may result in 
issuance of a complaint under Sec. 30.85 without consideration of any 
information that the respondent may wish to provide.


<R05>
Sec. 30.75  Response to prepenalty notice.

    The response shall be in a format prescribed in the prepenalty 
notice. The response shall include any arguments opposing the imposition 
of a civil money penalty that the respondent may wish to present.


<R05>
Sec. 30.80  Factors in determining appropriateness and amount of civil money penalty.

    In determining whether to seek a penalty, and the amount of such 
penalty, the officials designated in subpart B of this part shall 
consider the following factors:
    (a) The gravity of the offense;
    (b) Any history of prior offenses. For violations under Secs. 30.25, 
30.35, 30.45, 30.50, 30.55, and 30.60, offenses that occurred prior to 
December 15, 1989 may be considered;
    (c) The ability to pay the penalty;
    (d) The injury to the public;
    (e) Any benefits received by the violator;
    (f) The extent of potential benefit to other persons;
    (g) Deterrence of future violations;
    (h) The degree of the violator's culpability;
    (i) With respect to Urban Homestead violations under Sec. 30.30, the 
expenditures made by the violator in connection with any gross profit 
derived; and
    (j) Such other matters as justice may require.
    (k) In addition to the above factors, with respect to violations 
under Secs. 30.45, 30.55, and 30.60, the Assistant Secretary for 
Housing-Federal Housing Commissioner, or his or her designee, shall also 
consider:
    (1) Any injury to tenants; and/or
    (2) Any injury to lot owners.


<R05>
Sec. 30.85  Complaint.

    (a) General. Upon the expiration of the period for the respondent to 
submit a response to the prepenalty notice, the official designated in 
subpart B of this part, or his or her designee (or the Mortgagee Review 
Board in actions

[[Page 256]]

under Sec. 30.35) shall determine whether to seek a civil money penalty. 
Such determination shall be based upon a review of the prepenalty 
notice, the response, if any, and the factors listed at Sec. 30.80. A 
determination by the Mortgagee Review Board to seek a civil money 
penalty shall be by a majority vote of the Board.
    (b) If a determination is made to seek a civil money penalty, the 
official or his or her designee, or the Mortgagee Review Board, shall 
issue a complaint to the respondent. The complaint shall state the 
following:
    (1) The factual basis for the decision to seek a penalty;
    (2) The applicable civil money penalty statute;
    (3) The amount of penalty sought;
    (4) The right to submit a response in writing, within 15 days of 
receipt of the complaint, requesting a hearing on any material fact in 
the complaint, or on the appropriateness of the penalty sought;
    (5) The address to which a response must be sent;
    (6) That the failure to submit a response may result in the 
imposition of the penalty in the amount sought.
    (c) A copy of this part and of 24 CFR part 26, subpart B shall be 
included with the complaint.
    (d) Service of the complaint. The complaint shall be served on the 
respondent by first class mail, personal delivery, or other means. In 
cases of violations by mortgagees and lenders of 12 U.S.C. 1735f-14(b) 
(1)(D) or (1)(F), or by GNMA issuers or custodians of 12 U.S.C. 1723i(b) 
(1)(G) or (1)(I), a copy of the complaint shall be provided to the 
Attorney General.


<R05>
Sec. 30.90  Response to the complaint.

    (a) General. The respondent may submit to HUD a written response to 
the complaint within 15 days of its receipt. The response shall be 
considered a request for a hearing. The response should include the 
admission or denial of each allegation of liability made in the 
complaint; any defense on which the respondent intends to rely; any 
reasons why the civil money penalty is not warranted or should be less 
than the amount sought in the complaint; and the name, address, and 
telephone number of the person who will act as the respondent's 
representative, if any.
    (b) Filing with the administrative law judges. HUD shall file the 
complaint and response with the Chief Docket Clerk, Office of 
Administrative Law Judges, in accordance with Sec. 26.37 of this title. 
If no response is submitted, then HUD may file a motion for default 
judgment, together with a copy of the complaint, in accordance with 
Sec. 26.39 of this title.


<R05>
Sec. 30.95  Hearings.

    Hearings under this part shall be conducted in accordance with the 
procedures at 24 CFR part 26, subpart B.


<R05>
Sec. 30.100  Settlements.

    The officials listed at subpart B of this part, or their designees 
(or the Mortgagee Review Board for violations under Sec. 30.35), are 
authorized to enter into settlement agreements of civil money penalty 
claims. Settlement agreements may be executed at any time prior to the 
issuing of a notice of final determination under Sec. 26.50 of this 
title, and may include sanctions for failure to comply with the terms of 
the agreement.


<R03>
PART 35--LEAD-BASED PAINT POISONING PREVENTION IN CERTAIN RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURES--Table of Contents

<R05>


  Subpart A--Notifications to Purchasers and Tenants of HUD-Associated 
  Housing Constructed Prior to 1978 of the Hazards of Lead-Based Paint 
                                Poisoning

Sec.
35.1  Purpose and scope.
35.3  Definitions.
35.5  Requirements.

   Subpart B--Prohibition Against the Use of Lead-Based Paint in HUD-
                           Associated Housing

35.10  Purpose and scope.
35.12  Definitions.
35.14  Requirements.

  Subpart C--Elimination of Lead-Based Paint Hazards in HUD-Associated 
                                 Housing

35.20  Purpose and scope.
35.22  Definitions.
35.24  Requirements.

[[Page 257]]

                 Subpart D--Local Codes and Regulations

35.40  Compliance with local laws.
35.42  Requirements.

 Subpart E--Elimination of Lead-Based Paint Hazards in Federally-Owned 
           Properties Prior to Sale for Residential Habitation

35.50  Purpose and scope.
35.52  Applicability.
35.54  Definitions.
35.56  Requirements.

 Subpart F--Prohibition Against the Use of Lead-Based Paint in Federal 
  and Federally-Assisted Construction or Rehabilitation of Residential 
                               Structures

35.60  Scope.
35.61  Definitions.
35.62  Federal construction; prohibition against use of lead-based 
          paint.
35.63  Federally assisted construction; prohibition against use of lead-
          based paint.
35.64  Reports to the Secretary.
35.65  Authority for subpart B of these regulations.

                          Subpart G [Reserved]

Subpart H--Disclosure of Known Lead-Based Paint and/or Lead-Based Paint 
           Hazards Upon Sale or Lease of Residential Property

35.80  Purpose.
35.82  Scope and applicability.
35.84  Effective dates.
35.86  Definitions.
35.88  Disclosure requirements for sellers and lessors.
35.90  Opportunity to conduct an evaluation.
35.92  Certification and acknowledgment of disclosure.
35.94  Agent responsibilities.
35.96  Enforcement.
35.98  Impact on State and local requirements.

    Authority: 42 U.S.C. 3535(d), 4821-4846 and 4852d.

    Source: 41 FR 28878, July 13, 1976, unless otherwise noted.


<R04>
  Subpart A--Notification to Purchasers and Tenants of HUD-Associated 
  Housing Constructed Prior to 1978 of the Hazards of Lead-Based Paint 
                                Poisoning


<R05>
Sec. 35.1  Purpose and scope.

    This subpart A establishes procedures to assure that purchasers and 
tenants of all HUD-associated housing constructed prior to 1978 are 
notified of the hazards of lead-based paint which may exist in such 
housing, of the symptoms and treatment of lead-based paint poisoning, 
and of the importance and availability of maintenance and removal 
techniques for eliminating such hazards.

[51 FR 27787, Aug. 1, 1986]


<R05>
Sec. 35.3  Definitions.

    Act. The Lead-Based Paint Poisoning Prevention Act, Pub. L. 91-695, 
84 Stat. 2078, as amended by Pub. L. 93-151 and Pub. L. 94-317 (42 
U.S.C. 4821-4846).
    Assistant Secretaries. The Assistant Secretaries in the Department 
of Housing and Urban Development.
    HUD-associated housing. Any residential structure that is the 
subject of an application for mortgage insurance under the National 
Housing Act or is proposed for the receipt of housing assistance 
payments under a program administered by the Secretary. For purposes of 
this subpart A, HUD-associated housing also includes any existing 
residential structure--
    (1) Acquired by the Secretary pursuant to any provision of law 
which, prior to such acquisition, was insured under the National Housing 
Act or was subject to a loan under section 312 of the Housing Act of 
1964,
    (2) Sold by the Secretary following any such acquisition and subject 
to any requirements regarding its use or operation under an agreement 
with, or condition imposed by, the Secretary, or
    (3) That is currently covered by mortgage insurance or a contract 
for housing assistance payments.
    Residential structure. Any house, apartment or structure intended 
for human habitation, including any non-dwelling facility operated by 
the owner and commonly used by children under

[[Page 258]]

seven years of age, such as a child care center.
    Secretary. The Secretary of Housing and Urban Development or a HUD 
official delegated the Secretary's authority with respect to the Act.

[51 FR 27787, Aug. 1, 1986, as amended at 61 FR 5204, Feb. 9, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 35.5  Requirements.

    (a) Purchasers and tenants of HUD-associated housing constructed 
prior to 1978 shall be notified:
    (1) That the property was constructed prior to 1978;
    (2) That the property may contain lead-based paint;
    (3) Of the hazards of lead-based paint;
    (4) Of the symptoms and treatment of lead-based paint poisoning; and
    (5) Of the precautions to be taken to avoid lead-based paint 
poisoning (including maintenance and removal techniques for eliminating 
such hazards).

Prospective purchasers or renters shall receive the above notifications 
prior to purchase or rental.
    (b) Each Assistant Secretary shall take necessary actions to 
implement the requirements of paragaph (a) of this section with respect 
to the HUD programs within his/her administrative jurisdiction. Such 
actions shall include providing the required notification (prepared by 
the Secretary after consultation with the National Institute of Building 
Sciences) and establishing procedures to:
    (1) Provide evidence that the required notification has been 
received by purchasers and tenants of HUD-associated housing constructed 
prior to 1978, and
    (2) Require the inclusion of appropriate provisions in contracts of 
sale, rental or management of HUD-associated housing to assure that 
purchasers and tenants receive the required notification.
    (c) Any requirement of this section, except use of the required 
notification, shall be deemed superseded by a regulation promulgated by 
an Assistant Secretary with respect to any program under his or her 
jurisdiction which states expressly that it is promulgated pursuant to 
the authorization granted in this section and supersedes, with respect 
to programs within its defined scope, the notification requirements 
prescribed by this section. Sec. e.g., 24 CFR 570.680(b) (Community 
Development Block Grants).

[51 FR 27787, Aug. 1, 1986, as amended at 53 FR 20798, June 6, 1988]


<R04>
   Subpart B--Prohibition Against the Use of Lead-Based Paint in HUD-
                           Associated Housing


<R05>
Sec. 35.10  Purpose and scope.

    This subpart implements the provisions of 42 CFR part 90 issued by 
the Secretary of Health and Human Services pursuant to section 401 of 
the Act which are applicable to Federal agencies and which prohibit the 
use of lead-based paint on applicable surfaces of residential structures 
constructed or rehabilitated by the Federal Government or with Federal 
assistance and establishes procedures to prohibit the use of lead-based 
paint on applicable surfaces in all HUD-associated housing.

[41 FR 28876, July 13, 1976, as amended at 50 FR 9269, Mar. 7, 1985]


<R05>
Sec. 35.12  Definitions.

    The definitions contained in Sec. 35.3 of subpart A of this part 
shall apply to this subpart B and in addition the following definition 
is applicable to this subpart B:
    (a) Lead-based paint as defined in section 501(3) of the Act as 
amended by Pub. L. 94-317 (42 U.S.C. 4801, et seq), the National 
Consumer Information and Health Promotion Act of 1976, means: (1) Any 
paint containing more than five-tenths of 1 per centum lead by weight 
(calculated as lead metal in the total non-volatile content of the paint 
or the equivalent measure of lead in the dried film of paint already 
applied or both; or (2) with respect to paint which is manufactured 
after June 22, 1977 lead-based paint means any paint containing more 
than six one-hundredths of 1 per centum lead by weight (calculated as 
lead metal) in the total nonvolatile content of the paint or the 
equivalent measure of lead in the dried film of paint already applied.

[41 FR 28876, July 13, 1976, as amended at 42 FR 5043, Jan. 27, 1977]

[[Page 259]]


<R05>
Sec. 35.14  Requirements.

    (a) No office of the Department shall use or permit the use of lead-
based paint on applicable surfaces of HUD-associated housing.
    (b) Each Assistant Secretary shall implement the requirements of 
paragraph (a) of this section with respect to the HUD programs within 
his/her administrative jurisdiction. Implemention shall include the 
establishment of procedures to require the inclusion of appropriate 
provisions in contracts and subcontracts involving HUD-associated 
housing prohibiting the use of lead-based paint on applicable surfaces 
of such HUD-associated housing and shall include provisions necessary 
for enforcement of the prohibition.


<R04>
  Subpart C--Elimination of Lead-Based Paint Hazards in HUD-Associated 
                                 Housing


<R05>
Sec. 35.20  Purpose and scope.

    This subpart C implements the provisions of section 302 of the Act 
with respect to establishing procedures to eliminate as far as 
practicable the hazards of lead-based paint poisoning with respect to 
any existing HUD-associated housing which may present such hazards.

[51 FR 27787, Aug. 1, 1986]


<R05>
Sec. 35.22  Definitions.

    As used in this subpart:
    Applicable surface means all intact and nonintact interior and 
exterior painted surfaces of a residential structure.
    Defective paint surface means an applicable surface on which the 
paint is cracking, scaling, chipping, peeling, or loose.
    HUD-associated housing shall have the meaning ascribed in Sec. 35.3.
    Residential structure shall have the meaning ascribed in Sec. 35.3.

[51 FR 27787, Aug. 1, 1986, as amended at 53 FR 20798, June 6, 1988]


<R05>
Sec. 35.24  Requirements.

    (a) Each Assistant Secretary shall establish procedures with respect 
to programs involving HUD-associated housing within his or her 
administrative jurisdiction to eliminate as far as practicable the 
hazards of lead-based paint poisoning with respect to housing that may 
present such hazards.
    (b) Subject to the provisions of separate regulations promulgated 
with respect to any program by the Assistant Secretary having 
jurisdiction over that program, the following minimum requirements shall 
apply to all programs:
    (1) All applicable surfaces of HUD-associated housing constructed 
prior to 1978 shall be inspected to determine whether defective paint 
surfaces exist.
    (2)(i) Treatment necessary to eliminate immediate hazards shall, at 
a minimum, consist of the covering or removal of defective paint 
surfaces found in HUD-associated housing constructed prior to 1978.
    (ii) Covering may be accomplished by such means as adding a layer of 
wallboard to the wall surface. Depending on the wall condition, 
wallcoverings which are permanently attached may be used. Covering or 
replacing trim surfaces is also permitted. Paint removal may be 
accomplished by such methods as scraping, heat treatment (infra-red or 
coil type heat guns) or chemicals. Machine sanding and use of propane or 
gasoline torches (open-flame methods) are not permitted. Washing and 
repainting without thorough removal or covering does not constitute 
adequate treatment. In the case of defective paint spots, scraping and 
repainting the defective area is considered adquate treatment.
    (3) Appropriate provisions for the inspection of applicable surfaces 
and elimination of hazards shall be included in contracts and 
subcontracts involving HUD-associated housing to which such requirements 
may apply.
    (4) Any requirements of this section shall be deemed superseded by a 
regulation promulgated by an Assistant Secretary with respect to any 
program under his or her jurisdiction which states expressly that it is 
promulgated under the authorization granted in this section and 
supersedes, with respect to programs within its defined scope, the 
requirements prescribed by this section. See, e.g., 24 CFR part 200, 
subpart O (Mortgage Insurance and Property

[[Page 260]]

Disposition); Sec. 570.608 (Community Development Block Grant); 
Sec. 882.109(i) (Section 8 Existing Housing); part 965, subpart H 
(Public Housing); part 905, subpart K (Indian Housing).

[52 FR 1890, Jan. 15, 1987, as amended at 53 FR 20798, June 6, 1988; 56 
FR 920, Jan. 9, 1991; 56 FR 15172, Apr. 15, 1991]


<R04>
                 Subpart D--Local Codes and Regulations


<R05>
Sec. 35.40  Compliance with local laws.

    (a) HUD, as owner of federally-owned housing, will comply with State 
or local laws, ordinances, codes, or regulations governing lead-based 
paint hazard abatement.
    (b) Nothing in this part 35 is intended to relieve an owner or 
tenant of HUD-associated housing of any responsibility for compliance 
with State or local laws, ordinances, codes, or regulations governing 
lead-based paint hazard abatement.
    (c) HUD does not assume any responsibility with respect to 
inspection, enforcement, interpretation or determination of compliance 
with such State or local requirements, except that the Federal standard 
for lead content in paint supersedes any State or local requirement, 
prohibition, or standard, as provided in section 506 of the Act.


<R05>
Sec. 35.42  Requirements.

    Each Assistant Secretary shall take necessary actions to implement 
the intent of Sec. 35.40.


<R04>
 Subpart E--Elimination of Lead-Based Paint Hazards in Federally-Owned 
           Properties Prior to Sale for Residential Habitation


<R05>
Sec. 35.50  Purpose and scope.

    This subpart E implements the provisions of section 302 of the Act 
which directs the Secretary to establish and implement procedures to 
eliminate the hazards of lead-based paint poisoning in all federally-
owned properties prior to the sale of such properties when their use is 
intended for residential habitation.


<R05>
Sec. 35.52  Applicability.

    The requirements established by this subpart E are applicable to all 
federally-owned properties prior to their sale by a Federal agency when 
their use is intended for residential habitation.


<R05>
Sec. 35.54  Definitions.

    The definitions contained in Secs. 35.3 and 35.22 shall apply to 
this subpart E. The following definitions are also applicable to this 
subpart E:
    Federal agency. The United States or any executive departments, 
independent establishments, administrative agencies and 
instrumentalities of the United States, including corporations in which 
all or substantially all of the stock is beneficially owned by the 
United States or by any of the foregoing departments, establishments, 
agencies or instrumentalities.
    Federally-owned properties. Any properties owned by a federal agency 
as defined in this section.
    Use for residential habitation. The use of a property as a 
residential structure as defined in Sec. 35.3.

[51 FR 27788, Aug. 1, 1986]


<R05>
Sec. 35.56  Requirements.

    (a) Prior to occupancy of a federally-owned property where its use 
subsequent to sale is intended for residential habitation, the Federal 
agency selling the property shall assure that the following steps are 
taken:
    (1) All applicable surfaces of residential structures constructed 
prior to 1978 shall be inspected to determine whether defective paint 
surfaces exist. For this purpose all defective paint surfaces shall be 
assumed to be immediate hazards; and
    (2) Treatment necessary to eliminate hazards of lead-based paint 
shall consist of covering or removal of defective paint surfaces. 
Covering may be accomplished by such means as adding a layer of wallbard 
to the wall surface. Depending on the wall condition, wallcoverings 
which are permanently attached may be used. Covering or replacing trim 
surfaces is also permitted. Paint removal may be accomplished by such 
methods as scraping, heat treatment (infra-red or coil type heat guns)

[[Page 261]]

or chemicals. Machine sanding and use of propane or gasoline torches 
(open-flame methods) are not permitted. Washing and repainting without 
thorough removal or covering does not constitute adequate treatment. In 
the case of defective paint spots, scraping and repainting the defective 
area is considered adequate treatment.
    (3) Prospective purchasers are provided all notifications described 
in Sec. 35.5(a).
    (b) The provisions of this subpart E shall be binding upon all 
Federal agencies as provided by section 302 of the Act; however, nothing 
contained in this part 35 shall preclude any Federal agency from 
promulgating such other procedures or additional requirements as may be 
necessary to implement the provisions of the Act.

[41 FR 28878, July 13, 1976, as amended at 51 FR 27789, Aug. 1, 1986; 52 
FR 1891, Jan. 15, 1987; 53 FR 20799, June 6, 1988]


<R04>
 Subpart F--Prohibition Against the Use of Lead-Based Paint in Federal 
  and Federally-Assisted Construction or Rehabilitation of Residential 
                               Structures

    Source: 42 FR 5043, Jan. 27, 1977, unless otherwise noted. Correctly 
designated at 42 FR 13112, Mar. 9, 1977.


<R05>
Sec. 35.60  Scope.

    The regulations of this subpart are promulgated to implement section 
401 of the Lead-Based Paint Poisoning Prevention Act, as amended, which 
directs the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development to take such 
steps and impose such conditions as may be necessary or appropriate to 
prohibit the use of lead-based paint in residential structures 
constructed or rehabilitated by the Federal Government or with Federal 
assistance in any form. The regulations are applicable to all Federal 
agencies.


<R05>
Sec. 35.61  Definitions.

    The definitions contained in Sec. 35.3 shall apply to this subpart F 
and in addition the following definitions are applicable to this subpart 
F:
    (a) Federal Agency means the United States or any executive 
departments, independent establishments, administrative agencies and 
instrumentalities of the United States, including corporations in which 
all or substantially all of the stock is beneficially owned by the 
United States or by any of the foregoing departments, establishments, 
agencies or instrumentalities.
    (b) Agency Head means the principal official of a Federal Agency and 
includes those persons duly authorized to act in his behalf.
    (c) Lead-based paint as defined in section 501(3) of the Act as 
amended by Pub. L. 94-317 (42 U.S.C. 4801 et seq), the National Consumer 
Information and Health Promotion Act of 1976, means: (1) Any paint 
containing more than five-tenths of 1 per centum lead by weight 
(calculated as lead metal) in the total non-volatile content of the 
paint or the equivalent measure of lead in the dried film of paint 
already applied or both; or (2) with respect to paint which is 
manufactured after June 22, 1977 lead-based paint means any paint 
containing more than six one-hundredths of 1 per centum lead by weight 
(calculated as lead metal) in the total nonvolatile content of the paint 
or the equivalent measure of lead in the dried film of paint already 
applied.


<R05>
Sec. 35.62  Federal construction; prohibition against use of lead-based paint.

    No Federal agency shall, in any residential structure constructed or 
rehabilitated by such agency, use or permit the use of lead-based paint 
on applicable surfaces.


<R05>
Sec. 35.63  Federally assisted construction; prohibition against use of lead-based paint.

    (a) Each Agency Head shall issue regulations and take such other 
steps as in his or her judgment are necessary to prohibit the use of 
lead-based paint on applicable surfaces of any residential structures 
constructed or rehabilitated by such agency under any federally assisted 
program.
    (b) Such regulations shall require the inclusion of appropriate 
provisions in contracts and subcontracts pursuant to

[[Page 262]]

which such federally assisted construction or rehabilitation is 
performed, prohibiting such use of lead-based paint, and shall include 
provisions for enforcement of that prohibition.


<R05>
Sec. 35.64  Reports to the Secretary.

    (a) To assist the Secretary in fulfilling her responsibilities under 
the Act, each Federal agency shall furnish to the Secretary, not later 
than 3 months after the effective date of these regulations, a report of 
the steps it has taken to comply with this subpart F, part 35.
    (b) Each Federal agency shall submit such additional reports on its 
activities in the implementation of this part as may be deemed necessary 
by the Secretary.


<R05>
Sec. 35.65  Authority for subpart B of these regulations.

    On or after the effective date of these amended regulations, subpart 
F will serve as the authority for subpart B of these regulations.


<R04>
                          Subpart G [Reserved]


<R04>
Subpart H--Disclosure of Known Lead-Based Paint and/or Lead-Based Paint 
           Hazards Upon Sale or Lease of Residential Property

    Source: 61 FR 9082, Mar. 6, 1996, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 35.80  Purpose.

    This subpart implements the provisions of 42 U.S.C. 4852d, which 
impose certain requirements on the sale or lease of target housing. 
Under this subpart, a seller or lessor of target housing shall disclose 
to the purchaser or lessee the presence of any known lead-based paint 
and/or lead-based paint hazards; provide available records and reports; 
provide the purchaser or lessee with a lead hazard information pamphlet; 
give purchasers a 10-day opportunity to conduct a risk assessment or 
inspection; and attach specific disclosure and warning language to the 
sales or leasing contract before the purchaser or lessee is obligated 
under a contract to purchase or lease target housing.


<R05>
Sec. 35.82  Scope and applicability.

    This subpart applies to all transactions to sell or lease target 
housing, including subleases, with the exception of the following:
    (a) Sales of target housing at foreclosure.
    (b) Leases of target housing that have been found to be lead-based 
paint free by an inspector certified under the Federal certification 
program or under a federally accredited State or tribal certification 
program. Until a Federal certification program or federally accredited 
State certification program is in place within the State, inspectors 
shall be considered qualified to conduct an inspection for this purpose 
if they have received certification under any existing State or tribal 
inspector certification program. The lessor has the option of using the 
results of additional test(s) by a certified inspector to confirm or 
refute a prior finding.
    (c) Short-term leases of 100 days or less, where no lease renewal or 
extension can occur.
    (d) Renewals of existing leases in target housing in which the 
lessor has previously disclosed all information required under 
Sec. 35.88 and where no new information described in Sec. 35.88 has come 
into the possession of the lessor. For the purposes of this paragraph, 
renewal shall include both renegotiation of existing lease terms and/or 
ratification of a new lease.


<R05>
Sec. 35.84  Effective dates.

    The requirements in this subpart take effect in the following 
manner:
    (a) For owners of more than four residential dwellings, the 
requirements shall take effect on September 6, 1996.
    (b) For owners of one to four residential dwellings, the 
requirements shall take effect on December 6, 1996.


<R05>
Sec. 35.86  Definitions.

    The following definitions apply to this subpart.
    The Act means the Residential Lead-Based Paint Hazard Reduction Act 
of 1992, 42 U.S.C. 4852d.
    Agent means any party who enters into a contract with a seller or 
lessor,

[[Page 263]]

including any party who enters into a contract with a representative of 
the seller or lessor, for the purpose of selling or leasing target 
housing. This term does not apply to purchasers or any purchaser's 
representative who receives all compensation from the purchaser.
    Available means in the possession of or reasonably obtainable by the 
seller or lessor at the time of the disclosure.
    Common area means a portion of a building generally accessible to 
all residents/users including, but not limited to, hallways, stairways, 
laundry and recreational rooms, playgrounds, community centers, and 
boundary fences.
    Contract for the purchase and sale of residential real property 
means any contract or agreement in which one party agrees to purchase an 
interest in real property on which there is situated one or more 
residential dwellings used or occupied, or intended to be used or 
occupied, in whole or in part, as the home or residence of one or more 
persons.
    EPA means the Environmental Protection Agency.
    Evaluation means a risk assessment and/or inspection.
    Foreclosure means any of the various methods, statutory or 
otherwise, known in different jurisdictions, of enforcing payment of a 
debt, by the taking and selling of real property.
    Housing for the elderly means retirement communities or similar 
types of housing reserved for households composed of one or more persons 
62 years of age or more at the time of initial occupancy.
    Inspection means:
    (1) A surface-by-surface investigation to determine the presence of 
lead-based paint as provided in section 302(c) of the Lead-Based Paint 
Poisoning and Prevention Act [42 U.S.C. 4822], and
    (2) The provision of a report explaining the results of the 
investigation.
    Lead-based paint means paint or other surface coatings that contain 
lead equal to or in excess of 1.0 milligram per square centimeter or 0.5 
percent by weight.
    Lead-based paint free housing means target housing that has been 
found to be free of paint or other surface coatings that contain lead 
equal to or in excess of 1.0 milligram per square centimeter or 0.5 
percent by weight.
    Lead-based paint hazard means any condition that causes exposure to 
lead from lead-contaminated dust, lead-contaminated soil, or lead-
contaminated paint that is deteriorated or present in accessible 
surfaces, friction surfaces, or impact surfaces that would result in 
adverse human health effects as established by the appropriate Federal 
agency.
    Lessee means any entity that enters into an agreement to lease, 
rent, or sublease target housing, including but not limited to 
individuals, partnerships, corporations, trusts, government agencies, 
housing agencies, Indian tribes, and nonprofit organizations.
    Lessor means any entity that offers target housing for lease, rent, 
or sublease, including but not limited to individuals, partnerships, 
corporations, trusts, government agencies, housing agencies, Indian 
tribes, and nonprofit organizations.
    Owner means any entity that has legal title to target housing, 
including but not limited to individuals, partnerships, corporations, 
trusts, government agencies, housing agencies, Indian tribes, and 
nonprofit organizations, except where a mortgagee holds legal title to 
property serving as collateral for a mortgage loan, in which case the 
owner would be the mortgagor.
    Purchaser means an entity that enters into an agreement to purchase 
an interest in target housing, including but not limited to individuals, 
partnerships, corporations, trusts, government agencies, housing 
agencies, Indian tribes, and nonprofit organizations.
    Reduction means measures designed to reduce or eliminate human 
exposure to lead-based paint hazards through methods including interim 
controls and abatement.
    Residential dwelling means:
    (1) A single-family dwelling, including attached structures such as 
porches and stoops; or
    (2) A single-family dwelling unit in a structure that contains more 
than one separate residential dwelling unit, and in which each such unit 
is used or occupied, or intended to be used or occupied, in whole or in 
part, as the residence of one or more persons.

[[Page 264]]

    Risk assessment means an on-site investigation to determine and 
report the existence, nature, severity, and location of lead-based paint 
hazards in residential dwellings, including:
    (1) Information gathering regarding the age and history of the 
housing and occupancy by children under age 6;
    (2) Visual inspection;
    (3) Limited wipe sampling or other environmental sampling 
techniques;
    (4) Other activity as may be appropriate; and
    (5) Provision of a report explaining the results of the 
investigation.
    Seller means any entity that transfers legal title to target 
housing, in whole or in part, in return for consideration, including but 
not limited to individuals, partnerships, corporations, trusts, 
government agencies, housing agencies, Indian tribes, and nonprofit 
organizations. The term ``seller'' also includes:
    (1) An entity that transfers shares in a cooperatively owned 
project, in return for consideration; and
    (2) An entity that transfers its interest in a leasehold, in 
jurisdictions or circumstances where it is legally permissible to 
separate the fee title from the title to the improvement, in return for 
consideration.
    Target housing means any housing constructed prior to 1978, except 
housing for the elderly or persons with disabilities (unless any child 
who is less than 6 years of age resides or is expected to reside in such 
housing) or any 0-bedroom dwelling.
    TSCA means the Toxic Substances Control Act, 15 U.S.C. 2601.
    0-bedroom dwelling means any residential dwelling in which the 
living area is not separated from the sleeping area. The term includes 
efficiencies, studio apartments, dormitory housing, military barracks, 
and rentals of individual rooms in residential dwellings.


<R05>
Sec. 35.88  Disclosure requirements for sellers and lessors.

    (a) The following activities shall be completed before the purchaser 
or lessee is obligated under any contract to purchase or lease target 
housing that is not otherwise an exempt transaction pursuant to 
Sec. 35.82. Nothing in this section implies a positive obligation on the 
seller or lessor to conduct any evaluation or reduction activities.
    (1) The seller or lessor shall provide the purchaser or lessee with 
an EPA-approved lead hazard information pamphlet. Such pamphlets include 
the EPA document entitled Protect Your Family From Lead in Your Home 
(EPA -747-K-94-001) or an equivalent pamphlet that has been approved for 
use in that State by EPA.
    (2) The seller or lessor shall disclose to the purchaser or lessee 
the presence of any known lead-based paint and/or lead-based paint 
hazards in the target housing being sold or leased. The seller or lessor 
shall also disclose any additional information available concerning the 
known lead-based paint and/or lead-based paint hazards, such as the 
basis for the determination that lead-based paint and/or lead-based 
paint hazards exist, the location of the lead-based paint and/or lead-
based paint hazards, and the condition of the painted surfaces.
    (3) The seller or lessor shall disclose to each agent the presence 
of any known lead-based paint and/or lead-based paint hazards in the 
target housing being sold or leased and the existence of any available 
records or reports pertaining to lead-based paint and/or lead-based 
paint hazards. The seller or lessor shall also disclose any additional 
information available concerning the known lead-based paint and/or lead-
based paint hazards, such as the basis for the determination that lead-
based paint and/or lead-based paint hazards exist, the location of the 
lead-based paint and/or lead-based paint hazards, and the condition of 
the painted surfaces.
    (4) The seller or lessor shall provide the purchaser or lessee with 
any records or reports available to the seller or lessor pertaining to 
lead-based paint and/or lead-based paint hazards in the target housing 
being sold or leased. This requirement includes records and reports 
regarding common areas. This requirement also includes records and 
reports regarding other residential dwellings in multifamily target 
housing, provided that such information is part of an evaluation or 
reduction of lead-based paint and/or

[[Page 265]]

lead-based paint hazards in the target housing as a whole.
    (b) If any of the disclosure activities identified in paragraph (a) 
of this section occurs after the purchaser or lessee has provided an 
offer to purchase or lease the housing, the seller or lessor shall 
complete the required disclosure activities prior to accepting the 
purchaser's or lessee's offer and allow the purchaser or lessee an 
opportunity to review the information and possibly amend the offer.

(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 
2070-0151)

[61 FR 9082, Mar. 6, 1996, as amended at 64 FR 14382, Mar. 25, 1999]


<R05>
Sec. 35.90  Opportunity to conduct an evaluation.

    (a) Before a purchaser is obligated under any contract to purchase 
target housing, the seller shall permit the purchaser a 10-day period 
(unless the parties mutually agree, in writing, upon a different period 
of time) to conduct a risk assessment or inspection for the presence of 
lead-based paint and/or lead-based paint hazards.
    (b) Notwithstanding paragraph (a) of this section, a purchaser may 
waive the opportunity to conduct the risk assessment or inspection by so 
indicating in writing.

(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 
2070-0151)

[61 FR 9082, Mar. 6, 1996, as amended at 64 FR 14382, Mar. 25, 1999]


<R05>
Sec. 35.92  Certification and acknowledgment of disclosure.

    (a) Seller requirements. Each contract to sell target housing shall 
include an attachment containing the following elements, in the language 
of the contract (e.g., English, Spanish):
    (1) A Lead Warning Statement consisting of the following language:

    Every purchaser of any interest in residential real property on 
which a residential dwelling was built prior to 1978 is notified that 
such property may present exposure to lead from lead-based paint that 
may place young children at risk of developing lead poisoning. Lead 
poisoning in young children may produce permanent neurological damage, 
including learning disabilities, reduced intelligence quotient, 
behavioral problems, and impaired memory. Lead poisoning also poses a 
particular risk to pregnant women. The seller of any interest in 
residential real property is required to provide the buyer with any 
information on lead-based paint hazards from risk assessments or 
inspections in the seller's possession and notify the buyer of any known 
lead-based paint hazards. A risk assessment or inspection for possible 
lead-based paint hazards is recommended prior to purchase.

    (2) A statement by the seller disclosing the presence of known lead-
based paint and/or lead-based paint hazards in the target housing being 
sold or indicating no knowledge of the presence of lead-based paint and/
or lead-based paint hazards. The seller shall also provide any 
additional information available concerning the known lead-based paint 
and/or lead-based paint hazards, such as the basis for the determination 
that lead-based paint and/or lead-based paint hazards exist, the 
location of the lead-based paint and/or lead-based paint hazards, and 
the condition of the painted surfaces.
    (3) A list of any records or reports available to the seller 
pertaining to lead-based paint and/or lead-based paint hazards in the 
housing that have been provided to the purchaser. If no such records or 
reports are available, the seller shall so indicate.
    (4) A statement by the purchaser affirming receipt of the 
information set out in paragraphs (a)(2) and (a)(3) of this section and 
the lead hazard information pamphlet required under section 15 U.S.C. 
2696.
    (5) A statement by the purchaser that he/she has either:
    (i) Received the opportunity to conduct the risk assessment or 
inspection required by Sec. 35.90(a); or
    (ii) Waived the opportunity.
    (6) When any agent is involved in the transaction to sell target 
housing on behalf of the seller, a statement that:
    (i) The agent has informed the seller of the seller's obligations 
under 42 U.S.C. 4852d; and
    (ii) The agent is aware of his/her duty to ensure compliance with 
the requirements of this subpart.
    (7) The signatures of the sellers, agents, and purchasers, 
certifying to the accuracy of their statements, to the best of their 
knowledge, along with the dates of signature.

[[Page 266]]

    (b) Lessor requirements. Each contract to lease target housing shall 
include, as an attachment or within the contract, the following 
elements, in the language of the contract (e.g., English, Spanish):
    (1) A Lead Warning Statement with the following language:

    Housing built before 1978 may contain lead-based paint. Lead from 
paint, paint chips, and dust can pose health hazards if not managed 
properly. Lead exposure is especially harmful to young children and 
pregnant women. Before renting pre-1978 housing, lessors must disclose 
the presence of lead-based paint and/or lead-based paint hazards in the 
dwelling. Lessees must also receive a federally approved pamphlet on 
lead poisoning prevention.

    (2) A statement by the lessor disclosing the presence of known lead-
based paint and/or lead-based paint hazards in the target housing being 
leased or indicating no knowledge of the presence of lead-based paint 
and/or lead-based paint hazards. The lessor shall also disclose any 
additional information available concerning the known lead-based paint 
and/or lead-based paint hazards, such as the basis for the determination 
that lead-based paint and/or lead-based paint hazards exist in the 
housing, the location of the lead-based paint and/or lead-based paint 
hazards, and the condition of the painted surfaces.
    (3) A list of any records or reports available to the lessor 
pertaining to lead-based paint and/or lead-based paint hazards in the 
housing that have been provided to the lessee. If no such records or 
reports are available, the lessor shall so indicate.
    (4) A statement by the lessee affirming receipt of the information 
set out in paragraphs (b)(2) and (b)(3) of this section and the lead 
hazard information pamphlet required under 15 U.S.C. 2696.
    (5) When any agent is involved in the transaction to lease target 
housing on behalf of the lessor, a statement that:
    (i) The agent has informed the lessor of the lessor's obligations 
under 42 U.S.C. 4852d; and
    (ii) The agent is aware of his/her duty to ensure compliance with 
the requirements of this subpart.
    (6) The signatures of the lessors, agents, and lessees certifying to 
the accuracy of their statements to the best of their knowledge, along 
with the dates of signature.
    (c) Retention of certification and acknowledgment information. (1) 
The seller, and any agent, shall retain a copy of the completed 
attachment required under paragraph (a) of this section for no less than 
3 years from the completion date of the sale. The lessor, and any agent, 
shall retain a copy of the completed attachment or lease contract 
containing the information required under paragraph (b) of this section 
for no less than 3 years from the commencement of the leasing period.
    (2) This recordkeeping requirement is not intended to place any 
limitations on civil suits under the Act, or to otherwise affect a 
lessee's or purchaser's rights under the civil penalty provisions of 42 
U.S.C. 4852d(b)(3).
    (d) The seller, lessor, or agent shall not be responsible for the 
failure of a purchaser's or lessee's legal representative (where such 
representative receives all compensation from the purchaser or lessee) 
to transmit disclosure materials to the purchaser or lessee, provided 
that all required parties have completed and signed the necessary 
certification and acknowledgment language required under paragraphs (a) 
and (b) of this section.

(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 
2070-0151)

[61 FR 9082, Mar. 6, 1996, as amended at 64 FR 14382, Mar. 25, 1999]


<R05>
Sec. 35.94  Agent responsibilities.

    (a) Each agent shall ensure compliance with all requirements of this 
subpart. To ensure compliance, the agent shall:
    (1) Inform the seller or lessor of his/her obligations under 
Secs. 35.88, 35.90, and 35.92.
    (2) Ensure that the seller or lessor has performed all activities 
required under Secs. 35.88, 35.90, and 35.92, or personally ensure 
compliance with the requirements of Secs. 35.88, 35.90, and 35.92.
    (b) If the agent has complied with paragraph (a)(1) of this section, 
the agent shall not be liable for the failure to disclose to a purchaser 
or lessee the presence of lead-based paint and/or

[[Page 267]]

lead-based paint hazards known by a seller or lessor but not disclosed 
to the agent.

(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 
2070-0151)

[61 FR 9082, Mar. 6, 1996, as amended at 64 FR 14382, Mar. 25, 1999]


<R05>
Sec. 35.96  Enforcement.

    (a) Any person who knowingly fails to comply with any provision of 
this subpart shall be subject to civil monetary penalties in accordance 
with the provisions of 42 U.S.C. 3545 and 24 CFR part 30.
    (b) The Secretary is authorized to take such action as may be 
necessary to enjoin any violation of this subpart in the appropriate 
Federal district court.
    (c) Any person who knowingly violates the provisions of this subpart 
shall be jointly and severally liable to the purchaser or lessee in an 
amount equal to 3 times the amount of damages incurred by such 
individual.
    (d) In any civil action brought for damages pursuant to 42 U.S.C. 
4852d(b)(3), the appropriate court may award court costs to the party 
commencing such action, together with reasonable attorney fees and any 
expert witness fees, if that party prevails.
    (e) Failure or refusal to comply with Secs. 35.88 (disclosure 
requirements for sellers and lessors), Sec. 35.90 (opportunity to 
conduct an evaluation), Sec. 35.92 (certification and acknowledgment of 
disclosure), or Sec. 35.94 (agent responsibilities) is a violation of 42 
U.S.C. 4852d(b)(5) and of TSCA section 409 (15 U.S.C. 2689).
    (f) Violators may be subject to civil and criminal sanctions 
pursuant to TSCA section 16 (15 U.S.C. 2615) for each violation. For 
purposes of enforcing this subpart, the penalty for each violation 
applicable under 15 U.S.C. 2615 shall be not more than $10,000.


<R05>
Sec. 35.98  Impact on State and local requirements.

    Nothing in this subpart shall relieve a seller, lessor, or agent 
from any responsibility for compliance with State or local laws, 
ordinances, codes, or regulations governing notice or disclosure of 
known lead-based paint and/or lead-based paint hazards. Neither HUD nor 
EPA assumes any responsibility for ensuring compliance with such State 
or local requirements.


<R03>
PART 40--ACCESSIBILITY STANDARDS FOR DESIGN, CONSTRUCTION, AND ALTERATION OF PUBLICLY OWNED RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURES--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
40.1  Purpose.
40.2  Definition of ``residential structure''.
40.3  Applicability.
40.4  Standards.
40.5  [Reserved]
40.6  Records.
40.7  Availability of Accessibility Standards.

    Authority: 42 U.S.C. 3535(d), 4153.

    Source: 36 FR 24437, Dec. 22, 1971, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 40.1  Purpose.

    This part prescribes standards for the design, construction, and 
alteration of publicly owned residential structures to insure that 
physically handicapped persons will have ready access to, and use of, 
such structures.


<R05>
Sec. 40.2  Definition of ``residential structure''.

    (a) As used in this part, the term residential structure means a 
residential structure (other than a privately owned residential 
structure and a residential structure on a military reservation):
    (1) Constructed or altered by or on behalf of the United States;
    (2) Leased in whole or in part by the United States after August 12, 
1968, if constructed or altered in accordance with plans and 
specifications of the United States; or
    (3) Financed in whole or in part by a grant or loan made by the 
United States after August 12, 1968, if such residential structure is 
subject to standards for design, construction, or alteration issued 
under authority of the law authorizing such grant or loan.
    (b) As used in this part, residential structure includes the 
following:
    (1) Any residential structure which, in whole or in part, is 
intended for occupancy by the physically handicapped or designed for 
occupancy by the elderly;

[[Page 268]]

    (2) All elevator residential structures;
    (3) Any residential structure that contains 15 or more housing 
units, unless otherwise specifically prescribed by the Uniform Federal 
Accessibility Standards contained in appendix A to this part.
    (4) Nonresidential structures appurtenant to a residential structure 
covered under this part.

[36 FR 24437, Dec. 22, 1971, as amended at 49 FR 31620, Aug. 7, 1984]


<R05>
Sec. 40.3  Applicability.

    (a) The standards prescribed in Sec. 40.4 are applicable to 
residential structures designed after the effective date of this part. 
If the design of a structure commenced prior to that date, the standards 
shall be made applicable to the maximum extent practicable, as 
determined by the head of the department, agency, or instrumentality of 
the United States concerned. If no design stage is involved in the 
construction or alteration of a residential structure, the standards of 
Sec. 40.4 shall be applicable to construction or alteration for which 
bids are solicited after the effective date of this part.
    (b) The standards prescribed in Sec. 40.4 are not applicable to:
    (1) Any portion of a residential structure or its grounds which need 
not, because of its intended use, be made accessible to, or usable by, 
the public or by physically handicapped persons;
    (2) The alteration of an existing residential structure to the 
extent that the alteration does not involve work which is related to the 
standards of this part; or
    (3) The alteration of an existing building, or of such portions 
thereof, to which application of the standards is not structurally 
feasible.


<R05>
Sec. 40.4  Standards.

    Residential structures subject to this part shall be designed, 
constructed or altered to ensure that physically handicapped persons 
have access to, and use of, these structures. This requirement is 
satisfied by using the specifications contained in appendix A to this 
part, the Uniform Federal Accessibility Standards (UFAS).

[49 FR 31621, Aug. 7, 1984]


<R05>
Sec. 40.5  [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 40.6  Records.

    The administering agency's file on each contract, grant, or loan 
involving the design, construction, or alteration of a residential 
structure shall include appropriate documentation indicating: (a) That 
the standards prescribed in Sec. 40.4 are applicable to and have been or 
will be incorporated in the residential structure, or (b) that the grant 
or loan has been or will be made subject to the requirement that the 
standards are applicable and will be incorporated in the residential 
structure. The file should also indicate any modification or waiver of 
the standards which has been issued by the Secretary of HUD.


<R05>
Sec. 40.7  Availability of Accessibility Standards.

    Copies of the Uniform Federal Accessibility Standards are available 
from the Office of Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity, U.S. Department 
of Housing and Urban Development, Room 5230, 451 Seventh Street, SW., 
Washington, DC 20410, telephone (202) 755-5404 (this is not a toll-free 
number). Hearing or speech-impaired individuals may call HUD's TDD 
number (202) 708-0113 or 1-800-877-8399 (Federal Information Relay 
Service TDD). (Other than the ``800'' number, these are not toll-free 
numbers.)

[61 FR 5204, Feb. 9, 1996]


<R03>
PART 41--POLICIES AND PROCEDURES FOR THE ENFORCEMENT OF STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS FOR ACCESSIBILITY BY THE PHYSICALLY HANDICAPPED--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
41.1  Applicability.
41.2  Definitions.
41.3  Assurance and declaration required.
41.4  Waiver or modification of standards.
41.5  Achieving compliance.
41.6  Matters involving the Architectural and Transportation Barriers 
          Compliance Board.


[[Page 269]]


    Authority: Architectural Barriers Act of 1968, as amended by Pub. L. 
90-480, 42 U.S.C. 4151 et seq.

    Source: 44 FR 62806, Oct. 31, 1979, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 41.1  Applicability.

    This part sets forth policies and procedures for the enforcement of 
standards and requirements for accessibility by the physically 
handicapped imposed:
    (a) For nonresidential buildings or facilities by regulations issued 
by the General Services Administration at subchapter D of the Federal 
Property Management Regulations, subpart 101-19.6--Accommodations for 
the Physically Handicapped, or
    (b) By regulation or contract under any other program of the 
Department, except a program subject only to standards or requirements 
at 24 CFR part 8 imposed pursuant to section 504 of the Rehabilitation 
Act of 1973.

The policies and procedures of this part shall apply after the effective 
date of these regulations to all complaints received, and/or findings of 
noncompliance made, regarding buildings or facilities subject to such 
regulatory or contractural requirements.


<R05>
Sec. 41.2  Definitions.

    As used in this part, the term Secretary means the Secretary of 
Housing and Urban Development, or to the extent of any delegation of 
authority by the Secretary to act under this part, any other Department 
Official to whom authority has been delegated.


<R05>
Sec. 41.3  Assurance and declaration required.

    (a) Each Assistant Secretary shall, as a condition for approval of 
any contract or application for assistance under a program imposing 
standards and/or requirements for accessibility which are subject to 
this part, require an assurance of compliance with those standards and 
requirements. Such assurance shall be in a form acceptable to the 
Secretary.
    (b) For each project covered under this part, except a project 
subject to Departmental examinations and inspections as set forth in 
Sec. 41.5(a), the responsible Assistant Secretary shall require a 
declaration as to project drawings, specifications, and other 
construction documents. The declaration shall be signed by the licensed, 
or registered, architect or engineer, or by such other responsible 
official as designated by HUD, who has prepared such construction 
documents. The declaration shall affirm that the proposed project, to 
the best knowledge and belief of the declarer, conforms to applicable 
accessibility design standards and requirements. The declaration 
statement shall be in a form acceptable to the Secretary.


<R05>
Sec. 41.4  Waiver or modification of standards.

    (a) The applicability of standards and requirements for 
accessibility by the physically handicapped may be waived or modified on 
a case-by-case basis upon a written request from a recipient of a 
Departmental grant or loan or from a Departmental agency leasing a 
building or facility.
    (b) For residential buildings or facilities, a waiver or 
modification may be granted only by the Secretary.
    (c) Upon the recommendation of an Assistant Secretary, a waiver or 
modification for nonresidential buildings or facilities may be granted 
only by the Administrator, General Services Administration.
    (d) No request for a waiver or modification shall be recommended for 
approval by an Assistant Secretary or approved by the Secretary unless 
the following criteria obtain:
    (1) The granting of the waiver or modification is based upon 
findings of fact, and is not inconsistent with the provisions of the 
Architectural Barriers Act, and
    (2) Application of the requirement or standard would adversely 
affect the purposes of the Departmental program under which the loan or 
grant is being provided or for which the building or facility is being 
leased.
    (e) Requests for a waiver or modification shall be submitted to the 
appropriate Assistant Secretary for review. Each request shall include:
    (1) The name and address of the requestor.
    (2) The name and location of the involved building or facility.

[[Page 270]]

    (3) Any applicable plans, drawings, specifications or other 
descriptions of the building or facility.
    (4) The standard provision or requirement from which the requestor 
seeks a waiver or modification.
    (5) A description of the building or facility as to its 
accessibility for the physically handicapped and how the waiving or 
modification of a standard or requirement would affect that 
accessibility.
    (6) A statement of the facts which establish that the criteria of 
paragraph (d) of this section would be satisfied.
    (7) A description of the steps taken, or to be taken, to comply with 
standards and requirements for which a waiver or modification is not 
being requested.
    (8) Such other information as the requestor or the responsible 
Assistant Secretary deems appropriate or necessary.
    (f) If the responsible Assistant Secretary finds that the criteria 
of paragraph (d) of this section are satisfied, then he or she shall 
submit the request along with his or her recommendations to the 
Secretary for action or for referral to the Administrator, General 
Services Administration for action. In reviewing request for waiver and 
modifications, the Secretary shall assure consistent Department policy 
regarding the removal of architectural barriers and accessibility by 
physically handicapped persons.
    (g) All waivers and modifications granted pursuant to this part 
shall have only future effect on; and are limited to cases for which the 
request is made.


<R05>
Sec. 41.5  Achieving compliance.

    (a) Examinations and inspections. If, for any project, an Assistant 
Secretary requires Departmental architectural and engineering 
examinations of drawings and specifications or other construction 
documents or requires Departmental architectural and engineering 
inspections during or upon completion of construction, those 
examinations and inspections shall include a determination of compliance 
with standards and requirements for accessibility referenced in this 
part.
    (b) Periodic compliance reviews. The Secretary, in consultation with 
the appropriate Assistant Secretary, shall conduct surveys and 
investigations as deemed appropriate to achieve compliance with 
standards or requirements subject to this part.
    (c) Complaints. Any interested person who has reason to believe that 
there has been noncompliance with standards or requirements subject to 
this part, may, by himself or herself, or by a representative, file a 
written complaint with the responsible Department Official or with the 
Architectural and Transportation Barriers Compliance Board, Washington, 
DC 20201.
    (d) Investigations. The Secretary shall, after consultation with the 
appropriate Assistant Secretary, make a prompt investigation whenever a 
compliance review, report, complaint, or any other information indicates 
a possible failure to comply with standards or requirements subject to 
this part. The investigation should include a determination of the 
authority under which the standards or requirements were imposed and, 
where appropriate, a review of the records kept pursuant to 24 CFR 40.6; 
the circumstances under which the building of facility was designed, 
constructed or altered; and other factors relevant to a determination as 
to whether there has been noncompliance with this part.
    (e) Resolution of matters. (1) If any examination, inspection, 
periodic compliance review, complaint, or investigation pursuant to this 
section indicates a failure to comply with the applicable standards or 
requirements, the Secretary shall attempt to gain voluntary compliance 
whenever possible.
    (2) If it has been determined that voluntary compliance cannot be 
achieved, the Secretary shall refer the matter to the appropriate 
Assistant Secretary for action pursuant to his or her program authority 
regarding the residential structure or other building or facility under 
investigation, to achieve compliance with the requirements subject to 
this part. The Assistant Secretary shall report to the Secretary within 
30 days of the date of such referral regarding the action taken and the 
schedule and means of achieving compliance, except that the Secretary 
may specify a

[[Page 271]]

shorter or longer reporting period, as deeded appropriate.
    (f) Disposition of unresolved complaints. Unresolved complaints 
shall be referred to the Architectural and Transportation Barriers 
Compliance Board to be processed in accordance with 36 CFR part 1150. A 
complaint shall be deemed unresolved if it is not resolved within 90 
days of the date of the filing of the complaint with the Department.
    (g) Compliance action by other individuals. Individuals other than 
the Secretary may receive complaints and undertake other appropriate 
actions to achieve compliance with requirements subject to this part, so 
long as initial notification of such complaints or proposed actions is 
given both to the Secretary and the appropriate Assistant Secretary.


<R05>
Sec. 41.6  Matters involving the Architectural and Transportation Barriers Compliance Board.

    (a) Complaints. With respect to any complaint referred to the 
responsible Department Official by the Architectural and Transportation 
Barriers Compliance Board (A&TBCB), the procedures set forth in this 
part shall apply. In such a case, the Secretary shall coordinate all 
investigations and/or other compliance actions to assure that the 
Department resolves any architectural barriers deficiencies so as to 
respond to the A&TBCB within its required 60-day period set forth at 36 
CFR 1150.41 for the informal resolution of complaints.
    (b) Citations. The Office of General Counsel shall, with the 
assistance of the appropriate Assistant Secretary, respond to any 
citation issued by the A&TBCB to the Department alleging noncompliance 
with the standards issued pursuant to the Architectural Barriers Act of 
1968, as amended. The applicable procedures regarding such a citation 
are set forth at 36 CFR part 1150.


<R03>
PART 42--DISPLACEMENT, RELOCATION ASSISTANCE, AND REAL PROPERTY ACQUISITION FOR HUD AND HUD-ASSISTED PROGRAMS--Table of Contents

<R05>


                           Subpart A--General

Sec.
42.1  Applicable rules.

                          Subpart B [Reserved]

 Subpart C--Requirements Under Section 104(d) of Housing and Community 
                         Development Act of 1974

42.301  Applicability.
42.305  Definitions.
42.325  Residential antidisplacement and relocation assistance plan.
42.350  Relocation assistance for displaced persons.
42.375  One-for-one replacement of lower-income dwelling units.
42.390  Appeals.

    Authority: 42 U.S.C. 3535(d), 4601, 5304, and 12705(b).

    Source: 61 FR 51757, Oct. 3, 1996, unless otherwise noted.


<R04>
                           Subpart A--General


<R05>
Sec. 42.1  Applicable rules.

    (a) URA. HUD-assisted programs and projects are subject to the 
Uniform Relocation Assistance and Real Property Acquisition Policies Act 
of 1970, 42 U.S.C. 4601 (URA) (42 U.S.C. 4601), and implementing 
regulations issued by the Department of Transportation at 49 CFR part 
24.
    (b) Section 104(d). In addition to the URA, the Community 
Development Block Grant (CDBG), Urban Development Action Grant (UDAG), 
and HOME Investment Partnerships (HOME) programs are also subject to 
section 104(d) of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974 (42 
U.S.C. 5304(d)). The provisions applicable to these programs are set out 
in subpart C of this part.
    (c) Additional requirements. Applicable program regulations may 
contain additional relocation provisions.

[[Page 272]]


<R04>
                          Subpart B [Reserved]


<R04>
 Subpart C--Requirements Under Section 104(d) of Housing and Community 
                         Development Act of 1974


<R05>
Sec. 42.301  Applicability.

    This subpart applies only to CDBG grants under 24 CFR part 570, 
subparts D, F, and I (Entitlement grants, HUD-Administered Small Cities, 
and State programs); grants under 24 CFR part 570, subpart G (Urban 
Development Action Grants), and Loan Guarantees under 24 CFR part 570, 
subpart M; and assistance to State and local governments under 24 CFR 
part 92 (HOME program).


<R05>
Sec. 42.305  Definitions.

    The terms Fair Market Rent (FMR), HUD, Section 8, and Uniform 
Relocation Act (URA) are defined in part 5 of this title. Otherwise, as 
used in this subpart:
    Comparable replacement dwelling unit means a dwelling unit that:
    (1) Meets the criteria of 49 CFR 24.2(d)(1) through (6); and
    (2) Is available at a monthly cost for rent plus estimated average 
monthly utility costs that does not exceed the ``Total Tenant Payment'' 
determined under Sec. 813.107 of this title, after taking into account 
any rental assistance the household would receive.
    Conversion. (1) This term means altering a housing unit so that it 
is:
    (i) Used for nonhousing purposes;
    (ii) Used for housing purposes, but no longer meets the definition 
of lower-income dwelling unit; or
    (iii) Used as an emergency shelter.
    (2) A housing unit that continues to be used for housing after 
completion of the project is not considered a ``conversion'' if, upon 
completion of the project, the unit is owned and occupied by a person 
who owned and occupied the unit before the project.
    Displaced person means a lower-income person who, in connection with 
an activity assisted under any program subject to this subpart, 
permanently moves from real property or permanently moves personal 
property from real property as a direct result of the demolition or 
conversion of a lower-income dwelling. For purposes of this definition, 
a permanent move includes a move made permanently and:
    (1) After notice by the grantee to move from the property following 
initial submission to HUD of the consolidated plan required of 
entitlement grantees pursuant to Sec. 570.302; of an application for 
assistance pursuant to Secs. 570.426, 570.430, or 570.465 that is 
thereafter approved; or an application for loan assistance under 
Sec. 570.701 that is thereafter approved;
    (2) After notice by the property owner to move from the property, 
following the submission of a request for financial assistance by the 
property owner (or other person in control of the site) that is 
thereafter approved; or
    (3) Before the dates described in this definition, if HUD or the 
grantee determine that the displacement was a direct result of 
conversion or demolition in connection with an activity subject to this 
subpart for which financial assistance has been requested and is 
thereafter approved.
    HCD Act of 1974 means the Housing and Community Development Act of 
1974 (42 U.S.C. 5301 et seq.).
    Lower-income dwelling unit means a dwelling unit with a market rent 
(including utility costs) that does not exceed the applicable Fair 
Market Rent (FMR) for existing housing established under 24 CFR part 
888.
    Lower-income person means, as appropriate, a ``low and moderate 
income person'' as that term is defined in Sec. 570.3 of this title, or 
a ``low-income family'' as that term is defined in Sec. 92.2 of this 
title.
    Recipient means CDBG grantee, UDAG grantee, or the HOME 
participating jurisdiction.
    Standard condition and substandard condition suitable for 
rehabilitation have the meaning the recipient has established for those 
terms in its HUD-approved consolidated plan pursuant to 24 CFR part 91. 
In the case of a unit of general local government funded by a State, 
either the State's definitions for those terms or the definitions 
adopted by the unit of general local government for this purpose shall 
apply.
    Vacant occupiable dwelling unit means a vacant dwelling unit that is 
in a

[[Page 273]]

standard condition; a vacant dwelling unit that is in a substandard 
condition, but is suitable for rehabilitation; or a dwelling unit in any 
condition that has been occupied (except by a squatter) at any time 
within the period beginning 3 months before the date of execution of the 
agreement by the recipient covering the rehabilitation or demolition.


<R05>
Sec. 42.325  Residential antidisplacement and relocation assistance plan.

    (a) Certification. (1) As part of its consolidated plan under 24 CFR 
part 91, the recipient must certify that it has in effect and is 
following a residential antidisplacement and relocation assistance plan.
    (2) A unit of general local government receiving funds from the 
State must certify to the State that it has in effect and is following a 
residential antidisplacement and relocation assistance plan, and that it 
will minimize displacement of persons as a result of assisted 
activities. The State may require the unit of general local government 
to follow the State's plan or permit it to develop its own plan. A unit 
of general local government that develops its own plan must adopt the 
plan and make it public.
    (b) Plan contents. (1) The plan shall indicate the steps that will 
be taken consistent with other goals and objectives of the program, as 
provided in parts 92 and 570 of this title, to minimize the displacement 
of families and individuals from their homes and neighborhoods as a 
result of any assisted activities.
    (2) The plan shall provide for relocation assistance in accordance 
with Sec. 42.350.
    (3) The plan shall provide one-for-one replacement units to the 
extent required by Sec. 42.375.


<R05>
Sec. 42.350  Relocation assistance for displaced persons.

    A displaced person may choose to receive either assistance under the 
URA and implementing regulations at 49 CFR part 24 or assistance under 
section 104(d) of the HCD Act of 1974, including:
    (a) Advisory services. Advisory services at the levels described in 
49 CFR part 24. A displaced person must be advised of his or her rights 
under the Fair Housing Act (42 U.S.C. 3601-19). If the comparable 
replacement dwelling to be provided to a minority person is located in 
an area of minority concentration, as defined in the recipient's 
consolidated plan, if applicable, the minority person must also be 
given, if possible, referrals to comparable and suitable decent, safe, 
and sanitary replacement dwellings not located in such areas.
    (b) Moving expenses. Payment for moving expenses at the levels 
described in 49 CFR part 24.
    (c) Security deposits and credit checks. The reasonable and 
necessary cost of any security deposit required to rent the replacement 
dwelling unit, and for credit checks required to rent or purchase the 
replacement dwelling unit.
    (d) Interim living costs. The recipient shall reimburse a person for 
actual reasonable out-of-pocket costs incurred in connection with a 
displacement, including moving expenses and increased housing costs, if:
    (1) The person must relocate temporarily because continued occupancy 
of the dwelling unit constitutes a substantial danger to the health or 
safety of the person or the public; or
    (2) The person is displaced from a ``lower-income dwelling unit,'' 
none of the comparable replacement dwelling units to which the person 
has been referred qualifies as a lower-income dwelling unit, and a 
suitable lower-income dwelling unit is scheduled to become available in 
accordance with Sec. 42.375.
    (e) Replacement housing assistance. Persons are eligible to receive 
one of the following two forms of replacement housing assistance:
    (1) Each person must be offered rental assistance equal to 60 times 
the amount necessary to reduce the monthly rent and estimated average 
monthly cost of utilities for a replacement dwelling (comparable 
replacement dwelling or decent, safe, and sanitary replacement dwelling 
to which the person relocates, whichever costs less) to the ``Total 
Tenant Payment,'' as determined under part 813 of this title. All or a 
portion of this assistance may be offered through a certificate or 
voucher for rental assistance (if available) provided under Section 8. 
If a

[[Page 274]]

Section 8 certificate or voucher is provided to a person, the recipient 
must provide referrals to comparable replacement dwelling units where 
the owner is willing to participate in the Section 8 Tenant-Based 
Assistance Existing Housing Program (see part 982 of this title). When 
provided, cash assistance will generally be in installments, in 
accordance with 42 U.S.C. 3537c; or
    (2) If the person purchases an interest in a housing cooperative or 
mutual housing association and occupies a decent, safe, and sanitary 
dwelling in the cooperative or association, the person may elect to 
receive a payment equal to the capitalized value of 60 times the amount 
that is obtained by subtracting the ``Total Tenant Payment,'' as 
determined under part 813 of this title, from the monthly rent and 
estimated average monthly cost of utilities at a comparable replacement 
dwelling unit. To compute the capitalized value, the installments shall 
be discounted at the rate of interest paid on passbook savings deposits 
by a federally insured financial institution conducting business within 
the recipient's jurisdiction. To the extent necessary to minimize 
hardship to the household, the recipient shall, subject to appropriate 
safeguards, issue a payment in advance of the purchase of the interest 
in the housing cooperative or mutual housing association.


<R05>
Sec. 42.375  One-for-one replacement of lower-income dwelling units.

    (a) Units that must be replaced. All occupied and vacant occupiable 
lower-income dwelling units that are demolished or converted to a use 
other than as lower-income dwelling units in connection with an assisted 
activity must be replaced with comparable lower-income dwelling units.
    (b) Acceptable replacement units. Replacement lower-income dwelling 
units may be provided by any government agency or private developer and 
must meet the following requirements:
    (1) The units must be located within the recipient's jurisdiction. 
To the extent feasible and consistent with other statutory priorities, 
the units shall be located within the same neighborhood as the units 
replaced.
    (2) The units must be sufficient in number and size to house no 
fewer than the number of occupants who could have been housed in the 
units that are demolished or converted. The number of occupants who 
could have been housed in units shall be determined in accordance with 
applicable local housing occupancy codes. The recipient may not replace 
those units with smaller units (e.g., a 2-bedroom unit with two 1-
bedroom units), unless the recipient has provided the information 
required under paragraph (c)(7) of this section.
    (3) The units must be provided in standard condition. Replacement 
lower-income dwelling units may include units that have been raised to 
standard from substandard condition if:
    (i) No person was displaced from the unit (see definition of 
``displaced person'' in Sec. 42.305); and
    (ii) The unit was vacant for at least 3 months before execution of 
the agreement between the recipient and the property owner.
    (4) The units must initially be made available for occupancy at any 
time during the period beginning 1 year before the recipient makes 
public the information required under paragraph (d) of this section and 
ending 3 years after the commencement of the demolition or 
rehabilitation related to the conversion.
    (5) The units must be designed to remain lower-income dwelling units 
for at least 10 years from the date of initial occupancy. Replacement 
lower-income dwelling units may include, but are not limited to, public 
housing or existing housing receiving Section 8 project-based 
assistance.
    (c) Preliminary information to be made public. Before the recipient 
enters into a contract committing it to provide funds under programs 
covered by this subpart for any activity that will directly result in 
the demolition of lower-income dwelling units or the conversion of 
lower-income dwelling units to another use, the recipient must make 
public, and submit in writing to the HUD field office (or State, in the 
case of a unit of general local government funded by the State), the 
following information:

[[Page 275]]

    (1) A description of the proposed assisted activity;
    (2) The location on a map and number of dwelling units by size 
(number of bedrooms) that will be demolished or converted to a use other 
than for lower-income dwelling units as a direct result of the assisted 
activity;
    (3) A time schedule for the commencement and completion of the 
demolition or conversion;
    (4) The location on a map and the number of dwelling units by size 
(number of bedrooms) that will be provided as replacement dwelling 
units. If such data are not available at the time of the general 
submission, the submission shall identify the general location on an 
area map and the approximate number of dwelling units by size, and 
information identifying the specific location and number of dwelling 
units by size shall be submitted and disclosed to the public as soon as 
it is available;
    (5) The source of funding and a time schedule for the provision of 
replacement dwelling units;
    (6) The basis for concluding that each replacement dwelling unit 
will remain a lower-income dwelling unit for at least 10 years from the 
date of initial occupancy; and
    (7) Information demonstrating that any proposed replacement of 
dwelling units with smaller dwelling units (e.g., a 2-bedroom unit with 
two 1-bedroom units) is consistent with the needs assessment contained 
in its HUD-approved consolidated plan. A unit of general local 
government funded by the State that is not required to submit a 
consolidated plan to HUD must make public information demonstrating that 
the proposed replacement is consistent with the housing needs of lower-
income households in the jurisdiction.
    (d) Replacement not required. (1) In accordance with 42 U.S.C. 
5304(d)(3), the one-for-one replacement requirement of this section does 
not apply to the extent the HUD field office determines, based upon 
objective data, that there is an adequate supply of vacant lower-income 
dwelling units in standard condition available on a nondiscriminatory 
basis within the area.
    (2) The recipient must submit directly to the HUD field office the 
request for determination that the one-for-one replacement requirement 
does not apply. Simultaneously with the submission of the request, the 
recipient must make the submission public and inform interested persons 
that they have 30 days from the date of submission to provide to HUD 
additional information supporting or opposing the request.
    (3) A unit of general local government funded by the State must 
submit the request for determination under this paragraph to the State. 
Simultaneously with the submission of the request, the unit of general 
local government must make the submission public and inform interested 
persons that they have 30 days from the date of submission to provide to 
the State additional information supporting or opposing the request. If 
the State, after considering the submission and the additional data, 
agrees with the request, the State must provide its recommendation with 
supporting information to the field office.


<R05>
Sec. 42.390  Appeals.

    A person who disagrees with the recipient's determination concerning 
whether the person qualifies as a ``displaced person,'' or with the 
amount of relocation assistance for which the person is eligible, may 
file a written appeal of that determination with the recipient. A person 
who is dissatisfied with the recipient's determination on his or her 
appeal may submit a written request for review of that determination to 
the HUD field office (or to the State in the case of a unit of general 
local government funded by the State). If the full relief is not 
granted, the recipient shall advise the person of his or her right to 
seek judicial review.

                         PARTS 43-45 [RESERVED]


<R03>
PART 50--PROTECTION AND ENHANCEMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY--Table of Contents

<R05>


            Subpart A--General: Federal Laws and Authorities

Sec.
50.1  Purpose, authority, and applicability.
50.2  Terms and abbreviations.
50.3  Environmental policy.

[[Page 276]]

50.4  Related Federal laws and authorities.

    Subpart B--General Policy: Responsibilities and Program Coverage

50.10  Basic environmental responsibility.
50.11  Responsibility of the HUD approving official.

               Subpart C--General Policy: Decision Points

50.16  Decision points for policy actions.
50.17  Decision points for projects.

       Subpart D--General Policy: Environmental Review Procedures

50.18  General.
50.19  Categorical exclusions not subject to the Federal laws and 
          authorities cited in Sec. 50.4.
50.20  Categorical exclusions subject to the Federal laws and 
          authorities cited in Sec. 50.4.
50.21  Aggregation.
50.22  Environmental management and monitoring.
50.23  Public participation.
50.24  HUD review of another agency's EIS.

        Subpart E--Environmental Assessments and Related Reviews

50.31  The EA.
50.32  Responsibility for environmental processing.
50.33  Action resulting from the assessment.
50.34  Time delays for exceptional circumstances.
50.35  Use of prior environmental assessments.
50.36  Updating of environmental reviews.

               Subpart F--Environmental Impact Statements

50.41  EIS policy.
50.42  Cases when an EIS is required.
50.43  Emergencies.

    Authority: 42 U.S.C. 3535(d) and 4332; and Executive Order 11991, 3 
CFR, 1977 Comp., p. 123.

    Source: 61 FR 50916, Sept. 27, 1996, unless otherwise noted.


<R04>
            Subpart A--General: Federal Laws and Authorities


<R05>
Sec. 50.1  Purpose, authority, and applicability.

    (a) This part implements the policies of the National Environmental 
Policy Act (NEPA) and other environmental requirements (as specified in 
Sec. 50.4).
    (b) NEPA (42 U.S.C. 4321 et seq.), establishes national policy, 
goals and procedures for protecting, restoring and enhancing 
environmental quality. NEPA is implemented by Executive Order 11514 of 
March 5, 1970, (3 CFR, 1966--1970 Comp., p. 902) as amended by Executive 
Order 11991 of May 24, 1977, (3 CFR, 1977 Comp., p. 123) and by the 
Council on Environmental Quality (CEQ) Regulations, 40 CFR parts 1500-
1508.
    (c) The regulations issued by CEQ at 40 CFR parts 1500-1508 
establish the basic procedural requirements for compliance with NEPA. 
These procedures are to be followed by all Federal agencies and are 
incorporated by reference into this part. This part, therefore, provides 
supplemental instructions to reflect the particular nature of HUD 
programs, and is to be used in tandem with 40 CFR parts 1500-1508 and 
regulations that implement authorities cited at Sec. 50.4.
    (d) These regulations apply to all HUD policy actions (as defined in 
Sec. 50.16), and to all HUD project actions (see Sec. 50.2(a)(2)). Also, 
they apply to projects and activities carried out by recipients subject 
to environmental policy and procedures of 24 CFR part 58, when the 
recipient that is regulated under 24 CFR part 58 claims the lack of 
legal capacity to assume the Secretary's environmental review 
responsibilities and the claim is approved by HUD or when HUD determines 
to conduct an environmental review itself in place of a nonrecipient 
responsible entity. For programs, activities or actions not specifically 
identified or when there are questions regarding the applicability of 
this part, the Assistant Secretary for Community Planning and 
Development shall be consulted.


<R05>
Sec. 50.2  Terms and abbreviations.

    (a) The definitions for most of the key terms or phrases contained 
in this part appear in 40 CFR part 1508 and in the authorities cited in 
Sec. 50.4.
    The following definitions also apply to this part:
    Environmental review means a process for complying with NEPA 
(through an EA or EIS) and/or with the laws and authorities cited in 
Sec. 50.4.

[[Page 277]]

    HUD approving official means the HUD official authorized to make the 
approval decision for any proposed policy or project subject to this 
part.
    Project means an activity, or a group of integrally-related 
activities, undertaken directly by HUD or proposed for HUD assistance or 
insurance.
    (b) The following abbreviations are used throughout this part:
    AS/CPD--Assistant Secretary for Community Planning and Development.
    CEQ--Council on Environmental Quality
    EA--Environmental Assessment
    EIS--Environmental Impact Statement
    FONSI--Finding of No Significant Impact
    HUD--Department of Housing and Urban Development
    NEPA--National Environmental Policy Act
    NOI/EIS--Notice of Intent to Prepare an Environmental Impact 
Statement


<R05>
Sec. 50.3  Environmental policy.

    (a) It is the policy of the Department to reject proposals which 
have significant adverse environmental impacts and to encourage the 
modification of projects in order to enhance environmental quality and 
minimize environmental harm.
    (b) The HUD approving official shall consider environmental and 
other Departmental objectives in the decisionmaking process.
    (c) When EA's or EIS's or reviews under Sec. 50.4 reveal conditions 
or safeguards that should be implemented once a proposal is approved in 
order to protect and enhance environmental quality or minimize adverse 
environmental impacts, such conditions or safeguards must be included in 
agreements or other relevant documents.
    (d) A systematic, interdisciplinary approach shall be used to assure 
the integrated use of the natural and social sciences and the 
environmental design arts in making decisions.
    (e) Environmental impacts shall be evaluated on as comprehensive a 
scale as is practicable.
    (f) HUD offices shall begin the environmental review process at the 
earliest possible time so that potential conflicts between program 
procedures and environmental requirements are identified at an early 
stage.
    (g) Applicants for HUD assistance shall be advised of environmental 
requirements and consultation with governmental agencies and individuals 
shall take place at the earliest time feasible.
    (h) For HUD grant programs in which the funding approval for an 
applicant's program must occur before the applicant's selection of 
properties, the application shall contain an assurance that the 
applicant agrees to assist HUD to comply with this part and that the 
applicant shall:
    (1) Supply HUD with all available, relevant information necessary 
for HUD to perform for each property any environmental review required 
by this part;
    (2) Carry out mitigating measures required by HUD or select 
alternate eligible property; and
    (3) Not acquire, rehabilitate, convert, lease, repair or construct 
property, nor commit or expend HUD or local funds for these program 
activities with respect to any eligible property, until HUD approval of 
the property is received.
    (i)(1) It is HUD policy that all property proposed for use in HUD 
programs be free of hazardous materials, contamination, toxic chemicals 
and gasses, and radioactive substances, where a hazard could affect the 
health and safety of occupants or conflict with the intended utilization 
of the property.
    (2) HUD environmental review of multifamily and non-residential 
properties shall include evaluation of previous uses of the site and 
other evidence of contamination on or near the site, to assure that 
occupants of proposed sites are not adversely affected by the hazards 
listed in paragraph (i)(1) of this section.
    (3) Particular attention should be given to any proposed site on or 
in the general proximity of such areas as dumps, landfills, industrial 
sites or other locations that contain hazardous wastes.
    (4) HUD shall require the use of current techniques by qualified 
professionals to undertake investigations determined necessary.

[[Page 278]]


<R05>
Sec. 50.4  Related Federal laws and authorities.

    HUD and/or applicants must comply, where applicable, with all 
environmental requirements, guidelines and statutory obligations under 
the following authorities and HUD standards:
    (a) Historic properties. (1) The National Historic Preservation Act 
of 1966 (16 U.S.C. 470 et seq.), as amended.
    (2) Executive Order 11593, Protection and Enhancement of the 
Cultural Environment, May 13, 1971 (3 CFR, 1971--1975 Comp., p. 559).
    (3) The Archaeological and Historic Preservation Act of 1974, which 
amends the Reservoir Salvage Act of 1960 (16 U.S.C. 469 et seq.).
    (4) Procedures for the Protection of Historic and Cultural 
Properties (Advisory Council on Historic Preservation--36 CFR part 800).
    (b) Flood insurance, floodplain management and wetland protection. 
(1) Flood Disaster Protection Act of 1973 (42 U.S.C. 4001-4128) and the 
National Flood Insurance Reform Act of 1994 (Pub.L. 103-325, 108 Stat. 
2160).
    (2) HUD Procedure for the Implementation of Executive Order 11988 (3 
CFR, 1977 Comp., p. 117)--24 CFR part 55, Floodplain Management.
    (3) Executive Order 11990 (Protection of Wetlands), (3 CFR, 1977 
Comp., p. 121).
    (c) Coastal areas protection and management. (1) The Coastal Barrier 
Resources Act, as amended by the Coastal Barrier Improvement Act of 1990 
(16 U.S.C. 3501 et seq.).
    (2) The Coastal Zone Management Act of 1972 (16 U.S.C. 1451 et 
seq.), as amended.
    (d) Sole source aquifers. The Safe Drinking Water Act of 1974 (42 
U.S.C. 201, 300 et seq., and 21 U.S.C. 349), as amended. (See 40 CFR 
part 149.)
    (e) Endangered species. The Endangered Species Act of 1973 (16 
U.S.C. 1531 et seq.), as amended. (See 50 CFR part 402.)
    (f) Wild and scenic rivers. The Wild and Scenic Rivers Act (16 U.S.C 
1271 et seq.), as amended.
    (g) Water quality. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as 
amended by the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972 
(33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq.), and later enactments.
    (h) Air quality. The Clean Air Act (42 U.S.C. 7401 et seq.), as 
amended. (See 40 CFR parts 6, 51, and 93.)
    (i) Solid waste management. (1) The Solid Waste Disposal Act, as 
amended by the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 (42 U.S.C. 
6901 et seq.), and later enactments.
    (2) The Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and 
Liability Act of 1980 (42 U.S.C. 9601 et seq.), as amended.
    (j) Farmlands protection. The Farmland Protection Policy Act of 1981 
(7 U.S.C. 4201 et seq.), as amended. (See 7 CFR part 658.)
    (k) HUD environmental standards. Applicable criteria and standards 
specified in HUD environmental regulations (24 CFR part 51).
    (l) Environmental justice. Executive Order 12898--Federal Actions to 
Address Environmental Justice in Minority Populations and Low-Income 
Populations (3 CFR, 1994 Comp., p. 859).


<R04>
    Subpart B--General Policy: Responsibilities and Program Coverage


<R05>
Sec. 50.10  Basic environmental responsibility.

    (a) It is the responsibility of all Assistant Secretaries, the 
General Counsel, and the HUD approving official to assure that the 
requirements of this part are implemented.
    (b) The Assistant Secretary for Community Planning and Development 
(A/S CPD), represented by the Office of Community Viability, whose 
Director shall serve as the Departmental Environmental Clearance Officer 
(DECO), is assigned the overall Departmental responsibility for 
environmental policies and procedures for compliance with NEPA and the 
related laws and authorities. To the extent permitted by applicable laws 
and the CEQ regulations, the A/S CPD shall approve waivers and 
exceptions or establish criteria for exceptions from the requirements of 
this part.


<R05>
Sec. 50.11  Responsibility of the HUD approving official.

    (a) The HUD approving official shall make an independent evaluation 
of the

[[Page 279]]

environmental issues, take responsibility for the scope and content of 
the compliance finding, EA or EIS, and make the environmental finding, 
where applicable. (Also, see Sec. 50.32.)
    (b) Copies of environmental reviews and findings shall be maintained 
in the project file for projects, in the rules docket files for Federal 
Register publications, and in program files for non-Federal Register 
policy documents.


<R04>
               Subpart C--General Policy: Decision Points


<R05>
Sec. 50.16  Decision points for policy actions.

    Either an EA and FONSI or an EIS on all policy actions not meeting 
the criteria of Sec. 50.19 shall be completed prior to the approval 
action. Policy actions include all proposed Federal Register policy 
documents and other policy-related Federal actions (40 CFR 1508.18). The 
decision as to whether a proposed policy action is categorically 
excluded from an EA shall be made by the Program Environmental Clearance 
Officer (PECO) in Headquarters as early as possible. Where the PECO has 
any doubt as to whether a proposed action qualifies for exclusion, the 
PECO shall request a determination by the AS/CPD. The EA and FONSI may 
be combined into a single document.


<R05>
Sec. 50.17  Decision points for projects.

    Either an EA and FONSI or an EIS for individual projects shall be 
completed before the applicable program decision points below for 
projects not meeting the criteria of Sec. 50.20. Compliance with 
applicable authorities cited in Sec. 50.4 shall be completed before the 
applicable program decision points below unless the project meets the 
criteria for exclusion under Sec. 50.19.
    (a) New Construction. (1) Project mortgage insurance or other 
financial assistance for multifamily housing projects (including 
sections 202 and 811), nursing homes, hospitals, group practice 
facilities and manufactured home parks: Issuance of Site Appraisal and 
Market Analysis (SAMA) Letter or initial equivalent indication of HUD 
approval of a specific site;
    (2) Public Housing: HUD approval of the proposal.
    (3) Loan Guarantee Recovery Fund Program (24 CFR part 573). HUD 
issuance of a letter of commitment or initial equivalent indication of 
HUD approval.
    (b) Rehabilitation projects. Use the decision points under ``new 
construction'' for HUD programs cited in paragraph (a) of this section; 
otherwise the decision point is the HUD project approval.
    (c) Public housing modernization programs. HUD approval of the 
modernization grants.
    (d) Property Disposition. Multifamily structures, college housing, 
nursing homes, manufactured homes and parks, group practice facilities, 
vacant land and one to four family structures: HUD approval of the 
Disposition Program.
    (e) HUD programs subject to 24 CFR part 58. For cases in which HUD 
exercises environmental responsibility under this part where a recipient 
lacks legal capacity to do so or HUD determines to do so in place of a 
nonrecipient responsible entity under 24 CFR part 58 (see Sec. 50.1(d)), 
the decision point is: HUD's execution of an agreement or contract, 
whichever comes first, or in the case of Section 8 Project-Based 
Certificate Assistance and Moderate Rehabilitation, HUD notification to 
the Public Housing Agency to proceed with execution of an Agreement to 
Enter into Housing Assistance Payments (HAP) Contract.
    (f) Section 50.3(h). Notwithstanding the other paragraphs of this 
section, the decision point for grant programs in which HUD approval of 
funding for an applicant's program must occur before the applicant's 
selection of properties for use in its program is: HUD approval of 
specific properties.
    (g) Stewart B. McKinney Homeless Assistance Act Programs. Where the 
recipients are nonprofit organizations or governmental entities with 
special or limited purpose powers, the decision point is: HUD project 
approval.
    (h) Programs not specifically covered in this section. Consult with 
the AS/CPD for decision points.

[[Page 280]]


<R04>
       Subpart D--General Policy: Environmental Review Procedures


<R05>
Sec. 50.18  General.

    HUD may, from time to time, complete programmatic reviews that 
further avoid the necessity of complying with the laws and authorities 
in Sec. 50.4 on a property-by-property basis.


<R05>
Sec. 50.19  Categorical exclusions not subject to the Federal laws and authorities cited in Sec. 50.4.

    (a) General. The activities and related approvals of policy 
documents listed in paragraphs (b) and (c) of this section are not 
subject to the individual compliance requirements of the Federal laws 
and authorities cited in Sec. 50.4, unless otherwise indicated below. 
These activities and approvals of policy documents are also 
categorically excluded from the EA required by NEPA except in 
extraordinary circumstances (Sec. 50.20(b)). HUD approval or 
implementation of these categories of activities and policy documents 
does not require environmental review, because they do not alter 
physical conditions in a manner or to an extent that would require 
review under NEPA or the other laws and authorities cited at Sec. 50.4.
    (b) Activities. (1) Environmental and other studies, resource 
identification and the development of plans and strategies.
    (2) Information and financial advisory services.
    (3) Administrative and management expenses.
    (4) Public services that will not have a physical impact or result 
in any physical changes, including but not limited to services concerned 
with employment, crime prevention, child care, health, drug abuse, 
education, counseling, energy conservation and welfare or recreational 
needs.
    (5) Inspections and testing of properties for hazards or defects.
    (6) Purchase of insurance.
    (7) Purchase of tools.
    (8) Engineering or design costs.
    (9) Technical assistance and training.
    (10) Assistance for temporary or permanent improvements that do not 
alter environmental conditions and are limited to protection, repair or 
restoration activities necessary only to control or arrest the effects 
from disasters or imminent threats to public safety including those 
resulting from physical deterioration.
    (11) Tenant-based rental assistance.
    (12) Supportive services including, but not limited to, health care, 
housing services, permanent housing placement, day care, nutritional 
services, short-term payments for rent/mortgage/utility costs, and 
assistance in gaining access to local, State, and Federal government 
benefits and services.
    (13) Operating costs including maintenance, security, operation, 
utilities, furnishings, equipment, supplies, staff training and 
recruitment and other incidental costs; however, in the case of 
equipment, compliance with Sec. 50.4(b)(1) is required.
    (14) Economic development activities, including but not limited to, 
equipment purchase, inventory financing, interest subsidy, operating 
expenses and similar costs not associated with construction or physical 
expansion of existing facilities; however, in the case of equipment 
purchase, compliance with Sec. 50.4(b)(1) is required.
    (15) Activities to assist homeownership of existing dwelling units, 
including closing costs and down payment assistance to home buyers, 
interest buydowns and similar activities that result in the transfer of 
title to a property; however, compliance with Secs. 50.4 (b)(1) and 
(c)(1) and 51.303(a)(3) is required.
    (16) Housing pre-development costs including legal, consulting, 
developer and other costs related to site options, project financing, 
administrative costs and fees for loan commitments, zoning approvals, 
and other related activities which do not have a physical impact.
    (17) HUD's insurance of one-to-four family mortgages under the 
Direct Endorsement program, the insurance of one-to-four family 
mortgages under the Lender Insurance program, and HUD's guarantee of 
loans for one-to-four family dwellings under the Direct Guarantee 
procedure for the Indian Housing loan guarantee program, without any HUD 
review or approval before the completion of construction or 
rehabilitation and the loan closing; and HUD's acceptance for insurance 
of loans insured under Title I of the National

[[Page 281]]

Housing Act; however, compliance with Secs. 50.4(b)(1) and (c)(1) and 24 
CFR 51.303(a)(3) is required.
    (18) HUD's endorsement of one-to-four family mortgage insurance for 
proposed construction under Improved Area processing; however, the 
Appraiser/Review Appraiser Checksheet (Form HUD-54891) must be 
completed.
    (19) Activities of the Government National Mortgage Association 
under Title III of the National Housing Act (12 U.S.C. 1716 et seq.).
    (20) Activities under the Interstate Land Sales Full Disclosure Act 
(15 U.S.C. 1701 et seq.).
    (21) Refinancing of HUD-insured mortgages that will not allow new 
construction or rehabilitation, nor result in any physical impacts or 
changes except for routine maintenance; however, compliance with 
Sec. 50.4(b)(1) is required.
    (22) Approval of the sale of a HUD-held mortgage.
    (23) Approval of the foreclosure sale of a property with a HUD-held 
mortgage; however, appropriate restrictions will be imposed to protect 
historic properties.
    (24) HUD guarantees under the Loan Guarantee Recovery Fund Program 
(24 CFR part 573) of loans that refinance existing loans and mortgages, 
where any new construction or rehabilitation financed by the existing 
loan or mortgage has been completed prior to the filing of an 
application under the program, and the refinancing will not allow 
further construction or rehabilitation, nor result in any physical 
impacts or changes except for routine maintenance; however, compliance 
with Secs. 50.4 (b)(1) and (c)(1) and 51.303(a) is required.
    (c) Approval of policy documents. (1) Approval of rules and notices 
proposed for publication in the Federal Register or other policy 
documents that do not:
    (i) Direct, provide for assistance or loan and mortgage insurance 
for, or otherwise govern or regulate, real property acquisition, 
disposition, leasing (other than tenant-based rental assistance), 
rehabilitation, alteration, demolition, or new construction; or
    (ii) Establish, revise, or provide for standards for construction or 
construction materials, manufactured housing, or occupancy.
    (2) Approval of policy documents that amend an existing document 
where the existing document as a whole would not fall within an 
exclusion in this paragraph (c) but the amendment by itself would do so;
    (3) Approval of policy documents that set out fair housing or 
nondiscrimination standards or enforcement procedures or provide for 
assistance in promoting or enforcing fair housing or nondiscrimination;
    (4) Approval of handbooks, notices and other documents that provide 
operating instructions and procedures in connection with activities 
under a Federal Register document that has previously been subject to a 
required environmental review.
    (5) Approval of a Notice of Funding Availability (NOFA) that 
provides funding under, and does not alter any environmental 
requirements of, a regulation or program guideline that was previously 
published in the Federal Register, provided that
    (i) The NOFA specifically refers to the environmental review 
provisions of the regulation or guideline; or
    (ii) The regulation or guideline contains no environmental review 
provisions because it concerns only activities listed in paragraph (b) 
of this section.
    (6) Statutorily required and/or discretionary establishment and 
review of interest rates, loan limits, building cost limits, prototype 
costs, fair market rent schedules, HUD-determined prevailing wage rates, 
income limits and exclusions with regard to eligibility for or 
calculation of HUD housing assistance or rental assistance, and similar 
rate and cost determinations and related external administrative or 
fiscal requirements or procedures which do not constitute a development 
decision that affects the physical condition of specific project areas 
or building sites.

[61 FR 50916, Sept. 27, 1996, as amended at 62 FR 15802, Apr. 2, 1997; 
63 FR 48990, Sept. 11, 1998]

[[Page 282]]


<R05>
Sec. 50.20  Categorical exclusions subject to the Federal laws and authorities cited in Sec. 50.4.

    (a) The following actions, activities and programs are categorically 
excluded from the NEPA requirements of this part. They are not excluded 
from individual compliance requirements of other environmental statutes, 
Executive orders and HUD standards cited in Sec. 50.4, where 
appropriate. Form HUD-4128 shall be used to document compliance. Where 
the responsible official determines that any item identified below may 
have an environmental effect because of extraordinary circumstances (40 
CFR 1508.4), the requirements of NEPA shall apply (see paragraph (b) of 
this section).
    (1) Special projects directed to the removal of material and 
architectural barriers that restrict the mobility of and accessibility 
to elderly and persons with disabilities.
    (2) Rehabilitation of structures when the following conditions are 
met:
    (i) In the case of residential buildings, the unit density is not 
changed more than 20 percent;
    (ii) The project does not involve changes in land use (from non-
residential to residential or from residential to non-residential); and
    (iii) The estimated cost of rehabilitation is less than 75 percent 
of the total estimated cost of replacement after rehabilitation.
    (3) An individual action on a one- to four-family dwelling or an 
individual action on a project of five or more units developed on 
scattered sites when the sites are more than 2,000 feet apart and there 
are not more than four units on any one site.
    (4) Acquisition or disposition of, or equity loans on, an existing 
structure.
    (5) Purchased or refinanced housing and medical facilities under 
section 223(f) of the National Housing Act (12 U.S.C. 1715n).
    (6) Mortgage prepayments or plans of action (including incentives) 
under 24 CFR part 248.
    (b) For categorical exclusions having the potential for significant 
impact because of extraordinary circumstances, HUD must prepare an EA in 
accordance with subpart E. If it is evident without preparing an EA that 
an EIS is required pursuant to Sec. 50.42, HUD should proceed directly 
to the preparation of an EIS in accordance with subpart F.


<R05>
Sec. 50.21  Aggregation.

    Activities which are geographically related and are logical parts of 
a composite of contemplated HUD projects shall be evaluated together.


<R05>
Sec. 50.22  Environmental management and monitoring.

    An Environmental Management and Monitoring Program shall be 
established prior to project approval when it is deemed necessary by the 
HUD approving official. The program shall be part of the approval 
document and must:
    (a) Be concurred in by the Field Environmental Clearance Officer 
(FECO) (in the absence of a FECO, by the Program Environmental Clearance 
Officer in Headquarters) and any cooperating agencies;
    (b) Contain specific standards, safeguards and commitments to be 
completed during project implementation;
    (c) Identify the staff who will be responsible for the post-approval 
inspection; and
    (d) Specify the time periods for conducting the evaluation and 
monitoring the applicant's compliance with the project agreements.


<R05>
Sec. 50.23  Public participation.

    HUD shall inform the affected public about NEPA-related hearings, 
public meetings, and the availability of environmental documents (see 40 
CFR 1506.6(b)) in accordance with this section. Where project actions 
result in a FONSI, the FONSI will be available in the project file. The 
local HUD field office may be contacted by persons who wish to review 
the FONSI. In all cases, HUD shall mail notices to those who have 
requested them. Additional efforts for involving the public in specific 
notice or compliance requirements shall be made in accord with the 
implementing procedures of the laws and authorities cited in Sec. 50.4. 
Notices pertaining to an EIS or an amendment to an EIS or a FONSI 
subject to Sec. 50.34 shall be given to the public in accordance with 
paragraphs (a) through (d) of this section.

[[Page 283]]

    (a) A NOI/EIS shall be forwarded to the AS/CPD to the attention of 
the Departmental Environmental Clearance Officer for publication in the 
Federal Register.
    (b) Notices will be bilingual if the affected public includes a 
significant portion of non-English speaking persons and will identify a 
date when the official public involvement element of the proposed action 
is to be completed and HUD internal processing is to continue.
    (c) All required notices shall be published in an appropriate local 
printed news medium, and sent to individuals and groups known to be 
interested in the proposed action.
    (d) All notices shall inform the public where additional information 
may be obtained.


<R05>
Sec. 50.24  HUD review of another agency's EIS.

    Where another agency's EIS is referred to the HUD Field Office in 
whose jurisdiction the project is located, the Field Environmental 
Clearance Officer shall determine whether HUD has an interest in the EIS 
and, if so, will review and comment. Any EIS received from another 
Federal agency requesting comment on legislative proposals, regulations, 
or other policy documents shall be sent to the AS/CPD for comment, and 
the AS/CPD shall provide the General Counsel the opportunity for 
comment.


<R04>
        Subpart E--Environmental Assessments and Related Reviews


<R05>
Sec. 50.31  The EA.

    (a) Form HUD-4128--Environmental Assessment and Compliance Findings 
for the Related Laws--is the EA form to be used for analysis and 
documentation by HUD for projects and activities under subpart E. The 
Departmental Environmental Clearance Officer shall approve the issuance 
of equivalent formats, if Form HUD-4128 does not meet specific program 
needs.
    (b) The program representative shall obtain interdisciplinary 
assistance from professional experts and other HUD staff as needed. 
Additional information may also be requested of the sponsor/applicant. 
HUD is responsible for assessing and documenting the extent of the 
environmental impact.


<R05>
Sec. 50.32  Responsibility for environmental processing.

    The program staff in the HUD office responsible for processing the 
project application or recommending a policy action is responsible for 
conducting the compliance finding, EA, or EIS. The collection of data 
and studies as part of the information contained in the environmental 
review may be done by an applicant or the applicant's contractor. The 
HUD program staff may use any information supplied by the applicant or 
contractor, provided HUD independently evaluates the information, will 
be responsible for its accuracy, supplements the information, if 
necessary, to conform to the requirements of this part, and prepares the 
environmental finding. Assessments for projects over 200 lots/dwelling 
units or beds shall be sent to the Field Environmental Clearance Officer 
(FECO) or, in the absence of a FECO, to the Program Environmental 
Clearance Officer in Headquarters for review and comment.


<R05>
Sec. 50.33  Action resulting from the assessment.

    (a) A proposal may be accepted without modifications if the EA 
indicates that the proposal will not significantly (see 40 CFR 1508.27) 
affect the quality of the human environment and a FONSI is prepared.
    (b) A proposal may be accepted with modifications provided that:
    (1) Changes have been made that would reduce adverse environmental 
impact to acceptable and insignificant levels; and
    (2) An Environmental Management and Monitoring Program is developed 
in accordance with Sec. 50.22 when it is deemed necessary by the HUD 
approving official.
    (c) A proposal should be rejected if significant and unavoidable 
adverse environmental impacts would still exist after modifications have 
been made to the proposal and an EIS is not prepared.
    (d) A proposal (if not rejected) shall require an EIS if the EA 
indicates that significant environmental impacts would result.

[[Page 284]]


<R05>
Sec. 50.34  Time delays for exceptional circumstances.

    (a) Under the circumstances described in this section, the FONSI 
must be made available for public review for 30 calendar days before a 
final decision is made whether to prepare an EIS and before the HUD 
action is taken. The circumstances are:
    (1) When the proposed action is, or is closely similar to, one which 
normally requires the preparation of an EIS pursuant to Sec. 50.42(b) 
but it is determined, as a result of an EA or in the course of 
preparation of a draft EIS, that the proposed action will not have a 
significant impact on the human environment; or
    (2) When the nature of the proposed action is without precedent and 
does not appear to require more than an assessment.
    (b) In such cases, the FONSI must be concurred in by the AS/CPD and 
the Program Environmental Clearance Officer. Notice of the availability 
of the FONSI shall be given to the public in accordance with paragraphs 
(a) through (d) of Sec. 50.23.


<R05>
Sec. 50.35  Use of prior environmental assessments.

    When other Federal, State, or local agencies have prepared an EA or 
other environmental analysis for a proposed HUD project, these documents 
should be requested and used to the extent possible. HUD must, however, 
conduct the environmental analysis and prepare the EA and be responsible 
for the required environmental finding.


<R05>
Sec. 50.36  Updating of environmental reviews.

    The environmental review must be re-evaluated and updated when the 
basis for the original environmental or compliance findings is affected 
by a major change requiring HUD approval in the nature, magnitude or 
extent of a project and the project is not yet complete. A change only 
in the amount of financing or mortgage insurance involved does not 
normally require the environmental review to be re-evaluated or updated.


<R04>
               Subpart F--Environmental Impact Statements


<R05>
Sec. 50.41  EIS policy.

    EIS's will be prepared and considered in program determinations 
pursuant to the general environmental policy stated in Sec. 50.3 and 40 
CFR 1505.2 (b) and (c).


<R05>
Sec. 50.42  Cases when an EIS is required.

    (a) An EIS is required if the proposal is determined to have a 
significant impact on the human environment pursuant to subpart E.
    (b) An EIS will normally be required if the proposal:
    (1) Would provide a site or sites for hospitals or nursing homes 
containing a total of 2,500 or more beds; or
    (2) Would remove, demolish, convert, or substantially rehabilitate 
2,500 or more existing housing units (but not including rehabilitation 
projects categorically excluded under Sec. 50.20), or which would result 
in the construction or installation of 2,500 or more housing units, or 
which would provide sites for 2,500 or more housing units.
    (c) When the environmental concerns of one or more Federal 
authorities cited in Sec. 50.4 will be affected by the proposal, the 
cumulative impact of all such effects should be assessed to determine 
whether an EIS is required. Where all of the affected authorities 
provide alternative procedures for resolution, those procedures should 
be used in lieu of an EIS.


<R05>
Sec. 50.43  Emergencies.

    In cases of national emergency and disasters or cases of imminent 
threat to health and safety or other emergency which require the taking 
of an action with significant environmental impact, the provisions of 40 
CFR 1506.11 and of any applicable Sec. 50.4 authorities which provide 
for emergencies shall apply.


<R03>
PART 51--ENVIRONMENTAL CRITERIA AND STANDARDS--Table of Contents

<R05>


                      Subpart A--General Provisions

Sec.
51.1  Purpose.
51.2  Authority.
51.3  Responsibilities.

[[Page 285]]

51.4  Program coverage.

                 Subpart B--Noise Abatement and Control

51.100  Purpose and authority.
51.101  General policy.
51.102  Responsibilities.
51.103  Criteria and standards.
51.104  Special requirements.
51.105  Exceptions.
51.106  Implementation.

Appendix I to Subpart B to Part 51-- Definition of Acoustical Quantities

  Subpart C--Siting of HUD-Assisted Projects Near Hazardous Operations 
 Handling Conventional Fuels or Chemicals of an Explosive or Flammable 
                                 Nature

51.200  Purpose.
51.201  Definitions.
51.202  Approval of HUD-assisted projects.
51.203  Safety standards.
51.204  HUD-assisted hazardous facilities.
51.205  Mitigating measures.
51.206  Implementation.
51.207  Special circumstances.
51.208  Reservation of administrative and legal rights.

Appendix I to Subpart C to Part 51--Specific Hazardous Substances
Appendix II to Subpart C to Part 51--Development of Standards; 
          Calculation Methods

  Subpart D--Siting of HUD Assisted Projects in Runway Clear Zones at 
Civil Airports and Clear Zones and Accident Potential Zones at Military 
                                Airfields

51.300  Purpose.
51.301  Definitions.
51.302  Coverage.
51.303  General policy.
51.304  Responsibilities.
51.305  Implementation.

    Authority: 42 U.S.C. 3535(d), unless otherwise noted.

    Source: 44 FR 40861, July 12, 1979, unless otherwise noted.


<R04>
                      Subpart A--General Provisions


<R05>
Sec. 51.1  Purpose.

    The Department of Housing and Urban Development is providing program 
Assistant Secretaries and administrators and field offices with 
environmental standards, criteria and guidelines for determining project 
acceptability and necessary mitigating measures to insure that 
activities assisted by the Department achieve the goal of a suitable 
living environment.


<R05>
Sec. 51.2  Authority.

    This part implements the Department's responsibilities under: The 
National Housing Act (12 U.S.C. 1701 et seq.); sec. 2 of the Housing Act 
of 1949 (42 U.S.C. 1441); secs. 2 and 7(d) of the Department of Housing 
and Urban Development Act (42 U.S.C. 3531 and 3535(d)); the National 
Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (42 U.S.C. 4321); and the other 
statutes that are referred to in this part.

[61 FR 13333, Mar. 26, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 51.3  Responsibilities.

    The Assistant Secretary for Community Planning and Development is 
responsible for administering HUD's environmental criteria and standards 
as set forth in this part. The Assistant Secretary for Community 
Planning and Development may be assisted by HUD officials in 
implementing the responsibilities established by this part. HUD will 
identify these HUD officials and their specific responsibilities through 
Federal Register notice.

[61 FR 13333, Mar. 26, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 51.4  Program coverage.

    Environmental standards shall apply to all HUD actions except where 
special provisions and exemptions are contained in each subpart.


<R04>
                 Subpart B--Noise Abatement and Control


<R05>
Sec. 51.100  Purpose and authority.

    (a) It is the purpose of this subpart B to:
    (1) Call attention to the threat of noise pollution;
    (2) Encourage the control of noise at its source in cooperation with 
other Federal departments and agencies;
    (3) Encourage land use patterns for housing and other noise 
sensitive urban needs that will provide a suitable separation between 
them and major noise sources;
    (4) Generally prohibit HUD support for new construction of noise 
sensitive uses on sites having unacceptable noise exposure;

[[Page 286]]

    (5) Provide policy on the use of structural and other noise 
attenuation measures where needed; and
    (6) Provide policy to guide implementation of various HUD programs.
    (b) Authority. Specific authorities for noise abatement and control 
are contained in the Noise Control Act of 1972, as amended (42 U.S.C. 
4901 et seq.); and the General Services Administration, Federal 
Management Circular 75-2; Compatible Land Uses at Federal Airfields.

[44 FR 40861, July 12, 1979, as amended at 61 FR 13333, Mar. 26, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 51.101  General policy.

    (a) It is HUD's general policy to provide minimum national standards 
applicable to HUD programs to protect citizens against excessive noise 
in their communities and places of residence.
    (1) Planning assistance. HUD requires that grantees give adequate 
consideration to noise exposures and sources of noise as an integral 
part of the urban environment when HUD assistance is provided for 
planning purposes, as follows:
    (i) Particular emphasis shall be placed on the importance of 
compatible land use planning in relation to airports, highways and other 
sources of high noise.
    (ii) Applicants shall take into consideration HUD environmental 
standards impacting the use of land.
    (2) Activities subject to 24 CFR part 58. (i) Responsible entities 
under 24 CFR part 58 must take into consideration the noise criteria and 
standards in the environmental review process and consider ameliorative 
actions when noise sensitive land development is proposed in noise 
exposed areas. Responsible entities shall address deviations from the 
standards in their environmental reviews as required in 24 CFR part 58.
    (ii) Where activities are planned in a noisy area, and HUD 
assistance is contemplated later for housing and/or other noise 
sensitive activities, the responsible entity risks denial of the HUD 
assistance unless the HUD standards are met.
    (3) HUD support for new construction. HUD assistance for the 
construction of new noise sensitive uses is prohibited generally for 
projects with unacceptable noise exposures and is discouraged for 
projects with normally unacceptable noise exposure. (Standards of 
acceptability are contained in Sec. 51.103(c).) This policy applies to 
all HUD programs providing assistance, subsidy or insurance for housing, 
manufactured home parks, nursing homes, hospitals, and all programs 
providing assistance or insurance for land development, redevelopment or 
any other provision of facilities and services which are directed to 
making land available for housing or noise sensitive development. The 
policy does not apply to research demonstration projects which do not 
result in new construction or reconstruction, flood insurance, 
interstate land sales egistration, or any action or emergency assistance 
under disaster assistance provisions or appropriations which are 
provided to save lives, protect property, protect public health and 
safety, remove debris and wreckage, or assistance that has the effect of 
restoring facilities substantially as they existed prior to the 
disaster.
    (4) HUD support for existing construction. Noise exposure by itself 
will not result in the denial of HUD support for the resale and purchase 
of otherwise acceptable existing buildings. However, environmental noise 
is a marketability factor which HUD will consider in determining the 
amount of insurance or other assistance that may be given.
    (5) HUD support of modernization and rehabilitation. For 
modernization projects located in all noise exposed areas, HUD shall 
encourage noise attenuation features in alterations. For major or 
substantial rehabilitation projects in the Normally Unacceptable and 
Unacceptable noise zones, HUD actively shall seek to have project 
sponsors incorporate noise attenuation features, given the extent and 
nature of the rehabilitation being undertaken and the level or exterior 
noise exposure. In Unacceptable noise zones, HUD shall strongly 
encourage conversion of noise-exposed sites to land uses compatible with 
the high noise levels.
    (6) Research, guidance and publications. HUD shall maintain a 
continuing program designed to provide new

[[Page 287]]

knowledge of noise abatement and control to public and private bodies, 
to develop improved methods for anticipating noise encroachment, to 
develop noise abatement measures through land use and building 
construction practices, and to foster better understanding of the 
consequences of noise. It shall be HUD's policy to issue guidance 
documents periodically to assist HUD personnel in assigning an 
acceptability category to projects in accordance with noise exposure 
standards, in evaluating noise attenuation measures, and in advising 
local agencies about noise abatement strategies. The guidance documents 
shall be updated periodically in accordance with advances in the state-
of-the-art.
    (7) Construction equipment, building equipment and appliances. HUD 
shall encourage the use of quieter construction equipment and methods in 
population centers, the use of quieter equipment and appliances in 
buildings, and the use of appropriate noise abatement techniques in the 
design of residential structures with potential noise problems.
    (8) Exterior noise goals. It is a HUD goal that exterior noise 
levels do not exceed a day-night average sound level of 55 decibels. 
This level is recommended by the Environmental Protection Agency as a 
goal for outdoors in residential areas. The levels recommended by EPA 
are not standards and do not take into account cost or feasibility. For 
the purposes of this regulation and to meet other program objectives, 
sites with a day-night average sound level of 65 and below are 
acceptable and are allowable (see Standards in Sec. 51.103(c)).
    (9) Interior noise goals. It is a HUD goal that the interior 
auditory environment shall not exceed a day-night average sound level of 
45 decibels. Attenuation measures to meet these interior goals shall be 
employed where feasible. Emphasis shall be given to noise sensitive 
interior spaces such as bedrooms. Minimum attenuation requirements are 
prescribed in Sec. 51.104(a).
    (10) Acoustical privacy in multifamily buildings. HUD shall require 
the use of building design and acoustical treatment to afford acoustical 
privacy in multifamily buildings pursuant to requirements of the Minimum 
Property Standards.

[44 FR 40861, July 12, 1979, as amended at 50 FR 9268, Mar. 7, 1985; 61 
FR 13333, Mar. 26, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 51.102  Responsibilities.

    (a) Surveillance of noise problem areas. Appropriate field staff 
shall maintain surveillance of potential noise problem areas and advise 
local officials, developers, and planning groups of the unacceptability 
of sites because of noise exposure at the earliest possible time in the 
decision process. Every attempt shall be made to insure that applicants' 
site choices are consistent with the policy and standards contained 
herein.
    (b) Notice to applicants. At the earliest possible stage, HUD 
program staff shall:
    (1) Determine the suitability of the acoustical environment of 
proposed projects;
    (2) Notify applicants of any adverse or questionable situations; and
    (3) Assure that prospective applicants are apprised of the standards 
contained herein so that future site choices will be consistent with 
these standards.
    (c) Interdepartmental coordination. HUD shall foster appropriate 
coordination between field offices and other departments and agencies, 
particularly the Environmental Protection Agency, the Department of 
Transportation, Department of Defense representatives, and the 
Department of Veterans Affairs. HUD staff shall utilize the 
acceptability standards in commenting on the prospective impacts of 
transportation facilities and other noise generators in the 
Environmental Impact Statement review process.

[44 FR 40861, July 12, 1979, as amended at 54 FR 39525, Sept. 27, 1989; 
61 FR 13333, Mar. 26, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 51.103  Criteria and standards.

    These standards apply to all programs as indicated in Sec. 51.101.
    (a) Measure of external noise environments. The magnitude of the 
external noise environment at a site is determined by the value of the 
day-night average sound level produced as the result of the accumulation 
of noise from all sources contributing to the external

[[Page 288]]

noise environment at the site. Day-night average sound level, 
abbreviated as DNL and symbolized as L<INF>dn!</INF>, is the 24-hour 
average sound level, in decibels, obtained after addition of 10 decibels 
to sound levels in the night from 10 p.m. to 7 a.m. Mathematical 
expressions for average sound level and day-night average sound level 
are stated in the Appendix I to this subpart.
    (b) Loud impulsive sounds. On an interim basis, when loud impulsive 
sounds, such as explosions or sonic booms, are experienced at a site, 
the day-night average sound level produced by the loud impulsive sounds 
alone shall have 8 decibels added to it in assessing the acceptability 
of the site (see Appendix I to this subpart). Alternatively, the C-
weighted day-night average sound level (L<INF>Cdn</INF>) may be used 
without the 8 decibel addition, as indicated in Sec. 51.106(a)(3). 
Methods for assessing the contribution of loud impulsive sounds to day-
night average sound level at a site and mathematical expressions for 
determining whether a sound is classed as ``loud impulsive'' are 
provided in the Appendix I to this subpart.
    (c) Exterior standards. (1) The degree of acceptability of the noise 
environment at a site is determined by the sound levels external to 
buildings or other facilities containing noise sensitive uses. The 
standards shall usually apply at a location 2 meters (6.5 feet) from the 
building housing noise sensitive activities in the direction of the 
predominant noise source. Where the building location is undetermined, 
the standards shall apply 2 meters (6.5 feet) from the building setback 
line nearest to the predominant noise source. The standards shall also 
apply at other locations where it is determined that quiet outdoor space 
is required in an area ancillary to the principal use on the site.
    (2) The noise environment inside a building is considered acceptable 
if: (i) The noise environment external to the building complies with 
these standards, and (ii) the building is constructed in a manner common 
to the area or, if of uncommon construction, has at least the equivalent 
noise attenuation characteristics.

                      Site Acceptability Standards
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                   Day-night average         Special
                                    sound level (in       approvals and
                                       decibels)          requirements
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Acceptable....................  Not exceeding 65 dB(1)  None.
Normally Unacceptable.........  Above 65 dB but not     Special
                                 exceeding 75 dB.        Approvals (2)
                                                        Environmental
                                                         Review (3).
                                                        Attenuation (4).
Unacceptable..................  Above 75 dB...........  Special
                                                         Approvals (2).
                                                        Environmental
                                                         Review (3).
                                                        Attenuation (5).
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Notes: (1) Acceptable threshold may be shifted to 70 dB in special
  circumstances pursuant to Sec.  51.105(a).
(2) See Sec.  51.104(b) for requirements.
(3) See Sec.  51.104(b) for requirements.
(4) 5 dB additional attenuation required for sites above 65 dB but not
  exceeding 70 dB and 10 dB additional attenuation required for sites
  above 70 dB but not exceeding 75 dB. (See Sec.  51.104(a).)
(5) Attenuation measures to be submitted to the Assistant Secretary for
  CPD for approval on a case-by-case basis.


[44 FR 40861, July 12, 1979, as amended at 49 FR 12214, Mar. 29, 1984]


<R05>
Sec. 51.104  Special requirements.

    (a)(1) Noise attenuation. Noise attenuation measures are those 
required in addition to attenuation provided by buildings as commonly 
constructed in the area, and requiring open windows for ventilation. 
Measures that reduce external noise at a site shall be used wherever 
practicable in preference to the incorporation of additional noise 
attenuation in buildings. Building designs and construction techniques 
that provide more noise attenuation than typical construction may be 
employed also to meet the noise attenuation requirements.
    (2) Normally unacceptable noise zones and unacceptable noise zones. 
Approvals in Normally Unacceptable Noise Zones require a minimum of 5 
decibels additional sound attenuation for buildings having noise-
sensitive uses if the day-night average sound level is greater

[[Page 289]]

than 65 decibels but does not exceed 70 decibels, or a minimum of 10 
decibels of additional sound attenuation if the day-night average sound 
level is greater than 70 decibels but does not exceed 75 decibels. Noise 
attenuation measures in Unacceptable Noise Zones require the approval of 
the Assistant Secretary for Community Planning and Development, or the 
Certifying Officer for activities subject to 24 CFR part 58. (See 
Sec. 51.104(b)(2).)
    (b) Environmental review requirements. Environmental reviews shall 
be conducted pursuant to the requirements of 24 CFR parts 50 and 58, as 
applicable, or other environmental regulations issued by the Department. 
These requirements are hereby modified for all projects proposed in the 
Normally Unacceptable and Unacceptable noise exposure zones as follows:
    (1) Normally unacceptable noise zone. (i) All projects located in 
the Normally Unacceptable Noise Zone require a Special Environmental 
Clearance except an EIS is required for a proposed project located in a 
largely undeveloped area, or where the HUD action is likely to encourage 
the establishment of incompatible land use in this noise zone.
    (ii) When an EIS is required, the concurrence of the Program 
Assistant Secretary is also required before a project can be approved. 
For the purposes of this paragraph, an area will be considered as 
largely undeveloped unless the area within a 2-mile radius of the 
project boundary is more than 50 percent developed for urban uses and 
infrastructure (particularly water and sewers) is available and has 
capacity to serve the project.
    (iii) All other projects in the Normally Unacceptable zone require a 
Special Environmental Clearance, except where an EIS is required for 
other reasons pursuant to HUD environmental policies.
    (2) Unacceptable noise zone. An EIS is required prior to the 
approval of projects with unacceptable noise exposure. Projects in or 
partially in an Unacceptable Noise Zone shall be submitted to the 
Assistant Secretary for Community Planning and Development, or the 
Certifying Officer for activities subject to 24 CFR part 58, for 
approval. The Assistant Secretary or the Certifying Officer may waive 
the EIS requirement in cases where noise is the only environmental issue 
and no outdoor noise sensitive activity will take place on the site. In 
such cases, an environmental review shall be made pursuant to the 
requirements of 24 CFR parts 50 or 58, as appropriate.

[44 FR 40861, July 12, 1979, as amended at 61 FR 13333, Mar. 26, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 51.105  Exceptions.

    (a) Flexibility for non-acoustic benefits. Where it is determined 
that program objectives cannot be achieved on sites meeting the 
acceptability standard of 65 decibels, the Acceptable Zone may be 
shifted to L<INF>dn</INF> 70 on a case-by-case basis if all the 
following conditions are satisfied:
    (1) The project does not require an Environmental Impact Statement 
under provisions of Sec. 51.104(b)(1) and noise is the only 
environmental issue.
    (2) The project has received a Special Environmental Clearance and 
has received the concurrence of the Environmental Clearance Officer.
    (3) The project meets other program goals to provide housing in 
proximity to employment, public facilities and transportation.
    (4) The project is in conformance with local goals and maintains the 
character of the neighborhood.
    (5) The project sponsor has set forth reasons, acceptable to HUD, as 
to why the noise attenuation measures that would normally be required 
for new construction in the L<INF>dn</INF> 65 to L<INF>dn</INF> 70 zone 
cannot be met.
    (6) Other sites which are not exposed to noise above L<INF>dn</INF> 
65 and which meet program objectives are generally not available.

The above factors shall be documented and made part of the project file.

[44 FR 40861, July 12, 1979, as amended at 61 FR 13334, Mar. 26, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 51.106  Implementation.

    (a) Use of available data. HUD field staff shall make maximum use of 
noise data prepared by others when such data are determined to be 
current and adequately projected into the future and are in terms of the 
following:

[[Page 290]]

    (1) Sites in the vicinity of airports. The noise environment around 
airports is described sometimes in terms of Noise Exposure Forecasts, 
abbreviated as NEF or, in the State of California, as Community Noise 
Equivalent Level, abbreviated as CNEL. The noise environment for sites 
in the vicinity of airports for which day-night average sound level data 
are not available may be evaluated from NEF or CNEL analyses using the 
following conversions to DNL:

DNL<nearly-eq> NEF+35
DNL<nearly-eq> CNEL

    (2) Sites in the vicinity of highways. Highway projects receiving 
Federal aid are subject to noise analyses under the procedures of the 
Federal Highway Administration. Where such analyses are available they 
may be used to assess sites subject to the requirements of this 
standard. The Federal Highway Administration employs two alternate sound 
level descriptors: (i) The A-weighted sound level not exceeded more than 
10 percent of the time for the highway design hour traffic flow, 
symbolized as L<INF>10</INF>; or (ii) the equivalent sound level for the 
design hour, symbolized as L<INF>eq</INF>. The day-night average sound 
level may be estimated from the design hour L<INF>10</INF> or L<INF>eq</INF> 
values by the following relationships, provided heavy trucks do not 
exceed 10 percent of the total traffic flow in vehicles per 24 hours and 
the traffic flow between 10 p.m. and 7 a.m. does not exceed 15 percent 
of the average daily traffic flow in vehicles per 24 hours:

DNL<nearly-eq> L<INF>10</INF> (design hour)--3 decibels
DNL<nearly-eq> L<INF>eg</INF> (design hour) decibels


Where the auto/truck mix and time of day relationships as stated in this 
section do not exist, the HUD Noise Assessment Guidelines or other noise 
analysis shall be used.
    (3) Sites in the vicinity of installations producing loud impulsive 
sounds. Certain Department of Defense installations produce loud 
impulsive sounds from artillery firing and bombing practice ranges. 
Noise analyses for these facilities sometimes encompass sites that may 
be subject to the requirements of this standard. Where such analyses are 
available they may be used on an interim basis to establish the 
acceptability of sites under this standard. The Department of Defense 
uses day-night average sound level based on C-weighted sound level, 
symbolized L<INF>Cdn</INF>, for the analysis of loud impulsive sounds. 
Where such analyses are provided, the 8 decibel addition specified in 
Sec. 51.103(b), is not required, and the same numerical values of day-
night average sound level used on an interim basis to determine site 
suitability for non-impulsive sounds apply to the L<INF>Cdn</INF>.
    (4) Use of areawide acoustical data. HUD encourages the preparation 
and use of areawide acoustical information, such as noise contours for 
airports. Where such new or revised contours become available for 
airports (civil or military) and military installations they shall first 
be referred to the HUD State Office (Environmental Officer) for review, 
evaluation and decision on appropriateness for use by HUD. The HUD State 
Office shall submit revised contours to the Assistant Secretary for 
Community Planning and Development for review, evaluation and decision 
whenever the area affected is changed by 20 percent or more, or whenever 
it is determined that the new contours will have a significant effect on 
HUD programs, or whenever the contours are not provided in a methodology 
acceptable under Sec. 51.106(a)(1) or in other cases where the HUD State 
Office determines that Headquarters review is warranted. For other 
areawide acoustical data, review is required only where existing 
areawide data are being utilized and where such data have been changed 
to reflect changes in the measurement methodology or underlying noise 
source assumptions. Requests for determination on usage of new or 
revised areawide data shall include the following:
    (i) Maps showing old, if applicable, and new noise contours, along 
with brief description of data source and methodology.
    (ii) Impact on existing and prospective urbanized areas and on 
development activity.
    (iii) Impact on HUD-assisted projects currently in processing.

[[Page 291]]

    (iv) Impact on future HUD program activity. Where a field office has 
determined that immediate approval of new areawide data is necessary and 
warranted in limited geographic areas, the request for approval should 
state the circumstances warranting such approval. Actions on proposed 
projects shall not be undertaken while new areawide noise data are being 
considered for HUD use except where the proposed location is affected in 
the same manner under both the old and new noise data.
    (b) Site assessments. Compliance with the standards contained in 
Sec. 51.103(c) shall, where necessary, be determined using noise 
assessment guidelines, handbooks, technical documents and procedures 
issued by the Department.
    (c) Variations in site noise levels. In many instances the noise 
environment will vary across a site, with portions of the site being in 
an Acceptable noise environment and other portions in a Normally 
Unacceptable noise environment. The standards in Sec. 51.103(c) shall 
apply to the portions of a building or buildings used for residential 
purposes and for ancillary noise sensitive open spaces.
    (d) Noise measurements. Where noise assessments result in a finding 
that the site is borderline or questionable, or is controversial, noise 
measurements may be performed. Where it is determined that noise 
measurements are required, such measurements will be conducted in 
accordance with methods and measurement criteria established by the 
Department. Locations for noise measurements will depend on the location 
of noise sensitive uses that are nearest to the predominant noise source 
(see Sec. 51.103(c)).
    (e) Projections of noise exposure. In addition to assessing existing 
exposure, future conditions should be projected. To the extent possible, 
noise exposure shall be projected to be representative of conditions 
that are expected to exist at a time at least 10 years beyond the date 
of the project or action under review.
    (f) Reduction of site noise by use of berms and/or barriers. If it 
is determined by adequate analysis that a berm and/or barrier will 
reduce noise at a housing site, and if the barrier is existing or there 
are assurances that it will be in place prior to occupancy, the 
environmental noise analysis for the site may reflect the benefits 
afforded by the berm and/or barrier. In the environmental review process 
under Sec. 51.104(b), the location height and design of the berm and/or 
barrier shall be evaluated to determine its effectiveness, and impact on 
design and aesthetic quality, circulation and other environmental 
factors.

[44 FR 40861, July 12, 1979, as amended at 61 FR 13334, Mar. 26, 1996]

 Appendix I to Subpart B to Part 51--Definition of Acoustical Quantities

    1. Sound Level. The quantity in decibels measured with an instrument 
satisfying requirements of American National Standard Specification for 
Type 1 Sound Level Meters S1.4-1971. Fast time-averaging and A-frequency 
weighting are to be used, unless others are specified. The sound level 
meter with the A-weighting is progressively less sensitive to sounds of 
frequency below 1,000 hertz (cycles per second), somewhat as is the ear. 
With fast time averaging the sound level meter responds particularly to 
recent sounds almost as quickly as does the ear in judging the loudness 
of a sound.
    2. Average Sound Level. Average sound level, in decibels, is the 
level of the mean-square A-weighted sound pressure during the stated 
time period, with reference to the square of the standard reference 
sound pressure of 20 micropascals.
    Day-night average sound level, abbreviated as DNL, and symbolized 
mathematically as L<INF>dn</INF> is defined as:

[[Page 292]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC12OC91.000

    Time t is in seconds, so the limits shown in hours and minutes are 
actually interpreted in seconds. L<INF>A</INF>(t) is the time varying 
value of A-weighted sound level, the quantity in decibels measured by an 
instrument satisfying requirements of American National Standard 
Specification for Type 1 Sound Level Meters S1.4-1971.
    3. Loud Impulsive Sounds. When loud impulsive sounds such as sonic 
booms or explosions are anticipated contributors to the noise 
environment at a site, the contribution to day-night average sound level 
produced by the loud impulsive sounds shall have 8 decibels added to it 
in assessing the acceptability of a site.
    A loud impulsive sound is defined for the purpose of this regulation 
as one for which:
    (i) The sound is definable as a discrete event wherein the sound 
level increases to a maximum and then decreases in a total time interval 
of approximately one second or less to the ambient background level that 
exists without the sound; and
    (ii) The maximum sound level (obtained with slow averaging time and 
A-weighting of a Type 1 sound level meter whose characteristics comply 
with ANSI S1.4-1971) exceeds the sound level prior to the onset of the 
event by at least 6 decibels; and
    (iii) The maximum sound level obtained with fast averaging time of a 
sound level meter exceeds the maximum value obtained with slow averaging 
time by at least 4 decibels.

[44 FR 40861, July 12, 1979; 49 FR 10253, Mar. 20, 1984; 49 FR 12214, 
Mar. 29, 1984]


<R04>
  Subpart C--Siting of HUD-Assisted Projects Near Hazardous Operations 
 Handling Conventional Fuels or Chemicals of an Explosive or Flammable 
                                 Nature

    Authority: 42 U.S.C. 3535(d).

    Source: 49 FR 5103, Feb. 10, 1984, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 51.200  Purpose.

    The purpose of this subpart C is to:
    (a) Establish safety standards which can be used as a basis for 
calculating acceptable separation distances (ASD) for HUD-assisted 
projects from specific, stationary, hazardous operations which store, 
handle, or process hazardous substances;
    (b) Alert those responsible for the siting of HUD-assisted projects 
to the inherent potential dangers when such projects are located in the 
vicinity of such hazardous operations;
    (c) Provide guidance for identifying those hazardous operations 
which are most prevalent;
    (d) Provide the technical guidance required to evaluate the degree 
of danger anticipated from explosion and thermal radiation (fire); and
    (e) Provide technical guidance required to determine acceptable 
separation distances from such hazards.

[49 FR 5103, Feb. 10, 1984, as amended at 61 FR 13334, Mar. 26, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 51.201  Definitions.

    The terms Department and Secretary are defined in 24 CFR part 5.
    Acceptable separation distance (ASD)--means the distance beyond 
which the explosion or combustion of a hazard is not likely to cause 
structures or individuals to be subjected to blast overpressure or 
thermal radiation flux levels in excess of the safety standards in 
Sec. 51.203. The ASD is determined by applying the safety standards 
established by this subpart C to the guidance set forth in HUD 
Guidebook, ``Siting of HUD-Assisted Projects Near Hazardous 
Facilities.''
    Blast overpressure--means the pressure, in pounds per square inch, 
in excess of normal atmospheric pressure on the surrounding medium 
caused by an explosion.

[[Page 293]]

    Danger zone--means the land area circumscribed by the radius which 
delineates the ASD of a given hazard.
    Hazard--means any stationary container which stores, handles or 
processes hazardous substances of an explosive or fire prone nature. The 
term ``hazard'' does not include pipelines for the transmission of 
hazardous substances, if such pipelines are located underground or 
comply with applicable Federal, State and local safety standards. Also 
excepted are: (1) Containers with a capacity of 100 gallons or less when 
they contain common liquid industrial fuels, such as gasoline, fuel oil, 
kerosene and crude oil since they generally would pose no danger in 
terms of thermal radiation of blast overpressure to a project; and (2) 
facilities which are shielded from a proposed HUD-assisted project by 
the topography, because these topographic features effectively provide a 
mitigating measure already in place.
    Hazardous substances--means petroleum products (petrochemicals) and 
chemicals that can produce blast overpressure or thermal radiation 
levels in excess of the standards set forth in Sec. 51.203. A specific 
list of hazardous substance is found in appendix I to this subpart.
    HUD-assisted project--the development, construction, rehabilitation, 
modernization or conversion with HUD subsidy, grant assistance, loan, 
loan guarantee, or mortgage insurance, of any project which is intended 
for residential, institutional, recreational, commercial or industrial 
use. For purposes of this subpart the terms ``rehabilitation'' and 
``modernization'' refer only to such repairs and renovation of a 
building or buildings as will result in an increased number of people 
being exposed to hazardous operations by increasing residential 
densities, converting the type of use of a building to habitation, or 
making a vacant building habitable.
    Thermal radiation level--means the emission and propagation of heat 
energy through space or a material medium, expressed in BTU per square 
foot per hour (BTU/ft.<SUP>2</SUP> hr.).

[49 FR 5103, Feb. 10, 1984, as amended at 61 FR 5204, Feb. 9, 1996; 61 
FR 13334, Mar. 26, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 51.202  Approval of HUD-assisted projects.

    (a) The Department will not approve an application for assistance 
for a proposed project located at less than the acceptable separation 
distance from a hazard, as defined in Sec. 51.201, unless appropriate 
mitigating measures, as defined in Sec. 51.205, are implemented, or 
unless mitigating measures are already in place.
    (b) In the case of all applications for proposed HUD-assisted 
projects, the Department shall evaluate projected development plans in 
the vicinity of these projects to determine whether there are plans to 
install a hazardous operation in close proximity to the proposed 
project. If the evaluation shows that such a plan exists, the Department 
shall not approve assistance for the project unless the Department 
obtains satisfactory assurances that adequate mitigating measures will 
be taken when the hazardous operation is installed.

[49 FR 5103, Feb. 10, 1984, as amended at 61 FR 13334, Mar. 26, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 51.203  Safety standards.

    The following standards shall be used in determining the acceptable 
separation distance of a proposed HUD-assisted project from a hazard:
    (a) Thermal Radiation Safety Standard. Projects shall be located so 
that:
    (1) The allowable thermal radiation flux level at the building shall 
not exceed 10,000 BTU/sq. ft. per hr.;
    (2) The allowable thermal radiation flux level for outdoor, 
unprotected facilities or areas of congregation shall not exceed 450 
BTU/sq. ft. per hour.
    (b) Blast Overpressure Safety Standard. Projects shall be located so 
that the maximum allowable blast overpressure at both buildings and 
outdoor, unprotected facilities or areas shall not exceed 0.5 psi.
    (c) If a hazardous substance constitutes both a thermal radiation 
and blast overpressure hazard, the ASD for each hazard shall be 
calculated, and the larger of the two ASDs shall be used to determine 
compliance with this subpart.
    (d) Background information on the standards and the logarithmic 
thermal

[[Page 294]]

radiation and blast overpressure charts that provide assistance in 
determining acceptable separation distances are contained in appendix II 
to this subpart C.

[49 FR 5103, Feb. 10, 1984, as amended at 61 FR 13334, Mar. 26, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 51.204  HUD-assisted hazardous facilities.

    In reviewing applications for proposed HUD-assisted projects 
involving the installation of hazardous facilities, the Department shall 
ensure that such hazardous facilities are located at an acceptable 
separation distance from residences and from any other facility or area 
where people may congregate or be present. The mitigating measures 
listed in Sec. 51.205 may be taken into account in determining 
compliance with this section.


<R05>
Sec. 51.205  Mitigating measures.

    Application of the standards for determining an Acceptable 
Separation Distance (ASD) for a HUD-assisted project from a potential 
hazard of an explosion or fire prone nature is predicated on level 
topography with no intervening object(s) between the hazard and the 
project. Application of the standards can be eliminated or modified if:
    (a) The nature of the topography shields the proposed project from 
the hazard.
    (b) An existing permanent fire resistant structure of adequate size 
and strength will shield the proposed project from the hazard.
    (c) A barrier is constructed surrounding the hazard, at the site of 
the project, or in between the potential hazard and the proposed 
project.
    (d) The structure and outdoor areas used by people are designed to 
withstand blast overpressure and thermal radiation anticipated from the 
potential hazard (e.g., the project is of masonry and steel or 
reinforced concrete and steel construction).


<R05>
Sec. 51.206  Implementation.

    This subpart C shall be implemented for each proposed HUD-assisted 
project by the HUD approving official or responsible entity responsible 
for review of the project. The implementation procedure will be part of 
the environmental review process in accordance with the procedures set 
forth in 24 CFR parts 50 and 58.

[61 FR 13334, Mar. 26, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 51.207  Special circumstances.

    The Secretary or the Secretary's designee may, on a case-by-case 
basis, when circumstances warrant, require the application of this 
subpart C with respect to a substance not listed in appendix I to this 
subpart C that would create thermal or overpressure effect in excess of 
that listed in Sec. 51.203.

[61 FR 13334, Mar. 26, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 51.208  Reservation of administrative and legal rights.

    Publication of these standards does not constitute a waiver of any 
right: (a) Of HUD to disapprove a project proposal if the siting is too 
close to a potential hazard not covered by this subpart, and (b) of HUD 
or any person or other entity to seek to abate or to collect damages 
occasioned by a nuisance, whether or not covered by the subpart.

    Appendix I to Subpart C to Part 51--Specific Hazardous Substances

    The following is a list of specific petroleum products and chemicals 
defined to be hazardous substances under Sec. 51.201.

                            Hazardous Liquids

Acetic Acid
Acetic Anhydride
Acetone
Acrylonitrile
Amyl Acetate
Amyl Alcohol
Benzene
Butyl Acetate
Butyl Acrylate
Butyl Alcohol
Carbon Bisulfide
Carbon Disulfide
Cellosolve
Cresols
Crude Oil (Petroleum)
Cumene
Cyclohexane
No. 2 Diesel Fuel
Ethyl Acetate
Ethyl Acrylate
Ethyl Alcohol
Ethyl Benzene
Ethyl Dichloride
Ethyl Ether
Gasoline
Heptane
Hexane
Isobutyl Acetate
Isobutyl Alcohol
Isopropyl Acetate
Isopropyl Alcohol
Jet Fuel and Kerosene
Methyl Alcohol
Methyl Amyl Alcohol
Methyl Cellosolve
Methyl Ethyl Ketone
Naptha
Pentane
Propylene Oxide
Toluene
Vinyl Acetate
Xylene

[[Page 295]]



                             Hazardous Gases

Acetaldehyde
Butadiene
Butane
Ethene
Ethylene
Ethylene Oxide
Hydrogen
Liquefied Natural Gas (LNG)
Liquefied Petroleum Gas (LPG)
Propane
Propylene
Vinyl Chloride

(Primary Source: ``Urban Development Siting with respect to Hazardous 
Commercial/Industrial Facilities,'' by Rolf Jensen and Associates, Inc., 
April 1982)

[49 FR 5105, Feb. 10, 1984; 49 FR 12214, Mar. 29, 1984]

     Appendix II to Subpart C to Part 51--Development of Standards; 
                           Calculation Methods

           I. Background Information Concerning the Standards

    (a) Thermal Radiation:
    (1) Introduction. Flammable products stored in above ground 
containers represent a definite, potential threat to human life and 
structures in the event of fire. The resulting fireball emits thermal 
radiation which is absorbed by the surroundings. Combustible structures, 
such as wooden houses, may be ignited by the thermal radiation being 
emitted. The radiation can cause severe burn, injuries and even death to 
exposed persons some distance away from the site of the fire.
    (2) Criteria for Acceptable Separation Distance (ASD). Wooden 
buildings, window drapes and trees generally ignite spontaneously when 
exposed for a relatively long period of time to thermal radiation levels 
of approximately 10,000 Btu/hr. sq. ft. It will take 15 to 20 minutes 
for a building to ignite at that degree of thermal intensity. Since the 
reasonable response time for fire fighting units in urbanized areas is 
approximately five to ten minutes, a standard of 10,000 BTU/hr. sq. ft. 
is considered an acceptable level of thermal radiation for buildings.
    People in outdoor areas exposed to a thermal radiation flux level of 
approximately 1,500 Btu/ft<SUP>2</SUP> hr will suffer intolerable pain 
after 15 seconds. Longer exposure causes blistering, permanent skin 
damage, and even death. Since it is assumed that children and the 
elderly could not take refuge behind walls or run away from the thermal 
effect of the fire within the 15 seconds before skin blistering occurs, 
unprotected (outdoor) areas, such as playgrounds, parks, yards, school 
grounds, etc., must be placed at such a distance from potential fire 
locations so that the radiation flux level is well below 1500 Btu/
ft<SUP>2</SUP> hr. An acceptable flux level, particularly for elderly 
people and children, is 450 Btu/ft<SUP>2</SUP> hr. The skin can be 
exposed to this degree of thermal radiation for 3 minutes or longer with 
no serious detrimental effect. The result would be the same as a bad 
sunburn. Therefore, the standard for areas in which there will be 
exposed people, e.g. outdoor recreation areas such as playgrounds and 
parks, is set at 450 Btu/hr. sq. ft. Areas covered also include open 
space ancillary to residential structures, such as yard areas and 
vehicle parking areas.
    (3) Acceptable Separation Distance From a Potential Fire Hazard. 
This is the actual setback required for the safety of occupied buildings 
and their inhabitants, and people in open spaces (exposed areas) from a 
potential fire hazard. The specific distance required for safety from 
such a hazard depends upon the nature and the volume of the substance. 
The Technical Guidebook entitled ``Urban Development Siting With Respect 
to Hazardous/Commercial Industrial Facilities,'' which supplements this 
regulation, contains the technical guidance required to compute 
Acceptable Separation Distances (ASD) for those flammable substances 
most often encountered.
    (b) Blast Overpressure:
    The Acceptable Separation Distance (ASD) for people and structures 
from materials prone to explosion is dependent upon the resultant blast 
measured in pounds per square inch (psi) overpressure. It has been 
determined by the military and corroborated by two independent studies 
conducted for the Department of Housing and Urban Development that 0.5 
psi is the acceptable level of blast overpressure for both buildings and 
occupants, because a frame structure can normally withstand that level 
of external exertion with no serious structural damage, and it is 
unlikely that human beings inside the building would normally suffer any 
serious injury. Using this as the safety standard for blast 
overpressure, nomographs have been developed from which an ASD can be 
determined for a given quantify of hazardous substance. These nomographs 
are contained in the handbook with detailed instructions on their use.
    (c) Hazard evaluation:
    The Acceptable Separation Distances for buildings, which are 
determined for thermal radiation and blast overpressure, delineate 
separate identifiable danger zones for each potential accident source. 
For some materials the fire danger zone will have the greatest radius 
and cover the largest area, while for others the explosion danger zone 
will be the greatest. For example, conventional petroleum fuel products 
stored in unpressurized tanks do not emit blast overpressure of 
dangerous levels when ignited. In most cases, hazardous substances will 
be stored in pressurized containers. The resulting blast overpressure 
will be experienced at a greater distance than the resulting thermal 
radiation for the standards set in Section 51.203.

[[Page 296]]

In any event the hazard requiring the greatest separation distance will 
prevail in determining the location of HUD-assisted projects.
    The standards developed for the protection of people and property 
are given in the following table.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                              Blast
                                    Thermal radiation     overpressure
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Amount of acceptable exposure      10,000 BTU/ft<SUP>2</SUP> hr..  0.5 psi.
 allowed for building structures.
Amount of acceptable exposure      450 BTU/ft<SUP>2</SUP> hr.....  0.5 psi.
 allowed for people in open areas.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

                             Problem Example

    The following example is given as a guide to assist in understanding 
how the procedures are used to determine an acceptable separation 
distance. The technical data are found in the HUD Guidebook. Liquid 
propane is used in the example since it is both an explosion and a fire 
hazard.
    In this hypothetical case a proposed housing project is to be 
located 850 feet from a 30,000 gallon liquid propane (LPG) tank. The 
objective is to determine the acceptable separation distance from the 
LPG tank. Since propane is both explosive and fire prone it will be 
necessary to determine the ASD for both explosion and for fire. The 
greatest of the two will govern. There is no dike around the tank in 
this example.
    Nomographs from the technical Guidebook have been reproduced to 
facilitate the solving of the problem.

                            ASD For Explosion

    Use Figure 1 to determine the acceptable separation distance for 
explosion.
    The graph depicted on Figure 1 is predicated on a blast overpressure 
of 0.5 psi.
    The ASD in feet can be determined by applying the quantity of the 
hazard (in gallons) to the graph.
    In this case locate the 30,000 gallon point on the horizontal axis 
and draw a vertical line from that point to the intersection with the 
straight line curve. Then draw a horizontal line from the point where 
the lines cross to the left vertical axis where the ACCEPTABLE 
SEPARATION DISTANCE of 660 feet is found.
    Therefore the ASD for explosion is 660 feet
    Since the proposed project site is located 850 feet from the tank it 
is located at a safe distance with regards to blast overpressure.

[[Page 297]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC12OC91.001

                              ASD For Fire

    To determine the ASD for fire it will be necessary to first find the 
fire width (diameter of the fireball) on Figure 2. Then apply this to 
Figure 3 to determine the ASD.
    Since there are two safety standards for fire: (a) 10,000 BTU/
ft<SUP>2</SUP> hr. for buildings; and (b) 450 BTU/ft<SUP>2</SUP> hr. for 
people in exposed areas, it will be necessary to determine an ASD for 
each.
    To determine the fire width locate the 30,000 gallon point on the 
horizontal axis on Figure 2 and draw a vertical line to the straight 
line curve. Then draw a horizontal line from the point where the lines 
cross to the left vertical axis where the FIRE WIDTH is found to be 350 
feet.

[[Page 298]]

    Now locate the 350 ft. point on the horizontal axis of Figure 3 and 
draw a vertical line from that point to curves 1 and 2. Then draw 
horizontal lines from the points where the lines cross to the left 
vertical axis where the ACCEPTABLE SEPARATION DISTANCES of 240 feet for 
buildings and 1,150 feet for exposure to people is found.
    Based on this the proposed project site is located at a safe 
distance from a potential fireball. However, exposed playgrounds or 
other exposed areas of congregation must be at least 1,150 feet from the 
tank, or be appropriately shielded from a potential fireball.

(Source: HUD Handbook, ``Urban Development Siting With Respect to 
Hazardous Commercial/Industrial Facilities.'')
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC12OC91.002


[[Page 299]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC12OC91.003

[49 FR 5105, Feb. 10, 1984; 49 FR 12214, Mar. 29, 1984]

[[Page 300]]


<R04>
  Subpart D--Siting of HUD Assisted Projects in Runway Clear Zones at 
Civil Airports and Clear Zones and Accident Potential Zones at Military 
                                Airfields

    Authority: Sec. 2, Housing Act of 1949, as amended, 42 U.S.C. 1441, 
affirmed by sec. 2, HUD Act of 1969, Pub. L. 90-448; sec. 7(d), HUD Act 
of 1965, 42 U.S.C. 3535(d); OMB, Fed'l Mgmt. Cir. 75-2: Compatible Land 
Uses At Federal Airfields.

    Source: 49 FR 880, Jan. 6, 1984, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 51.300  Purpose.

    It is the purpose of this subpart to promote compatible land uses 
around civil airports and military airfields by identifying suitable 
land uses for Runway Clear Zones at civil airports and Clear Zones and 
Accident Potential Zones at military airfields and by establishing them 
as standards for providing HUD assistance, subsidy or insurance.

[49 FR 880, Jan. 6, 1984, as amended at 61 FR 13334, Mar. 26, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 51.301  Definitions.

    For the purposes of this regulation, the following definitions 
apply:
    (a) Accident Potential Zone. An area at military airfields which is 
beyond the Clear Zone. The standards for the Accident Potential Zones 
are set out in Department of Defense Instruction 4165.57, ``Air 
Installations Compatible Use Zones,'' November 8, 1977, 32 CFR part 256. 
There are no Accident Potential Zones at civil airports.
    (b) Airport Operator. The civilian or military agency, group or 
individual which exercises control over the operations of the civil 
airport or military airfield.
    (c) Civil Airport. An existing commercial service airport as 
designated in the National Plan of Integrated Airport Systems prepared 
by the Federal Aviation Administration in accordance with section 504 of 
the Airport and Airway Improvement Act of 1982.
    (d) Runway Clear Zones and Clear Zones. Areas immediately beyond the 
ends of a runway. The standards for Runway Clear Zones for civil 
airports are established by FAA regulation 14 CFR part 152. The 
standards for Clear Zones for military airfields are established by DOD 
Instruction 4165.57, 32 CFR part 256.


<R05>
Sec. 51.302  Coverage.

    (a) These policies apply to HUD programs which provide assistance, 
subsidy or insurance for construction, land development, community 
development or redevelopment or any other provision of facilities and 
services which are designed to make land available for construction. 
When the HUD assistance, subsidy or insurance is used to make land 
available for construction rather than for the actual construction, the 
provision of the HUD assistance, subsidy or insurance shall be dependent 
upon whether the facility to be built is itself acceptable in accordance 
with the standards in Sec. 51.303.
    (b) These policies apply not only to new construction but also to 
substantial or major modernization and rehabilitation and to any other 
program which significantly prolongs the physical or economic life of 
existing facilities or which, in the case of Accident Potential Zones:
    (1) Changes the use of the facility so that it becomes one which is 
no longer acceptable in accordance with the standards contained in 
Sec. 51.303(b);
    (2) Significantly increases the density or number of people at the 
site; or
    (3) Introduces explosive, flammable or toxic materials to the area.
    (c) Except as noted in Sec. 51.303(a)(3), these policies do not 
apply to HUD programs where the action only involves the purchase, sale 
or rental of an existing property without significantly prolonging the 
physical or economic life of the property.
    (d) The policies do not apply to research or demonstration projects 
which do not result in new construction or reconstruction, to interstate 
land sales registration, or to any action or emergency assistance which 
is provided to save lives, protect property, protect public health and 
safety, or remove debris and wreckage.

[49 FR 880, Jan. 6, 1984, as amended at 61 FR 13334, Mar. 26, 1996]

[[Page 301]]


<R05>
Sec. 51.303  General policy.

    It is HUD's general policy to apply standards to prevent 
incompatible development around civil airports and military airfields.
    (a) HUD policy for actions in Runway Clear Zones and Clear Zones.
    (1) HUD policy is not to provide any assistance, subsidy or 
insurance for projects and actions covered by this part except as stated 
in Sec. 51.303(a)(2) below.
    (2) If a project proposed for HUD assistance, subsidy or insurance 
is one which will not be frequently used or occupied by people, HUD 
policy is to provide assistance, subsidy or insurance only when written 
assurances are provided to HUD by the airport operator to the effect 
that there are no plans to purchase the land involved with such 
facilities as part of a Runway Clear Zone or Clear Zone acquisition 
program.
    (3) Special notification requirements for Runway Clear Zones and 
Clear Zones. In all cases involving HUD assistance, subsidy, or 
insurance for the purchase or sale of an existing property in a Runway 
Clear Zone or Clear Zone, HUD (or the responsible entity or recipient 
under 24 CFR part 58) shall advise the buyer that the property is in a 
Runway Clear Zone or Clear Zone, what the implications of such a 
location are, and that there is a possibility that the property may, at 
a later date, be acquired by the airport operator. The buyer must sign a 
statement acknowledging receipt of this information.
    (b) HUD policy for actions in Accident Potential Zones at Military 
Airfields. HUD policy is to discourage the provision of any assistance, 
subsidy or insurance for projects and actions in the Accident Potential 
Zones. To be approved, projects must be generally consistent with the 
recommendations in the Land Use Compatibility Guidelines For Accident 
Potential Zones chart contained in DOD Instruction 4165.57, 32 CFR part 
256.

[49 FR 880, Jan. 6, 1984, as amended at 61 FR 13334, Mar. 26, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 51.304  Responsibilities.

    (a) The following persons have the authority to approve actions in 
Accident Potential Zones:
    (1) For programs subject to environmental review under 24 CFR part 
58: the Certifying Officer of the responsible entity as defined in 24 
CFR part 58.
    (2) For all other HUD programs: the HUD approving official having 
approval authority for the project.
    (b) The following persons have the authority to approve actions in 
Runway Clear Zones and Clear Zones:
    (1) For programs subject to environmental review under 24 CFR part 
58: The Certifying Officer of the responsible entity as defined in 24 
CFR part 58.
    (2) For all other HUD programs: the Program Assistant Secretary.

[61 FR 13335, Mar. 26, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 51.305  Implementation.

    (a) Projects already approved for assistance. This regulation does 
not apply to any project approved for assistance prior to the effective 
date of the regulation whether the project was actually under 
construction at that date or not.
    (b) Acceptable data on Runway Clear Zones, Clear Zones and Accident 
Potential Zones. The only Runway Clear Zones, Clear Zones and Accident 
Potential Zones which will be recognized in applying this part are those 
provided by the airport operators and which for civil airports are 
defined in accordance with FAA regulations 14 CFR part 152 or for 
military airfields, DOD Instruction 4165.57, 32 CFR part 256. All data, 
including changes, related to the dimensions of Runway Clear Zones for 
civil airports shall be verified with the nearest FAA Airports District 
Office before use by HUD.
    (c) Changes in Runway Clear Zones, Clear Zones, and Accident 
Potential Zones. If changes in the Runway Clear Zones, Clear Zones or 
Accident Potential Zones are made, the field offices shall immediately 
adopt these revised zones for use in reviewing proposed projects.
    (d) The decision to approve projects in the Runway Clear Zones, 
Clear

[[Page 302]]

Zones and Accident Potential Zones must be documented as part of the 
enviornmental assessment or, when no assessment is required, as part of 
the project file.


<R03>
PART 52--INTERGOVERNMENTAL REVIEW OF DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMS AND ACTIVITIES--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
52.1  What is the purpose of these regulations?
52.2  What definitions apply to these regulations?
52.3  What programs and activities of the Department are subject to 
          these regulations?
52.4  What are the Secretary's general responsibilities under the Order?
52.5  What is the Secretary's obligation with respect to Federal 
          interagency coordination?
52.6  What procedures apply to the selection of programs and activities 
          under these regulations?
52.7  How does the Secretary communicate with state and local officials 
          concerning the Department's programs and activities?
52.8  How does the Secretary provide states an opportunity to comment on 
          proposed Federal financial assistance and direct Federal 
          development?
52.9  How does the Secretary receive and respond to comments?
52.10  How does the Secretary make efforts to accommodate 
          intergovernmental concerns?
52.11  What are the Secretary's obligations in interstate situations?
52.12  [Reserved]

    Authority: 31 U.S.C. 6506; 42 U.S.C. 3334, 3535(d).

    Source: 48 FR 29216, June 24, 1983, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 52.1  What is the purpose of these regulations?

    (a) The regulations in this part implement Executive Order 12372, 
``Intergovernmental Review of Federal Programs,'' issued July 14, 1982 
and amended on April 8, 1983. These regulations also implement 
applicable provisions of section 401 of the Intergovernmental 
Cooperation Act of 1968 and section 204 of the Demonstration Cities and 
Metropolitan Development Act of 1966.
    (b) These regulations are intended to foster an intergovernmental 
partnership and a strengthened Federalism by relying on state processes 
and on state, areawide, regional and local coordination for review of 
proposed Federal financial assistance and direct Federal development.
    (c) These regulations are intended to aid the internal management of 
the Department, and are not intended to create any right or benefit 
enforceable at law by a party against the Department or its officers.


<R05>
Sec. 52.2  What definitions apply to these regulations?

    Order means Executive Order 12372, issued July 14, 1982, and amended 
April 8, 1983 and titled ``Intergovernmental Review of Federal 
Programs.''
    Secretary means the Secretary of the U.S. Department of Housing and 
Urban Development or an official or employee of the Department acting 
for the Secretary under a delegation of authority.
    State means any of the 50 states, the District of Columbia, the 
Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana 
Islands, Guam, American Samoa, the U.S. Virgin Islands, or the Trust 
Territory of the Pacific Islands.

[48 FR 29216, June 24, 1983, as amended at 61 FR 5205, Feb. 9, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 52.3  What programs and activities of the Department are subject to these regulations?

    The Secretary publishes in the Federal Register a list of the 
Department's programs and activities that are subject to these 
regulations and identifies which of these are subject to the 
requirements of section 204 of the Demonstration Cities and Metropolitan 
Development Act.


<R05>
Sec. 52.4  What are the Secretary's general responsibilities under the Order?

    (a) The Secretary provides opportunities for consultation by elected 
officials of those state and local governments that would provide the 
non-federal funds for, or that would be directly affected by, proposed 
Federal financial assistance from, or direct Federal development by, the 
Department.

[[Page 303]]

    (b) If a state adopts a process under the Order to review and 
coordinate proposed Federal financial assistance and direct Federal 
development, the Secretary, to the extent permitted by law:
    (1) Uses the state process to determine official views of state and 
local elected officials;
    (2) Communicates with state and local elected officials as early in 
a program planning cycle as is reasonably feasible to explain specific 
plans and actions;
    (3) Makes efforts to accommodate state and local elected officials' 
concerns with proposed Federal financial assistance and direct Federal 
development that are communicated through the state process;
    (4) Allows the states to simplify and consolidate existing federally 
required state plan submissions;
    (5) Where state planning and budgeting systems are sufficient and 
where permitted by law, encourages the substitution of state plans for 
federally required state plans;
    (6) Seeks the coordination of views of affected state and local 
elected officials in one state with those of another state when proposed 
Federal financial assistance or direct Federal development has an impact 
on interstate metropolitan urban centers or other interstate areas; and
    (7) Supports state and local governments by discouraging the 
reauthorization or creation of any planning organization which is 
federally-funded, which has a limited purpose, and which is not 
adequately representative of, or accountable to, state or local elected 
officials.


<R05>
Sec. 52.5  What is the Secretary's obligation with respect to Federal interagency coordination?

    The Secretary, to the extent practicable, consults with and seeks 
advice from all other substantially affected Federal departments and 
agencies in an effort to assure full coordination between such agencies 
and the Department regarding programs and activities covered under these 
regulations.


<R05>
Sec. 52.6  What procedures apply to the selection of programs and activities under these regulations?

    (a) A state may select any program or activity published in the 
Federal Register in accordance with Sec. 52.3 of this part for 
intergovernmental review under these regulations. Each state, before 
selecting programs and activities shall consult with local elected 
officials.
    (b) Each state that adopts a process shall notify the Secretary of 
the Department's programs and activities selected for that process.
    (c) A state may notify the Secretary of changes in its selections at 
any time. For each change, the state shall submit to the Secretary an 
assurance that the state has consulted with local elected officials 
regarding the change. The Department may establish deadlines by which 
states are required to inform the Secretary of changes in their program 
selections.
    (d) The Secretary uses a state's process as soon as feasible, 
depending on individual programs and activities, after the Secretary is 
notified of its selections.


<R05>
Sec. 52.7  How does the Secretary communicate with state and local officials concerning the Department's programs and activities?

    (a) For those programs and activities covered by a state process 
under Sec. 52.6, the Secretary, to the extent permitted by law--
    (1) Uses the state process to determine views of state and local 
elected officials; and,
    (2) Communicates with state and local elected officials, through the 
state process, as early in a program planning cycle as is reasonably 
feasible to explain specific plans and actions.
    (b) The Secretary provides notice to directly affected state, 
areawide, regional, and local entities in a state of proposed Federal 
financial assistance or direct Federal development if--
    (1) The state has not adopted a process under the Order; or
    (2) The assistance or development involves a program or activity not 
selected for the state process.


[[Page 304]]



This notice may be made by publication in the Federal Register or other 
appropriate means, which the Department in its discretion deems 
appropriate.


<R05>
Sec. 52.8  How does the Secretary provide states an opportunity to comment on proposed Federal financial assistance and direct Federal development?

    (a) Except in unusual circumstances, the Secretary gives state 
processes or directly affected state, areawide, regional and local 
officials and entities--
    (1) At least 30 days from the date established by the Secretary to 
comment on proposed Federal financial assistance under: (i) A covered 
mortgage insurance program, (ii) the Urban Development Action Grant 
Program, or (iii) the Housing Development Grant Program.
    (2) At least 60 days from the date established by the Secretary to 
comment on proposed Federal financial assistance other than under a 
program covered by paragraph (a)(1).
    (b) This section also applies to comments in cases in which the 
review, coordination, and communication with the Department have been 
delegated.
    (c) Applicants for programs and activities subject to section 204 of 
the Demonstration Cities and Metropolitan Act shall allow areawide 
agencies a 60-day opportunity for review and comment.

[48 FR 29216, June 24, 1983, as amended at 49 FR 24653, June 14, 1984]


<R05>
Sec. 52.9  How does the Secretary receive and respond to comments?

    (a) The Secretary follows the procedures in Sec. 52.10 if--
    (1) A state office or official is designated to act as a single 
point of contact between a state process and all Federal agencies, and
    (2) That office or official transmits a state process recommendation 
for a program selected under Sec. 52.6.
    (b)(1) The single point of contact is not obligated to transmit 
comments from state, areawide, regional or local officials and entities 
where there is no state process recommendation.
    (2) If a state process recommendation is transmitted by a single 
point of contact, all comments from state, areawide, regional, and local 
officials and entities that differ from it must also be transmitted.
    (c) If a state has not established a process, or is unable to submit 
a state process recommendation, state, areawide, regional and local 
officials and entities may submit comments either to the applicant or to 
the Department.
    (d) If a program or activity is not selected for a state process, 
state, areawide, regional and local officials and entities may submit 
comments either to the applicant or to the Department. In addition, if a 
state process recommendation for a nonselected program or activity is 
transmitted to the Department by the single point of contact, the 
Secretary follows the procedures of Sec. 52.10 of this part.
    (e) The Secretary considers comments which do not constitute a state 
process recommendation submitted under these regulations and for which 
the Secretary is not required to apply the procedures of Sec. 52.10 of 
this part, when such comments are provided by a single point of contact, 
by the applicant, or directly to the Department by a commenting party.


<R05>
Sec. 52.10  How does the Secretary make efforts to accommodate intergovernmental concerns?

    (a) If a state process provides a state process recommendation to 
the Department through its single point of contact, the Secretary 
either--
    (1) Accepts the recommendation;
    (2) Reaches a mutually agreeable solution with the state process; or
    (3) Provides the single point of contact with such written 
explanation of its decision, as the Secretary in his or her discretion 
deems appropriate. The Secretary may also supplement the written 
explanation by providing the explanation to the single point of contact 
by telephone, other telecommunication, or other means.
    (b) In any explanation under paragraph (a)(3) of this section, the 
Secretary informs the single point of contact that--
    (1) The Department will not implement its decision for at least ten 
days

[[Page 305]]

after the single point of contact receives the explanation; or
    (2) The Secretary has reviewed the decision and determined that, 
because of unusual circumstances, the waiting period of at least ten 
days is not feasible.
    (c) For purposes of computing the waiting period under paragraph 
(b)(1) of this section, a single point of contact is presumed to have 
received written notification 5 days after the date of mailing of such 
notification.


<R05>
Sec. 52.11  What are the Secretary's obligations in interstate situations?

    (a) The Secretary is responsible for--
    (1) Identifying proposed Federal financial assistance and direct 
Federal development that have an impact on interstate areas;
    (2) Notifying appropriate officials and entities in states which 
have adopted a process and which select the Department's program or 
activity.
    (3) Making efforts to identify and notify the affected state, 
areawide, regional, and local officials and entities in those states 
that have not adopted a process under the Order or do not select the 
Department's program or activity;
    (4) Responding pursuant to Sec. 52.10 of this part if the Secretary 
receives a recommendation from a designated areawide agency transmitted 
by a single point of contact, in cases in which review, coordination, 
and communication with the Department have been delegated.
    (b) The Secretary uses the procedures in Sec. 52.10 if a state 
process provides a state process recommendation to the Department 
through a single point of contact.


<R05>
Sec. 52.12  [Reserved]


<R03>
PART 55--FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT--Table of Contents

<R05>


                           Subpart A--General

Sec.
55.1  Purpose and basic responsibility.
55.2  Terminology.
55.3  Assignment of responsibilities.

   Subpart B--Application of Executive Order on Floodplain Management

55.10  Environmental review procedures under 24 CFR parts 50 and 58.
55.11  Applicability of subpart C decision making process.
55.12  Inapplicability of 24 CFR part 55 to certain categories of 
          proposed actions.

Subpart C--Procedures for Making Determinations on Floodplain Management

55.20  Decision making process.
55.21  Notification of floodplain hazard.
55.22  Conveyance restrictions for the disposition of multifamily real 
          property.
55.23  [Reserved]
55.24  Aggregation.
55.25  Areawide compliance.
55.26  Adoption of another agency's review under the executive orders.
55.27  Documentation.

    Authority: 42 U.S.C. 3535(d) and 4001-4128; E.O. 11988, 42 FR 26951, 
3 CFR, 1977 Comp., p. 117.

    Source: 59 FR 19107, Apr. 21, 1994, unless otherwise noted.


<R04>
                           Subpart A--General


<R05>
Sec. 55.1  Purpose and basic responsibility.

    (a) This part implements the requirements of Executive Order 11988, 
Floodplain Management, and employs the principles of the Unified 
National Program for Floodplain Management. It covers the proposed 
acquisition, construction, improvement, disposition, financing and use 
of properties located in a floodplain for which approval is required 
either from HUD under any applicable HUD program or from a grant 
recipient subject to 24 CFR part 58. This part does not prohibit 
approval of such actions (except for certain actions in high hazard 
areas), but provides a consistent means for implementing the 
Department's interpretation of the executive order in the project 
approval decision making processes of HUD and of grant recipients 
subject to 24 CFR part 58. The implementation of Executive Order 11988 
under this part shall be conducted by HUD, for Department-administered 
programs subject to environmental review under 24 CFR part 50, and by 
authorized recipients of HUD financial assistance subject to 
environmental review under 24 CFR part 58.

[[Page 306]]

    (b) Under section 202(a) of the Flood Disaster Protection Act of 
1973, 42 U.S.C. 4106(a), proposed HUD financial assistance (including 
mortgage insurance) for acquisition or construction purposes in any 
``area having special flood hazards'' (a flood zone designated by the 
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA)) shall not be approved in 
communities identified by FEMA as eligible for flood insurance but which 
are not participating in the National Flood Insurance Program. This 
prohibition only applies to proposed HUD financial assistance in a FEMA-
designated area of special flood hazard one year after the community has 
been formally notified by FEMA of the designation of the affected area. 
This prohibition is not applicable to HUD financial assistance in the 
form of formula grants to states, including financial assistance under 
the State-administered CDBG Program (24 CFR part 570, subpart I) and the 
State-administered Rental Rehabilitation Program (24 CFR 511.51), 
Emergency Shelter Grant amounts allocated to States (24 CFR parts 575 
and 576), and HOME funds provided to a state under Title II of the 
Cranston-Gonzalez National Affordable Housing Act (42 U.S.C. 12701-
12839).
    (c) Except with respect to actions listed in Sec. 55.12(c), no HUD 
financial assistance (including mortgage insurance) may be approved 
after May 23, 1994 with respect to:
    (1) Any action, other than a functionally dependent use, located in 
a floodway;
    (2) Any critical action located in a coastal high hazard area; or
    (3) Any non-critical action located in a coastal high hazard area, 
unless the action is designed for location in a coastal high hazard area 
or is a functionally dependent use. An action will be considered to be 
designed for location in a coastal high hazard area if:
    (i) In the case of new construction or substantial improvement, the 
work meets the current standards for V zones in FEMA regulations (44 CFR 
60.3(e)) and, if applicable, the Minimum Property Standards for such 
construction in 24 CFR 200.926d(c)(4)(iii); or
    (ii) In the case of existing construction (including any minor 
improvements):
    (A) The work met FEMA elevation and construction standards for a 
coastal high hazard area (or if such a zone or such standards were not 
designated, the 100-year floodplain) applicable at the time the original 
improvements were constructed; or
    (B) If the original improvements were constructed before FEMA 
standards for the 100-year floodplain became effective or before FEMA 
designated the location of the action as within the 100-year floodplain, 
the work would meet at least the earliest FEMA standards for 
construction in the 100-year floodplain.


<R05>
Sec. 55.2  Terminology.

    (a) With the exception of those terms defined in paragraph (b) of 
this section, the terms used in this part shall follow the definitions 
contained in section 6 of Executive Order 11988 and in the Floodplain 
Management Guidelines for Implementing Executive Order 11988 (43 FR 
6030, February 10, 1978) issued by the Water Resources Council; and the 
terms ``criteria'' and ``Regular Program'', shall follow the definitions 
contained in FEMA regulations at 44 CFR 59.1.
    (b) The definitions of the following terms in Executive Order 11988 
and related documents affecting this part are modified for purposes of 
this part:
    (1) Coastal high hazard area means the area subject to high velocity 
waters, including but not limited to hurricane wave wash or tsunamis. 
The area is designated on a Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) under FEMA 
regulations as Zone V1-30, VE, or V. (FIRMs as well as Flood Hazard 
Boundary Maps (FHBM) shall also be relied on for the delineation of 
``100-year floodplains'' (Sec. 55.2(b)(8)), ``500-year floodplains'' 
(Sec. 55.2(b)(3)), and ``floodways'' (Sec. 55.2(b)(4)).
    (2)(i) Critical action means any activity for which even a slight 
chance of flooding would be too great, because such flooding might 
result in loss of life, injury to persons, or damage to property. 
Critical actions include activities that create, maintain or extend

[[Page 307]]

the useful life of those structures or facilities that:
    (A) Produce, use or store highly volatile, flammable, explosive, 
toxic or water-reactive materials;
    (B) Provide essential and irreplaceable records or utility or 
emergency services that may become lost or inoperative during flood and 
storm events (e.g., data storage centers, generating plants, principal 
utility lines, emergency operations centers including fire and police 
stations, and roadways providing sole egress from flood-prone areas); or
    (C) Are likely to contain occupants who may not be sufficiently 
mobile to avoid loss of life or injury during flood or storm events, 
e.g., persons who reside in hospitals, nursing homes, convalescent 
homes, intermediate care facilities, board and care facilities, and 
retirement service centers. Housing for independent living for the 
elderly is not considered a critical action.
    (ii) Critical actions shall not be approved in floodways or coastal 
high hazard areas.
    (3) 500-year floodplain means the minimum floodplain of concern for 
Critical Actions and is the area subject to inundation from a flood 
having a 0.2 percent chance of occurring in any given year. (See 
Sec. 55.2(b)(1) for appropriate data sources.)
    (4) Floodway means that portion of the floodplain which is effective 
in carrying flow, where the flood hazard is generally the greatest, and 
where water depths and velocities are the highest. The term ``floodway'' 
as used here is consistent with ``regulatory floodways'' as identified 
by FEMA. (See Sec. 55.2(b)(1) for appropriate data sources.)
    (5) Functionally dependent use means a land use that must 
necessarily be conducted in close proximity to water (e.g., a dam, 
marina, port facility, water-front park, and many types of bridges).
    (6) High hazard area means a floodway or a coastal high hazard area.
    (7) 100-year floodplain means the floodplain of concern for this 
part and is the area subject to a one percent or greater chance of 
flooding in any given year. (See Sec. 55.2(b)(1) for appropriate data 
sources.)
    (8)(i) Substantial improvement means either:
    (A) Any repair, reconstruction, modernization or improvement of a 
structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market 
value of the structure either:
    (1) Before the improvement or repair is started; or
    (2) If the structure has been damaged, and is being restored, before 
the damage occurred; or
    (B) Any repair, reconstruction, modernization or improvement of a 
structure that results in an increase of more than twenty percent in the 
number of dwelling units in a residential project or in the average peak 
number of customers and employees likely to be on-site at any one time 
for a commercial or industrial project.
    (ii) Substantial improvement may not be defined to include either:
    (A) Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with 
existing state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications 
that is solely necessary to assure safe living conditions, or
    (B) Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of 
Historical Places or on a State Inventory of Historic Places.
    (iii) Structural repairs, reconstruction, or improvements not 
meeting this definition are considered ``minor improvements''.


<R05>
Sec. 55.3  Assignment of responsibilities.

    (a)(1) The Assistant Secretary for Community Planning and 
Development (CPD) shall oversee: (i) The Department's implementation of 
the order and this part in all HUD programs, and
    (ii) The implementation activities of HUD program managers and grant 
recipients for HUD financial assistance subject to 24 CFR part 58.
    (2) In performing these responsibilities, the Assistant Secretary 
for CPD shall make pertinent policy determinations in cooperation with 
appropriate program offices and provide necessary assistance, training, 
publications, and procedural guidance.
    (b) Other HUD Assistant Secretaries, the General Counsel, and the 
President of the Government National Mortgage Association (GNMA) shall: 
(1) Ensure compliance with this part for all actions

[[Page 308]]

under their jurisdiction that are proposed to be conducted, supported, 
or permitted in a floodplain;
    (2) Ensure that actions approved by HUD or grant recipients are 
monitored and that any prescribed mitigation is implemented;
    (3) Ensure that the offices under their jurisdiction have the 
technical resources to implement the requirements of this part; and
    (4) Incorporate in departmental regulations, handbooks, and project 
and site standards those criteria, standards, and procedures necessary 
to comply with the requirements of this part.
    (c) Recipient Certifying Officer. In accordance with section 9 of 
Executive Order 11988, Certifying Officers of grant recipients 
administering activities subject to 24 CFR part 58 shall: (1) Comply 
with this part in carrying out HUD-assisted programs, and
    (2) Monitor approved actions and ensure that any prescribed 
mitigation is implemented.


<R04>
   Subpart B--Application of Executive Order on Floodplain Management


<R05>
Sec. 55.10  Environmental review procedures under 24 CFR parts 50 and 58.

    (a) Where an environmental review is required under the National 
Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (NEPA), 42 U.S.C. 4332, and 24 CFR part 
50 or part 58, compliance with this part shall be completed before the 
completion of an environmental assessment (EA) including a finding of no 
significant environmental impact (FONSI), or an environmental impact 
statement (EIS), in accordance with the decision points listed in 24 CFR 
50.17 (a) through (h), or before the preparation of an EA under 24 CFR 
58.40 or an EIS under 24 CFR 58.36. For types of proposed actions that 
are categorically excluded from National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) 
requirements under 24 CFR part 50 (or part 58), compliance with this 
part shall be completed before the Department's initial (SAMA, 
conditional, etc.) approval (or the conditional commitment or approval 
by a grant recipient subject to 24 CFR part 58) of proposed actions in a 
floodplain.
    (b) The categorical exclusion of certain proposed actions from 
environmental review requirements under NEPA and 24 CFR parts 50 and 58 
(see 24 CFR 50.20 and 58.35) does not exclude those actions from 
compliance with this part.


<R05>
Sec. 55.11  Applicability of subpart C decision making process.

    (a) Before reaching the decision points described in Sec. 55.10(a), 
HUD (for Department-administered programs) or the grant recipient (for 
HUD financial assistance subject to 24 CFR part 58) shall determine 
whether Executive Order 11988 and this part apply to the proposed 
action.
    (b) If Executive Order 11988 applies, the approval of a proposed 
action or initial commitment shall be made in accordance with this part. 
The primary purpose of Executive Order 11988 is to ``avoid direct or 
indirect support of floodplain development.''
    (c) The following table indicates the applicability, by location and 
type of action, of the decision making process for implementing 
Executive Order 11988 under subpart C of this part.

                                                     Table 1
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                             Type of proposed location
  Type of proposed action (new   -------------------------------------------------------------------------------
     reviewable action or an                                                   100-year        Area between 100-
           amendment)                  Floodways         Coastal high     floodplain outside     and 500-year
                                                         hazard areas      high hazard area       floodplain
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Critical actions as defined in    Critical actions    Critical actions    Allowed if the      Allowed if the
 Sec.  55.2(b)(2).                 not allowed.        not allowed.        proposed critical   proposed critical
                                                                           action is           action is
                                                                           processed under     processed under
                                                                           Sec.  55.20 \1\.    Sec.  55.20 \1\.

[[Page 309]]

 
Non-critical actions not          Allowed only if     Allowed only if     Allowed if the      Any non-critical
 excluded under Sec.  55.12 (b)    the proposed        the proposed        proposed action     action is allowed
 or (c).                           action is a         action: (1) Is      is processed        without
                                   functionally        either (a)          under Sec.  55.20   processing under
                                   dependent use and   designed for        \1\.                this part.
                                   processed under     location in a
                                   Sec.  55.20 \1\.    coastal high
                                                       hazard area or
                                                       (b) a
                                                       functionally
                                                       dependent use;
                                                       and (2) is
                                                       processed under
                                                       Sec.  55.20 \1\.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Or those paragraphs of Sec.  55.20 that are applicable to an action listed in Sec.  55.12(a).


<R05>
Sec. 55.12  Inapplicability of 24 CFR part 55 to certain categories of proposed actions.

    (a) The decision making steps in Sec. 55.20 (b), (c) and (g) (steps 
2, 3 and 7) shall not apply to the following categories of proposed 
actions: (1) HUD actions involving the disposition of HUD-acquired 
multifamily housing projects or ``bulk sales'' of HUD-acquired one- to 
four-family properties in communities that are in the Regular Program of 
the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) and in good standing (i.e., 
not suspended from program eligibility or placed on probation under 44 
CFR 59.24).
    (2) HUD's actions under section 223(f) of the National Housing Act 
(12 U.S.C. 1715n(f)) for the purchase or refinancing of existing 
multifamily housing projects (including hospitals, nursing homes, board 
and care facilities, and intermediate care facilities) in communities 
that are in good standing under the NFIP.
    (3) HUD mortgage insurance actions for the repair, rehabilitation, 
modernization or improvement of existing multifamily housing projects 
(including nursing homes, board and care facilities and intermediate 
care facilities) and existing one- to four-family properties, in 
communities that are in the Regular Program of the NFIP and are in good 
standing, provided that the number of units is not increased more than 
20 percent, the action does not involve a conversion from nonresidential 
to residential land use, and the footprint of the structure and paved 
areas is not significantly increased.
    (b) The decision making process in Sec. 55.20 shall not apply to the 
following categories of proposed actions: (1) HUD's mortgage insurance 
actions and other financial assistance for the purchasing, mortgaging or 
refinancing of existing one- to four-family properties in communities 
that are in the Regular Program of the National Flood Insurance Program 
(NFIP) and in good standing (i.e., not suspended from program 
eligibility or placed on probation under 44 CFR 59.24), where the action 
is not a critical action and the property is not located in a floodway 
or coastal high hazard area;
    (2) Financial assistance for minor repairs or improvements on one- 
to four-family properties that do not meet the thresholds for 
``substantial improvement'' under Sec. 55.2(b)(8);
    (3) HUD actions involving the disposition of individual HUD-
acquired, one- to four-family properties; and
    (4) HUD guarantees under the Loan Guarantee Recovery Fund Program 
(24 CFR part 573) of loans that refinance existing loans and mortgages, 
where any new construction or rehabilitation financed by the existing 
loan or mortgage has been completed prior to the filing of an 
application under the program, and the refinancing will not allow 
further construction or rehabilitation, nor result in any physical 
impacts or changes except for routine maintenance.
    (c) This part shall not apply to the following categories of 
proposed HUD actions:
    (1) HUD-assisted exempt activities described in 24 CFR 58.34;

[[Page 310]]

    (2) Policy level actions described at 24 CFR 50.16 that do not 
involve site-based decisions;
    (3) HUD's implementation of the full disclosure and other 
registration requirements of the Interstate Land Sales Disclosure Act 
(15 U.S.C. 1701--1720);
    (4) An action involving a repossession, receivership, foreclosure, 
or similar acquisition of property to protect or enforce HUD's financial 
interests under previously approved loans, grants, mortgage insurance, 
or other HUD assistance;
    (5) A minor amendment to a previously approved action with no 
additional adverse impact on or from a floodplain;
    (6) HUD's approval of a project site, an incidental portion of which 
is situated in an adjacent floodplain, but only if: (i) The proposed 
construction and landscaping activities (except for minor grubbing, 
clearing of debris, pruning, sodding, seeding, etc.) do not occupy or 
modify the 100-year floodplain or the 500-year floodplain (for Critical 
Actions);
    (ii) Appropriate provision is made for site drainage; and
    (iii) A covenant or comparable restriction is placed on the 
property's continued use to preserve the floodplain;
    (7) An action for interim assistance, assistance under the section 
232(i) Fire Safety Equipment Loan Insurance Program, or emergency 
activities involving imminent threats to health and safety, and limited 
to necessary protection, repair or restoration activities to control the 
imminent risk or damage;
    (8) HUD's approval of financial assistance for a project on any site 
in a floodplain for which FEMA has issued:
    (i) A final Letter of Map Amendment (LOMA) or final Letter of Map 
Revision (LOMR) that removed the property from a FEMA-designated 
floodplain location; or
    (ii) A conditional LOMA or conditional LOMR if the HUD approval is 
subject to the requirements and conditions of the conditional LOMA or 
conditional LOMR;
    (9) HUD's acceptance of a housing subdivision approval action by the 
Department of Veterans Affairs or Farmers Home Administration in 
accordance with section 535 of the Housing Act of 1949 (42 U.S.C. 
1490o);
    (10) An action that was, on May 23, 1994, already approved by HUD 
(or a grant recipient subject to 24 CFR part 58) and is being 
implemented (unless approval is requested for a new reviewable action), 
provided that Secs. 55.21 and 55.22 apply where the covered transactions 
under those sections have not yet occurred, and that any hazard 
minimization measures required by HUD (or a grant recipient subject to 
24 CFR part 58) under its implementation of Executive Order 11988 before 
May 23, 1994 shall be completed;
    (11) Issuance or use of Housing Vouchers, Certificates under the 
Section 8 Existing Housing Program, or other forms of rental subsidy 
where HUD, the awarding community, or the public housing agency that 
administers the contract awards rental subsidies that are not project-
based (i.e., do not involve site-specific subsidies); and
    (12) Secondary mortgage operations of the Government National 
Mortgage Association (GNMA).

[59 FR 19107, Apr. 21, 1994, as amended at 59 FR 33199, June 28, 1994; 
62 FR 15802, Apr. 2, 1997]


<R04>
Subpart C--Procedures for Making Determinations on Floodplain Management


<R05>
Sec. 55.20  Decision making process.

    The decision making process for compliance with this part contains 
eight steps, including public notices and an examination of practicable 
alternatives. The steps to be followed in the decision making process 
are:
    (a) Step 1. Determine whether the proposed action is located in a 
100-year floodplain (or a 500-year floodplain for a Critical Action). If 
the proposed action would not be conducted in one of those locations, 
then no further compliance with this part is required.
    (b) Step 2. Notify the public at the earliest possible time of a 
proposal to consider an action in a floodplain (or in the 500-year 
floodplain for a Critical Action), and involve the affected and 
interested public in the decision making process.

[[Page 311]]

    (1) The public notices required by paragraphs (b) and (g) of this 
section may be combined with other project notices wherever appropriate. 
Notices required under this part must be bilingual if the affected 
public is largely non-English speaking. In addition, all notices must be 
published in an appropriate local printed news medium, and must be sent 
to federal, state, and local public agencies, organizations, and, where 
not otherwise covered, individuals known to be interested in the 
proposed action.
    (2) A minimum of 15 calendar days shall be allowed for comment on 
the public notice.
    (3) A notice under this paragraph shall state: the name, proposed 
location and description of the activity; the total number of acres of 
floodplain involved; and the HUD official and phone number to contact 
for information. The notice shall indicate the hours and the HUD office 
at which a full description of the proposed action may be reviewed.
    (c) Step 3. Identify and evaluate practicable alternatives to 
locating the proposed action in a floodplain (or the 500-year floodplain 
for a Critical Action).
    (1) The consideration of practicable alternatives to the proposed 
site or method may include:
    (i) Locations outside the floodplain (or 500-year floodplain for a 
Critical Action);
    (ii) Alternative methods to serve the identical project objective; 
and
    (iii) A determination not to approve any action.
    (2) In reviewing practicable alternatives, the Department or a grant 
recipient subject to 24 CFR part 58 shall consider feasible 
technological alternatives, hazard reduction methods and related 
mitigation costs, and environmental impacts.
    (d) Step 4. Identify the potential direct and indirect impacts 
associated with the occupancy or modification of the floodplain (or 500-
year floodplain for a Critical Action).
    (e) Step 5. Where practicable, design or modify the proposed action 
to minimize the potential adverse impacts within the floodplain 
(including the 500-year floodplain for a Critical Action) and to restore 
and preserve its natural and beneficial values. All critical actions in 
the 500-year floodplain shall be designed and built at or above the 100-
year floodplain (in the case of new construction) and modified to 
include:
    (1) Preparation of and participation in an early warning system;
    (2) An emergency evacuation and relocation plan;
    (3) Identification of evacuation route(s) out of the 500-year 
floodplain; and
    (4) Identification marks of past or estimated flood levels on all 
structures.
    (f) Step 6. Reevaluate the proposed action to determine:
    (1) Whether it is still practicable in light of its exposure to 
flood hazards in the floodplain, the extent to which it will aggravate 
the current hazards to other floodplains, and its potential to disrupt 
floodplain values; and
    (2) Whether alternatives preliminarily rejected at Step 3 (paragraph 
(c)) of this section are practicable in light of the information gained 
in Steps 4 and 5 (paragraphs (d) and (e)) of this section.
    (g) Step 7. (1) If the reevaluation results in a determination that 
there is no practicable alternative to locating the proposal in the 
floodplain (or the 500-year floodplain for a Critical Action), publish a 
final notice that includes:
    (i) The reasons why the proposal must be located in the floodplain;
    (ii) A list of the alternatives considered; and
    (iii) All mitigation measures to be taken to minimize adverse 
impacts and to restore and preserve natural and beneficial values.
    (2) In addition, the public notice procedures of Sec. 55.20(b)(1) 
shall be followed, and a minimum of 7 calendar days for public comment 
before approval of the proposed action shall be provided.
    (h) Step 8. Upon completion of the decision making process in Steps 
1 through 7, implement the proposed action. There is a continuing 
responsibility to ensure that the mitigating measures identified in Step 
7 are implemented.

[[Page 312]]


<R05>
Sec. 55.21  Notification of floodplain hazard.

    For HUD programs under which a financial transaction for a property 
located in a floodplain (a 500-year floodplain for a Critical Action) is 
guaranteed, approved, regulated or insured, any private party 
participating in the transaction and any current or prospective tenant 
shall be informed by HUD (or by HUD's designee, e.g., a mortgagor) or a 
grant recipient subject to 24 CFR part 58 of the hazards of the 
floodplain location before the execution of documents completing the 
transaction.


<R05>
Sec. 55.22  Conveyance restrictions for the disposition of multifamily real property.

    (a) In the disposition (including leasing) of multifamily properties 
acquired by HUD that are located in a floodplain (a 500-year floodplain 
for a Critical Action), the documents used for the conveyance must: (1) 
Refer to those uses that are restricted under identified federal, state, 
or local floodplain regulations; and
    (2) Include any land use restrictions limiting the use of the 
property by a grantee or purchaser and any successors under state or 
local laws.
    (b)(1) For disposition of multifamily properties acquired by HUD 
that are located in a 500-year floodplain and contain Critical Actions, 
HUD shall, as a condition of approval of the disposition, require by 
covenant or comparable restriction on the property's use that the 
property owner and successive owners provide written notification to 
each current and prospective tenant concerning: (i) The hazards to life 
and to property for those persons who reside or work in a structure 
located within the 500-year floodplain, and
    (ii) The availability of flood insurance on the contents of their 
dwelling unit or business.
    (2) The notice shall also be posted in the building so that it will 
be legible at all times and easily visible to all persons entering or 
using the building.

[59 FR 19107, Apr. 21, 1994, as amended at 59 FR 33199, June 28, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 55.23  [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 55.24  Aggregation.

    Where two or more actions have been proposed, require compliance 
with subpart C of this part, affect the same floodplain, and are 
currently under review by the Department (or by a grant recipient 
subject to 24 CFR part 58), individual or aggregated approvals may be 
issued. A single compliance review and approval under this section is 
subject to compliance with the decision making process in Sec. 55.20.


<R05>
Sec. 55.25  Areawide compliance.

    (a) A HUD-approved areawide compliance process may be substituted 
for individual compliance or aggregated compliance under Sec. 55.24 
where a series of individual actions is proposed or contemplated in a 
pertinent area for HUD's examination of floodplain hazards. In areawide 
compliances, the area for examination may include a sector of, or the 
entire, floodplain--as relevant to the proposed or anticipated actions. 
The areawide compliance process shall be in accord with the decision 
making process under Sec. 55.20.
    (b) The areawide compliance process shall address the relevant 
executive orders and shall consider local land use planning and 
development controls (e.g., those enforced by the community for purposes 
of floodplain management under the National Flood Insurance Program 
(NFIP)) and applicable state programs for floodplain management. The 
process shall include the development and publication of a strategy that 
identifies the range of development and mitigation measures under which 
the proposed HUD assistance may be approved and that indicates the types 
of actions that will not be approved in the floodplain.
    (c) Individual actions that fit within the types of proposed HUD 
actions specifically addressed under the areawide compliance do not 
require further compliance with Sec. 55.20 except that a determination 
by the Department or a grant recipient subject to 24 CFR part 58 shall 
be made concerning whether the individual action accords with the 
areawide strategy. Where the individual action does not accord with the

[[Page 313]]

areawide strategy, specific development and mitigation measures shall be 
prescribed as a condition of HUD's approval of the individual action.
    (d) Areawide compliance under the procedures of this section is 
subject to the following provisions: (1) It shall be initiated by HUD 
through a formal agreement of understanding with affected local 
governments concerning mutual responsibilities governing the 
preparation, issuance, implementation, and enforcement of the areawide 
strategy;
    (2) It may be performed jointly with one or more Federal departments 
or agencies, or grant recipients subject to 24 CFR part 58 that serve as 
the responsible Federal official;
    (3) It shall establish mechanisms to ensure that: (i) The terms of 
approval of individual actions (e.g., concerning structures and 
facilities) will be consistent with the areawide strategy;
    (ii) The controls set forth in the areawide strategy are implemented 
and enforced in a timely manner; and
    (iii) Where necessary, mitigation for individual actions will be 
established as a condition of approval.
    (4) An open scoping process (in accordance with 40 CFR 1501.7) shall 
be used for determining the scope of issues to be addressed and for 
identifying significant issues related to housing and community 
development for the floodplain;
    (5) Federal, state and local agencies with expertise in floodplain 
management, flood evacuation preparedness, land use planning and 
building regulation, or soil and natural resource conservation shall be 
invited to participate in the scoping process and to provide advice and 
comments; and
    (6) Eligibility for participation in and the use of the areawide 
compliance must be limited to communities that are in the Regular 
Program of the National Flood Insurance Program and in good standing 
(i.e., not suspended from program eligibility or placed on probation 
under 44 CFR 59.24), thereby demonstrating a capacity for and commitment 
to floodplain management standards sufficient to perform 
responsibilities under this part.
    (7) An expiration date (not to exceed ten years from the date of the 
formal adoption by the local governments) for HUD approval of areawide 
compliance under this part must be stated in the agreement between the 
local governments and HUD. In conjunction with the setting of an 
expiration date, a mechanism for HUD's reevaluation of the 
appropriateness of areawide compliance must be provided in the 
agreement.


<R05>
Sec. 55.26  Adoption of another agency's review under the executive orders.

    If a proposed action covered under this part is already covered in a 
prior review performed under the executive order by another agency, that 
review may be adopted by HUD or by a grant recipient authorized under 24 
CFR part 58, provided that:
    (a) There is no pending litigation relating to the other agency's 
review for floodplain management;
    (b) The adopting agency makes a finding that:
    (1) The type of action currently proposed is comparable to the type 
of action previously reviewed by the other agency; and
    (2) There has been no material change in circumstances since the 
previous review was conducted; and
    (c) As a condition of approval, mitigation measures similar to those 
prescribed in the previous review shall be required of the current 
proposed action.


<R05>
Sec. 55.27  Documentation.

    (a) For purposes of compliance with Sec. 55.20, the responsible HUD 
official who would approve the proposed action (or the Certifying 
Officer for a grant recipient subject to 24 CFR part 58) shall require 
that the following actions be documented: (1) Under Sec. 55.20(c), 
practicable alternative sites have been considered outside the 
floodplain, but within the local housing market area, the local public 
utility service area, or the jurisdictional boundaries of a recipient 
unit of general local government (as defined in 24 CFR 570.3), whichever 
geographic area is more appropriate to the proposed HUD action. Actual 
sites under review must be identified and the reasons for the non-
selection of those sites as practicable alternatives must be described; 
and

[[Page 314]]

    (2) Under Sec. 55.20(e), measures to minimize the potential adverse 
impacts of the proposed action on the affected floodplain as identified 
in Sec. 55.20(d) have been applied to the design for the proposed 
action.
    (b) For purposes of compliance with Sec. 55.24, Sec. 55.25, or 
Sec. 55.26 (as appropriate), the responsible HUD official (or the 
Certifying Officer for a grant recipient subject to 24 CFR part 58) who 
would approve the proposed action shall require documentation of 
compliance with the required conditions.
    (c) Documentation of compliance with this part (including copies of 
public notices) must be attached to the environmental assessment, the 
environmental impact statement or the compliance record and be 
maintained as a part of the project file. In addition, for environmental 
impact statements, documentation of compliance with this part must be 
included as a part of the record of decision (or environmental review 
record for grant recipients subject to 24 CFR part 58).


<R03>
PART 58--ENVIRONMENTAL REVIEW PROCEDURES FOR ENTITIES ASSUMING HUD ENVIRONMENTAL RESPONSIBILITIES--Table of Contents

<R05>


    Subpart A--Purpose, Legal Authority, Federal Laws and Authorities

Sec.
58.1  Purpose and applicability.
58.2  Terms, abbreviations and definitions.
58.4  Assumption authority.
58.5  Related Federal laws and authorities.
58.6  Other requirements.

   Subpart B--General Policy: Responsibilities of Responsible Entities

58.10  Basic environmental responsibility.
58.11  Legal capacity and performance.
58.12  Technical and administrative capacity.
58.13  Responsibilities of the certifying officer.
58.14  Interaction with State, Federal and non-Federal entities.
58.15  Tiering.
58.17  Historic preservation requirements for prior section 17 grants.
58.18  Responsibilities of States assuming HUD responsibilities.

       Subpart C--General Policy: Environmental Review Procedures

58.21  Time periods.
58.22  Limitations on activities pending clearance.
58.23  Financial assistance for environmental review.

    Subpart D--Environmental Review Process: Documentation, Range of 
           Activities, Project Aggregation and Classification

58.30  Environmental review process.
58.32  Project aggregation.
58.33  Emergencies.
58.34  Exempt activities.
58.35  Categorical exclusions.
58.36  Environmental assessments.
58.37  Environmental impact statement determinations.
58.38  Environmental review record.

   Subpart E--Environmental Review Process: Environmental Assessments 
                                 (EA's)

58.40  Preparing the environmental assessment.
58.43  Dissemination and/or publication of the findings of no 
          significant impact.
58.45  Public comment periods.
58.46  Time delays for exceptional circumstances.
58.47  Re-evaluation of environmental assessments and other 
          environmental findings.

Subpart F--Environmental Review Process: Environmental Impact Statement 
                             Determinations

58.52  Adoption of other agencies' EISs.
58.53  Use of prior environmental impact statements.

Subpart G--Environmental Review Process: Procedures for Draft, Final and 
              Supplemental Environmental Impact Statements

58.55  Notice of intent to prepare an EIS.
58.56  Scoping process.
58.57  Lead agency designation.
58.59  Public hearings and meetings.
58.60  Preparation and filing of environmental impact statements.

           Subpart H--Release of Funds for Particular Projects

58.70  Notice of intent to request release of funds.
58.71  Request for release of funds and certification.
58.72  HUD or State actions on RROFs and certifications.
58.73  Objections to release of funds.

[[Page 315]]

58.74  Time for objecting.
58.75  Permissible bases for objections.
58.76  Procedure for objections.
58.77  Effect of approval of certification.

    Authority: 12 U.S.C. 1707 note; 42 U.S.C. 1437o(i)(1) and (2), 
1437x, 3535(d), 3547, 4332, 4852, 5304(g), 11402, and 12838; E.O. 11514, 
3 CFR, 1966-1970, Comp., p. 902, as amended by E.O. 11991, 3 CFR, 1977 
Comp., p.123.

    Source: 61 FR 19122, Apr. 30, 1996, unless otherwise noted.


<R04>
    Subpart A--Purpose, Legal Authority, Federal Laws and Authorities


<R05>
Sec. 58.1  Purpose and applicability.

    (a) Purpose. This part provides instructions and guidance to 
recipients of HUD assistance and other responsible entities for 
conducting an environmental review for a particular project or activity 
and for obtaining approval of a Request for Release of Funds.
    (b) Applicability. This part applies to activities and projects 
where specific statutory authority exists for recipients or other 
responsible entities to assume environmental responsibilities. Programs 
and activities subject to this part include:
    (1) Community Development Block Grant programs authorized by Title I 
of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974, in accordance with 
section 104(g) (42 U.S.C. 5304(g));
    (2) The Rental Rehabilitation program and Housing Development Grant 
program authorized by section 17 of the United States Housing Act of 
1937, in accordance with sections 17(i)(1) and 17(i)(2) with respect to 
projects and programs for which binding commitments have been entered 
into prior to October 1, 1991, since section 17 was repealed by the 
Cranston-Gonzalez National Affordable Housing Act enacted November 28, 
1990 (42 U.S.C. 1437o(i)(1) and (2));
    (3) Grants to States and units of general local government under the 
Emergency Shelter Grant Program, Supportive Housing program (and its 
predecessors, the Supportive Housing Demonstration program (both 
Transitional Housing and Permanent Housing for Homeless Persons with 
Disabilities) and Supplemental Assistance for Facilities to Assist the 
Homeless), Shelter Plus Care program, Safe Havens for Homeless 
Individuals Demonstration Program, and Rural Homeless Housing 
Assistance, authorized by Title IV of the Stewart B. McKinney Homeless 
Assistance Act, in accordance with section 443 (42 U.S.C. 11402);
    (4) The HOME Investment Partnerships Program authorized by Title II 
of the Cranston-Gonzalez National Affordable Housing Act (NAHA), in 
accordance with section 288 (42 U.S.C. 12838);
    (5) Grants to States and units of general local government for 
abatement of lead-based paint and lead dust hazards pursuant to Title II 
of the Departments of Veterans Affairs and Housing and Urban Development 
and Independent Agencies Appropriations Act, 1992, and grants for lead-
based paint hazard reduction under section 1011 of the Housing and 
Community Development Act of 1992, in accordance with section 1011(o) 
(42 U.S.C. 4852(o));
    (6)(i) Public Housing Programs under Title I of the United States 
Housing Act of 1937, in accordance with section 26 (42 U.S.C. 1437x);
    (ii) Indian Housing Programs under Title I of the United States 
Housing Act of 1937, including the Mutual Help Program, in accordance 
with section 26 (42 U.S.C. 1437x); and
    (iii) Assistance administered by a public housing agency or Indian 
housing authority under section 8 of the United States Housing Act of 
1937, except for assistance provided under 24 CFR part 886, in 
accordance with section 26 (42 U.S.C. 1437x);
    (7) Special Projects appropriated under an appropriation act for 
HUD, such as special projects under the heading ``Annual Contributions 
for Assisted Housing'' in Title II of various Departments of Veterans 
Affairs and Housing and Urban Development, and Independent Agencies 
Appropriations Acts, in accordance with section 305(c) of the 
Multifamily Housing Property Disposition Reform Act of 1994 (42 U.S.C. 
3547);
    (8) The FHA Multifamily Housing Finance Agency Pilot Program under 
section 542(c) of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1992, in 
accordance with section 542(c)(9)(12 U.S.C. 1707 note); and

[[Page 316]]

    (9) The Self-Help Homeownership Opportunity Program under section 11 
of the Housing Opportunity Program Extension Act of 1996 (Pub. L. 104-
120, 110 Stat. 834), in accordance with section 11(m)).


<R05>
Sec. 58.2  Terms, abbreviations and definitions.

    (a) For the purposes of this part, the following definitions 
supplement the uniform terminology provided in 40 CFR part 1508:
    (1) Activity means an action that a grantee or recipient puts forth 
as part of an assisted project, regardless of whether its cost is to be 
borne by the HUD assistance or is an eligible expense under the HUD 
assistance program.
    (2) Certifying Officer means the official who is authorized to 
execute the Request for Release of Funds and Certification and has the 
legal capacity to carry out the responsibilities of Sec. 58.13.
    (3) Extraordinary Circumstances means a situation in which an 
environmental assessment (EA) or environmental impact statement (EIS) is 
not normally required, but due to unusual conditions, an EA or EIS is 
appropriate. Indicators of unusual conditions are:
    (i) Actions that are unique or without precedent;
    (ii) Actions that are substantially similar to those that normally 
require an EIS;
    (iii) Actions that are likely to alter existing HUD policy or HUD 
mandates; or
    (iv) Actions that, due to unusual physical conditions on the site or 
in the vicinity, have the potential for a significant impact on the 
environment or in which the environment could have a significant impact 
on users of the facility.
    (4) Project means an activity, or a group of integrally related 
activities, designed by the recipient to accomplish, in whole or in 
part, a specific objective.
    (5) Recipient means any of the following entities, when they are 
eligible recipients or grantees under a program listed in Sec. 58.1(b):
    (i) A State that does not distribute HUD assistance under the 
program to a unit of general local government;
    (ii) Guam, the Northern Mariana Islands, the Virgin Islands, 
American Samoa, and Palau;
    (iii) A unit of general local government;
    (iv) An Indian tribe;
    (v)(A) With respect to Public Housing Programs under 
Sec. 58.1(b)(6)(i), a public housing agency;
    (B) With respect to Indian Housing Programs under 
Sec. 58.1(b)(6)(ii), an Indian housing authority;
    (C) With respect to section 8 assistance under Sec. 58.1(b)(6)(iii), 
a public housing agency or Indian housing authority;
    (vi) Any direct grantee of HUD for a special project under 
Sec. 58.1(b)(7);
    (vii) With respect to the FHA Multifamily Housing Finance Agency 
Pilot Program under Sec. 58.1(b)(8), a qualified housing finance agency; 
and
    (viii) With respect to the Self-Help Homeownership Opportunity 
Program under Sec. 58.1(b)(9), any direct grantee of HUD.
    (6) Release of funds. In the case of the FHA Multifamily Housing 
Finance Agency Pilot Program under Sec. 58.1(b)(8), Release of Funds, as 
used in this part, refers to HUD issuance of a firm approval letter, and 
Request for Release of Funds refers to a recipient's request for a firm 
approval letter.
    (7) Responsible Entity means:
    (i) With respect to environmental responsibilities under programs 
listed in Sec. 58.1(b) (1) through (5), a recipient under the program.
    (ii) With respect to environmental responsibilities under the 
programs listed in Sec. 58.1(b) (6) through (9), a State, unit of 
general local government, Indian tribe or Alaska native village, when it 
is the recipient under the program. Non-recipient responsible entities 
are designated as follows:
    (A) For qualified housing finance agencies, the State or a unit of 
general local government, Indian tribe or Alaska native village whose 
jurisdiction contains the project site;
    (B) For public housing agencies, the unit of general local 
government within which the project is located that exercises land use 
responsibility, or if HUD determines this infeasible, the county, or if 
HUD determines this infeasible, the State;

[[Page 317]]

    (C) For non-profit organizations and other entities, the unit of 
general local government, Indian tribe or Alaska native village within 
which the project is located that exercises land use responsibility, or 
if HUD determines this infeasible, the county, or if HUD determines this 
infeasible, the State;
    (D) For Indian housing authorities (outside of Alaska), the Indian 
tribe in whose jurisdiction the project is located, or if the project is 
located outside of a reservation, the Indian tribe that established the 
authority; and
    (E) For Indian housing authorities in Alaska, the Alaska native 
village in whose community the project is located, or if HUD determines 
this infeasible, a unit of general local government or the State, as 
designated by HUD.
    (8) Unit Density refers to a change in the number of dwelling units. 
Where a threshold is identified as a percentage change in density that 
triggers review requirements, no distinction is made between an increase 
or a decrease in density.
    (9) Tiering means the evaluation of an action or an activity at 
various points in the development process as a proposal or event becomes 
ripe for an Environment Assessment or Review.
    (10) Vacant Building means a habitable structure that has been 
vacant for more than one year.
    (b) The following abbreviations are used throughout this part:

(1) CDBG--Community Development Block Grant;
(2) CEQ--Council on Environmental Quality;
(3) EA--Environmental Assessment;
(4) EIS--Environmental Impact Statement;
(5) EPA--Environmental Protection Agency;
(6) ERR--Environmental Review Record;
(7) FONSI--Finding of No Significant Impact;
(8) HUD--Department of Housing and Urban Development;
(9) NAHA--Cranston-Gonzalez National Affordable Housing Act of 1990;
(10) NEPA--National Environmental Policy Act of 1969, as amended;
(11) NOI/EIS--Notice of Intent to Prepare an EIS;
(12) NOI/RROF--Notice of Intent to Request Release of Funds;
(13) ROD--Record of Decision;
(14) ROF--Release of Funds; and
(15) RROF--Request for Release of Funds.


<R05>
Sec. 58.4  Assumption authority.

    (a) Assumption authority for responsible entities: General. 
Responsible entities shall assume the responsibility for environmental 
review, decision-making, and action that would otherwise apply to HUD 
under NEPA and other provisions of law that further the purposes of 
NEPA, as specified in Sec. 58.5. Responsible entities that receive 
assistance directly from HUD assume these responsibilities by execution 
of a grant agreement with HUD and/or a legally binding document such as 
the certification contained on HUD Form 7015.15, certifying to the 
assumption of environmental responsibilities. When a State distributes 
funds to a responsible entity, the State must provide for appropriate 
procedures by which these responsible entities will evidence their 
assumption of environmental responsibilities.
    (b) Particular responsibilities of the States. (1) States are 
recipients for purposes of directly undertaking a State project and must 
assume the environmental review responsibilities for the State's 
activities and those of any non-governmental entity that may participate 
in the project. In this case, the State must submit the certification 
and RROF to HUD for approval.
    (2) States must exercise HUD's responsibilities in accordance with 
Sec. 58.18, with respect to approval of a unit of local government's 
environmental certification and RROF for a HUD assisted project funded 
through the State, except for projects assisted by Section 17 Rental 
Rehabilitation assistance and Housing Development Grants. Approval by 
the State of a unit of local government's certification and RROF 
satisfies the Secretary's responsibilities under NEPA and the related 
laws cited in Sec. 58.5.
    (3) For section 17 Rental Rehabilitation projects and Housing 
Development Grants, the State agency shall meet the responsibilities set 
forth in Sec. 58.18. However, for section 17 projects, the

[[Page 318]]

State lacks authority to approve RROFs and therefore must forward to the 
responsible HUD Field Office the local recipient's certification and 
RROF, any objections to the release of funds submitted by another party, 
and the State's recommendation as to whether HUD should approve the 
certification and the RROF.


<R05>
Sec. 58.5  Related Federal laws and authorities.

    In accordance with the provisions of law cited in Sec. 58.1(b), the 
responsible entity must assume responsibilities for environmental 
review, decision-making and action that would apply to HUD under the 
following specified laws and authorities. The responsible entity must 
certify that it has complied with the requirements that would apply to 
HUD under these laws and authorities and must consider the criteria, 
standards, policies and regulations of these laws and authorities.
    (a) Historic properties. (1) The National Historic Preservation Act 
of 1966 as amended (16 U.S.C. 470 et seq.), particularly sections 106 
and 110 (16 U.S.C. 470 and 470h-2), except as provided in Sec. 58.17 for 
Section 17 projects.
    (2) Executive Order 11593, Protection and Enhancement of the 
Cultural Environment, May 13, 1971 (36 FR 8921), 3 CFR 1971-1975 Comp., 
p. 559, particularly section 2(c).
    (3) Federal historic preservation regulations as follows:
    (i) 36 CFR part 800 with respect to HUD programs other than Urban 
Development Action Grants (UDAG); and
    (ii) 36 CFR part 801 with respect to UDAG.
    (4) The Reservoir Salvage Act of 1960 as amended by the 
Archeological and Historic Preservation Act of 1974 (16 U.S.C. 469 et 
seq.), particularly section 3 (16 U.S.C. 469a-1).
    (b) Floodplain management and wetland protection. (1) Executive 
Order 11988, Floodplain Management, May 24, 1977 (42 FR 26951), 3 CFR, 
1977 Comp., p. 117, as interpreted in HUD regulations at 24 CFR part 55, 
particularly section 2(a) of the order (For an explanation of the 
relationship between the decision-making process in 24 CFR part 55 and 
this part, see Sec. 55.10 of this subtitle A.)
    (2) Executive Order 11990, Protection of Wetlands, May 24, 1977 (42 
FR 26961), 3 CFR, 1977 Comp., p. 121, particularly sections 2 and 5.
    (c) Coastal Zone Management. The Coastal Zone Management Act of 1972 
(16 U.S.C. 1451 et seq.), as amended, particularly section 307(c) and 
(d) (16 U.S.C. 1456(c) and (d)).
    (d) Sole source aquifers. (1) The Safe Drinking Water Act of 1974 
(42 U.S.C. 201, 300(f) et seq., and 21 U.S.C. 349) as amended; 
particularly section 1424(e)(42 U.S.C. 300h-3(e)).
    (2) Sole Source Aquifers (Environmental Protection Agency--40 CFR 
part 149).
    (e) Endangered species. The Endangered Species Act of 1973 (16 
U.S.C. 1531 et seq.) as amended, particularly section 7 (16 U.S.C. 
1536).
    (f) Wild and scenic rivers. The Wild and Scenic Rivers Act of 1968 
(16 U.S.C. 1271 et seq.) as amended, particularly section 7(b) and (c) 
(16 U.S.C. 1278(b) and (c)).
    (g) Air quality. (1) The Clean Air Act (42 U.S.C. 7401 et. seq.) as 
amended; particularly section 176(c) and (d) (42 U.S.C. 7506(c) and 
(d)).
    (2) Determining Conformity of Federal Actions to State or Federal 
Implementation Plans (Environmental Protection Agency-- 40 CFR parts 6, 
51, and 93).
    (h) Farmlands protection. (1) Farmland Protection Policy Act of 1981 
(7 U.S.C. 4201 et seq.) particularly sections 1540(b) and 1541 (7 U.S.C. 
4201(b) and 4202).
    (2) Farmland Protection Policy (Department of Agriculture--7 CFR 
part 658).
    (i) HUD environmental standards. Applicable criteria and standards 
specified in HUD environmental regulations (24 CFR part 51) (other than 
the runway clear zone and clear zone notification requirement in 24 CFR 
51.303 (a)(3)) and HUD Notice 79-33, Policy Guidance to Address the 
Problems Posed by Toxic Chemicals and Radioactive Materials, September 
10, 1979).
    (j) Environmental justice. Executive Order 12898--Federal Actions to 
Address Environmental Justice in Minority Populations and Low-Income 
Populations, February 11, 1994 (59 FR 7629), 3 CFR, 1994 Comp. p. 859.

[[Page 319]]


<R05>
Sec. 58.6  Other requirements.

    In addition to the duties under the laws and authorities specified 
in Sec. 58.5 for assumption by the responsible entity under the laws 
cited in Sec. 58.1(b), the responsible entity must comply with the 
following requirements. Applicability of the following requirements does 
not trigger the certification and release of funds procedure under this 
part or preclude exemption of an activity under Sec. 58.34(a)(12) and/or 
the applicability of Sec. 58.35(b). However, the responsible entity 
remains responsible for addressing the following requirements in its ERR 
and meeting these requirements, where applicable, regardless of whether 
the activity is exempt under Sec. 58.34 or categorically excluded under 
Sec. 58.35(a) or (b).
    (a)(1) Under the Flood Disaster Protection Act of 1973, as amended 
(42 U.S.C. 4001-4128), Federal financial assistance for acquisition and 
construction purposes (including rehabilitation) may not be used in an 
area identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) as 
having special flood hazards, unless:
    (i) The community in which the area is situated is participating in 
the National Flood Insurance Program (see 44 CFR parts 59 through 79), 
or less than one year has passed since the FEMA notification regarding 
such hazards; and
    (ii) Where the community is participating in the National Flood 
Insurance Program, flood insurance protection is to be obtained as a 
condition of the approval of financial assistance to the property owner.
    (2) Where the community is participating in the National Flood 
Insurance Program and the recipient provides financial assistance for 
acquisition or construction purposes (including rehabilitation) for 
property located in an area identified by FEMA as having special flood 
hazards, the responsible entity is responsible for assuring that flood 
insurance under the National Flood Insurance Program is obtained and 
maintained.
    (3) Paragraph (a) of this section does not apply to Federal formula 
grants made to a State.
    (b) Under section 582 of the National Flood Insurance Reform Act of 
1994, 42 U.S.C. 5154a, HUD disaster assistance that is made available in 
a special flood hazard area may not be used to make a payment (including 
any loan assistance payment) to a person for repair, replacement or 
restoration for flood damage to any personal, residential or commercial 
property if:
    (1) The person had previously received Federal flood disaster 
assistance conditioned on obtaining and maintaining flood insurance; and
    (2) The person failed to obtain and maintain flood insurance.
    (c) Pursuant to the Coastal Barrier Resources Act, as amended by the 
Coastal Barrier Improvement Act of 1990 (16 U.S.C. 3501), HUD assistance 
may not be used for most activities proposed in the Coastal Barrier 
Resources System.
    (d) In all cases involving HUD assistance, subsidy, or insurance for 
the purchase or sale of an existing property in a Runway Clear Zone or 
Clear Zone, as defined in 24 CFR part 51, the responsible entity shall 
advise the buyer that the property is in a runway clear zone or clear 
zone, what the implications of such a location are, and that there is a 
possibility that the property may, at a later date, be acquired by the 
airport operator. The buyer must sign a statement acknowledging receipt 
of this information.

[61 FR 19122, Apr. 30, 1996, as amended at 63 FR 15271, Mar. 30, 1998]


<R04>
   Subpart B--General Policy: Responsibilities of Responsible Entities


<R05>
Sec. 58.10  Basic environmental responsibility.

    In accordance with the provisions of law cited in Sec. 58.1(b), the 
responsible entity must assume the environmental responsibilities for 
projects under programs cited in Sec. 58.1(b), and in doing so must 
comply with the provisions of NEPA and the CEQ regulations contained in 
40 CFR parts 1500 through 1508, including the requirements set forth in 
this part. This includes responsibility for compliance with the 
applicable provisions and requirements of

[[Page 320]]

the Federal laws and authorities specified in Sec. 58.5.

[63 FR 15271, Mar. 30, 1998]


<R05>
Sec. 58.11  Legal capacity and performance.

    (a) A responsible entity which believes that it does not have the 
legal capacity to carry out the environmental responsibilities required 
by this part must contact the appropriate local HUD Office or the State 
for further instructions. Determinations of legal capacity will be made 
on a case-by-case basis.
    (b) If a public housing, Indian housing, special project or self-
help homeownership opportunity recipient objects to the non-recipient 
responsible entity conducting the environmental review on the basis of 
performance, timing, or compatibility of objectives, HUD will review the 
facts to determine who will perform the environmental review.
    (c) At any time, HUD may reject the use of a responsible entity to 
conduct the environmental review in a particular case on the basis of 
performance, timing or compatibility of objectives, or in accordance 
with Sec. 58.77(d)(1).
    (d) If a responsible entity, other than a recipient, objects to 
performing an environmental review, or if HUD determines that the 
responsible entity should not perform the environmental review, HUD may 
designate another responsible entity to conduct the review in accordance 
with this part or may itself conduct the environmental review in 
accordance with the provisions of 24 CFR part 50.


<R05>
Sec. 58.12  Technical and administrative capacity.

    The responsible entity must develop the technical and administrative 
capability necessary to comply with 40 CFR parts 1500 through 1508 and 
the requirements of this part.


<R05>
Sec. 58.13  Responsibilities of the certifying officer.

    Under the terms of the certification required by Sec. 58.71, a 
responsible entity's certifying officer is the ``responsible Federal 
official'' as that term is used in section 102 of NEPA and in statutory 
provisions cited in Sec. 58.1(b). The Certifying Officer is therefore 
responsible for all the requirements of section 102 of NEPA and the 
related provisions in 40 CFR parts 1500 through 1508, and 24 CFR part 
58, including the related Federal authorities listed in Sec. 58.5. The 
Certifying Officer must also:
    (a) Represent the responsible entity and be subject to the 
jurisdiction of the Federal courts. The Certifying Officer will not be 
represented by the Department of Justice in court; and
    (b) Ensure that the responsible entity reviews and comments on all 
EISs prepared for Federal projects that may have an impact on the 
recipient's program.


<R05>
Sec. 58.14  Interaction with State, Federal and non-Federal entities.

    A responsible entity shall consult with appropriate environmental 
agencies, State, Federal and non-Federal entities and the public in the 
preparation of an EIS, EA or other environmental reviews undertaken 
under the related laws and authorities cited in Sec. 58.5 and Sec. 58.6. 
The responsible entity must also cooperate with other agencies to reduce 
duplication between NEPA and comparable environmental review 
requirements of the State (see 40 CFR 1506.2 (b) and (c)). The 
responsible entity must prepare its EAs and EISs so that they comply 
with the environmental review requirements of both Federal and State 
laws unless otherwise specified or provided by law. State, Federal and 
local agencies may participate or act in a joint lead or cooperating 
agency capacity in the preparation of joint EISs or joint environmental 
assessments (see 40 CFR 1501.5(b) and 1501.6). A single EIS or EA may be 
prepared and adopted by multiple users to the extent that the review 
addresses the relevant environmental issues and there is a written 
agreement between the cooperating agencies which sets forth the 
coordinated and overall responsibilities.

[63 FR 15271, Mar 30, 1998]


<R05>
Sec. 58.15  Tiering.

    Responsible entities may tier their environmental reviews and 
assessments to eliminate repetitive discussions of the same issues at 
subsequent levels of review. Tiering is appropriate

[[Page 321]]

when there is a requirement to evaluate a policy or proposal in the 
early stages of development or when site-specific analysis or mitigation 
is not currently feasible and a more narrow or focused analysis is 
better done at a later date. The site specific review need only 
reference or summarize the issues addressed in the broader review. The 
broader review should identify and evaluate those issues ripe for 
decision and exclude those issues not relevant to the policy, program or 
project under consideration. The broader review should also establish 
the policy, standard or process to be followed in the site specific 
review. The Finding of No Significant Impact (FONSI) with respect to the 
broader assessment shall include a summary of the assessment and 
identify the significant issues to be considered in site specific 
reviews. Subsequent site-specific reviews will not require notices or a 
Request for Release of Funds unless the Certifying Officer determines 
that there are unanticipated impacts or impacts not adequately addressed 
in the prior review. A tiering approach can be used for meeting 
environmental review requirements in areas designated for special focus 
in local Consolidated Plans. Local and State Governments are encouraged 
to use the Consolidated Plan process to facilitate environmental 
reviews.


<R05>
Sec. 58.17  Historic preservation requirements for prior section 17 grants.

    A recipient of a section 17 grant shall comply with the historic 
preservation requirements of this part and existing grant agreements.


<R05>
Sec. 58.18  Responsibilities of States assuming HUD responsibilities.

    (a) States that elect to administer a HUD program shall ensure that 
the program complies with the provisions of this part. The State must:
    (1) Designate the State agency or agencies which will be responsible 
for carrying out the requirements and administrative responsibilities 
set forth in subpart H of this part and which will:
    (i) Develop a monitoring and enforcement program for post-review 
actions on environmental reviews and monitor compliance with any 
environmental conditions included in the award.
    (ii) Receive public notices, RROFs and certifications from 
recipients pursuant to Secs. 58.70 and 58.71; accept objections from the 
public and from other agencies (Sec. 58.73); and perform other related 
responsibilities regarding releases of funds.
    (2) Fulfill the State role in subpart H relative to the time period 
set for the receipt and disposition of comments, objections and appeals 
(if any) on particular projects.
    (b) States administering section 17 Programs shall assume the 
responsibilities set forth in this section for overseeing the State 
recipient's performance and compliance with NEPA and related Federal 
authorities as set forth in this part, including receiving RROFs and 
environmental certifications for particular projects from State 
recipients and objections from government agencies and the public in 
accordance with the procedures contained in subpart H of this part. The 
State shall forward to the responsible HUD Field Office the 
environmental certification, the RROF and any objections received, and 
shall recommend whether to approve or disapprove the certification and 
RROF.


<R04>
       Subpart C--General Policy: Environmental Review Procedures


<R05>
Sec. 58.21  Time periods.

    All time periods in this part shall be counted in calendar days. The 
first day of a time period begins at 12:01 a.m. local time on the day 
following the publication or the mailing and posting date of the notice 
which initiates the time period.


<R05>
Sec. 58.22  Limitations on activities pending clearance.

    (a) A recipient may not commit HUD assistance funds under a program 
listed in Sec. 58.1(b) on an activity or project until HUD or the State 
has approved the recipient's RROF and the related certification of the 
responsible entity. In addition, until the RROF and related 
certification has been approved, the recipient may not commit non-HUD 
funds on an activity or project under a program listed in Sec. 58.1(b) 
if the

[[Page 322]]

activity or project would have an adverse environmental impact or limit 
the choice of reasonable alternatives. If an activity is exempt under 
Sec. 58.34, or not subject to Sec. 58.5 under Sec. 58.35(b), no RROF is 
required and a recipient may undertake the activity immediately after 
the award of the assistance.
    (b) An option agreement on a proposed site or property is allowable 
prior to the completion of the environmental review if the option 
agreement is subject to a determination by the recipient on the 
desirability of the property for the project as a result of the 
completion of the environmental review in accordance with this part and 
the cost of the option is a nominal portion of the purchase price. There 
is no constraint on the purchase of an option by third parties that have 
not been selected for HUD funding, have no responsibility for the 
environmental review and have no say in the approval or disapproval of 
the project.
    (c) Relocation. Funds may be committed for relocation assistance 
before the approval of the RROF and related certification for the 
project provided that the relocation assistance is required by 24 CFR 
part 42.


<R05>
Sec. 58.23  Financial assistance for environmental review.

    The costs of environmental reviews, including costs incurred in 
complying with any of the related laws and authorities cited in 
Sec. 58.5 and Sec. 58.6, are eligible costs to the extent allowable 
under the HUD assistance program regulations.


<R04>
    Subpart D--Environmental Review Process: Documentation, Range of 
           Activities, Project Aggregation and Classification


<R05>
Sec. 58.30  Environmental review process.

    (a) The environmental review process consists of all the actions 
that a responsible entity must take to determine compliance with this 
part. The environmental review process includes all the compliance 
actions needed for other activities and projects that are not assisted 
by HUD but are aggregated by the responsible entity in accordance with 
Sec. 58.32.
    (b) The environmental review process should begin as soon as a 
recipient determines the projected use of HUD assistance.


<R05>
Sec. 58.32  Project aggregation.

    (a) A responsible entity must group together and evaluate as a 
single project all individual activities which are related either on a 
geographical or functional basis, or are logical parts of a composite of 
contemplated actions.
    (b) In deciding the most appropriate basis for aggregation when 
evaluating activities under more than one program, the responsible 
entity may choose: functional aggregation when a specific type of 
activity (e.g., water improvements) is to take place in several separate 
locales or jurisdictions; geographic aggregation when a mix of 
dissimilar but related activities is to be concentrated in a fairly 
specific project area (e.g., a combination of water, sewer and street 
improvements and economic development activities); or a combination of 
aggregation approaches, which, for various project locations, considers 
the impacts arising from each functional activity and its 
interrelationship with other activities.
    (c) The purpose of project aggregation is to group together related 
activities so that the responsible entity can:
    (1) Address adequately and analyze, in a single environmental 
review, the separate and combined impacts of activities that are 
similar, connected and closely related, or that are dependent upon other 
activities and actions. (See 40 CFR 1508.25(a)).
    (2) Consider reasonable alternative courses of action.
    (3) Schedule the activities to resolve conflicts or mitigate the 
individual, combined and/or cumulative effects.
    (4) Prescribe mitigation measures and safeguards including project 
alternatives and modifications to individual activities.
    (d) Multi-year project aggregation--(1) Release of funds. When a 
recipient's planning and program development provide for activities to 
be implemented over two or more years, the responsible entity's 
environmental review should consider the relationship

[[Page 323]]

among all component activities of the multi-year project regardless of 
the source of funds and address and evaluate their cumulative 
environmental effects. The estimated range of the aggregated activities 
and the estimated cost of the total project must be listed and described 
by the responsible entity in the environmental review and included in 
the RROF. The release of funds will cover the entire project period.
    (2) When one or more of the conditions described in Sec. 58.47 
exists, the recipient or other responsible entity must re-evaluate the 
environmental review.


<R05>
Sec. 58.33  Emergencies.

    (a) In the cases of emergency, disaster or imminent threat to health 
and safety which warrant the taking of an action with significant 
environmental impact, the provisions of 40 CFR 1506.11 shall apply.
    (b) If funds are needed on an emergency basis and when adherence to 
separate comment periods would prevent the giving of assistance, the 
combined Notice of FONSI and the Notice of the Intent to Request Release 
of Funds may be disseminated and/or published simultaneously with the 
submission of the Request for Release of Funds (RROF). The combined 
Notice of FONSI and NOI/ROF shall state that the funds are needed on an 
immediate emergency basis due to a Presidentially declared disaster and 
that the comment periods have been combined. The Notice shall also 
invite commenters to submit their comments to both HUD and the 
responsible entity issuing the notice to assure that these comments will 
receive full consideration.


<R05>
Sec. 58.34  Exempt activities.

    (a) Except for the applicable requirements of Sec. 58.6, the 
responsible entity does not have to comply with the requirements of this 
part or undertake any environmental review, consultation or other action 
under NEPA and the other provisions of law or authorities cited in 
Sec. 58.5 for the activities exempt by this section or projects 
consisting solely of the following exempt activities:
    (1) Environmental and other studies, resource identification and the 
development of plans and strategies;
    (2) Information and financial services;
    (3) Administrative and management activities;
    (4) Public services that will not have a physical impact or result 
in any physical changes, including but not limited to services concerned 
with employment, crime prevention, child care, health, drug abuse, 
education, counseling, energy conservation and welfare or recreational 
needs;
    (5) Inspections and testing of properties for hazards or defects;
    (6) Purchase of insurance;
    (7) Purchase of tools;
    (8) Engineering or design costs;
    (9) Technical assistance and training;
    (10) Assistance for temporary or permanent improvements that do not 
alter environmental conditions and are limited to protection, repair, or 
restoration activities necessary only to control or arrest the effects 
from disasters or imminent threats to public safety including those 
resulting from physical deterioration;
    (11) Payment of principal and interest on loans made or obligations 
guaranteed by HUD;
    (12) Any of the categorical exclusions listed in Sec. 58.35(a) 
provided that there are no circumstances which require compliance with 
any other Federal laws and authorities cited in Sec. 58.5.
    (b) A recipient does not have to submit an RROF and certification, 
and no further approval from HUD or the State will be needed by the 
recipient for the drawdown of funds to carry out exempt activities and 
projects. However, the responsible entity must document in writing its 
determination that each activity or project is exempt and meets the 
conditions specified for such exemption under this section.

[61 FR 19122, Apr. 30, 1996, as amended at 63 FR 15271, Mar. 30, 1998]


<R05>
Sec. 58.35  Categorical exclusions.

    Categorical exclusion refers to a category of activities for which 
no environmental impact statement or environmental assessment and 
finding of no significant impact under NEPA is

[[Page 324]]

required, except in extraordinary circumstances (see Sec. 58.2(a)(3)) in 
which a normally excluded activity may have a significant impact. 
Compliance with the other applicable Federal environmental laws and 
authorities listed in Sec. 58.5 is required for any categorical 
exclusion listed in paragraph (a) of this section.
    (a) Categorical exclusions subject to Sec. 58.5. The following 
activities are categorically excluded under NEPA, but may be subject to 
review under authorities listed in Sec. 58.5:
    (1) Acquisition, repair, improvement, reconstruction, or 
rehabilitation of public facilities and improvements (other than 
buildings) when the facilities and improvements are in place and will be 
retained in the same use without change in size or capacity of more than 
20 percent (e.g., replacement of water or sewer lines, reconstruction of 
curbs and sidewalks, repaving of streets).
    (2) Special projects directed to the removal of material and 
architectural barriers that restrict the mobility of and accessibility 
to elderly and handicapped persons.
    (3) Rehabilitation of buildings and improvements when the following 
conditions are met:
    (i) In the case of multifamily residential buildings:
    (A) Unit density is not changed more than 20 percent;
    (B) The project does not involve changes in land use from 
residential to non-residential; and
    (C) The estimated cost of rehabilitation is less than 75 percent of 
the total estimated cost of replacement after rehabilitation.
    (ii) In the case of non-residential structures, including 
commercial, industrial, and public buildings:
    (A) The facilities and improvements are in place and will not be 
changed in size or capacity by more than 20 percent; and
    (B) The activity does not involve a change in land use, such as from 
non-residential to residential, commercial to industrial, or from one 
industrial use to another.
    (4) An individual action on a one- to four-family dwelling or an 
individual action on a project of five or more units developed on 
scattered sites when the sites are more than 2,000 feet apart and there 
are not more than four units on any one site.
    (5) Acquisition or disposition of an existing structure or 
acquisition of vacant land provided that the structure or land acquired 
or disposed of will be retained for the same use.
    (6) Combinations of the above activities.
    (b) Categorical exclusions not subject to Sec. 58.5. The Department 
has determined that the following categorically excluded activities 
would not alter any conditions that would require a review or compliance 
determination under the Federal laws and authorities cited in Sec. 58.5. 
When the following kinds of activities are undertaken, the responsible 
entity does not have to publish a NOI/RROF or execute a certification 
and the recipient does not have to submit a RROF to HUD (or the State) 
except in the circumstances described in paragraph (c) of this section. 
Following the award of the assistance, no further approval from HUD or 
the State will be needed with respect to environmental requirements, 
except where paragraph (c) of this section applies. The recipient 
remains responsible for carrying out any applicable requirements under 
Sec. 58.6.
    (1) Tenant-based rental assistance;
    (2) Supportive services including, but not limited to, health care, 
housing services, permanent housing placement, day care, nutritional 
services, short-term payments for rent/mortgage/utility costs, and 
assistance in gaining access to local, State, and Federal government 
benefits and services;
    (3) Operating costs including maintenance, security, operation, 
utilities, furnishings, equipment, supplies, staff training and 
recruitment and other incidental costs;
    (4) Economic development activities, including but not limited to, 
equipment purchase, inventory financing, interest subsidy, operating 
expenses and similar costs not associated with construction or expansion 
of existing operations;
    (5) Activities to assist homebuyers to purchase existing dwelling 
units or

[[Page 325]]

dwelling units under construction, including closing costs and down 
payment assistance, interest buydowns, and similar activities that 
result in the transfer of title.
    (6) Affordable housing pre-development costs including legal, 
consulting, developer and other costs related to obtaining site options, 
project financing, administrative costs and fees for loan commitments, 
zoning approvals, and other related activities which do not have a 
physical impact.
    (c) Circumstances requiring NEPA review. If a responsible entity 
determines that an activity or project identified in paragraph (a) or 
(b) of this section, because of extraordinary circumstances and 
conditions at or affecting the location of the activity or project, may 
have a significant environmental effect, it shall comply with all the 
requirements of this part.
    (d) The Environmental Review Record (ERR) must contain a well 
organized written record of the process and determinations made under 
this section.

[61 FR 19122, Apr. 30, 1996, as amended at 63 FR 15272, Mar. 30, 1998]


<R05>
Sec. 58.36  Environmental assessments.

    If a project is not exempt or categorically excluded under 
Secs. 58.34 and 58.35, the responsible entity must prepare an EA in 
accordance with subpart E of this part. If it is evident without 
preparing an EA that an EIS is required under Sec. 58.37, the 
responsible entity should proceed directly to an EIS.


<R05>
Sec. 58.37  Environmental impact statement determinations.

    (a) An EIS is required when the project is determined to have a 
potentially significant impact on the human environment.
    (b) An EIS is required under any of the following circumstances, 
except as provided in paragraph (c) of this section:
    (1) The project would provide a site or sites for, or result in the 
construction of, hospitals or nursing homes containing a total of 2,500 
or more beds.
    (2) The project would remove, demolish, convert or substantially 
rehabilitate 2,500 or more existing housing units (but not including 
rehabilitation projects categorically excluded under Sec. 58.35), or 
would result in the construction or installation of 2,500 or more 
housing units, or would provide sites for 2,500 or more housing units.
    (3) The project would provide enough additional water and sewer 
capacity to support 2,500 or more additional housing units. The project 
does not have to be specifically intended for residential use nor does 
it have to be totally new construction. If the project is designed to 
provide upgraded service to existing development as well as to serve new 
development, only that portion of the increased capacity which is 
intended to serve new development should be counted.
    (c) If, on the basis of an EA, a responsible entity determines that 
the thresholds in paragraph (b) of this section are the sole reason for 
the EIS, the responsible entity may prepare a FONSI pursuant to 40 CFR 
1501.4. In such cases, the FONSI must be made available for public 
review for at least 30 days before the responsible entity makes the 
final determination whether to prepare an EIS.
    (d) Notwithstanding paragraphs (a) through (c) of this section, an 
EIS is not required where Sec. 58.53 is applicable.
    (e) Recommended EIS Format. The responsible entity must use the EIS 
format recommended by the CEQ regulations (40 CFR 1502.10) unless a 
determination is made on a particular project that there is a compelling 
reason to do otherwise. In such a case, the EIS format must meet the 
minimum requirements prescribed in 40 CFR 1502.10.


<R05>
Sec. 58.38  Environmental review record.

    The responsible entity must maintain a written record of the 
environmental review undertaken under this part for each project. This 
document will be designated the ``Environmental Review Record'' (ERR), 
and shall be available for public review. The responsible entity must 
use the current HUD-recommended formats or develop equivalent formats.
    (a) ERR Documents. The ERR shall contain all the environmental 
review documents, public notices and written

[[Page 326]]

determinations or environmental findings required by this part as 
evidence of review, decisionmaking and actions pertaining to a 
particular project of a recipient. The document shall:
    (1) Describe the project and the activities that the recipient has 
determined to be part of the project;
    (2) Evaluate the effects of the project or the activities on the 
human environment;
    (3) Document compliance with applicable statutes and authorities, in 
particular those cited in Sec. 58.5 and 58.6; and
    (4) Record the written determinations and other review findings 
required by this part (e.g., exempt and categorically excluded projects 
determinations, findings of no significant impact).
    (b) Other documents and information. The ERR shall also contain 
verifiable source documents and relevant base data used or cited in EAs, 
EISs or other project review documents. These documents may be 
incorporated by reference into the ERR provided that each source 
document is identified and available for inspection by interested 
parties. Proprietary material and special studies prepared for the 
recipient that are not otherwise generally available for public review 
shall not be incorporated by reference but shall be included in the ERR.


<R04>
   Subpart E--Environmental Review Process: Environmental Assessments 
                                 (EA's)


<R05>
Sec. 58.40  Preparing the environmental assessment.

    The responsible entity may prepare the EA using the HUD recommended 
format. In preparing an EA for a particular project, the responsible 
entity must:
    (a) Determine existing conditions and describe the character, 
features and resources of the project area and its surroundings; 
identify the trends that are likely to continue in the absence of the 
project.
    (b) Identify all potential environmental impacts, whether beneficial 
or adverse, and the conditions that would change as a result of the 
project.
    (c) Identify, analyze and evaluate all impacts to determine the 
significance of their effects on the human environment and whether the 
project will require further compliance under related laws and 
authorities cited in Sec. 58.5 and Sec. 58.6.
    (d) Examine and recommend feasible ways in which the project or 
external factors relating to the project could be modified in order to 
eliminate or minimize adverse environmental impacts.
    (e) Examine alternatives to the project itself, if appropriate, 
including the alternative of no action.
    (f) Complete all environmental review requirements necessary for the 
project's compliance with applicable authorities cited in Secs. 58.5 and 
58.6.
    (g) Based on steps set forth in paragraph (a) through (f) of this 
section, make one of the following findings:
    (1) A Finding of No Significant Impact (FONSI), in which the 
responsible entity determines that the project is not an action that 
will result in a significant impact on the quality of the human 
environment. The responsible entity may then proceed to Sec. 58.43.
    (2) A finding of significant impact, in which the project is deemed 
to be an action which may significantly affect the quality of the human 
environment. The responsible entity must then proceed with its 
environmental review under subpart F or G of this part.


<R05>
Sec. 58.43  Dissemination and/or publication of the findings of no significant impact.

    (a) If the responsible entity makes a finding of no significant 
impact, it must prepare a FONSI notice, using the current HUD-
recommended format or an equivalent format. As a minimum, the 
responsible entity must send the FONSI notice to individuals and groups 
known to be interested in the activities, to the local news media, to 
the appropriate tribal, local, State and Federal agencies; to the 
Regional Offices of the Environmental Protection Agency having 
jurisdiction and to the HUD Field Office (or the State where 
applicable). The responsible entity may also publish the FONSI notice in 
a newspaper of general circulation in the affected community. If the 
notice is not published, it must also be prominently displayed in public 
buildings, such as the local Post Office and within

[[Page 327]]

the project area or in accordance with procedures established as part of 
the citizen participation process.
    (b) The responsible entity may disseminate or publish a FONSI notice 
at the same time it disseminates or publishes the NOI/RROF required by 
Sec. 58.70. If the notices are released as a combined notice, the 
combined notice shall:
    (1) Clearly indicate that it is intended to meet two separate 
procedural requirements; and
    (2) Advise the public to specify in their comments which ``notice'' 
their comments address.
    (c) The responsible entity must consider the comments and make 
modifications, if appropriate, in response to the comments, before it 
completes its environmental certification and before the recipient 
submits its RROF. If funds will be used in Presidentially declared 
disaster areas, modifications resulting from public comment, if 
appropriate, must be made before proceeding with the expenditure of 
funds.


<R05>
Sec. 58.45  Public comment periods.

    (a) Notice of finding of no significant impact: 15 days from date of 
publication or if no publication, 18 days from the date of mailing and 
posting.
    (b) Notice of intent to request release of funds: 7 days from date 
of publication or if no publication, 10 days from date of mailing and 
posting.
    (c) Concurrent or combined notices: Same as FONSI notice.


<R05>
Sec. 58.46  Time delays for exceptional circumstances.

    The responsible entity must make the FONSI available for public 
comments for 30 days before the recipient files the RROF when:
    (a) There is a considerable interest or controversy concerning the 
project;
    (b) The proposed project is similar to other projects that normally 
require the preparation of an EIS; or
    (c) The project is unique and without precedent.


<R05>
Sec. 58.47  Re-evaluation of environmental assessments and other environmental findings.

    (a) A responsible entity must re-evaluate its environmental findings 
to determine if the original findings are still valid, when:
    (1) The recipient proposes substantial changes in the nature, 
magnitude or extent of the project, including adding new activities not 
anticipated in the original scope of the project;
    (2) There are new circumstances and environmental conditions which 
may affect the project or have a bearing on its impact, such as 
concealed or unexpected conditions discovered during the implementation 
of the project or activity which is proposed to be continued; or
    (3) The recipient proposes the selection of an alternative not in 
the original finding.
    (b)(1) If the original findings are still valid but the data or 
conditions upon which they were based have changed, the responsible 
entity must affirm the original findings and update its ERR by including 
this re-evaluation and its determination based on its findings. Under 
these circumstances, if a FONSI notice has already been published, no 
further publication of a FONSI notice is required.
    (2) If the responsible entity determines that the original findings 
are no longer valid, it must prepare an EA or an EIS if its evaluation 
indicates potentially significant impacts.
    (3) Where the recipient is not the responsible entity, the recipient 
must inform the responsible entity promptly of any proposed substantial 
changes under paragraph (a)(1) of this section, new circumstances or 
environmental conditions under paragraph (a)(2) of this section, or any 
proposals to select a different alternative under paragraph (a)(3) of 
this section, and must then permit the responsible entity to re-evaluate 
the findings before proceeding.

[61 FR 19122, Apr. 30, 1996, as amended at 63 FR 15272, Mar. 30, 1998]

[[Page 328]]


<R04>
Subpart F--Environmental Review Process: Environmental Impact Statement 
                             Determinations


<R05>
Sec. 58.52  Adoption of other agencies' EISs.

    The responsible entity may adopt a draft or final EIS prepared by 
another agency provided that the EIS was prepared in accordance with 40 
CFR parts 1500 through 1508. If the responsible entity adopts an EIS 
prepared by another agency, the procedure in 40 CFR 1506.3 shall be 
followed. An adopted EIS may have to be revised and modified to adapt it 
to the particular environmental conditions and circumstances of the 
project if these are different from the project reviewed in the EIS. In 
such cases the responsible entity must prepare, circulate, and file a 
supplemental draft EIS in the manner prescribed in Sec. 58.60(d) and 
otherwise comply with the clearance and time requirements of the EIS 
process, except that scoping requirements under 40 CFR 1501.7 shall not 
apply. The agency that prepared the original EIS should be informed that 
the responsible entity intends to amend and adopt the EIS. The 
responsible entity may adopt an EIS when it acts as a cooperating agency 
in its preparation under 40 CFR 1506.3. The responsible entity is not 
required to re-circulate or file the EIS, but must complete the 
clearance process for the RROF. The decision to adopt an EIS shall be 
made a part of the project ERR.


<R05>
Sec. 58.53  Use of prior environmental impact statements.

    Where any final EIS has been listed in the Federal Register for a 
project pursuant to this part, or where an areawide or similar broad 
scale final EIS has been issued and the EIS anticipated a subsequent 
project requiring an environmental clearance, then no new EIS is 
required for the subsequent project if all the following conditions are 
met:
    (a) The ERR contains a decision based on a finding pursuant to 
Sec. 58.40 that the proposed project is not a new major Federal action 
significantly affecting the quality of the human environment. The 
decision shall include:
    (1) References to the prior EIS and its evaluation of the 
environmental factors affecting the proposed subsequent action subject 
to NEPA;
    (2) An evaluation of any environmental factors which may not have 
been previously assessed, or which may have significantly changed;
    (3) An analysis showing that the proposed project is consistent with 
the location, use, and density assumptions for the site and with the 
timing and capacity of the circulation, utility, and other supporting 
infrastructure assumptions in the prior EIS;
    (4) Documentation showing that where the previous EIS called for 
mitigating measures or other corrective action, these are completed to 
the extent reasonable given the current state of development.
    (b) The prior final EIS has been filed within five (5) years, and 
updated as follows:
    (1) The EIS has been updated to reflect any significant revisions 
made to the assumptions under which the original EIS was prepared;
    (2) The EIS has been updated to reflect new environmental issues and 
data or legislation and implementing regulations which may have 
significant environmental impact on the project area covered by the 
prior EIS.
    (c) There is no litigation pending in connection with the prior EIS, 
and no final judicial finding of inadequacy of the prior EIS has been 
made.


<R04>
Subpart G--Environmental Review Process: Procedures for Draft, Final and 
              Supplemental Environmental Impact Statements


<R05>
Sec. 58.55  Notice of intent to prepare an EIS.

    As soon as practicable after the responsible entity decides to 
prepare an EIS, it must publish a NOI/EIS, using the HUD recommended 
format and disseminate it in the same manner as required by 40 CFR parts 
1500 through 1508.


<R05>
Sec. 58.56  Scoping process.

    The determination on whether or not to hold a scoping meeting will 
depend on the same circumstances and factors as for the holding of 
public hearings

[[Page 329]]

under Sec. 58.59. The responsible entity must wait at least 15 days 
after disseminating or publishing the NOI/EIS before holding a scoping 
meeting.


<R05>
Sec. 58.57  Lead agency designation.

    If there are several agencies ready to assume the lead role, the 
responsible entity must make its decision based on the criteria in 40 
CFR 1501.5(c). If the responsible entity and a Federal agency are unable 
to reach agreement, then the responsible entity must notify HUD (or the 
State, where applicable). HUD (or the State) will assist in obtaining a 
determination based on the procedure set forth in 40 CFR 1501.5(e).


<R05>
Sec. 58.59  Public hearings and meetings.

    (a) Factors to consider. In determining whether or not to hold 
public hearings in accordance with 40 CFR 1506.6, the responsible entity 
must consider the following factors:
    (1) The magnitude of the project in terms of economic costs, the 
geographic area involved, and the uniqueness or size of commitment of 
resources involved.
    (2) The degree of interest in or controversy concerning the project.
    (3) The complexity of the issues and the likelihood that information 
will be presented at the hearing which will be of assistance to the 
responsible entity.
    (4) The extent to which public involvement has been achieved through 
other means.
    (b) Procedure. All public hearings must be preceded by a notice of 
public hearing, which must be published in the local news media 15 days 
before the hearing date. The Notice must:
    (1) State the date, time, place, and purpose of the hearing or 
meeting.
    (2) Describe the project, its estimated costs, and the project area.
    (3) State that persons desiring to be heard on environmental issues 
will be afforded the opportunity to be heard.
    (4) State the responsible entity's name and address and the name and 
address of its Certifying Officer.
    (5) State what documents are available, where they can be obtained, 
and any charges that may apply.


<R05>
Sec. 58.60  Preparation and filing of environmental impact statements.

    (a) The responsible entity must prepare the draft environmental 
impact statement (DEIS) and the final environmental impact statements 
(FEIS) using the current HUD recommended format or its equivalent.
    (b) The responsible entity must file and distribute the (DEIS) and 
the (FEIS) in the following manner:
    (1) Five copies to EPA Headquarters;
    (2) Five copies to EPA Regional Office;
    (3) Copies made available in the responsible entity's and the 
recipient's office;
    (4) Copies or summaries made available to persons who request them; 
and
    (5) FEIS only--one copy to State, HUD Field Office, and HUD 
Headquarters library.
    (c) The responsible entity may request waivers from the time 
requirements specified for the draft and final EIS as prescribed in 40 
CFR 1506.6.
    (d) When substantial changes are proposed in a project or when 
significant new circumstances or information becomes available during an 
environmental review, the recipient may prepare a supplemental EIS as 
prescribed in 40 CFR 1502.9.
    (e) The responsible entity must prepare a Record of Decision (ROD) 
as prescribed in 40 CFR 1505.2.

[61 FR 19122, Apr. 30, 1996, as amended at 63 FR 15272, Mar. 30, 1998]


<R04>
           Subpart H--Release of Funds for Particular Projects


<R05>
Sec. 58.70  Notice of intent to request release of funds.

    The NOI/RROF must be disseminated and/or published in the manner 
prescribed by Sec. 58.43 and Sec. 58.45 before the certification is 
signed by the responsible entity.


<R05>
Sec. 58.71  Request for release of funds and certification.

    (a) The RROF and certification shall be sent to the appropriate HUD 
Field Office (or the State, if applicable), except as provided in 
paragraph (b) of

[[Page 330]]

this section. This request shall be executed by the Certifying Officer. 
The request shall describe the specific project and activities covered 
by the request and contain the certification required under the 
applicable statute cited in Sec. 58.1(b). The RROF and certification 
must be in a form specified by HUD.
    (b) When the responsible entity is conducting an environmental 
review on behalf of a recipient, as provided for in Sec. 58.10, the 
recipient must provide the responsible entity with all available project 
and environmental information and refrain from undertaking any physical 
activities or choice limiting actions until HUD (or the State, if 
applicable) has approved its request for release of funds. The 
certification form executed by the responsible entity's certifying 
officer shall be sent to the recipient that is to receive the assistance 
along with a description of any special environmental conditions that 
must be adhered to in carrying out the project. The recipient is to 
submit the RROF and the certification of the responsible entity to HUD 
(or the State, if applicable) requesting the release of funds. The 
recipient must agree to abide by the special conditions, procedures and 
requirements of the environmental review, and to advise the responsible 
entity of any proposed change in the scope of the project or any change 
in environmental conditions.
    (c) If the responsible entity determines that some of the activities 
are exempt under applicable provisions of this part, the responsible 
entity shall advise the recipient that it may commit funds for these 
activities as soon as programmatic authorization is received. This 
finding shall be documented in the ERR maintained by the responsible 
entity and in the recipient's project files.


<R05>
Sec. 58.72  HUD or State actions on RROFs and certifications.

    The actions which HUD (or a State) may take with respect to a 
recipient's environmental certification and RROF are as follows:
    (a) In the absence of any receipt of objection to the contrary, 
except as provided in paragraph (b) of this section, HUD (or the State) 
will assume the validity of the certification and RROF and will approve 
these documents after expiration of the 15-day period prescribed by 
statute.
    (b) HUD (or the State) may disapprove a certification and RROF if it 
has knowledge that the responsible entity has not complied with the 
items in Sec. 58.75, or that the RROF and certification are inaccurate.
    (c) In cases in which HUD has approved a certification and RROF but 
subsequently learns (e.g., through monitoring) that the recipient 
violated Sec. 58.22 or the recipient or responsible entity otherwise 
failed to comply with a clearly applicable environmental authority, HUD 
shall impose appropriate remedies and sanctions in accord with the law 
and regulations for the program under which the violation was found.


<R05>
Sec. 58.73  Objections to release of funds.

    HUD (or the State) will not approve the ROF for any project before 
15 calendar days have elapsed from the time of receipt of the RROF and 
the certification or from the time specified in the notice published 
pursuant to Sec. 58.70, whichever is later. Any person or agency may 
object to a recipient's RROF and the related certification. However, the 
objections must meet the conditions and procedures set forth in subpart 
H of this part. HUD (or the State) can refuse the RROF and certification 
on any grounds set forth in Sec. 58.75. All decisions by HUD (or the 
State) regarding the RROF and the certification shall be final.


<R05>
Sec. 58.74  Time for objecting.

    All objections must be received by HUD (or the State) within 15 days 
from the time HUD (or the State) receives the recipient's RROF and the 
related certification, or within the time period specified in the 
notice, whichever is later.


<R05>
Sec. 58.75  Permissible bases for objections.

    HUD (or the State), will consider objections claiming a responsible 
entity's noncompliance with this part based only on any of the following 
grounds:

[[Page 331]]

    (a) The certification was not in fact executed by the responsible 
entity's Certifying Officer.
    (b) The responsible entity has failed to make one of the two 
findings pursuant to Sec. 58.40 or to make the written determination 
required by Secs. 58.35, 58.47 or 58.53 for the project, as applicable.
    (c) The responsible entity has omitted one or more of the steps set 
forth at subpart E of this part for the preparation, publication and 
completion of an EA.
    (d) The responsible entity has omitted one or more of the steps set 
forth at subparts F and G of this part for the conduct, preparation, 
publication and completion of an EIS.
    (e) The recipient has committed funds or incurred costs not 
authorized by this part before release of funds and approval of the 
environmental certification by HUD or the State.
    (f) Another Federal agency acting pursuant to 40 CFR part 1504 has 
submitted a written finding that the project is unsatisfactory from the 
standpoint of environmental quality.


<R05>
Sec. 58.76  Procedure for objections.

    A person or agency objecting to a responsible entity's RROF and 
certification shall submit objections in writing to HUD (or the State). 
The objections shall:
    (a) Include the name, address and telephone number of the person or 
agency submitting the objection, and be signed by the person or 
authorized official of an agency.
    (b) Be dated when signed.
    (c) Describe the basis for objection and the facts or legal 
authority supporting the objection.
    (d) State when a copy of the objection was mailed or delivered to 
the responsible entity's Certifying Officer.


<R05>
Sec. 58.77  Effect of approval of certification.

    (a) Responsibilities of HUD and States. HUD's (or, where applicable, 
the State's) approval of the certification shall be deemed to satisfy 
the responsibilities of the Secretary under NEPA and related provisions 
of law cited at Sec. 58.5 insofar as those responsibilities relate to 
the release of funds as authorized by the applicable provisions of law 
cited in Sec. 58.1(b).
    (b) Public and agency redress. Persons and agencies seeking redress 
in relation to environmental reviews covered by an approved 
certification shall deal with the responsible entity and not with HUD. 
It is HUD's policy to refer all inquiries and complaints to the 
responsible entity and its Certifying Officer. Similarly, the State 
(where applicable) may direct persons and agencies seeking redress in 
relation to environmental reviews covered by an approved certification 
to deal with the responsible entity, and not the State, and may refer 
inquiries and complaints to the responsible entity and its Certifying 
Officer. Remedies for noncompliance are set forth in program 
regulations.
    (c) Implementation of environmental review decisions. Projects of a 
recipient will require post-review monitoring and other inspection and 
enforcement actions by the recipient and the State or HUD (using 
procedures provided for in program regulations) to assure that decisions 
adopted through the environmental review process are carried out during 
project development and implementation.
    (d) Responsibility for monitoring and training. (1) At least once 
every three years, HUD intends to conduct in-depth monitoring and 
exercise quality control (through training and consultation) over the 
environmental activities performed by responsible entities under this 
part. Limited monitoring of these environmental activities will be 
conducted during each program monitoring site visit. If through limited 
or in-depth monitoring of these environmental activities or by other 
means, HUD becomes aware of any environmental deficiencies, HUD may take 
one or more of the following actions:
    (i) In the case of problems found during limited monitoring, HUD may 
schedule in-depth monitoring at an earlier date or may schedule in-depth 
monitoring more frequently;
    (ii) HUD may require attendance by staff of the responsible entity 
at HUD-sponsored or approved training, which will be provided 
periodically at various locations around the country;

[[Page 332]]

    (iii) HUD may refuse to accept the certifications of environmental 
compliance on subsequent grants;
    (iv) HUD may suspend or terminate the responsible entity's 
assumption of the environmental review responsibility;
    (v) HUD may initiate sanctions, corrective actions, or other 
remedies specified in program regulations or agreements or contracts 
with the recipient.
    (2) HUD's responsibilities and action under paragraph (d)(1) of this 
section shall not be construed to limit or reduce any responsibility 
assumed by a responsible entity with respect to any particular release 
of funds under this part. Whether or not HUD takes action under 
paragraph (d)(1) of this section, the Certifying Officer remains the 
responsible Federal official under Sec. 58.13 with respect to projects 
and activities for which the Certifying Officer has submitted a 
certification under this part.


<R03>
PART 60--PROTECTION OF HUMAN SUBJECTS--Table of Contents

<R05>


    Authority: 5 U.S.C. 301; 42 U.S.C. 300v-1(b) and 3535(d).

    Source: 61 FR 36463, July 10, 1996, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 60.101  Cross-reference.

    The provisions set forth at 45 CFR part 46, subpart A, concerning 
the protection of human research subjects, apply to all research 
conducted, supported, or otherwise subject to regulation by HUD.


<R03>
PART 70--USE OF VOLUNTEERS ON PROJECTS SUBJECT TO DAVIS-BACON AND HUD-DETERMINED WAGE RATES--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
70.1  Purpose and authority.
70.2  Applicability.
70.3  Definitions.
70.4  Procedure for implementing prevailing wage exemptions for 
          volunteers.
70.5  Procedure for obtaining HUD waiver of prevailing wage rates for 
          volunteers.

    Authority: Sec. 955, Cranston-Gonzalez National Affordable Housing 
Act (42 U.S.C. 1437(j), 5310 and 12 U.S.C. 1701q(c)(3); Sec. 7(d) 
Department of Housing and Urban Development Act (42 U.S.C. 3535(d)).

    Source: 57 FR 14756, Apr. 22, 1992, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 70.1  Purpose and authority.

    (a) This part implements section 955 of the National Affordable 
Housing Act (NAHA), which provides an exemption from the requirement to 
pay prevailing wage rates determined under the Davis-Bacon Act or (in 
the case of laborers and mechanics employed in the operation of public 
housing projects, and architects, technical engineers, draftsmen and 
technicians employed in the development of public housing projects) 
determined or adopted by HUD, for volunteers employed on projects that 
are subject to prevailing wage rates under Title I of the Housing and 
Community Development Act of 1974 (including Community Development Block 
Grants, section 108 loan guarantees, and Urban Development Action 
Grants), under section 12 of the United States Housing Act of 1937 
(public housing development and operation and section 8 projects), and 
under section 202 of the Housing Act of 1959 for elderly and handicapped 
housing projects prior to the effective date of the amendment of section 
202 by section 801 of NAHA. This part also implements other provisions 
that provide an exemption for volunteers, including section 286 of NAHA 
(the HOME program), section 202 of the House Act of 1959, as amended by 
NAHA (supportive housing for the elderly), and any later-enacted 
exemptions.
    (b) This part is also applicable to all HUD programs for which there 
is a statutory provision allowing HUD to waive Davis-Bacon wage rates 
for volunteers that are not otherwise employed at any time on the work 
for which the individual volunteers. These programs include section 811 
of NAHA (supportive housing for persons with disabilities), FHA mortgage 
insurance programs under sections 221(d)(3) and (d)(4) (each with 
respect to cooperative housing projects only), 221(h)(1) (but only where 
a nonprofit organization undertakes the construction), 235(j)(1) (but 
only where a nonprofit organization undertakes the construction), 231, 
232, 236 and 242 of the National Housing

[[Page 333]]

Act, rehabilitation under section 312 of the Housing Act of 1964 and 
college housing under section 402 of the Housing Act of 1950.
    (c) This part provides definitions and procedures for determining 
allowable payments to volunteers, determining who is a bona fide 
volunteer, and otherwise implementing exemptions from and waivers of 
prevailing wage requirements where volunteers are employed.


<R05>
Sec. 70.2  Applicability.

    This part applies to all HUD programs for which there is a statutory 
exemption from Davis-Bacon or HUD-determined prevailing wage rates for 
volunteers or a statutory provision allowing HUD waiver of Davis-Bacon 
prevailing wage rates for volunteers. The programs to which this part 
applies include the programs listed in section 70.1(a) and (b) and any 
other program for which a statutory exemption or HUD waiver provision 
for volunteers is enacted. This part does not, however, apply to HUD 
waivers of prevailing wage requirements under section 20 of the United 
States Housing Act of 1937 for public housing residents who volunteer a 
portion of their labor (see 24 CFR 964.41). This part also does not 
apply to the contribution of labor by an eligible family under the 
Mutual Help Homeownership Opportunity Program for Indian families under 
section 202 of the United States Housing Act of 1937.


<R05>
Sec. 70.3  Definitions.

    (a) A volunteer, for purposes of this part, is an individual who 
performs service for a public or private entity for civic, charitable, 
or humanitarian reasons, without promise, expectation or receipt of 
compensation for services rendered, on a HUD-assisted or insured project 
which is subject to a requirement to pay prevailing wage rates.
    (1) Individuals shall be considered volunteers only where their 
services are offered freely and without pressure and coercion, direct or 
implied, from an employer.
    (2) An individual shall not be considered a volunteer if the 
individual is otherwise employed at any time in the construction or 
maintenance work for which the individual volunteers.
    (b) Expenses, reasonable benefits, or nominal fees may be provided 
to volunteers without the status of the volunteer being lost but only 
after a determination is made by HUD on a case-by-case basis by 
examining the total amount of payments made (expenses, benefits, fees) 
in the context of the economic realities of the particular situation. 
Subject to this determination:
    (1) A payment for an expense may be received by a volunteer for 
items such as uniform allowances or reimbursement for reasonable 
cleaning expenses or wear and tear on personal clothing worn while 
performing the volunteer work. Additionally, reimbursement for 
approximate out-of-pocket expenses for the cost of meals and 
transportation expenses may be made.
    (2) Reasonable benefits may constitute inclusion of individual 
volunteers in group insurance plans (such as liability, health, life, 
disability, workers' compensation) or pension plan or length of service 
awards.
    (3) A nominal fee is not a substitute for compensation and must not 
be tied to productivity. The decision as to what constitutes ``nominal'' 
must be made on a case-by-case basis and in the context of the economic 
realities of the situation.
    (4) The phrase economic realities means that in determining whether 
the fee described in paragraph (b)(3) of this section may be deemed 
``nominal'', the amount of the fee must be judged in the context of what 
paid workers doing the same work would earn in the particular locality 
involved. For example, a ``payment'' made to a ``homeless'' volunteer in 
an amount which covers basic necessities but nonetheless represents an 
insignificant amount when compared with local cost of living and real 
wages may be determined to be nominal for purposes of qualifying as a 
volunteer, provided the payment is not in fact a substitute for 
compensation and is not tied in any way to productivity.
    (c) Prevailing wage rates, for purposes of this part, means:
    (1) Wage rates required to be paid to laborers and mechanics 
employed in the construction (including rehabilitation) of a project (or 
in the case of public housing, the development of the

[[Page 334]]

project), as determined by the Secretary of Labor under the Davis-Bacon 
Act;
    (2) Wage rates required to be paid to laborers and mechanics 
employed in the operation of a public housing project, as determined or 
adopted by the Secretary of HUD; and
    (3) Wage rates required to be paid to architects, technical 
engineers, draftsmen and technicians employed in the development of a 
public housing project, as determined or adopted by the Secretary of 
HUD.


<R05>
Sec. 70.4  Procedure for implementing prevailing wage exemptions for volunteers.

    (a) This section applies to those HUD programs for which there is a 
statutory exemption for volunteers, as referenced in Sec. 70.1(a).
    (b) Local or State agencies or private parties whose employees are 
otherwise subject to Davis-Bacon or HUD-determined prevailing wage rates 
which propose to use volunteers and wish to pay the volunteers' 
expenses, reasonable benefits, or nominal fees shall request a 
determination from HUD that these payments meet the criteria in 
Sec. 70.3(b). A written determination shall be provided to the requester 
by the Department within ten days of receipt by the Department of 
sufficient information to allow for the determination.
    (c) A determination under paragraph (b) shall not be construed in 
any way as limiting the use of bona fide volunteers on HUD-assisted 
construction, but rather is required to ensure that the Department 
performs its appropriate responsibilities under Reorganization Plan No. 
14 of 1950 and related Department of Labor Regulations in title 29 CFR 
part 5, regarding the administration and enforcement of the Davis-Bacon 
and Related Acts, and its responsibility for the administration and 
enforcement of HUD-determined or adopted wage rates in the operation of 
public housing assisted under the United States Housing Act of 1937.
    (d) For a project covered by prevailing wage rate requirements in 
which all the work is to be done by volunteers and there are no paid 
construction employees, the local or State funding agency (or, if none, 
the entity that employs the volunteers) shall record in the pertinent 
project file the name and address of the agency sponsoring the project, 
a description of the project (location, cost, nature of the work), and 
the number of volunteers and the hours of work they performed. The 
entity responsible for recording this information shall also provide a 
copy of this information to HUD.
    (e) For a project covered by prevailing wage rate requirements in 
which there is to be a mix of paid workers and volunteers, the local or 
State funding agency (or, if none, the entity responsible for generating 
certified payrolls) shall provide HUD the information in paragraph (d) 
of this section, along with the names of the volunteers.
    (f) Volunteers who receive no expenses, benefits or fees described 
in (c) and are otherwise bona fide shall be recorded as in (d) or (e).


<R05>
Sec. 70.5  Procedure for obtaining HUD waiver of prevailing wage rates for volunteers.

    (a) This section applies to those HUD programs under which HUD is 
statutorily authorized to waive prevailing wage requirements for 
volunteers, as referenced in Sec. 70.1(b).
    (b) Local or State agencies or private parties whose employees are 
otherwise subject to prevailing wage rates and which wish to use 
volunteers shall request a waiver of prevailing wage requirements from 
HUD for the volunteers. A request for waiver shall indicate that the 
proposed volunteers are volunteering their services for the purposes of 
lowering the costs of construction. The request shall include 
information sufficient for HUD to make a determination, as required by 
statute, that any amounts saved through the use of volunteers are fully 
credited to the corporation, cooperative, or public body or agency 
undertaking the construction and a determination that any payments to 
volunteers meet the criteria in section 70.3(b). Information regarding 
the crediting of amounts saved is required in order to insure that the 
statutorily prescribed purpose of lowering the costs of construction is 
fulfilled by passing savings from the use of volunteers on to the 
sponsor or other

[[Page 335]]

body or agency undertaking the construction, rather than permitting the 
retention of any savings as a windfall by a contractor or subcontractor. 
A written waiver shall be provided to the requestor by the Department 
within ten days of receipt by the Department of sufficient information 
to meet the requirements for a waiver.
    (c) For a project covered by prevailing wage rate requirements in 
which all the work is to be done by volunteers and there are no paid 
construction employees, the local or State funding agency (or, if none, 
the entity that employs the volunteers) shall record in the pertinent 
project file the name and address of the agency sponsoring the project, 
the name, location, and HUD project number (if any) of the project, the 
number of volunteers, and type of work and hours of work they performed. 
The entity responsible for recording this information shall provide a 
copy of the information to HUD.
    (d) For a project covered by prevailing wage rate requirements in 
which there is to be a mix of paid workers and volunteers, the local or 
State funding agency (or, if none, the entity responsible for generating 
certified payrolls) shall provide HUD the information in (c) of this 
section, along with the names of the proposed volunteers.


<R03>
  PART 81--THE SECRETARY OF HUD'S REGULATION OF THE FEDERAL NATIONAL MORTGAGE ASSOCIATION (FANNIE MAE) AND THE FEDERAL HOME LOAN MORTGAGE CORPORATION (FREDDIE 
MAC)--Table of Contents

<R05>


                           Subpart A--General

Sec.
81.1  Scope of part.
81.2  Definitions.

                        Subpart B--Housing Goals

81.11  General.
81.12  Low- and Moderate-Income Housing Goal.
81.13  Central Cities, Rural Areas, and Other Underserved Areas Housing 
          Goal.
81.14  Special Affordable Housing Goal.
81.15  General requirements.
81.16  Special counting requirements.
81.17  Affordability--Income level definitions--family size and income 
          known (owner-occupied units, actual tenants, and prospective 
          tenants).
81.18  Affordability--Income level definitions--family size not known 
          (actual or prospective tenants).
81.19  Affordability--Rent level definitions--tenant income is not 
          known.
81.20  Actions to be taken to meet the goals.
81.21  Notice and determination of failure to meet goals.
81.22  Housing plans.

                         Subpart C--Fair Housing

81.41  General.
81.42  Prohibitions against discrimination.
81.43  Reports; underwriting and appraisal guideline review.
81.44  Submission of information to the Secretary.
81.45  Obtaining and disseminating information.
81.46  Remedial actions.
81.47  Violations of provisions by the GSEs.

                     Subpart D--New Program Approval

81.51  General.
81.52  Requirement for program requests.
81.53  Processing of program requests.
81.54  Review of disapproval.

                    Subpart E--Reporting Requirements

81.61  General.
81.62  Mortgage reports.
81.63  Annual Housing Activities Report.
81.64  Periodic reports.
81.65  Other information and analyses.
81.66  Submission of reports.

                    Subpart F--Access to Information

81.71  General.
81.72  Public-use database and public information.
81.73  GSE request for proprietary treatment.
81.74  Secretarial determination on GSE request.
81.75  Proprietary information withheld by order or regulation.
81.76  FOIA requests and protection of GSE information.
81.77  Requests for GSE information on behalf of Congress, the 
          Comptroller General, a subpoena, or other legal process.

         Subpart G--Procedures for Actions and Review of Actions

81.81  General.
81.82  Cease-and-desist proceedings.
81.83  Civil money penalties.
81.84  Hearings.

[[Page 336]]

81.85  Public disclosure of final orders and agreements.
81.86  Enforcement and jurisdiction.
81.87  Judicial review.

                    Subpart H--Book-Entry Procedures

81.91  Maintenance of GSE Securities.
81.92  Law governing rights and obligations of United States, Federal 
          Reserve Banks, and GSEs; rights of any Person against United 
          States, Federal Reserve Banks, and GSEs; Law governing other 
          interests.
81.93  Creation of Participant's Security Entitlement; security 
          interests.
81.94  Obligations of GSEs; no adverse claims.
81.95  Authority of Federal Reserve Banks.
81.96  Withdrawal of Eligible Book-entry GSE Securities for conversion 
          to definitive form.
81.97  Waiver of regulations.
81.98  Liability of GSEs and Federal Reserve Banks.
81.99  Additional provisions.

                       Subpart I--Other Provisions

81.101  Equal employment opportunity.
81.102  Independent verification authority.

    Authority: 12 U.S.C. 1451 et seq., 1716-1723h, and 4501-4641; 28 
U.S.C. 2461 note; 42 U.S.C. 3535(d) and 3601-3619.

    Source: 60 FR 61888, Dec. 1, 1995, unless otherwise noted.


<R04>
                           Subpart A--General


<R05>
Sec. 81.1  Scope of part.

    (a) Authority. The Secretary has general regulatory power respecting 
the Federal National Mortgage Association (``Fannie Mae'') and the 
Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation (``Freddie Mac'') (referred to 
collectively as Government-sponsored enterprises (``GSEs'')) and is 
required to make such rules and regulations as are necessary and proper 
to ensure that the provisions of the Federal Housing Enterprises 
Financial Safety and Soundness Act of 1992 (``FHEFSSA''), codified 
generally at 12 U.S.C. 4501-4641; the Fannie Mae Charter Act, 12 U.S.C. 
1716-1723h; and the Freddie Mac Act, 12 U.S.C. 1451-59, are 
accomplished.
    (b) Relation between this part and the authorities of OFHEO. The 
Director of the Office of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight 
(``OFHEO'') will issue separate regulations implementing the Director's 
authority respecting the GSEs. In this part, OFHEO and the Director are 
only referenced when the Director's responsibilities are connected with 
the Secretary's responsibilities.


<R05>
Sec. 81.2  Definitions.

    (a) Statutory terms. All terms defined in FHEFSSA (12 U.S.C. 4502) 
are used in accordance with their statutory meaning unless otherwise 
defined in paragraph (b) of this section.
    (b) Other terms. As used in this part, the term--
    AHAR means the Annual Housing Activities Report that a GSE submits 
to the Secretary under sections 309(n) of the Fannie Mae Charter Act or 
307(f) of the Freddie Mac Act.
    AHAR information means data or information contained in the AHAR.
    AHS means the American Housing Survey published by HUD and the 
Department of Commerce.
    Balloon mortgage means a mortgage providing for payments at regular 
intervals, with a final payment (``balloon payment'') that is at least 5 
percent more than the periodic payments. The periodic payments may cover 
some or all of the periodic principal or interest. Typically, the 
periodic payments are level monthly payments that would fully amortize 
the mortgage over a stated term and the balloon payment is a single 
payment due after a specified period (but before the mortgage would 
fully amortize) and pays off or satisfies the outstanding balance of the 
mortgage.
    Book-entry GSE Security means a GSE Security issued or maintained in 
the Book-entry System. Book-entry GSE Security also means the separate 
interest and principal components of a Book-entry GSE Security if such 
security has been designated by the GSE as eligible for division into 
such components and the components are maintained separately on the 
books of one or more Federal Reserve Banks.
    Book-entry System means the automated book-entry system operated by 
the Federal Reserve Banks acting as the fiscal agent for the GSEs, on 
which Book-entry GSE Securities are issued, recorded, transferred and 
maintained in book-entry form.

[[Page 337]]

    Central city means the underserved areas located in any political 
subdivision designated as a central city by the Office of Management and 
Budget of the Executive Office of the President.
    Charter Act means the Federal National Mortgage Association Charter 
Act (12 U.S.C. 1716 et seq.) or the Federal Home Loan Mortgage 
Corporation Act (12 U.S.C. 1451 et seq.).
    Contract rent means the total rent that is, or is anticipated to be, 
specified in the rental contract as payable by the tenant to the owner 
for rental of a dwelling unit, including fees or charges for management 
and maintenance services and those utility charges that are included in 
the rental contract. In determining contract rent, rent concessions 
shall not be considered, i.e., contract rent is not decreased by any 
rent concessions. Contract rent is rent net of rental subsidies.
    Conventional mortgage means a mortgage other than a mortgage as to 
which a GSE has the benefit of any guaranty, insurance or other 
obligation by the United States or any of its agencies or 
instrumentalities.
    Day means a calendar day.
    Definitive GSE Security means a GSE Security in engraved or printed 
form, or that is otherwise represented by a certificate.
    Director means the Director of OFHEO.
    Dwelling unit means a room or unified combination of rooms intended 
for use, in whole or in part, as a dwelling by one or more persons, and 
includes a dwelling unit in a single-family property, multifamily 
property, or other residential or mixed-use property.
    ECOA means the Equal Credit Opportunity Act (15 U.S.C. 1691 et 
seq.).
    Eligible Book-entry GSE Security means a Book-entry GSE Security 
issued or maintained in the Book-entry System which by the terms of its 
Security Documentation is eligible to be converted from book-entry form 
into definitive form.
    Entitlement Holder means a Person or a GSE to whose account an 
interest in a Book-entry GSE Security is credited on the records of a 
Securities Intermediary.
    Familial status has the same definition as is set forth at 24 CFR 
100.20.
    Family means one or more individuals who occupy the same dwelling 
unit.
    Fannie Mae means the Federal National Mortgage Association and any 
affiliate thereof.
    Federal Reserve Bank Operating Circular means the publication issued 
by each Federal Reserve Bank that sets forth the terms and conditions 
under which the Reserve Bank maintains book-entry Securities accounts 
(including Book-entry GSE Securities) and transfers book-entry 
Securities (including Book-entry GSE Securities).
    FHEFSSA means the Federal Housing Enterprises Financial Safety and 
Soundness Act of 1992, codified generally at 12 U.S.C. 4501-4651.
    FOIA means the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552).
    Freddie Mac means the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation and any 
affiliate thereof.
    Freddie Mac Act means the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation Act 
(12 U.S.C. 1451 et seq.).
    Government-sponsored enterprise or GSE means Fannie Mae or Freddie 
Mac.
    GSE Security means any security or obligation of Fannie Mae or 
Freddie Mac issued under its respective Charter Act in the form of a 
Definitive GSE Security or a Book-entry GSE Security.
    Handicap has the same definition as is set forth at 24 CFR 100.201.
    HUD means the United States Department of Housing and Urban 
Development.
    Lender means any entity that makes, originates, sells, or services 
mortgages, and includes the secured creditors named in the debt 
obligation and document creating the mortgage.
    Low-income area means a census tract or block numbering area in 
which the median income does not exceed 80 percent of the area median 
income.
    Median income means, with respect to an area, the unadjusted median 
family income for the area, as most recently determined and published by 
the Secretary.
    Metropolitan area means a metropolitan statistical area (``MSA''), 
primary metropolitan statistical area (``PMSA''), or consolidated 
metropolitan statistical area (``CMSA''), designated by the Office of 
Management

[[Page 338]]

and Budget of the Executive Office of the President.
    Minority means any individual who is included within any one of the 
following racial and ethnic categories:
    (1) American Indian or Alaskan Native--a person having origins in 
any of the original peoples of North America, and who maintains cultural 
identification through tribal affiliation or community recognition;
    (2) Asian or Pacific Islander--a person having origins in any of the 
original peoples of the Far East, Southeast Asia, the Indian 
subcontinent, or the Pacific Islands;
    (3) African-American--a person having origins in any of the black 
racial groups of Africa; and
    (4) Hispanic--a person of Mexican, Puerto Rican, Cuban, Central or 
South American, or other Spanish culture or origin, regardless of race.
    Mortgage means a member of such classes of liens, including 
subordinate liens, as are commonly given or are legally effective to 
secure advances on, or the unpaid purchase price of, real estate under 
the laws of the State in which the real estate is located, or a 
manufactured home that is personal property under the laws of the State 
in which the manufactured home is located, together with the credit 
instruments, if any, secured thereby, and includes interests in 
mortgages. ``Mortgage'' includes a mortgage, lien, including a 
subordinate lien, or other security interest on the stock or membership 
certificate issued to a tenant-stockholder or resident-member by a 
cooperative housing corporation, as defined in section 216 of the 
Internal Revenue Code of 1986, and on the proprietary lease, occupancy 
agreement, or right of tenancy in the dwelling unit of the tenant-
stockholder or resident-member in such cooperative housing corporation.
    Mortgage data means data obtained by the Secretary from the GSEs 
under subsection 309(m) of the Fannie Mae Charter Act and subsection 
307(e) of the Freddie Mac Act.
    Mortgage purchase means a transaction in which a GSE bought or 
otherwise acquired with cash or other thing of value, a mortgage for its 
portfolio or for securitization.
    Multifamily housing means a residence consisting of more than 4 
dwelling units. The term includes cooperative buildings and condominium 
projects.
    New England means Connecticut, Maine, Massachusetts, New Hampshire, 
Rhode Island, and Vermont.
    OFHEO means the Office of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight.
    Ongoing program means a program that is expected to continue for the 
foreseeable future.
    Other underserved area means any underserved area that is in a 
metropolitan area, but not in a central city.
    Owner-occupied unit means a dwelling unit in single-family housing 
in which a mortgagor of the unit resides.
    Participant means a Person or GSE that maintains a Participant's 
Securities Account with a Federal Reserve Bank.
    Participation means a fractional interest in the principal amount of 
a mortgage.
    Person, as used in subpart H, means and includes an individual, 
corporation, company, governmental entity, association, firm, 
partnership, trust, estate, representative, and any other similar 
organization, but does not mean or include the United States, a GSE, or 
a Federal Reserve Bank.
    Portfolio of loans means 10 or more loans.
    Proprietary information means all mortgage data and all AHAR 
information that the GSEs submit to the Secretary in the AHARs that 
contain trade secrets or privileged or confidential, commercial, or 
financial information that, if released, would be likely to cause 
substantial competitive harm.
    Public data means all mortgage data and all AHAR information that 
the GSEs submit to the Secretary in the AHARs, that the Secretary 
determines are not proprietary and may appropriately be disclosed 
consistent with other applicable laws and regulations.
    Real estate mortgage investment conduit (REMIC) means multi-class 
mortgage securities issued by a tax-exempt entity.
    Refinancing means a transaction in which an existing mortgage is 
satisfied or replaced by a new mortgage undertaken by the same borrower. 
The term does not include:

[[Page 339]]

    (1) A renewal of a single payment obligation with no change in the 
original terms;
    (2) A reduction in the annual percentage rate of the mortgage as 
computed under the Truth in Lending Act, with a corresponding change in 
the payment schedule;
    (3) An agreement involving a court proceeding;
    (4) A workout agreement, in which a change in the payment schedule 
or collateral requirements is agreed to as a result of the mortgagor's 
default or delinquency, unless the rate is increased or the new amount 
financed exceeds the unpaid balance plus earned finance charges and 
premiums for the continuation of insurance;
    (5) The renewal of optional insurance purchased by the mortgagor and 
added to an existing mortgage; and
    (6) A renegotiated balloon mortgage on a multifamily property where 
the balloon payment was due within 1 year after the date of the closing 
of the renegotiated mortgage.
    Rent means, for a dwelling unit:
    (1) When the contract rent includes all utilities, the contract 
rent; or
    (2) When the contract rent does not include all utilities, the 
contract rent plus:
    (i) The actual cost of utilities not included in the contract rent; 
or
    (ii) A utility allowance.
    Rental housing means dwelling units in multifamily housing and 
dwelling units that are not owner occupied in single-family housing.
    Rental unit means a dwelling unit that is not owner-occupied and is 
rented or available to rent.
    Residence means a property where one or more families reside.
    Residential mortgage means a mortgage on single-family or 
multifamily housing.
    Revised Article 8 has the same meaning as in 31 CFR 357.2.
    Rural area means any underserved area located outside of any 
metropolitan area.
    Seasoned mortgage means a mortgage on which the date of the mortgage 
note is more than 1 year before the GSE purchased the mortgage.
    Second mortgage means any mortgage that has a lien position 
subordinate only to the lien of the first mortgage.
    Secondary residence means a dwelling where the mortgagor maintains 
(or will maintain) a part-time place of abode and typically spends (or 
will spend) less than the majority of the calendar year. A person may 
have more than one secondary residence at a time.
    Secretary means the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development and, 
where appropriate, any person designated by the Secretary to perform a 
particular function for the Secretary, including any HUD officer, 
employee, or agent.
    Security means any mortgage participation certificate, note, bond, 
debenture, evidence of indebtedness, collateral-trust certificate, 
transferable share, certificate of deposit for a security, or, in 
general, any interest or instrument commonly known as a ``security.''
    Securities Documentation means the applicable statement of terms, 
trust indenture, securities agreement or other documents establishing 
the terms of a Book-entry GSE Security.
    Single-family housing means a residence consisting of one to four 
dwelling units. Single-family housing includes condominium dwelling 
units and dwelling units in cooperative housing projects.
    Transfer message means an instruction of a Participant to a Federal 
Reserve Bank to effect a transfer of a Book-entry Security (including a 
Book-entry GSE Security) maintained in the Book-entry System, as set 
forth in Federal Reserve Bank Operating Circulars.
    Underserved area means:
    (1) For purposes of the definitions of ``central city'' and ``other 
underserved area,'' a census tract having:
    (i) A median income at or below 120 percent of the median income of 
the metropolitan area and a minority population of 30 percent or 
greater; or
    (ii) A median income at or below 90 percent of median income of the 
metropolitan area.
    (2) For purposes of the definition of ``rural area'':
    (i) In areas other than New England, a county having:

[[Page 340]]

    (A) A median income at or below 120 percent of the State 
nonmetropolitan median income and a minority population of 30 percent or 
greater; or
    (B) A median income at or below 95 percent of the greater of the:
    (1) State non-metropolitan median income; or
    (2) Nationwide non-metropolitan median income; and
    (ii) In New England, an entire county having the characteristics in 
paragraph (2)(i)(A) or (B) of this definition or the remainder of a 
county, where a portion of the county is in a metropolitan area and the 
remainder of the county has the characteristics in paragraph (2)(i)(A) 
or (B) of this definition.
    Utilities means charges for electricity, piped or bottled gas, 
water, sewage disposal, fuel (oil, coal, kerosene, wood, solar energy, 
or other), and garbage and trash collection. Utilities do not include 
charges for telephone service.
    Utility allowance means either:
    (1) The amount to be added to contract rent when utilities are not 
included in contract rent (also referred to as the ``AHS-derived utility 
allowance''), as issued annually by the Secretary; or
    (2) The utility allowance established under the HUD Section 8 
Program (42 U.S.C. 1437f) for the area where the property is located.
    Very-low-income has the same definition as ``very low-income'' has 
in FHEFSSA.
    Wholesale exchange means a transaction in which a GSE buys or 
otherwise acquires mortgages held in portfolio or securitized by the 
other GSE, or where both GSEs swap such mortgages.
    Working day means a day when HUD is officially open for business.
    (c) Subpart H terms. Unless the context requires otherwise, terms 
used in subpart H of this part that are not defined in this part, have 
the meanings as set forth in 31 CFR 357.2. Definitions and terms used in 
31 CFR part 357 should read as though modified to effectuate their 
application to the GSEs.

[60 FR 61888, Dec. 1, 1995, as amended at 61 FR 63947, Dec. 2, 1996; 62 
FR 28977, May 29, 1997]


<R04>
                        Subpart B--Housing Goals


<R05>
Sec. 81.11  General.

    This subpart establishes: three housing goals, as required by 
FHEFSSA; requirements for measuring performance under the goals; and 
procedures for monitoring and enforcing the goals.


<R05>
Sec. 81.12  Low- and Moderate-Income Housing Goal.

    (a) Purpose of goal. This annual goal for the purchase by each GSE 
of mortgages on housing for low- and moderate-income families (``the 
Low- and Moderate-Income Housing Goal'') is intended to achieve 
increased purchases by the GSEs of such mortgages.
    (b) Factors. In establishing the Low- and Moderate-Income Housing 
Goals, the Secretary considered the factors in 12 U.S.C. 4562(b). A 
statement documenting the Secretary's considerations and findings with 
respect to these factors, entitled ``Secretarial Considerations to 
Establish the Low- and Moderate-Income Housing Goal,'' was published in 
the Federal Register on December 1, 1995.
    (c) Goals. The annual goals for each GSE's purchases of mortgages on 
housing for low- and moderate-income families are:
    (1) For 1996, 40 percent of the total number of dwelling units 
financed by that GSE's mortgage purchases in 1996;
    (2) For each of the years 1997-99, 42 percent of the total number of 
dwelling units financed by that GSE's mortgage purchases in each of 
those years; and
    (3) For 2000 and thereafter the Secretary shall establish annual 
goals; pending establishment of goals for 2000 and thereafter, the 
annual goal for each of those years shall be 42 percent of the total 
number of dwelling units financed by that GSE's mortgage purchases in 
each of those years.


<R05>
Sec. 81.13  Central Cities, Rural Areas, and Other Underserved Areas Housing Goal.

    (a) Purpose of the goal. This annual goal for the purchase by each 
GSE of mortgages on housing located in central cities, rural areas, and 
other underserved areas is intended to achieve increased purchases by 
the GSEs of mortgages financing housing in areas

[[Page 341]]

that are underserved in terms of mortgage credit.
    (b) Factors. In establishing the Central Cities, Rural Areas, and 
Other Underserved Areas Goals, the Secretary considered the factors in 
12 U.S.C. 4564(b). A statement documenting the Secretary's 
considerations and findings with respect to these factors, entitled 
``Secretarial Considerations to Establish the Central Cities, Rural 
Areas, and Other Underserved Areas Housing Goal,'' was published in the 
Federal Register on December 1, 1995.
    (c) Goals. The annual goals for each GSE's purchases of mortgages on 
housing located in central cities, rural areas, and other underserved 
areas are:
    (1) For 1996, 21 percent of the total number of dwelling units 
financed by that GSE's mortgage purchases in 1996;
    (2) For each of the years 1997-99, 24 percent of the total number of 
dwelling units financed by that GSE's mortgage purchases in each of 
those years; and
    (3) For 2000 and thereafter the Secretary shall establish annual 
goals; pending establishment of goals for 2000 and thereafter, the 
annual goal for each of those years shall be 24 percent of the total 
number of dwelling units financed by that GSE's mortgage purchases in 
each of those years.
    (d) Measuring performance. The GSEs shall determine on a mortgage-
by-mortgage basis, through geocoding or any similarly accurate and 
reliable method, whether a mortgage finances one or more dwelling units 
located in a central city, rural area, or other underserved area.


<R05>
Sec. 81.14  Special Affordable Housing Goal.

    (a) Purpose of the goal. This goal is intended to achieve increased 
purchases by the GSEs of mortgages on rental and owner-occupied housing 
meeting the then-existing unaddressed needs of, and affordable to, low-
income families in low-income areas and very-low-income families.
    (b) Factors. In establishing the Special Affordable Housing Goals, 
the Secretary considered the factors in 12 U.S.C. 4563(a)(2). A 
statement documenting the Secretary's considerations and findings with 
respect to these factors, entitled ``Secretarial Considerations to 
Establish the Special Affordable Housing Goal,'' was published in the 
Federal Register on December 1, 1995.
    (c) Goals. The annual goals for each GSE's purchases of mortgages on 
rental and owner-occupied housing meeting the then-existing, unaddressed 
needs of and affordable to low-income families in low-income areas and 
very-low-income families are:
    (1) For 1996, 12 percent of the total number of dwelling units 
financed by each GSE's mortgage purchases in 1996. The goal shall 
include mortgage purchases financing dwelling units in multifamily 
housing totalling not less than 0.8 percent of the dollar volume of 
mortgages purchased by the respective GSE in 1994;
    (2) For each of the years 1997-99, 14 percent of the total number of 
dwelling units financed by each GSE's mortgage purchases in each of 
those years. The goal for each year shall include mortgage purchases 
financing dwelling units in multifamily housing totalling not less than 
0.8 percent of the dollar volume of mortgages purchased by the 
respective GSE in 1994; and
    (3) For 2000 and thereafter the Secretary shall establish annual 
goals. Pending establishment of goals for 2000 and thereafter, the 
annual goal for each of those years shall be 14 percent of the total 
number of dwelling units financed by each GSE's mortgages purchases in 
each of those years; the goal for each such year shall include mortgage 
purchases financing dwelling units in multifamily housing totalling not 
less than 0.8 percent of the dollar volume of mortgages purchased by the 
respective GSE in 1994.
    (d) Counting of multifamily units. (1) Dwelling units affordable to 
low-income families and financed by a particular purchase of a mortgage 
on multifamily housing shall count toward achievement of the Special 
Affordable Housing Goal where at least:
    (i) 20 percent of the dwelling units in the particular multifamily 
property are affordable to families whose incomes do not exceed 50 
percent of the area median income; or
    (ii) 40 percent of the dwelling units in the particular multifamily 
property

[[Page 342]]

are affordable to very-low-income families.
    (2) Where only some of the units financed by a purchase of a 
mortgage on multifamily housing count under the multifamily component of 
the goal, only a portion of the unpaid principal balance of the mortgage 
attributable to such units shall count toward the multifamily component. 
The portion of the mortgage counted under the multifamily requirement 
shall be equal to the ratio of the total units that count to the total 
number of units in the mortgaged property.
    (e) Full Credit Activities. (1) For purposes of 12 U.S.C. 4563(b)(1) 
and this paragraph (e), full credit means that each unit financed by a 
mortgage purchased by a GSE and meeting the requirements of this section 
shall count toward achievement of the Special Affordable Housing Goal 
for that GSE.
    (2) Consistent with Sec. 81.16(b)(3)(ii), the Secretary will give 
full credit toward achievement of the Special Affordable Housing Goals 
for the activities in 12 U.S.C. 4563(b)(1).
    (3) Mortgages under HUD's Home Equity Conversion Mortgage (``HECM'') 
Insurance Demonstration Program, 12 U.S.C. 1715z-20, and the Farmers 
Home Administration's Guaranteed Rural Housing Loan Program, 7 U.S.C. 
1933, meet the requirements of 12 U.S.C. 4563(b)(1)(A)(i) and (ii).
    (4)(i) For purposes of determining whether a seller meets the 
requirement in 12 U.S.C. 4563(b)(1)(B), a seller must currently operate 
on its own or actively participate in an ongoing program that will 
result in originating additional loans that meet the goal. Actively 
participating in such a program includes actively participating with a 
qualified housing group that operates a program resulting in the 
origination of loans that meet the requirements of the goal.
    (ii) To determine whether a seller meets the requirement in 
paragraph (e)(4)(i) of this section, the GSE shall verify and monitor 
that the seller meets the requirement and develop any necessary 
mechanisms to ensure compliance with this requirement.
    (iii) Where a seller's primary business is originating mortgages on 
housing that qualifies under this Special Affordable Housing Goal, such 
seller is presumed to meet the requirements in paragraph (e)(4)(i) of 
this section.
    (f) No credit activities. Neither the purchase nor the 
securitization of mortgages associated with the refinancing of a GSE's 
existing mortgage or mortgage-backed securities portfolios shall receive 
credit toward the achievement of the Special Affordable Housing Goal. 
Refinancings that result from the wholesale exchange of mortgages 
between the two GSEs shall not count toward the achievement of this 
goal. Refinancings of individual mortgages shall count toward 
achievement of this goal when the refinancing is an arms-length 
transaction that is borrower-driven and the mortgage otherwise counts 
toward achievement of this goal. For purposes of this paragraph (f), 
``mortgage or mortgage-backed securities portfolios'' includes mortgages 
retained by Fannie Mae or Freddie Mac and mortgages utilized to back 
mortgage-backed securities.


<R05>
Sec. 81.15  General requirements.

    (a) Calculating the numerator and denominator. Performance under 
each of the housing goals shall be measured using a fraction that is 
converted into a percentage. The numerator of each fraction is the 
number of dwelling units financed by a GSE's mortgage purchases in a 
particular year that count toward achievement of the housing goal. The 
denominator of each fraction is, for all mortgages purchased, the number 
of dwelling units that could count toward achievement of the goal under 
appropriate circumstances. The denominators shall not include GSE 
transactions or activities that are not mortgages or mortgage purchases. 
When a GSE lacks sufficient information to determine whether the 
purchase of a mortgage originated after 1992 counts toward achievement 
of a particular housing goal, that mortgage purchase shall be included 
in the denominator for that housing goal.
    (b) Properties with multiple dwelling units. For the purposes of 
counting toward the achievement of the goals, whenever the property 
securing a mortgage contains more than one dwelling unit, each such 
dwelling unit

[[Page 343]]

shall be counted as a separate dwelling unit financed by a mortgage 
purchase.
    (c) Credit toward multiple goals. A mortgage purchase (or dwelling 
unit financed by such purchase) by a GSE in a particular year shall 
count toward the achievement of each housing goal for which such 
purchase (or dwelling unit) qualifies in that year.
    (d) Counting owner-occupied units. For purposes of counting owner-
occupied units toward achievement of the Low- and Moderate-Income 
Housing Goal or the Special Affordable Housing Goal, mortgage purchases 
financing such units shall be evaluated based on the income of the 
mortgagors and the area median income at the time of origination of the 
mortgage. To determine whether mortgagors may be counted under a 
particular family income level, i.e., very-low-, low-, or moderate-
income, the income of the mortgagors is compared to the median income 
for the area at the time of mortgage origination, using the appropriate 
percentage factor provided under Sec. 81.17.
    (e) Counting rental units--(1) Use of income, rent--(i) Generally. 
For purposes of counting rental units toward achievement of the Low- and 
Moderate-Income Housing Goal or the Special Affordable Housing Goal, 
mortgage purchases financing such units shall be evaluated based on the 
income of actual or prospective tenants where such data is available, 
i.e., known to a lender.
    (ii) Availability of income information. (A) Each GSE shall require 
lenders to provide to the GSE tenant income information under paragraphs 
(e)(3) and (4) of this section, but only when such information is known 
to the lender.
    (B) When such tenant income information is available for all 
occupied units, the GSE's performance shall be based on the income of 
the tenants in the occupied units. For unoccupied units that are vacant 
and available for rent and for unoccupied units that are under repair or 
renovation and not available for rent, the GSE shall use the income of 
prospective tenants, if paragraph (e)(4) of this section is applicable. 
If paragraph (e)(4) of this section is not applicable, the GSE shall use 
rent levels for comparable units in the property to determine 
affordability.
    (2) Model units and rental offices. A model unit or rental office in 
a multifamily property may count toward achievement of the housing goals 
only if a GSE determines that:
    (i) It is reasonably expected that the units will be occupied by a 
family within one year;
    (ii) The number of such units is reasonable and minimal considering 
the size of the multifamily property; and
    (iii) Such unit otherwise meets the requirements for the goal.
    (3) Income of actual tenants. When the income of actual tenants is 
available, to determine whether a tenant is very-low-, low-, or 
moderate-income, the income of the tenant shall be compared to the 
median income for the area, adjusted for family size as provided in 
Sec. 81.17.
    (4) Income of prospective tenants. When income for tenants is 
available to a lender because a project is subject to a Federal housing 
program that establishes the maximum income for a tenant or a 
prospective tenant in rental units, the income of prospective tenants 
may be counted at the maximum income level established under such 
housing program for that unit. In determining the income of prospective 
tenants, the income shall be projected based on the types of units and 
market area involved. Where the income of prospective tenants is 
projected, each GSE must determine that the income figures are 
reasonable considering the rents (if any) on the same units in the past 
and considering current rents on comparable units in the same market 
area.
    (5) Use of rent. When the income of the prospective or actual 
tenants of a dwelling unit is not available, performance under these 
goals will be evaluated based on rent and whether the rent is affordable 
to the income group targeted by the housing goal. A rent is affordable 
if the rent does not exceed 30 percent of the maximum income level of 
very-low-, low-, or moderate-income families as provided in Sec. 81.19. 
In determining contract rent for a dwelling unit, the actual rent or 
average rent by unit type shall be used.
    (6) Timeliness of information. In determining performance under the 
housing goals, each GSE shall use tenant and

[[Page 344]]

rental information as of the time of mortgage:
    (i) Acquisition for mortgages on multifamily housing; and
    (ii) Origination for mortgages on single-family housing.
    (f) Application of Median income. (1) For purposes of determining an 
area's median income under Secs. 81.17 through 81.19 and for the 
definition of ``low-income area,'' the area is:
    (i) The metropolitan area, if the property which is the subject of 
the mortgage is in a metropolitan area; and
    (ii) In all other areas, the county in which the property is 
located, except that where the State nonmetropolitan median income is 
higher than the county's median income, the area is the State 
nonmetropolitan area.
    (2) When a GSE cannot precisely determine whether a mortgage is on 
dwelling unit(s) located in one area, the GSE shall determine the median 
income for the split area in the manner prescribed by the Federal 
Financial Institutions Examination Council for reporting under the Home 
Mortgage Disclosure Act, if the GSE can determine that the mortgage is 
on dwelling unit(s) located in:
    (i) A census tract;
    (ii) A census place code;
    (iii) A block-group enumeration district;
    (iv) A nine-digit zip code; or
    (v) Another appropriate geographic segment that is partially located 
in more than one area (``split area'').
    (g) Sampling not permitted. Performance under the housing goals for 
each year shall be based on a complete tabulation of mortgage purchases 
for that year; a sampling of such purchases is not acceptable.
    (h) Newly available data. When a GSE uses data to determine whether 
a mortgage purchase counts toward achievement of any goal and new data 
is released after the start of a calendar quarter, the GSE need not use 
the new data until the start of the following quarter.


<R05>
Sec. 81.16  Special counting requirements.

    (a) General. In determining whether a GSE shall receive full credit 
for a transaction or activity toward achievement of any of the housing 
goals, the Secretary shall consider whether a transaction or activity of 
the GSE is substantially equivalent to a mortgage purchase and either 
creates a new market or adds liquidity to an existing market.
    (b) Not counted. The following transactions or activities shall not 
count toward achievement of any of the housing goals and shall not be 
included in the denominator in calculating either GSE's performance 
under the housing goals:
    (1) Equity investments in housing development projects;
    (2) Purchases of State and local government housing bonds except as 
provided in 81.16(c)(8);
    (3) Purchases of non-conventional mortgages except:
    (i) Where such mortgages are acquired under a risk-sharing 
arrangement with a Federal agency; or
    (ii) As provided in Sec. 81.14(e)(2);
    (4) Commitments to buy mortgages at a later date or time;
    (5) Options to acquire mortgages;
    (6) Rights of first refusal to acquire mortgages;
    (7) Any interests in mortgages that the Secretary determines, in 
writing, shall not be treated as interests in mortgages;
    (8) Mortgage purchases to the extent they finance any dwelling units 
that are secondary residences; and
    (9) Any combination of (1) through (8) above.
    (c) Other special rules--(1) Credit enhancements. (i) Dwelling units 
financed under a credit enhancement entered into by a GSE shall be 
treated as mortgage purchases and count toward achievement of the 
housing goals when:
    (A) The GSE provides a specific contractual obligation to ensure 
timely payment of amounts due under a mortgage or mortgages financed by 
the issuance of housing bonds (such bonds may be issued by any entity, 
including a State or local housing finance agency);
    (B) The GSE assumes a credit risk in the transaction substantially 
equivalent to the risk that would have been assumed by the GSE if it had

[[Page 345]]

securitized the mortgages financed by such bonds; and
    (C) Such dwelling units otherwise qualify under this part.
    (ii) When a GSE provides a specific contractual obligation to ensure 
timely payment of amounts due under any mortgage originally insured by a 
public purpose mortgage insurance entity or fund, the GSE may, on a 
case-by-case basis, seek approval from the Secretary for such activities 
to count toward achievement of the housing goals.
    (2) Real estate mortgage investment conduits (``REMICs''). (i) A 
GSE's purchase or guarantee of all or a portion of a REMIC shall be 
treated as a mortgage purchase and receive credit toward the achievement 
of the housing goals provided:
    (A) The underlying mortgages or mortgage-backed securities for the 
REMIC were not:
    (1) Guaranteed by the Government National Mortgage Association; or
    (2) Previously counted toward any housing goal by the GSE; and
    (B) The GSE has the information necessary to support counting the 
dwelling units financed by the REMIC, or that part of the REMIC 
purchased or guaranteed by the GSE, toward the achievement of a 
particular housing goal.
    (ii) For REMICs that meet the requirements in paragraph (c)(2)(i) of 
this section and for which the GSE purchased or guaranteed:
    (A) The whole REMIC, all of the units financed by the REMIC shall be 
treated as a mortgage purchase and count toward achievement of the 
housing goals; or
    (B) A portion of the REMIC, the GSE shall receive partial credit 
toward achievement of the housing goals. This credit shall be equal to 
the percentage of the REMIC purchased or guaranteed by the GSE (the 
dollar amount of the purchase or guarantee divided by the total dollar 
amount of the REMIC) multiplied by the number of dwelling units that 
would have counted toward the goal(s) if the GSE had purchased or 
guaranteed the whole REMIC. In calculating performance under the housing 
goals, the denominator shall include the number of dwelling units 
included in the whole REMIC multiplied by the percentage of the REMIC 
purchased or guaranteed by the GSE.
    (3) Risk-sharing. Mortgage purchases under risk-sharing arrangements 
between the GSEs and any Federal agency where the units would otherwise 
count toward achievement of the housing goal under which the GSE is 
responsible for a substantial amount (50 percent or more) of the risk 
shall be treated as mortgage purchases and count toward achievement of 
the housing goal or goals.
    (4) Participations. Participations purchased by a GSE shall be 
treated as mortgage purchases and count toward the achievement of the 
housing goals, if the GSE's participation in the mortgage is 50 percent 
or more.
    (5) Cooperative housing and condominium projects. (i) The purchase 
of a mortgage on a cooperative housing unit (``a share loan'') or a 
condominium unit is a mortgage purchase. Such a purchase is counted 
toward achievement of a housing goal in the same manner as a mortgage 
purchase of single-family owner-occupied units, i.e., affordability is 
based on the income of the owner(s).
    (ii) The purchase of a mortgage on a cooperative building (``a 
blanket loan'') or a condominium project is a mortgage purchase and 
shall count toward achievement of the housing goals. Where a GSE 
purchases both ``a blanket loan'' and mortgages for units in the same 
building (``share loans''), both the blanket loan and the share loan(s) 
are mortgage purchases and shall count toward achievement of the housing 
goals. Where a GSE purchases both a condominium project mortgage and 
mortgages on condominium dwelling units in the same project, both the 
condominium project mortgages and the mortgages on condominium dwelling 
units are mortgage purchases and shall count toward achievement of the 
housing goals.
    (6) Seasoned mortgages. A GSE's purchase of a seasoned mortgage 
shall be treated as a mortgage purchase for purposes of these goals 
except:
    (i) Where the GSE has already counted the mortgages under a housing 
goal applicable to 1993 or any subsequent year; or

[[Page 346]]

    (ii) As provided in 12 U.S.C. 4563(b)(1)(B).
    (7) Purchase of refinanced mortgages. Except as provided in 
Sec. 81.14(f), the purchase of a refinanced mortgage by a GSE is a 
mortgage purchase and shall count toward achievement of the housing 
goals to the extent the mortgage qualifies.
    (8) Mortgage revenue bonds. (i) The purchase of a state or local 
mortgage revenue bond shall be treated as a mortgage purchase and units 
financed under such MRB shall count toward achievement of the goals 
where:
    (A) The MRB is to be repaid only from the principal and interest of 
the underlying mortgages originated with funds made available by the 
MRB; and
    (B) The MRB is not a general obligation of a state or local 
government or agency or is not credit enchanced by any government or 
agency, third party guarantor or surety.
    (ii) Dwelling units financed by a mortgage revenue bond meeting the 
requirements of paragraph (c)(8)(i) of this section shall count toward a 
housing goal to the extent such dwelling units otherwise qualify under 
this part.


<R05>
Sec. 81.17  Affordability--Income level definitions--family size and income known (owner-occupied units, actual tenants, and prospective tenants).

    In determining whether a dwelling unit is affordable to very-low-, 
low-, or moderate-income families, where the unit is owner-occupied or, 
for rental housing, family size and income information for the dwelling 
unit is known to the GSE, the affordability of the unit shall be 
determined as follows:
    (a) Moderate-income means:
    (1) In the case of owner-occupied units, income not in excess of 100 
percent of area median income; and
    (2) In the case of rental units, where the income of actual or 
prospective tenants is available, income not in excess of the following 
percentages of area median income corresponding to the following family 
sizes:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                             Percentage
                                                               of area
                Number of persons in family                    median
                                                               income
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1.........................................................           70
2.........................................................           80
3.........................................................           90
4.........................................................          100
5 or more.................................................         (*)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
*100% plus (8% multiplied by the number of persons in excess of 4).

    (b) Low-income means:
    (1) In the case of owner-occupied units, income not in excess of 80 
percent of area median income; and
    (2) In the case of rental units, where the income of actual or 
prospective tenants is available, income not in excess of the following 
percentages of area median income corresponding to the following family 
sizes:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                             Percentage
                                                               of area
                Number of persons in family                    median
                                                               income
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1.........................................................           56
2.........................................................           64
3.........................................................           72
4.........................................................           80
5 or more.................................................         (*)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
*80% plus (6.4% multiplied by the number of persons in excess of 4).

    (c) Very-low-income means:
    (1) In the case of owner-occupied units, income not in excess of 60 
percent of area median income; and
    (2) In the case of rental units, where the income of actual or 
prospective tenants is available, income not in excess of the following 
percentages of area median income corresponding to the following family 
sizes:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                             Percentage
                                                               of area
                Number of persons in family                    median
                                                               income
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1.........................................................           42
2.........................................................           48
3.........................................................           54
4.........................................................           60
5 or more.................................................         (*)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
*60% plus (4.8% multiplied by the number of persons in excess of 4).


<R05>
Sec. 81.18  Affordability--Income level definitions--family size not known (actual or prospective tenants).

    In determining whether a rental unit is affordable to very-low, low-
, or moderate-income families where family size is not known to the GSE, 
income will be adjusted using unit size, and affordability determined as 
follows:
    (a) For moderate-income, the income of prospective tenants shall not 
exceed

[[Page 347]]

the following percentages of area median income with adjustments, 
depending on unit size:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                             Percentage
                                                               of area
                         Unit size                             median
                                                               income
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Efficiency................................................           70
1 bedroom.................................................           75
2 bedrooms................................................           90
3 bedrooms or more........................................         (*)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
*104% plus (12% multiplied by the number of bedrooms in excess of 3).

    (b) For low-income, income of prospective tenants shall not exceed 
the following percentages of area median income with adjustments, 
depending on unit size:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                             Percentage
                                                               of area
                         Unit size                             median
                                                               income
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Efficiency................................................           56
1 bedroom.................................................           60
2 bedrooms................................................           72
3 bedrooms or more........................................         (*)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
*83.2% plus (9.6% multiplied by the number of bedrooms in excess of 3).

    (c) For very-low-income, income of prospective tenants shall not 
exceed the following percentages of area median income with adjustments, 
depending on unit size:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                             Percentage
                                                               of area
                         Unit size                             median
                                                               income
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Efficiency................................................           42
1 bedroom.................................................           45
2 bedrooms................................................           54
3 bedrooms or more........................................          (*)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
*62.4% plus (7.2% multiplied by the number of bedrooms in excess of 3).


<R05>
Sec. 81.19  Affordability--Rent level definitions--tenant income is not known.

    For purposes of determining whether a rental unit is affordable to 
very-low-, low-, or moderate-income families where the income of the 
family in the dwelling unit is not known to the GSE, the affordability 
of the unit is determined based on unit size as follows:
    (a) For moderate-income, maximum affordable rents to count as 
housing for moderate-income families shall not exceed the following 
percentages of area median income with adjustments, depending on unit 
size:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                             Percentage
                                                               of area
                         Unit size                             median
                                                               income
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Efficiency................................................           21
1 bedroom.................................................         22.5
2 bedrooms................................................           27
3 bedrooms or more........................................          (*)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
*31.2% plus (3.6% multiplied by the number of bedrooms in excess of 3);

    (b) For low-income, maximum affordable rents to count as housing for 
low-income families shall not exceed the following percentages of area 
median income with adjustments, depending on unit size:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                             Percentage
                                                               of area
                         Unit size                             median
                                                               income
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Efficiency................................................         16.8
1 bedroom.................................................           18
2 bedrooms................................................         21.6
3 bedrooms or more........................................          (*)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
*24.96% plus (2.88% multiplied by the number of bedrooms in excess of
  3); and

    (c) For very-low-income, maximum affordable rents to count as 
housing for very-low-income families shall not exceed the following 
percentages of area median income with adjustments, depending on unit 
size:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                             Percentage
                                                               of area
                         Unit size                             median
                                                               income
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Efficiency................................................         12.6
1 bedroom.................................................         13.5
2 bedrooms................................................         16.2
3 bedrooms or more........................................         (*)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
*18.72% plus (2.16% multiplied by the number of bedrooms in excess of
  3).

    (d) Missing Information. Each GSE shall make every effort to obtain 
the information necessary to make the calculations in this section. If a 
GSE makes such efforts but cannot obtain data on the number of bedrooms 
in particular units, in making the calculations on such units, the units 
shall be assumed to be efficiencies.


<R05>
Sec. 81.20  Actions to be taken to meet the goals.

    To meet the goals under this rule, each GSE shall operate in 
accordance with 12 U.S.C. 4565.


<R05>
Sec. 81.21  Notice and determination of failure to meet goals.

    If the Secretary determines that a GSE has failed or there is a 
substantial probability that a GSE will fail to

[[Page 348]]

meet any housing goal, the Secretary shall follow the procedures at 12 
U.S.C. 4566(b).


<R05>
Sec. 81.22  Housing plans.

    (a) If the Secretary determines, under Sec. 81.21, that a GSE has 
failed or there is a substantial probability that a GSE will fail to 
meet any housing goal and that the achievement of the housing goal was 
or is feasible, the Secretary shall require the GSE to submit a housing 
plan for approval by the Secretary.
    (b) Nature of plan. Each housing plan shall:
    (1) Be feasible;
    (2) Be sufficiently specific to enable the Secretary to monitor 
compliance periodically;
    (3) Describe the specific actions that the GSE will take:
    (i) To achieve the goal for the next calendar year; or
    (ii) If the Secretary determines that there is substantial 
probability that the GSE will fail to meet a housing goal in the current 
year, to make such improvements as are reasonable in the remainder of 
the year; and
    (4) Address any additional matters relevant to the plan as required, 
in writing, by the Secretary.
    (c) Deadline for submission. The GSE shall submit a housing plan to 
the Secretary within 30 days after issuance of a notice under Sec. 81.21 
requiring the GSE to submit a housing plan. The Secretary may extend the 
deadline for submission of a plan, in writing and for a time certain, to 
the extent the Secretary determines an extension is necessary.
    (d) Review of housing plans. The Secretary shall review and approve 
or disapprove housing plans in accordance with 12 U.S.C. 4566(c)(4) and 
(5).
    (e) Resubmission. If the Secretary disapproves an initial housing 
plan submitted by a GSE, the GSE shall submit an amended plan acceptable 
to the Secretary within 30 days of the Secretary disapproving the 
initial plan; the Secretary may extend the deadline if the Secretary 
determines an extension is in the public interest. If the amended plan 
is not acceptable to the Secretary, the Secretary may afford the GSE 15 
days to submit a new plan.


<R04>
                         Subpart C--Fair Housing


<R05>
Sec. 81.41  General.

    In this subpart, the Secretary: prohibits discrimination by the GSEs 
in their mortgage purchases because of race, color, religion, sex, 
handicap, familial status, age, or national origin, including any 
consideration of the age or location of a dwelling or age of the 
neighborhood or census tract where the dwelling is located in a manner 
that has a discriminatory effect; requires that the GSEs submit 
information to the Secretary to assist Fair Housing Act and ECOA 
investigations; provides for advising the GSEs of Fair Housing Act and 
ECOA violations; provides for reviewing the GSEs' underwriting and 
appraisal guidelines to ensure compliance with the Fair Housing Act; and 
requires that the GSEs take actions as directed by the Secretary 
following Fair Housing Act and ECOA adjudications. Because FHEFSSA 
provides, generally, that the Director of OFHEO shall enforce violations 
by the GSEs of FHEFSSA and regulations in this subpart, this subpart 
also provides for referral of such cases to the Director.


<R05>
Sec. 81.42  Prohibitions against discrimination.

    Neither GSE shall discriminate in any manner in making any mortgage 
purchases because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial 
status, age, or national origin, including any consideration of the age 
or location of the dwelling or the age of the neighborhood or census 
tract where the dwelling is located in a manner that has a 
discriminatory effect.


<R05>
Sec. 81.43  Reports; underwriting and appraisal guideline review.

    (a) Reports. Each GSE, in the AHAR required under Sec. 81.63, shall 
assess underwriting standards, business practices, repurchase 
requirements, pricing, fees, and procedures that affect the purchase of 
mortgages for low- and moderate-income families, or that may yield 
disparate results based on the race, color, religion, sex, handicap, 
familial status, age, or national origin of the borrower, including 
revisions thereto to promote affordable housing or fair lending.

[[Page 349]]

    (b) Review of Underwriting and Appraisal Guidelines. The Secretary 
shall periodically review and comment on the underwriting and appraisal 
guidelines of each enterprise to ensure that such guidelines are 
consistent with the Fair Housing Act and 12 U.S.C. 4545.


<R05>
Sec. 81.44  Submission of information to the Secretary.

    (a) General. Upon request from the Secretary, the GSEs shall submit 
information and data to the Secretary to assist in investigating whether 
any mortgage lender with which the GSE does business has failed to 
comply with the Fair Housing Act or ECOA.
    (b) Information requests and submissions--(1) Information requests 
by the Secretary. The Secretary may require the GSEs to submit 
information to assist in Fair Housing Act or ECOA investigations of 
lenders. Under FHEFSSA, other Federal agencies responsible for the 
enforcement of ECOA must submit requests for information from the GSEs 
through the Secretary. For matters involving only ECOA, the Secretary 
will only issue requests for information upon request from the 
appropriate Federal agency responsible for ECOA.
    (2) Information from established data systems. The Secretary may 
request that a GSE generate information or reports from its data 
system(s) to assist a Fair Housing Act or ECOA investigation.
    (3) GSE replies. A GSE receiving any request(s) for information 
under this section shall reply in a complete and timely manner with any 
and all information that it is privy to and collects that is responsive 
to the request.
    (c) Submission to ECOA enforcers. The Secretary shall submit any 
information received under paragraph (b) of this section concerning 
compliance with ECOA to appropriate Federal agencies responsible for 
ECOA enforcement, as provided in section 704 of ECOA.


<R05>
Sec. 81.45  Obtaining and disseminating information.

    (a) The Secretary shall obtain information from other regulatory and 
enforcement agencies of the Federal Government and State and local 
governments regarding violations by lenders of the Fair Housing Act, 
ECOA, and/or State or local fair housing/lending laws, and shall make 
such information available to the GSEs as the Secretary deems 
appropriate in accordance with applicable law regarding the 
confidentiality of supervisory information and the right to financial 
privacy, and subject to the terms of memoranda of understanding and 
other arrangements between the Secretary and Federal financial 
regulators and other agencies. In addition, the Secretary shall make 
information that the Secretary possesses regarding violations of the 
Fair Housing Act available to the GSEs.
    (b) As contemplated in paragraph (a) of this section, the Secretary 
shall obtain information regarding violations by lenders of the Fair 
Housing Act or ECOA involving discrimination with respect to the 
availability of credit in a residential real-estate-related transaction 
from other Federal regulatory or enforcement agencies. The Secretary 
will obtain information from regulators regarding violations of ECOA by 
lenders only in circumstances in which there is either more than a 
single ECOA violation, or the ECOA violation could also be a violation 
of the Fair Housing Act.


<R05>
Sec. 81.46  Remedial actions.

    (a) General. The Secretary shall direct the GSEs to take one or more 
remedial actions, including suspension, probation, reprimand or 
settlement, against lenders found to have engaged in discriminatory 
lending practices in violation of the Fair Housing Act or ECOA, pursuant 
to a final adjudication on the record and an opportunity for a hearing 
under subchapter II of chapter 5 of title 5, United States Code.
    (b) Definitions. For purposes of this subpart, the following 
definitions apply:
    Indefinite suspension means that, until directed to do otherwise by 
the Secretary, the GSEs will refrain from purchasing mortgages from a 
lender.
    Probation means that, for a fixed period of time specified by the 
Secretary, a lender that has been found to have violated the Fair 
Housing Act or ECOA will be subject automatically to more severe 
sanctions than probation, e.g.,

[[Page 350]]

suspension, if further violations are found.
    Remedial action includes a reprimand, probation, temporary 
suspension, indefinite suspension, or settlement.
    Reprimand means a written letter to a lender from a GSE, which has 
been directed to be sent by the Secretary, stating that the lender has 
violated the Fair Housing Act or ECOA and warning of the possibility 
that the Secretary may impose more severe remedial actions than 
reprimand if any further violation occurs.
    Temporary Suspension means that, for a fixed period of time 
specified by the Secretary, the GSEs will not purchase mortgages from a 
lender.
    (c) Institution of remedial actions. (1) The Secretary shall direct 
the GSE to take remedial action(s) against a lender charged with 
violating ECOA only after a final determination on the charge has been 
made by an appropriate United States District Court or any other court 
of competent jurisdiction. The Secretary shall direct the GSE to take 
remedial action(s) against a lender charged with violating the Fair 
Housing Act only after a final determination on the matter has been made 
by a United States Court, a HUD Administrative Law Judge, or the 
Secretary.
    (2) Following a final determination sustaining a charge against a 
lender for violating the Fair Housing Act or ECOA, in accordance with 
paragraph (c)(1) of this section, the Secretary shall determine the 
remedial action(s) that the GSE is to be directed to take for such 
violation.
    (3) In determining the appropriate remedial action(s), the Secretary 
shall solicit and fully consider the views of the Federal financial 
regulator responsible for the subject lender concerning the action(s) 
that are contemplated to be directed against such lender, prior to 
directing any such action(s). If such responsible Federal financial 
regulator makes a written determination that a particular remedial 
action would threaten the financial safety and soundness of a Federally-
insured lender, the Secretary shall consider other remedial actions. 
Where warranted, the Secretary also shall solicit and fully consider the 
views of the Director regarding the effect of the action(s) that are 
contemplated on the safety and soundness of the GSE. In determining what 
action(s) to direct, the Secretary will also, without limitation, 
consider the following:
    (i) The gravity of the violation;
    (ii) The extent to which other action has been taken against the 
lender for discriminatory activities;
    (iii) Whether the lender's actions demonstrate a discriminatory 
pattern or practice or an individual instance of discrimination;
    (iv) The impact or seriousness of the harm;
    (v) The number of people affected by the discriminatory act(s);
    (vi) Whether the lender operates an effective program of self 
assessment and correction;
    (vii) The extent of any actions or programs by the lender designed 
to compensate victims and prevent future fair lending violations;
    (viii) The extent that a finding of liability against a lender is 
based on a lender's use of a facially-neutral underwriting guideline of 
a secondary mortgage market entity applied appropriately by the lender 
in order to sell loans to that secondary mortgage market entity; and
    (ix) Any other information deemed relevant by the Secretary.
    (d) Notice of remedial action(s). (1) Following the Secretary's 
decision concerning the appropriate remedial action(s) that the GSE is 
to be directed to take, the Secretary shall prepare and issue to the GSE 
and the lender a written notice setting forth the remedial action(s) to 
be taken and the date such remedial action(s) are to commence. The 
Notice shall inform the lender of its right to request a hearing on the 
appropriateness of the proposed remedial action(s), within 20 days of 
service of the Notice, by filing a request with the Docket Clerk, HUD 
Office of Administrative Law Judges.
    (2) Where a lender does not timely request a hearing on a remedial 
action, the GSE shall take the action in accordance with the Notice.
    (e) Review and decision on remedial action(s). (1) Where a lender 
timely requests a hearing on a remedial action, a hearing shall be 
conducted before a

[[Page 351]]

HUD administrative law judge (ALJ) and a final decision rendered in 
accordance with the procedures set forth in 24 CFR part 26, subpart B, 
to the extent such provisions are not inconsistent with subpart C of 
this part or FHEFSSA. The lender and the Secretary, but not the GSE, 
shall be parties to the action. At such hearing, the appropriateness of 
the remedial action for the violation(s) will be the sole matter for 
review. The validity or appropriateness of the underlying determination 
on the violation(s) shall not be subject to review at such hearing.
    (2) The Secretary shall transmit to the GSEs each final decision by 
HUD on a remedial action and any dispositive settlement of a proceeding 
on such action.
    (3) The GSE shall take the action(s) set forth in a final decision 
by HUD on remedial action(s) or any dispositive settlement of such a 
proceeding setting forth remedial action(s) in accordance with such 
decision or settlement.

[60 FR 61888, Dec. 1, 1995, as amended by 61 FR 50218, Sept. 24, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 81.47  Violations of provisions by the GSEs.

    (a) FHEFSSA empowers the Director of OFHEO to initiate enforcement 
actions for GSE violations of the provisions of section 1325 of FHEFSSA 
and these regulations. The Secretary shall refer violations and 
potential violations of 12 U.S.C. 4545 and this subpart C to the 
Director.
    (b) Where a private complainant or the Secretary is also proceeding 
against a GSE under the Fair Housing Act, the Assistant Secretary for 
Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity shall conduct the investigation of 
the complaint and make the reasonable cause/no reasonable cause 
determination required by section 810(g) of the Fair Housing Act. Where 
reasonable cause is found, a charge shall be issued and the matter will 
proceed to enforcement pursuant to sections 812(b) and (o) of the Fair 
Housing Act.


<R04>
                     Subpart D--New Program Approval


<R05>
Sec. 81.51  General.

    This subpart details the requirements and procedures for review of 
requests for new program approval by the Secretary.


<R05>
Sec. 81.52  Requirement for program requests.

    (a) Before implementing a new program, a GSE shall submit a request 
for new program approval (``program request'') to the Secretary for the 
Secretary's review. Submission of a program request is not required 
where the program that the GSE proposes to implement is not 
significantly different from:
    (1) A program that has already been approved in writing by the 
Secretary; or
    (2) A program that was engaged in by the GSE prior to October 28, 
1992.
    (b) If a GSE does not submit a program request for a program, the 
Secretary may request information about the program and require that the 
GSE submit a program request. The GSE shall comply with the request and 
may indicate in such response its views respecting whether the program 
is subject to the Secretary's review.


<R05>
Sec. 81.53  Processing of program requests.

    (a) Each program request submitted to the Secretary by a GSE shall 
be in writing and shall be submitted to the Secretary and the Director, 
Office of Government-Sponsored Enterprises, Department of Housing and 
Urban Development, Washington, DC. For those requests submitted before 1 
year after the effective date of the regulations issued by the Director 
of OFHEO under 12 U.S.C. 4611(e), the GSE shall simultaneously submit 
the program request to the Director.
    (b) Each program request shall include:
    (1) An opinion from counsel stating the statutory authority for the 
new program (Freddie Mac Act section

[[Page 352]]

305(a) (1), (4), or (5), or Fannie Mae Charter Act section 302(b)(2)-(5) 
or 304);
    (2) A good-faith estimate of the anticipated dollar volume of the 
program over the short- and long-term;
    (3) A full description of: (i) The purpose and operation of the 
proposed program;
    (ii) The market targeted by the program;
    (iii) The delivery system for the program;
    (iv) The effect of the program on the mortgage market; and
    (v) Material relevant to the public interest.
    (c) Following receipt of a program request, the Secretary and, where 
a program request is submitted to the Director pursuant to paragraph (a) 
of this section, the Director shall review the program request.
    (d) Transition standard for approval. Program requests submitted by 
the GSEs before the date occurring 1 year after the effective date of 
the regulations issued by the Director under 12 U.S.C. 4611(e) shall be 
approved or disapproved by the Secretary as provided in 12 U.S.C. 
4542(b)(2).
    (e) Permanent standard for approval by the Secretary. Program 
requests submitted after the date occurring one year after the effective 
date of the regulations issued by the Director under 12 U.S.C. 4611(e) 
establishing the risk-based capital test shall be approved by the 
Secretary in accordance with 12 U.S.C. 4542(b)(1).
    (f) Time for review. Unless the Secretary and, where appropriate, 
the Director of OFHEO, need additional information, a program request 
shall be approved or disapproved within 45 days from the date it is 
received by the Director, Office of Government-Sponsored Enterprises, 
and, where applicable, the Director of OFHEO. If within 45 days after 
receiving a request, the Secretary or the Director of OFHEO determine 
that additional information is necessary to review the matter and 
request such information from the GSE, the Secretary may extend the time 
period for consideration for an additional 15 days.
    (1) Where additional information is requested, the GSE must provide 
the requested information to the Secretary and, where appropriate, the 
Director, within 10 days after the request for additional information.
    (2) If the GSE fails to furnish requested information within 10 days 
after the request for information, the Secretary may deny the GSE's 
request for approval based on such failure and so report to the 
Committees of Congress in accordance with paragraph (g) of this section.
    (g) Approval or report. Within 45 days or, if the period is 
extended, 60 days following receipt of a program request, the Secretary 
shall approve the request, in writing, or submit a report to the 
Committee on Banking and Financial Services of the House of 
Representatives and the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs 
of the Senate, explaining the reasons for not approving the request. If 
the Secretary does not act within this time period, the GSE's program 
request will be deemed approved.


<R05>
Sec. 81.54  Review of disapproval.

    (a) Programs disapproved as unauthorized. (1) Where the Secretary 
disapproves a program request on the grounds that the new program is not 
authorized, as defined in Sec. 81.53(d) or (e), the GSE may, within 30 
days of the date of receipt of the decision on disapproval, request an 
opportunity to review and supplement the administrative record for the 
decision, in accordance with paragraphs (a) (2) and (3) of this section.
    (2) Supplementing in writing. A GSE supplementing the record in 
writing must submit written materials within 30 days after the date of 
receipt of the decision on disapproval, but no later than the date of a 
meeting, if requested, under paragraph (a)(3) of this section.
    (3) Meeting. Within 10 days of the date of receipt of the decision 
of disapproval, the GSE may request a meeting. If the request for the 
meeting is timely, the Secretary shall arrange such a meeting, which 
shall be conducted by the Secretary or the Secretary's designee within 
10 working days after receipt of the request. The GSE may be represented 
by counsel and may submit relevant written materials to supplement the 
record.

[[Page 353]]

    (4) Determination. The Secretary shall:
    (i) In writing and within 10 days after submission of any materials 
under paragraph (a)(2) of this section or the conclusion of any meeting 
under paragraph (a)(3) of this section, whichever is later, withdraw, 
modify, or affirm the program disapproval; and
    (ii) Provide the GSE with that decision.
    (b) Programs disapproved under public interest determination. When a 
program request is disapproved because the Secretary determines that the 
program is not in the public interest or the Director makes the 
determination in 12 U.S.C. 4542(b)(2)(B), the Secretary shall provide 
the GSE with notice of, and opportunity for, a hearing on the record 
regarding such disapproval. A request for a hearing must be submitted by 
a GSE within 30 days of the Secretary's submission of a report under 
Sec. 81.53(g) disapproving a program request or the provision of the 
notice under this paragraph (b), whichever is later. The procedures for 
such hearings are provided in subpart G of this part.


<R04>
                    Subpart E--Reporting Requirements


<R05>
Sec. 81.61  General.

    This subpart establishes data submission and reporting requirements 
to carry out the requirements of the GSEs' Charter Acts and FHEFSSA.


<R05>
Sec. 81.62  Mortgage reports.

    (a) Loan-level data elements. To implement the data collection and 
submission requirements for mortgage data and to assist the Secretary in 
monitoring the GSEs' housing goal activities, each GSE shall collect and 
compile computerized loan-level data on each mortgage purchased in 
accordance with 12 U.S.C. 1456(e) and 1723a(m). The Secretary may, from 
time-to-time, issue a list entitled ``Required Loan-level Data 
Elements'' specifying the loan-level data elements to be collected and 
maintained by the GSEs and provided to the Secretary. The Secretary may 
revise the list by written notice to the GSEs.
    (b) Quarterly Mortgage reports. Each GSE shall submit to the 
Secretary quarterly a Mortgage Report. The fourth quarter report shall 
serve as the Annual Mortgage Report and shall be designated as such.
    (1) Each Mortgage Report shall include:
    (i) Aggregations of the loan-level mortgage data compiled by the GSE 
under paragraph (a) of this section for year-to-date mortgage purchases, 
in the format specified in writing by the Secretary; and
    (ii) Year-to-date dollar volume, number of units, and number of 
mortgages on owner-occupied and rental properties purchased by the GSE 
that do and do not qualify under each housing goal as set forth in this 
part.
    (2) To facilitate the Secretary's monitoring of the GSE's housing 
goal activities, the Mortgage Report for the second quarter shall 
include year-to-date computerized loan-level data consisting of the data 
elements required under paragraph (a) of this section.
    (3) To implement the data collection and submission requirements for 
mortgage data and to assist the Secretary in monitoring the GSE's 
housing goal activities, each Annual Mortgage Report shall include year-
to-date computerized loan-level data consisting of the data elements 
required by under paragraph (a) of this section.
    (c) Timing of Reports. The GSEs shall submit the Mortgage Report for 
each of the first 3 quarters of each year within 60 days of the end of 
the quarter. Each GSE shall submit its Annual Mortgage Report within 75 
days after the end of the calendar year.
    (d) Revisions to Reports. At any time before submission of its 
Annual Mortgage Report, a GSE may revise any of its quarterly reports 
for that year.
    (e) Format. The GSEs shall submit to the Secretary computerized 
loan-level data with the Mortgage Report, in the format specified in 
writing by the Secretary.


<R05>
Sec. 81.63  Annual Housing Activities Report.

    To comply with the requirements in sections 309(n) of the Fannie Mae 
Charter Act and 307(f) of the Freddie Mac Act and assist the Secretary 
in preparing the Secretary's Annual Report to Congress, each GSE shall 
submit to

[[Page 354]]

the Secretary an AHAR including the information listed in those sections 
of the Charter Acts and as provided in Sec. 81.43(a) of this part. Each 
GSE shall submit such report within 75 days after the end of each 
calendar year, to the Secretary the Committee on Banking and Financial 
Services of the House of Representatives, and the Committee on Banking, 
Housing, and Urban Affairs of the Senate. Each GSE shall make its AHAR 
available to the public at its principal and regional offices. Before 
making any such report available to the public, the GSE may exclude from 
the report any information that the Secretary has deemed proprietary 
under subpart F of this part.


<R05>
Sec. 81.64  Periodic reports.

    Each GSE shall provide to the Secretary all:
    (a) Material distributed to the GSE's Housing Advisory Council;
    (b) Press releases;
    (c) Investor reports;
    (d) Proxy statements;
    (e) Seller-servicer guides; and
    (f) Other information disclosed by the GSE to entities outside of 
the GSE, but only where the GSE determines that such information is 
relevant to the Secretary's regulatory responsibilities.


<R05>
Sec. 81.65  Other information and analyses.

    When deemed appropriate and requested in writing, on a case by-case 
basis, by the Secretary, a GSE shall furnish the data underlying any of 
the reports required under this part and shall conduct additional 
analyses concerning any such report. A GSE shall submit additional 
reports or other information concerning its activities when deemed 
appropriate to carry out the Secretary's responsibilities under FHEFSSA 
or the Charter Acts and requested in writing by the Secretary.


<R05>
Sec. 81.66  Submission of reports.

    Each GSE shall submit all hard copy reports or other written 
information required under this subpart to the Secretary and the 
Director, Office of Government-Sponsored Enterprises. Each GSE shall 
submit computerized data required under this subpart to the Director, 
Financial Institutions Regulations, Office of Policy Development and 
Research. The address for both of these offices is Department of Housing 
and Urban Development, 451 7th Street, SW. Washington, DC 20410.


<R04>
                    Subpart F--Access to Information


<R05>
Sec. 81.71  General.

    This subpart:
    (a) Provides for the establishment of a public-use database to make 
available to the public mortgage data that the GSEs submit to the 
Secretary under subsection 309(m) of the Fannie Mae Charter Act and 
subsection 307(e) of the Freddie Mac Act, and AHAR information that the 
GSEs submit to the Secretary in the AHAR under subsection 309(n) of the 
Fannie Mae Charter Act and subsection 307(f) of the Freddie Mac Act;
    (b) Establishes mechanisms for the GSEs to designate mortgage data 
or AHAR information as proprietary information and for the Secretary to 
determine whether such mortgage data or AHAR information is proprietary 
information which should be withheld from disclosure;
    (c) Addresses the availability of HUD procedures to protect from 
public disclosure proprietary information and other types of 
confidential business information submitted by or relating to the GSEs;
    (d) Addresses protections from disclosure when there is a request 
from Congress for information and sets forth protections for treatment 
of data or information submitted by or relating to the GSEs by HUD 
officers, employees, and contractors; and
    (e) Provides that data or information submitted by or relating to 
the GSEs that would constitute a clearly unwarranted invasion of 
personal privacy shall not be disclosed to the public.


<R05>
Sec. 81.72  Public-use database and public information.

    (a) General. Except as provided in paragraph (c) of this section, 
the Secretary shall establish and make available for public use, a 
public-use database containing public data as defined in Sec. 81.2.
    (b) Examination of submissions. Following receipt of mortgage data 
and

[[Page 355]]

AHAR information from the GSEs, the Secretary shall, as expeditiously as 
possible, examine the submissions for mortgage data and AHAR information 
that:
    (1) Has been deemed to be proprietary information under this part by 
a temporary order, final order, or regulation in effect at the time of 
submission;
    (2) Has been designated as proprietary information by the GSE in 
accordance with Sec. 81.73;
    (3) Would constitute a clearly unwarranted invasion of personal 
privacy if such data or information were released to the public; or
    (4) Is required to be withheld or, in the determination of the 
Secretary, is not appropriate for public disclosure under other 
applicable laws and regulations, including the Trade Secrets Act (18 
U.S.C. 1905) and Executive Order 12600.
    (c) Public data and proprietary data. The Secretary shall place 
public data in the public-use database. The Secretary shall exclude from 
the public-use database and from public disclosure:
    (1) All mortgage data and AHAR information within the scope of 
paragraphs (b)(1), (b)(3), and (b)(4) of this section;
    (2) Any other mortgage data and AHAR information under (b)(2) when 
determined by the Secretary under Sec. 81.74 to be proprietary 
information; and
    (3) Mortgage data that is not year-end data.
    (d) Access. The Secretary shall provide such means as the Secretary 
determines are reasonable for the public to gain access to the public-
use database. To obtain access to the public-use database, the public 
should contact the Director, Office of Government-Sponsored Enterprises, 
Department of Housing and Urban Development, 451 Seventh Street, S.W., 
Washington, DC 20410, telephone (202) 708-2224 (this is not a toll-free 
number).
    (e) Fees. The Secretary may charge reasonable fees to cover the cost 
of providing access to the public-use database. These fees will include 
the costs of system access, computer use, copying fees, and other costs.


<R05>
Sec. 81.73  GSE request for proprietary treatment.

    (a) General. A GSE may request proprietary treatment of any mortgage 
data or AHAR information that the GSE submits to the Secretary. Such a 
request does not affect the GSE's responsibility to provide data or 
information required by the Secretary. Where the Secretary grants a 
request for proprietary treatment, HUD will not include the data or 
information in the public-use database or publicly disclose the data or 
information, except as otherwise provided in accordance with this 
subpart.
    (b) Request for proprietary treatment of mortgage data and AHAR 
information. Except as provided in paragraph (c) of this section, a GSE 
requesting proprietary treatment of mortgage data or AHAR information 
shall:
    (1) Clearly designate those portions of the mortgage data or AHAR 
information to be treated as proprietary, with a prominent stamp, typed 
legend, or other suitable form of notice, stating ``Proprietary 
Information--Confidential Treatment Requested by [name of GSE]'' on each 
page or portion of page to which the request applies. If such marking is 
impractical, the GSE shall attach to the mortgage data or information 
for which confidential treatment is requested a cover sheet prominently 
marked ``Proprietary Information--Confidential Treatment Requested by 
[name of GSE];''
    (2) Accompany its request with a certification by an officer or 
authorized representative of the GSE that the mortgage data or 
information is proprietary; and
    (3) Submit any additional statements in support of proprietary 
designation that the GSE chooses to provide.
    (c) Alternative procedure available for mortgage data or AHAR 
information subject to a temporary order, final order, or regulation in 
effect. When the request for proprietary treatment pertains to mortgage 
data or AHAR information that has been deemed proprietary by the 
Secretary under a temporary order, final order, or regulation in effect, 
the GSE may reference such temporary order, final order, or regulation 
in lieu of complying with paragraphs (b)(2) and (3) of this section.

[[Page 356]]

    (d) Nondisclosure during pendency. Except as may otherwise be 
required by law, during the time any Request for Proprietary Treatment 
under Sec. 81.73 is pending determination by the Secretary, the data or 
information submitted by the GSE that is the subject of the request 
shall not be disclosed to, or be subject to examination by, the public 
or any person or representative of any person or agency outside of HUD.


<R05>
Sec. 81.74  Secretarial determination on GSE request.

    (a) General. The Secretary shall review all Requests for Proprietary 
Treatment from the GSEs, along with any other information that the 
Secretary may elicit from other sources regarding the Request.
    (b) Factors for proprietary treatment. Except as provided in 
paragraph (c) of this section, in making the determination of whether to 
accord proprietary treatment to mortgage data or AHAR information, the 
Secretary's considerations shall include, but are not limited to:
    (1) The type of data or information involved and the nature of the 
adverse consequences to the GSE, financial or otherwise, that would 
result from disclosure, including any adverse effect on the GSE's 
competitive position;
    (2) The existence and applicability of any prior determinations by 
HUD, any other Federal agency, or a court, concerning similar data or 
information;
    (3) The measures taken by the GSE to protect the confidentiality of 
the mortgage data or AHAR information in question, and similar data or 
information, before and after its submission to the Secretary;
    (4) The extent to which the mortgage data or AHAR information is 
publicly available including whether the data or information is 
available from other entities, from local government offices or records, 
including deeds, recorded mortgages, and similar documents, or from 
publicly available data bases;
    (5) The difficulty that a competitor, including a seller/servicer, 
would face in obtaining or compiling the mortgage data or AHAR 
information; and
    (6) Such additional facts and legal and other authorities as the 
Secretary may consider appropriate, including the extent to which 
particular mortgage data or AHAR information, when considered together 
with other information, could reveal proprietary information.
    (c) Alternative criterion for mortgage data or AHAR information 
subject to a temporary order, final order, or regulation in effect. 
Where the request for proprietary treatment pertains to mortgage data or 
AHAR information that has been deemed proprietary by the Secretary under 
a temporary order, final order, or regulation in effect, the Secretary 
shall grant the request with respect to any mortgage data or AHAR 
information which comes within the order or regulation.
    (d) Determination of proprietary treatment. The Secretary shall 
determine, as expeditiously as possible, whether mortgage data or AHAR 
information designated as proprietary by a GSE is proprietary 
information, or whether it is not proprietary and subject to inclusion 
in the public-use database and public release notwithstanding the GSE's 
request.
    (e) Action when according proprietary treatment to mortgage data and 
AHAR information. (1) When the Secretary determines that mortgage data 
or AHAR information designated as proprietary by a GSE is proprietary, 
and the mortgage data or AHAR information is not subject to a temporary 
order, a final order, or a regulation in effect providing that the 
mortgage data or AHAR information is not subject to public disclosure, 
the Secretary shall notify the GSE that the request has been granted. In 
such cases, the Secretary shall issue either a temporary order, a final 
order, or a regulation providing that the mortgage data or information 
is not subject to public disclosure. Such a temporary order, final 
order, or regulation shall:
    (i) Document the reasons for the determination; and
    (ii) Be provided to the GSE, made available to members of the 
public, and published in the Federal Register, except that any portions 
of such order or regulation that would reveal the

[[Page 357]]

proprietary information shall be withheld from public disclosure. 
Publications of temporary orders shall invite public comments when 
feasible.
    (2) Where the Secretary determines that such mortgage data or 
information is proprietary, the Secretary shall not make it publicly 
available, except as otherwise provided in accordance with this subpart.
    (f) Determination not to accord proprietary treatment to mortgage 
data and AHAR information or to seek further information. When the 
Secretary determines that such mortgage data or AHAR information 
designated as proprietary by a GSE may not be proprietary, that the 
request may be granted only in part, or that questions exist concerning 
the request, the following procedure shall apply:
    (1) The Secretary shall provide the GSE with an opportunity for a 
meeting with HUD to discuss the matter, for the purpose of gaining 
additional information concerning the request.
    (2) Following the meeting, based on the Secretary's review of the 
mortgage data or AHAR information that is the subject of a request and 
the GSE's objections, if any, to disclosure of such mortgage data or 
AHAR information, the Secretary shall make a determination:
    (i) If the Secretary determines to withhold from the public-use 
database as proprietary the mortgage data or AHAR information that is 
the subject of a request, the procedures in paragraph (e) of this 
section shall apply; or
    (ii) If the Secretary determines that any mortgage data or AHAR 
information that is the subject of a request is not proprietary, the 
Secretary shall provide notice in writing to the GSE of the reasons for 
this determination, and such notice shall provide that the Secretary 
shall not release the mortgage data or AHAR information to the public 
for 10 working days.


<R05>
Sec. 81.75  Proprietary information withheld by order or regulation.

    Following a determination by the Secretary that mortgage data or 
AHAR information is proprietary information under FHEFSSA, the Secretary 
shall expeditiously issue a temporary order, final order, or regulation 
withholding the mortgage data or AHAR information from the public-use 
database and from public disclosure by HUD in accordance with 12 U.S.C. 
4546. The Secretary may, from time-to-time, by regulation or order, 
issue a list entitled ``GSE Mortgage Data and AHAR Information: 
Proprietary Information/Public-Use Data'' providing that certain 
information shall be treated as proprietary information. The Secretary 
may modify the list by regulation or order.


<R05>
Sec. 81.76  FOIA requests and protection of GSE information.

    (a) General. HUD shall process FOIA requests for information 
submitted to the Secretary by the GSEs in accordance with:
    (1) HUD's FOIA and Privacy Act regulations, 24 CFR parts 15 and 16;
    (2) 12 U.S.C. 4525, 4543, and 4546 and this subpart; and
    (3) Other applicable statutes, regulations, and guidelines, 
including the Trade Secrets Act, 18 U.S.C. 1905, and Executive Order 
12600. In responding to requests for data or information submitted by or 
relating to the GSEs, the Secretary may invoke provisions of these 
authorities to protect data or information from disclosure.
    (b) Protection of confidential business information other than 
mortgage data and AHAR information. When a GSE seeks to protect from 
disclosure confidential business information, the GSE may seek 
protection of such confidential business information pursuant to the 
provisions of HUD's FOIA regulations at 24 CFR part 15, without regard 
to whether or not it is mortgage data or AHAR information.
    (c) Processing of FOIA requests--(1) FOIA Exemption (b)(4). HUD will 
process FOIA requests for confidential business information of the GSEs 
to which FOIA exemption 4 may apply in accordance with 24 CFR part 15, 
and the predisclosure notification procedures of Executive Order 12,600.
    (2) FOIA Exemption (b)(8). Under section 1319F of FHEFSSA, the 
Secretary may invoke FOIA exemption (b)(8) to withhold from the public 
any GSE data or information contained in or related to examination, 
operating, or condition reports prepared by, on behalf of, or for the 
use of HUD. HUD may make data

[[Page 358]]

or information available for the confidential use of other government 
agencies in their official duties or functions, but all data or 
information remains the property of HUD and any unauthorized use or 
disclosure of such data or information may be subject to the penalties 
of 18 U.S.C. 641.
    (3) Other FOIA exemptions. Under 24 CFR part 15, the Secretary may 
invoke other exemptions including, without limitation, exemption (b)(6) 
(5 U.S.C. 552(b)(6)), to protect data and information that would 
constitute a clearly unwarranted invasion of personal privacy.
    (d) Protection of information by HUD officers and employees. The 
Secretary will institute all reasonable safeguards to protect data or 
information submitted by or relating to either GSE, including, but not 
limited to, advising all HUD officers and employees having access to 
data or information submitted by or relating to either GSE of the legal 
restrictions against unauthorized disclosure of such data or information 
under HUD Standards of Conduct regulations, 24 CFR part O; the 
Government-wide Standards of Ethical Conduct, 5 CFR part 2635; and the 
Trade Secrets Act, 18 U.S.C. 1905. Officers and employees shall be 
advised of the penalties for unauthorized disclosure, ranging from 
disciplinary action under 24 CFR part O and 5 CFR part 2635 to criminal 
prosecution.
    (e) Protection of information by contractors. (1) In contracts and 
agreements entered into by HUD where contractors have access to data or 
information submitted by or relating to either GSE, HUD shall include 
detailed provisions specifying that:
    (i) Neither the contractor nor any of its officers, employees, 
agents, or subcontractors may release data submitted by or relating to 
either GSE without HUD's authorization; and
    (ii) Unauthorized disclosure may be a basis for:
    (A) Terminating the contract for default;
    (B) Suspending or debarring the contractor; and
    (C) Criminal prosecution of the contractor, its officers, employees, 
agents, or subcontractors under the Federal Criminal Code.
    (2) Contract provisions shall require safeguards against 
unauthorized disclosure, including training of contractor and 
subcontractor agents and employees, and provide that the contractor will 
indemnify and hold HUD harmless against unauthorized disclosure of data 
or information belonging to the GSEs or HUD.


<R05>
Sec. 81.77  Requests for GSE information on behalf of Congress, the Comptroller General, a subpoena, or other legal process.

    (a) General. With respect to information submitted by or relating to 
the GSEs, nothing in this subpart F may be construed to grant authority 
to the Secretary under FHEFSSA to withhold any information from or to 
prohibit the disclosure of any information to the following persons or 
entities:
    (1) Either House of Congress or, to the extent of matters within its 
jurisdiction, any committee or subcommittee thereof, or any joint 
committee of Congress or subcommittee of any such joint committee;
    (2) The Comptroller General, or any of the Comptroller General's 
authorized representatives, in the course of the performance of the 
duties of the General Accounting Office;
    (3) A court of competent jurisdiction pursuant to a subpoena; or
    (4) As otherwise compelled by law.
    (b) Notice of proprietary or confidential nature of GSE information. 
(1) In releasing data or information in response to a request as set out 
in paragraph (a) of this section, the Secretary will, where applicable, 
include a statement with the data or information to the effect that:
    (i) The GSE regards the data or information as proprietary 
information and/or confidential business information;
    (ii) Public disclosure of the data or information may cause 
competitive harm to the GSE; and
    (iii) The Secretary has determined that the data or information is 
proprietary information and/or confidential business information.
    (2) To the extent practicable, the Secretary will provide notice to 
the GSE after a request from the persons or entities described in 
paragraphs (a)(1)-(4) of this section for proprietary

[[Page 359]]

information or confidential business information is received and before 
the data or information is provided in response to the request.
    (c) Procedures for requests pursuant to subpoena or other legal 
process. The procedures in 24 CFR 15.71-15.74 shall be followed when a 
subpoena, order, or other demand of a court or other authority is issued 
for the production or disclosure of any GSE data or information that:
    (1) Is contained in HUD's files;
    (2) Relates to material contained in HUD's files; or
    (3) Was acquired by any person while such person was an employee of 
HUD, as a part of the performance of the employee's official duties or 
because of the employee's official status.
    (d) Requests pursuant to subpoena or other legal process not served 
on HUD. If an individual who is not a HUD employee or an entity other 
than HUD is served with a subpoena, order, or other demand of a court or 
authority for the production or disclosure of HUD data or information 
relating to a GSE and such data or information may not be disclosed to 
the public under this subpart or 24 CFR part 15, such individual or 
entity shall comply with 24 CFR 15.71-15.74 as if the individual or 
entity is a HUD employee, including immediately notifying HUD in 
accordance with the procedures set forth in 24 CFR 15.73(a).
    (e) Reservation of additional actions. Nothing in this section 
precludes further action by the Secretary, in his or her discretion, to 
protect data or information submitted by a GSE from unwarranted 
disclosure in appropriate circumstances.


<R04>
         Subpart G--Procedures for Actions and Review of Actions


<R05>
Sec. 81.81  General.

    This subpart sets forth procedures for:
    (a) The Secretary to issue cease-and-desist orders and impose civil 
money penalties to enforce the housing goal provisions implemented in 
subpart B of this part and the information submission and reporting 
requirements implemented in subpart E of this part; and
    (b) Hearings, in accordance with 12 U.S.C. 4542(c)(4)(B), on the 
Secretary's disapproval of new programs that the Secretary determines 
are not in the public interest.


<R05>
Sec. 81.82  Cease-and-desist proceedings.

    (a) Issuance. The Secretary may issue and serve upon a GSE a written 
notice of charges justifying issuance of a cease-and-desist order, if 
the Secretary determines the GSE:
    (1) Has failed to submit, within the time prescribed in Sec. 81.22, 
a housing plan that substantially complies with 12 U.S.C. 4566(c), as 
implemented by Sec. 81.22;
    (2) Is failing or has failed, or there is reasonable cause to 
believe that the GSE is about to fail, to make a good-faith effort to 
comply with a housing plan submitted to and approved by the Secretary; 
or
    (3) Has failed to submit any of the information required under 
sections 309(m) or (n) of the Fannie Mae Charter Act, sections 307(e) or 
(f) of the Freddie Mac Act, or subpart E of this part.
    (b) Procedures--(1) Content of notice. The notice of charges shall 
provide:
    (i) A concise statement of the facts constituting the alleged 
misconduct and the violations with which the GSE is charged;
    (ii) Notice of the GSE's right to a hearing on the record;
    (iii) A time and date for a hearing on the record;
    (iv) A statement of the consequences of failing to contest the 
matter; and
    (v) The effective date of the order if the GSE does not contest the 
matter.
    (2) Administrative Law Judge. A HUD Administrative Law Judge (ALJ) 
shall preside over any hearing conducted under this section. The hearing 
shall be conducted in accordance with Sec. 81.84 and, to the extent the 
provisions are not inconsistent with any of the procedures in this part 
or FHEFSSA, with 24 CFR part 26, subpart B.
    (3) Issuance of order. If the GSE consents to the issuance of the 
order or the ALJ finds, based on the hearing record, that a 
preponderance of the evidence established the conduct specified in the 
notice of charges, the ALJ may issue and serve upon the GSE an order 
requiring the GSE to:

[[Page 360]]

    (i) Submit a housing plan that substantially complies with 12 U.S.C. 
4566(c), as implemented by Sec. 81.22;
    (ii) Comply with a housing plan; or
    (iii) Provide the information required under subpart E of this part.
    (4) Effective date. An order under this section shall be effective 
as provided in 12 U.S.C. 4581(c) and Sec. 81.84(m).

[60 FR 61888, Dec. 1, 1995, as amended at 61 FR 50218, Sept. 24, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 81.83  Civil money penalties.

    (a) Imposition. The Secretary may impose a civil money penalty on a 
GSE that has failed:
    (1) To submit, within the time prescribed in Sec. 81.22, a housing 
plan that substantially complies with 12 U.S.C. 4566(c), as implemented 
by Sec. 81.22;
    (2) To make a good-faith effort to comply with a housing plan 
submitted and approved by the Secretary; or
    (3) To submit any of the information required under sections 309(m) 
or (n) of the Fannie Mae Charter Act, sections 307(e) or (f) of the 
Freddie Mac Act, or subpart E of this part.
    (b) Amount of penalty. The amount of the penalty shall not exceed:
    (1) For any failure described in paragraph (a)(1) of this section, 
$25,000 for each day that the failure occurs; and
    (2) For any failure described in paragraphs (a)(2) or (a)(3) of this 
section, $11,000 for each day that the failure occurs.
    (c) Factors in determining amount of penalty. In determining the 
amount of a penalty under this section, the Secretary shall consider the 
factors in 12 U.S.C. 4585(c)(2) including the public interest.
    (d) Procedures--(1) Notice of Intent. The Secretary shall notify the 
GSE in writing of the Secretary's determination to impose a civil money 
penalty by issuing a Notice of Intent to Impose Civil Money Penalties 
(``Notice of Intent''). The Notice of Intent shall provide:
    (i) A concise statement of the facts constituting the alleged 
misconduct;
    (ii) The amount of the civil money penalty;
    (iii) Notice of the GSE's right to a hearing on the record;
    (iv) The procedures to follow to obtain a hearing;
    (v) A statement of the consequences of failing to request a hearing; 
and
    (vi) The date the penalty shall be due unless the GSE contests the 
matter.
    (2) To appeal the Secretary's decision to impose a civil money 
penalty, the GSE shall, within 20 days of service of the Notice of 
Intent, file a written Answer with the Chief Docket Clerk, Office of 
Administrative Law Judges, Department of Housing and Urban Development, 
at the address provided in the Notice of Intent.
    (3) Administrative law judge. A HUD ALJ shall preside over any 
hearing conducted under this section, in accordance with Sec. 81.84 and, 
to the extent the provisions are not inconsistent with any of the 
procedures in this part or FHEFSSA, with 24 CFR part 26, subpart B.
    (4) Issuance of order. If the GSE consents to the issuance of the 
order or the ALJ finds, on the hearing record, that a preponderance of 
the evidence establishes the conduct specified in the notice of charges, 
the ALJ may issue an order imposing a civil money penalty.
    (5) Consultation with the Director. In the Secretary's discretion, 
the Director of OFHEO may be requested to review any Notice of Intent, 
determination, order, or interlocutory ruling arising from a hearing.
    (e) Action to collect penalty. The Secretary may request the 
Attorney General of the United States to bring an action to collect the 
penalty, in accordance with 12 U.S.C. 4585(d). Interest on, and other 
charges for, any unpaid penalty may be assessed in accordance with 31 
U.S.C. 3717.
    (f) Settlement by Secretary. The Secretary may compromise, modify, 
or remit any civil money penalty that may be, or has been, imposed under 
this section.

[60 FR 61888, Dec. 1, 1995, as amended at 61 FR 50218, Sept. 24, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 81.84  Hearings.

    (a) Applicability. The hearing procedures in this section apply to 
hearings on the record to review cease-and-desist orders, civil money 
penalties, and new programs disapproved based upon a determination by 
the Secretary that

[[Page 361]]

such programs are not in the public interest, in accordance with 12 
U.S.C. 4542(c)(4)(B).
    (b) Hearing requirements. (1) Hearings shall be held in the District 
of Columbia.
    (2) Hearings shall be conducted by a HUD ALJ authorized to conduct 
proceedings under 24 CFR part 26, subpart B.
    (c) Timing. Unless an earlier or later date is requested by a GSE 
and the request is granted by the ALJ, a hearing shall be fixed for a 
date not earlier than 30 days, nor later than 60 days, after:
    (1) Service of the notice of charges under Sec. 81.82;
    (2) Service of the Notice of Intent to Impose Civil Money 
Penalty(ies) under Sec. 81.83; or
    (3) Filing of a request for a hearing under Sec. 81.54(b).
    (d) Procedure. Hearings shall be conducted in accordance with the 
procedures set forth in 24 CFR part 26, subpart B to the extent that 
such provisions are not inconsistent with any of the procedures in this 
part or FHEFSSA.
    (e) Service--(1) To GSE. Any service required or authorized to be 
made by the Secretary under this subpart G may be made to the Chief 
Executive Officer of a GSE or any other representative as the GSE may 
designate in writing to the Secretary.
    (2) How service may be made. A serving party shall use one or more 
of the following methods of service:
    (i) Personal service;
    (ii) Delivering the papers to a reliable commercial courier service, 
overnight delivery service, or the U.S. Post Office for Express Mail 
Delivery; or
    (iii) Transmission by electronic media, only if the parties mutually 
agree. The serving party shall mail an original of the filing after any 
proper service using electronic media.
    (f) Subpoena authority--(1) General. In the course of or in 
connection with any hearing, the Secretary and the ALJ shall have the 
authority to:
    (i) Administer oaths and affirmations;
    (ii) Take and preserve testimony under oath;
    (iii) Issue subpoenas and subpoenas duces tecum; and
    (iv) Revoke, quash, or modify subpoenas and subpoenas duces tecum 
issued under this paragraph (f).
    (2) Witnesses and documents. The attendance of witnesses and the 
production of documents provided for in this section may be required 
from any place in any State. A witness may be required to appear, and a 
document may be required to be produced, at:
    (i) The hearing; and
    (ii) Any place that is designated for attendance at a deposition or 
production of a document under this section.
    (3) Enforcement. In accordance with 12 U.S.C. 4588(c), the Secretary 
may request the Attorney General of the United States to enforce any 
subpoena or subpoena duces tecum issued pursuant to this section. If a 
subpoenaed person fails to comply with all or any portion of a subpoena 
issued pursuant to this paragraph (f), the subpoenaing party or any 
other aggrieved person may petition the Secretary to seek enforcement of 
the subpoena. A party's petition to the Secretary for enforcement of a 
subpoena in no way limits the sanctions that may be imposed by the ALJ 
on a party who fails to comply with a subpoena issued under this 
paragraph (f).
    (4) Fees and expenses. Witnesses subpoenaed under this section shall 
be paid the same fees and mileage that are paid witnesses in the 
district courts of the United States and may seek reasonable expenses 
and attorneys fees in any court having jurisdiction of any proceeding 
instituted under this section. Such expenses and fees shall be paid by 
the GSE or from its assets.
    (g) Failure to appear. If a GSE fails to appear at a hearing through 
a duly authorized representative, the GSE shall be deemed to have 
consented to the issuance of the cease-and-desist order, the imposition 
of the penalty, or the disapproval of the new program, whichever is 
applicable.
    (h) Public hearings. (1) All hearings shall be open to the public, 
unless the ALJ determines that an open hearing would be contrary to the 
public interest. Where a party makes a timely motion to close a hearing 
and the ALJ denies the motion, such party may file

[[Page 362]]

with the Secretary within 5 working days a request for a closed hearing, 
and any party may file a reply to such a request within 5 working days 
of service of such a motion. Such motions, requests, and replies are 
governed by Sec. 26.38 of this title. When a request for a closed 
hearing has been filed with the Secretary under this paragraph (h)(1), 
the hearing shall be stayed until the Secretary has advised the parties 
and the ALJ, in writing, of the Secretary's decision on whether the 
hearing should be closed.
    (2) Failure to file a timely motion, request or reply is deemed a 
waiver of any objection regarding whether the hearing will be public or 
closed. A party must file any motion for a closed hearing within 10 days 
after:
    (i) Service of the notice of charges under Sec. 81.82;
    (ii) Service of the Notice of Intent to Impose Civil Money 
Penalt(ies) under Sec. 81.83; or
    (iii) Filing of a request for a hearing under Sec. 81.54(b).
    (i) Decision of ALJ. After each hearing, the ALJ shall issue an 
initial decision and serve the initial decision on the GSE, the 
Secretary, any other parties, and the HUD General Counsel. This service 
will constitute notification that the case has been submitted to the 
Secretary.
    (j) Review of initial decision--(1) Secretary's discretion. The 
Secretary, in the Secretary's discretion, may review any initial 
decision.
    (2) Requested by a party. Any party may file a notice of appeal of 
an initial decision to the Secretary in accordance with Sec. 26.51(c) of 
this title. Any waiver of the limitations contained in Sec. 26.51(f) of 
this title on the number of pages for notices of appeal and responses, 
of the time limitation in Sec. 26.51(c) of this title for filing a 
notice of appeal of the initial decision, or any other waivers under 
this subpart shall not be subject to the publication requirements in 42 
U.S.C. 3535(q).
    (k) Final decision. (1) The initial decision will become the final 
decision unless the Secretary issues a final decision within 90 days 
after the initial decision is served on the Secretary.
    (2) Issuance of final decision by Secretary. The Secretary may 
review any finding of fact, conclusion of law, or order contained in the 
initial decision of the ALJ and may issue a final decision in the 
proceeding. Any decision shall include findings of fact upon which the 
decision is predicated. The Secretary may affirm, modify, or set aside, 
in whole or in part, the initial decision or may remand the initial 
decision for further proceedings. The final decision shall be served on 
all parties and the ALJ.
    (l) Decisions on remand. If the initial decision is remanded for 
further proceedings, the ALJ shall issue an initial decision on remand 
within 60 days of the date of issuance of the decision to remand, unless 
it is impractical to do so.
    (m) Modification. The Secretary may modify, terminate, or set aside 
any order in accordance with 12 U.S.C. 4582(b)(2).

[60 FR 61888, Dec. 1, 1995, as amended at 61 FR 50219 Sept. 24, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 81.85  Public disclosure of final orders and agreements.

    (a) Disclosure. Except as provided in paragraph (b) of this section, 
the Secretary shall make available to the public final orders; written 
agreements and statements; and modifications and terminations of those 
orders, agreements, and statements, as set forth in 12 U.S.C. 4586(a) 
and the implementing regulations in this subpart G. The retention of 
records of these orders, agreements, and statements, and their 
modifications and terminations, are governed by 12 U.S.C. 4586(e).
    (b) Exceptions to disclosure. Exceptions to disclosure will be 
determined in accordance with 12 U.S.C. 4586 (c), (d), and (f) and 
paragraph (c) of this section.
    (c) Filing documents under seal--(1) Request by party. Upon the 
denial by the ALJ of a motion for a protective order, any party may 
request the Secretary to file any document or part of a document under 
seal if the party believes that disclosure of the document would be 
contrary to the public interest. Any other party may file with the 
Secretary a reply to such a request within 5 working days after a 
request is made or some other time to be determined by

[[Page 363]]

the Secretary. Such requests and replies are governed by Sec. 26.38 of 
this title.
    (2) Effect of request. A document or part of a document that is the 
subject of a timely request to the Secretary to file under seal will not 
be disclosed under this section until the Secretary has advised the 
parties and the ALJ, in writing, of the Secretary's decision on whether 
the document or part of a document should be filed under seal. The ALJ 
shall take all appropriate steps to preserve the confidentiality of such 
documents or parts of documents, including closing portions of the 
hearing to the public.
    (3) Time of request. Failure to file with the Secretary a timely 
request or a reply is deemed a waiver of any objection regarding the 
decision on whether a document is to be disclosed. A party must make its 
request to file a document under seal at least 10 days before the 
commencement of the hearing. A request may be filed at any other time 
before or during the course of the hearing, but the requesting party's 
obligation to produce the document or parts of the document will not be 
affected by the party's pending request to the Secretary, unless the 
Secretary expressly directs the ALJ to treat the document as protected 
from disclosure until the Secretary makes a final written decision on 
whether the document should be filed under seal. If the Secretary's 
direction to the ALJ is made orally, that direction must be reduced to 
writing and filed with the ALJ within 3 working days of the making of 
the oral order or the document will then be subject to disclosure 
pending the Secretary's final written decision on disclosure.

[60 FR 61888, Dec. 1, 1995, as amended at 61 FR 50219 Sept. 24, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 81.86  Enforcement and jurisdiction.

    If a GSE fails to comply with a final decision, the Secretary may 
request the Attorney General of the United States to bring an action in 
the United States District Court for the District of Columbia for the 
enforcement of the notice or order. Such request may be made:
    (a) For a cease-and-desist order:
    (1) Upon expiration of the 30-day period beginning on the service of 
the order on the GSE; or
    (2) Upon the effective time specified in an order issued upon 
consent; and
    (b) For a civil money penalty, when the order imposing the penalty 
is no longer subject to review under 12 U.S.C. 4582 and 4583 and the 
implementing regulations at Secs. 81.84 and 81.87.


<R05>
Sec. 81.87  Judicial review.

    (a) Commencement. In a proceeding under 12 U.S.C. 4581 or 4585, as 
implemented by Secs. 81.82 or 81.83, a GSE that is a party to the 
proceeding may obtain review of any final order issued under Sec. 81.84 
by filing in the United States Court of Appeals for the District of 
Columbia Circuit, within 30 days after the date of service of such 
order, a written petition praying that the order of the Secretary be 
modified, terminated, or set aside.
    (b) Filing of record. Upon receiving a copy of a petition, the Chief 
Docket Clerk, Office of Administrative Law Judges, shall file in the 
court the record in the proceeding, as provided in 28 U.S.C. 2112.
    (c) No automatic stay. The commencement of proceedings for judicial 
review under this section shall not, unless specifically ordered by the 
court, operate as a stay of any order issued by the Secretary.


<R04>
                    Subpart H--Book-Entry Procedures

    Source: 61 FR 63948, Dec. 2, 1996, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 81.91  Maintenance of GSE Securities.

    A GSE Security may be maintained in the form of a Definitive GSE 
Security or a Book-entry GSE Security. A Book-entry GSE Security shall 
be maintained in the Book-entry System.


<R05>
Sec. 81.92  Law governing rights and obligations of United States, Federal Reserve Banks, and GSEs; rights of any Person against United States, Federal Reserve 
          Banks, and GSEs; Law governing other interests.

    (a) Except as provided in paragraph (b) of this section, the 
following rights and obligations are governed solely by the book-entry 
regulations contained

[[Page 364]]

in this subpart H, the Securities Documentation, and Federal Reserve 
Bank Operating Circulars (but not including any choice of law provisions 
in the Security Documentation to the extent such provisions conflict 
with the Book-entry regulations contained in this subpart H):
    (1) The rights and obligations of a GSE and the Federal Reserve 
Banks with respect to:
    (i) A Book-entry GSE Security or Security Entitlement; and
    (ii) The operation of the Book-entry System as it applies to GSE 
Securities; and
    (2) The rights of any Person, including a Participant, against a GSE 
and the Federal Reserve Banks with respect to:
    (i) A Book-entry GSE Security or Security Entitlement; and
    (ii) The operation of the Book-entry System as it applies to GSE 
Securities;
    (b) A security interest in a Security Entitlement that is in favor 
of a Federal Reserve Bank from a Participant and that is not recorded on 
the books of a Federal Reserve Bank pursuant to Sec. 81.93(c)(1), is 
governed by the law (not including the conflict-of-law rules) of the 
jurisdiction where the head office of the Federal Reserve Bank 
maintaining the Participant's Securities Account is located. A security 
interest in a Security Entitlement that is in favor of a Federal Reserve 
Bank from a Person that is not a Participant, and that is not recorded 
on the books of a Federal Reserve Bank pursuant to Sec. 81.93(c)(1), is 
governed by the law determined in the manner specified in paragraph (d) 
of this section.
    (c) If the jurisdiction specified in the first sentence of paragraph 
(b) of this section is a State that has not adopted Revised Article 8, 
then the law specified in paragraph (b) of this section shall be the law 
of that State as though Revised Article 8 had been adopted by that 
State.
    (d) To the extent not otherwise inconsistent with this subpart H, 
and notwithstanding any provision in the Security Documentation setting 
forth a choice of law, the provisions set forth in 31 CFR 357.11 
regarding law governing other interests apply and shall be read as 
though modified to effectuate the application of 31 CFR 357.11 to the 
GSEs.

[61 FR 63948, Dec. 2, 1996, as amended at 62 FR 28977, May 29, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 81.93  Creation of Participant's Security Entitlement; security interests.

    (a) A Participant's Security Entitlement is created when a Federal 
Reserve Bank indicates by book-entry that a Book-entry GSE Security has 
been credited to a Participant's Securities Account.
    (b) A security interest in a Security Entitlement of a Participant 
in favor of the United States to secure deposits of public money, 
including without limitation deposits to the Treasury tax and loan 
accounts, or other security interest in favor of the United States that 
is required by Federal statute, regulation, or agreement, and that is 
marked on the books of a Federal Reserve Bank is thereby effected and 
perfected, and has priority over any other interest in the securities. 
Where a security interest in favor of the United States in a Security 
Entitlement of a Participant is marked on the books of a Federal Reserve 
Bank, such Reserve Bank may rely, and is protected in relying, 
exclusively on the order of an authorized representative of the United 
States directing the transfer of the security. For purposes of this 
paragraph, an ``authorized representative of the United States'' is the 
official designated in the applicable regulations or agreement to which 
a Federal Reserve Bank is a party, governing the security interest.
    (c)(1) A GSE and the Federal Reserve Banks have no obligation to 
agree to act on behalf of any Person or to recognize the interest of any 
transferee of a security interest or other limited interest in favor of 
any Person except to the extent of any specific requirement of Federal 
law or regulation or to the extent set forth in any specific agreement 
with the Federal Reserve Bank on whose books the interest of the 
Participant is recorded. To the extent required by such law or 
regulation or set forth in an agreement with a Federal Reserve Bank, or 
the Federal Reserve Bank Operating Circular, a security interest in a 
Security Entitlement that is in favor of a Federal Reserve Bank,

[[Page 365]]

a GSE, or a Person may be created and perfected by a Federal Reserve 
Bank marking its books to record the security interest. Except as 
provided in paragraph (b) of this section, a security interest in a 
Security Entitlement marked on the books of a Federal Reserve Bank shall 
have priority over any other interest in the securities.
    (2) In addition to the method provided in paragraph (c)(1) of this 
section, a security interest, including a security interest in favor of 
a Federal Reserve Bank, may be perfected by any method by which a 
security interest may be perfected under applicable law as described in 
Sec. 81.92(b) or (d). The perfection, effect of perfection or non-
perfection and priority of a security interest are governed by such 
applicable law. A security interest in favor of a Federal Reserve Bank 
shall be treated as a security interest in favor of a clearing 
corporation in all respects under such law, including with respect to 
the effect of perfection and priority of such security interest. A 
Federal Reserve Bank Operating Circular shall be treated as a rule 
adopted by a clearing corporation for such purposes.

[61 FR 63948, Dec. 2, 1996, as amended at 62 FR 28977, May 29, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 81.94  Obligations of GSEs; no adverse claims.

    (a) Except in the case of a security interest in favor of the United 
States or a Federal Reserve Bank or otherwise as provided in 
Sec. 81.93(c)(1), for the purposes of this subpart H, the GSE and the 
Federal Reserve Banks shall treat the Participant to whose Securities 
Account an interest in a Book-entry GSE Security has been credited as 
the person exclusively entitled to issue a Transfer Message, to receive 
interest and other payments with respect thereof and otherwise to 
exercise all the rights and powers with respect to such Security, 
notwithstanding any information or notice to the contrary. Neither the 
Federal Reserve Banks nor a GSE is liable to a Person asserting or 
having an adverse claim to a Security Entitlement or to a Book-entry GSE 
Security in a Participant's Securities Account, including any such claim 
arising as a result of the transfer or disposition of a Book-entry GSE 
Security by a Federal Reserve Bank pursuant to a Transfer Message that 
the Federal Reserve Bank reasonably believes to be genuine.
    (b) The obligation of the GSE to make payments (including payments 
of interest and principal) with respect to Book-entry GSE Securities is 
discharged at the time payment in the appropriate amount is made as 
follows:
    (1) Interest or other payments on Book-entry GSE Securities is 
either credited by a Federal Reserve Bank to a Funds Account maintained 
at such Bank or otherwise paid as directed by the Participant.
    (2) Book-entry GSE Securities are redeemed in accordance with their 
terms by a Federal Reserve Bank withdrawing the securities from the 
Participant's Securities Account in which they are maintained and by 
either crediting the amount of the redemption proceeds, including both 
redemption proceeds, where applicable, to a Funds Account at such Bank 
or otherwise paying such redemption proceeds as directed by the 
Participant. No action by the Participant ordinarily is required in 
connection with the redemption of a Book-entry GSE Security.

[61 FR 63948, Dec. 2, 1996, as amended at 62 FR 28977, May 28, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 81.95  Authority of Federal Reserve Banks.

    (a) Each Federal Reserve Bank is hereby authorized as fiscal agent 
of the GSEs to perform the following functions with respect to the 
issuance of Book-entry GSE Securities offered and sold by a GSE to which 
this subpart H applies, in accordance with the Securities Documentation, 
Federal Reserve Bank Operating Circulars, this subpart H, and procedures 
established by the Secretary consistent with these authorities:
    (1) To service and maintain Book-entry GSE Securities in accounts 
established for such purposes;
    (2) To make payments with respect to such securities, as directed by 
the GSE;
    (3) To effect transfer of Book-entry GSE Securities between 
Participants' Securities Accounts as directed by the Participants;

[[Page 366]]

    (4) To effect conversions between Book-entry GSE Securities and 
Definitive GSE Securities with respect to those securities as to which 
conversion rights are available pursuant to the applicable Securities 
Documentation; and
    (5) To perform such other duties as fiscal agent as may be requested 
by the GSE.
    (b) Each Federal Reserve Bank may issue Operating Circulars not 
inconsistent with this subpart H, governing the details of its handling 
of Book-entry GSE Securities, Security Entitlements, and the operation 
of the book-entry system under this subpart H.


<R05>
Sec. 81.96  Withdrawal of Eligible Book-entry GSE Securities for conversion to definitive form.

    (a) Eligible Book-entry GSE Securities may be withdrawn from the 
Book-entry System by requesting delivery of like Definitive GSE 
Securities.
    (b) A Reserve bank shall, upon receipt of appropriate instructions 
to withdraw Eligible Book-entry GSE Securities from book-entry in the 
Book-entry System, convert such securities into Definitive GSE 
Securities and deliver them in accordance with such instructions. No 
such conversion shall affect existing interests in such GSE Securities.
    (c) All requests for withdrawal of Eligible Book-entry GSE 
Securities must be made prior to the maturity or date of call of the 
securities.
    (d) GSE Securities which are to be delivered upon withdrawal may be 
issued in either registered or bearer form, to the extent permitted by 
the applicable Securities Documentation.

[61 FR 63948, Dec. 2, 1996, as amended at 62 FR 28977, May 29, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 81.97  Waiver of regulations.

    The Secretary reserves the right in the Secretary's discretion, to 
waive any provision(s) of these regulations in any case or class of 
cases for the convenience of a GSE, the United States, or in order to 
relieve any person(s) of unnecessary hardship, if such action is not 
inconsistent with law, does not adversely affect any substantial 
existing rights, and the Secretary is satisfied that such action will 
not subject a GSE or the United States to any substantial expense or 
liability.


<R05>
Sec. 81.98  Liability of GSEs and Federal Reserve Banks.

    A GSE and the Federal Reserve Banks may rely on the information 
provided in a Transfer Message, and are not required to verify the 
information. A GSE and the Federal Reserve Banks shall not be liable for 
any action taken in accordance with the information set out in a 
Transfer Message, or evidence submitted in support thereof.


<R05>
Sec. 81.99  Additional provisions.

    (a) Additional requirements. In any case or any class of cases 
arising under these regulations, a GSE may require such additional 
evidence and a bond of indemnity, with or without surety, as may in the 
judgment of the GSE be necessary for the protection of the interests of 
the GSE.
    (b) Notice of attachment for GSE Securities in Book-entry system. 
The interest of a debtor in a Security Entitlement may be reached by a 
creditor only by legal process upon the Securities Intermediary with 
whom the debtor's securities account is maintained, except where a 
Security Entitlement is maintained in the name of a secured party, in 
which case the debtor's interest may be reached by legal process upon 
the secured party. These regulations do not purport to establish whether 
a Federal Reserve Bank is required to honor an order or other notice of 
attachment in any particular case or class of cases.


<R04>
                       Subpart I--Other Provisions


<R05>
Sec. 81.101  Equal employment opportunity.

    Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac shall comply with sections 1 and 2 of 
Executive Order 11478 (3 CFR, 1966-1970 Compilation, p. 803), as amended 
by Executive Order 12106, (3 CFR, 1978, Compilation, p. 263), providing 
for the adoption and implementation of equal employment opportunity, as 
required by section 1216 of the Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery, 
and Enforcement Act of 1989 (12 U.S.C. 1833e).

[[Page 367]]


<R05>
Sec. 81.102  Independent verification authority.

    The Secretary may independently verify the accuracy and completeness 
of the data, information, and reports provided by each GSE, including 
conducting on-site verification, when such steps are reasonably related 
to determining whether a GSE is complying with 12 U.S.C. 4541-4589 and 
the GSE's Charter Act.


<R03>
PART 84--GRANTS AND AGREEMENTS WITH INSTITUTIONS OF HIGHER EDUCATION, HOSPITALS, AND OTHER NON-PROFIT ORGANIZATIONS--Table of Contents

<R05>


                           Subpart A--General

Sec.
84.1  Purpose.
84.2  Definitions.
84.3  Effect on other issuances.
84.4  Deviations.
84.5  Subawards.

                    Subpart B--Pre-Award Requirements

84.10  Purpose.
84.11  Pre-award policies.
84.12  Forms for applying for Federal assistance.
84.13  Debarment and suspension; Drug-Free Workplace.
84.14  Special award conditions.
84.15  Metric system of measurement.
84.16  Resource Conservation and Recovery Act.
84.17  Certifications and representations.

                   Subpart C--Post-Award Requirements

                    Financial and Program Management

84.20  Purpose of financial and program management.
84.21  Standards for financial management systems.
84.22  Payment.
84.23  Cost sharing or matching.
84.24  Program income.
84.25  Revision of budget and program plans.
84.26  Non-Federal audits.
84.27  Allowable costs.
84.28  Period of availability of funds.

                           Property Standards

84.30  Purpose of property standards.
84.31  Insurance coverage.
84.32  Real property.
84.33  Federally-owned and exempt property.
84.34  Equipment.
84.35  Supplies and other expendable property.
84.36  Intangible property.
84.37  Property trust relationship.

                          Procurement Standards

84.40  Purpose of procurement standards.
84.41  Recipient responsibilities.
84.42  Codes of conduct.
84.43  Competition.
84.44  Procurement procedures.
84.45  Cost and price analysis.
84.46  Procurement records.
84.47  Contract administration.
84.48  Contract provisions.

                           Reports and Records

84.50  Purpose of reports and records.
84.51  Monitoring and reporting program performance.
84.52  Financial reporting.
84.53  Retention and access requirements for records.

                       Termination and Enforcement

84.60  Purpose of termination and enforcement.
84.61  Termination.
84.62  Enforcement.

                 Subpart D--After-the-Award Requirements

84.70  Purpose.
84.71  Closeout procedures.
84.72  Subsequent adjustments and continuing responsibilities.
84.73  Collection of amounts due.

                    Subpart E--Use of Lump Sum Grants

84.80  Conditions for use of Lump Sum (fixed price or fixed amount) 
          grants.
84.81  Definition.
84.82  Provisions applicable only to lump sum grants.
84.83  Property standards.
84.84  Procurement standards.
84.85  Reports and records.
84.86  Termination and enforcement.
84.87  Closeout procedures, subsequent adjustments and continuing 
          responsibilities.

Appendix A to Part 84--Contract Provisions

    Authority: 42 U.S.C. 3535(d).

    Source: 59 FR 47011, Sept. 13, 1994, unless otherwise noted.


<R04>
                           Subpart A--General


<R05>
Sec. 84.1  Purpose.

    This part establishes uniform administrative requirements for 
Federal

[[Page 368]]

grants and agreements awarded to institutions of higher education, 
hospitals, and other non-profit organizations. Additional or 
inconsistent requirements shall not be imposed, except as provided in 
Secs. 84.4, and 84.14 or unless specifically required by Federal statute 
or executive order. Non-profit organizations that implement Federal 
programs for the States are also subject to State requirements.


<R05>
Sec. 84.2  Definitions.

    Accrued expenditures means the charges incurred by the recipient 
during a given period requiring the provision of funds for:
    (1) Goods and other tangible property received;
    (2) Services performed by employees, contractors, subrecipients, and 
other payees; and
    (3) Other amounts becoming owed under programs for which no current 
services or performance is required.
    Accrued income means the sum of:
    (1) Earnings during a given period from:
    (i) Services performed by the recipient; and
    (ii) Goods and other tangible property delivered to purchasers; and
    (2) Amounts becoming owed to the recipient for which no current 
services or performance is required by the recipient.
    Acquisition cost of equipment means the net invoice price of the 
equipment, including the cost of modifications, attachments, 
accessories, or auxiliary apparatus necessary to make the property 
usable for the purpose for which it was acquired. Other charges, such as 
the cost of installation, transportation, taxes, duty or protective in-
transit insurance, shall be included or excluded from the unit 
acquisition cost in accordance with the recipient's regular accounting 
practices.
    Advance means a payment made by Treasury check or other appropriate 
payment mechanism to a recipient upon its request either before outlays 
are made by the recipient or through the use of predetermined payment 
schedules.
    Award means financial assistance that provides support or 
stimulation to accomplish a public purpose. Awards include grants and 
other agreements in the form of money or property in lieu of money, by 
HUD to an eligible recipient. The term does not include: technical 
assistance, which provides services instead of money; other assistance 
in the form of loans, loan guarantees, capital advances under the 
Sections 202 and 811 programs, interest subsidies, or insurance; direct 
payments of any kind to individuals; and, contracts which are required 
to be entered into and administered under procurement laws and 
regulations.
    Cash contributions means the recipient's cash outlay, including the 
outlay of money contributed to the recipient by third parties.
    Closeout means the process by which HUD determines that all 
applicable administrative actions and all required work of the award 
have been completed by the recipient and HUD.
    Contract means a procurement contract under an award or subaward, 
and a procurement subcontract under a recipient's or subrecipient's 
contract.
    Cost sharing or matching means that portion of project or program 
costs not borne by HUD.
    Date of completion means the date on which all work under an award 
is completed or the date on the award document, or any supplement or 
amendment thereto, on which HUD sponsorship ends.
    Disallowed costs means those charges to an award that HUD determines 
to be unallowable, in accordance with the applicable Federal cost 
principles or other terms and conditions contained in the award.
    Equipment means tangible nonexpendable personal property including 
exempt property charged directly to the award having a useful life of 
more than one year and an acquisition cost of $5000 or more per unit. 
However, consistent with recipient policy, lower limits may be 
established.
    Excess property means property under the control of HUD that, as 
determined by the Secretary, is no longer required for its needs or the 
discharge of its responsibilities.
    Exempt property means tangible personal property acquired in whole 
or in part with Federal funds, where HUD has statutory authority to vest 
title in

[[Page 369]]

the recipient without further obligation to the Federal Government. An 
example of exempt property authority is contained in the Federal Grant 
and Cooperative Agreement Act (31 U.S.C. 6306), for property acquired 
under an award to conduct basic or applied research by a non-profit 
institution of higher education or non-profit organization whose 
principal purpose is conducting scientific research.
    Federal awarding agency means the Federal agency that provides an 
award to the recipient.
    Federal funds authorized means the total amount of Federal funds 
obligated by HUD for use by the recipient. This amount may include any 
authorized carryover of unobligated funds from prior funding periods 
when permitted by HUD regulations or implementing instructions.
    Federal share of real property, equipment, or supplies means that 
percentage of the property's acquisition costs and any improvement 
expenditures paid with Federal funds.
    Funding period means the period of time when Federal funding is 
available for obligation by the recipient.
    Intangible property and debt instruments means, but is not limited 
to, trademarks, copyrights, patents and patent applications and such 
property as loans, notes and other debt instruments, lease agreements, 
stock and other instruments of property ownership, whether considered 
tangible or intangible.
    Obligations means the amounts of orders placed, contracts and grants 
awarded, services received and similar transactions during a given 
period that require payment by the recipient during the same or a future 
period.
    Outlays or expenditures means charges made to the project or 
program. They may be reported on a cash or accrual basis. For reports 
prepared on a cash basis, outlays are the sum of cash disbursements for 
direct charges for goods and services, the amount of indirect expense 
charged, the value of third party in-kind contributions applied and the 
amount of cash advances and payments made to subrecipients. For reports 
prepared on an accrual basis, outlays are the sum of cash disbursements 
for direct charges for goods and services, the amount of indirect 
expense incurred, the value of in-kind contributions applied, and the 
net increase (or decrease) in the amounts owed by the recipient for 
goods and other property received, for services performed by employees, 
contractors, subrecipients and other payees and other amounts becoming 
owed under programs for which no current services or performance are 
required.
    Personal property means property of any kind except real property. 
It may be tangible, having physical existence, or intangible, having no 
physical existence, such as copyrights, patents, or securities.
    Prior approval means written approval by an authorized official 
evidencing prior consent.
    Program income means gross income earned by the recipient that is 
directly generated by a supported activity or earned as a result of the 
award (see exclusions in Secs. 84.24 (e) and (h)). Program income 
includes, but is not limited to, income from fees for services 
performed, the use or rental of real or personal property acquired under 
federally-funded projects, the sale of commodities or items fabricated 
under an award, license fees and royalties on patents and copyrights, 
and interest on loans made with award funds. Interest earned on advances 
of Federal funds is not program income. Except as otherwise provided in 
HUD regulations or the terms and conditions of the award, program income 
does not include the receipt of principal on loans, rebates, credits, 
discounts, etc., or interest earned on any of them.
    Project costs means all allowable costs, as set forth in the 
applicable Federal cost principles, incurred by a recipient and the 
value of the contributions made by third parties in accomplishing the 
objectives of the award during the project period.
    Project period means the period established in the award document 
during which HUD sponsorship begins and ends.
    Property means, unless otherwise stated, real property, equipment, 
intangible property and debt instruments.

[[Page 370]]

    Real property means land, including land improvements, structures 
and appurtenances thereto, but excludes movable machinery and equipment.
    Recipient means an organization receiving financial assistance 
directly from HUD to carry out a project or program. The term includes 
public and private institutions of higher education, public and private 
hospitals, and other quasi-public and private non-profit organizations 
such as, but not limited to, community action agencies, research 
institutes, educational associations, and health centers. The term 
includes commercial organizations, international organizations when 
operating domestically (such as agencies of the United Nations) which 
are recipients, subrecipients, or contractors or subcontractors of 
recipients or subrecipients. The term does not include government-owned 
contractor-operated facilities or research centers providing continued 
support for mission-oriented, large-scale programs that are government-
owned or controlled, or are designated as federally-funded research and 
development centers. The term does not include mortgagors that receive 
mortgages insured or held by HUD or mortgagors or project owners that 
receive capital advances from HUD under the Section 202 and 811 
programs.
    Research and development means all research activities, both basic 
and applied, and all development activities that are supported at 
universities, colleges, and other non-profit institutions. ``Research'' 
is defined as a systematic study directed toward fuller scientific 
knowledge or understanding of the subject studied. ``Development'' is 
the systematic use of knowledge and understanding gained from research 
directed toward the production of useful materials, devices, systems, or 
methods, including design and development of prototypes and processes. 
The term research also includes activities involving the training of 
individuals in research techniques where such activities utilize the 
same facilities as other research and development activities and where 
such activities are not included in the instruction function.
    Small awards means a grant or cooperative agreement not exceeding 
$100,000 or the small purchase threshold fixed at 41 U.S.C. 403(11), 
whichever is greater.
    Subaward means:
    (1) An award of financial assistance in the form of money, or 
property in lieu of money, made under an award by a recipient to an 
eligible subrecipient or by a subrecipient to a lower tier subrecipient. 
The term includes financial assistance when provided by any legal 
agreement, even if the agreement is called a contract, but does not 
include procurement of goods and services nor does it include any form 
of assistance which is excluded from the definition of ``award''.
    (2) For Community Development Block Grants, the term ``subaward'' 
does not include the arrangement whereby the prime recipient transfers 
funds to another entity and that entity is the project. A distinction is 
made between such a transfer for the furtherance of the prime 
recipient's goals and the transfer of funds to a subrecipient who 
carries out activities and is accountable to the prime recipient. For 
example, in a CDBG award where a prime recipient has as its program goal 
the revitalization of a downtown area, the funds transferred to a 
business in the downtown area to remodel its store would not be 
considered a subaward subject to this part 84.
    Subrecipient means the legal entity to which a subaward is made and 
which is accountable to the recipient for the use of the funds provided. 
The term includes commercial organizations and international 
organizations operating domestically (such as agencies of the United 
Nations).
    Supplies means all personal property excluding equipment, intangible 
property, and debt instruments as defined in this section, and 
inventions of a contractor conceived or first actually reduced to 
practice in the performance of work under a funding agreement (``subject 
inventions''), as defined in 37 CFR part 401, ``Rights to Inventions 
Made by Nonprofit Organizations and Small Business Firms Under 
Government Grants, Contracts, and Cooperative Agreements.''

[[Page 371]]

    Suspension means an action by HUD that temporarily withdraws HUD 
sponsorship under an award, pending corrective action by the recipient 
or pending a decision to terminate the award by HUD. Suspension of an 
award is a separate action from suspension under HUD regulations 
implementing E.O. 12549 and E.O. 12689, ``Debarment and Suspension,'' at 
24 CFR part 24.
    Termination means the cancellation of HUD sponsorship, in whole or 
in part, under an agreement at any time prior to the date of completion.
    Third party in-kind contributions means the value of non-cash 
contributions provided by non-Federal third parties. Third party in-kind 
contributions may be in the form of real property, equipment, supplies 
and other expendable property, and the value of goods and services 
directly benefiting and specifically identifiable to the project or 
program.
    Unliquidated obligations, for financial reports prepared on a cash 
basis, means the amount of obligations incurred by the recipient that 
have not been paid. For reports prepared on an accrued expenditure 
basis, they represent the amount of obligations incurred by the 
recipient for which an outlay has not been recorded.
    Unobligated balance means the portion of the funds authorized by HUD 
that has not been obligated by the recipient and is determined by 
deducting the cumulative obligations from the cumulative funds 
authorized.
    Unrecovered indirect cost means the difference between the amount 
awarded and the amount which could have been awarded under the 
recipient's approved negotiated indirect cost rate.
    Working capital advance means a procedure whereby funds are advanced 
to the recipient to cover its estimated disbursement needs for a given 
initial period.


<R05>
Sec. 84.3  Effect on other issuances.

    For awards subject to this part, all administrative requirements of 
codified program regulations, program manuals, handbooks and other 
nonregulatory materials which are inconsistent with the requirements of 
this part shall be superseded, except to the extent they are required by 
statute, or authorized in accordance with the deviations provision in 
Sec. 84.4.


<R05>
Sec. 84.4  Deviations.

    The Office of Management and Budget (OMB) may grant exceptions for 
classes of grants or recipients subject to the requirements of this rule 
when exceptions are not prohibited by statute. However, in the interest 
of maximum uniformity, exceptions from the requirements of this rule 
shall be permitted only in unusual circumstances. HUD may apply more 
restrictive requirements to a class of recipients when approved by OMB. 
HUD may apply less restrictive requirements when awarding small awards 
and when approved by OMB, except for those requirements which are 
statutory. Exceptions on a case-by-case basis may also be made by HUD.


<R05>
Sec. 84.5  Subawards.

    Unless sections of this part specifically exclude subrecipients from 
coverage, the provisions of this part shall be applied to subrecipients 
performing work under awards if such subrecipients are institutions of 
higher education, hospitals, commercial organizations and international 
organizations operating domestically, or other non-profit organizations. 
State, local and Federally recognized Indian tribal government 
subrecipients are subject to the provisions of regulations implementing 
the grants management common rule, ``Administrative Requirements for 
Grants and Cooperative Agreements to State, Local and Federally 
Recognized Indian Tribal Governments,'' (24 CFR part 85).


<R04>
                    Subpart B--Pre-Award Requirements


<R05>
Sec. 84.10  Purpose.

    Sections 84.11 through 84.17 prescribe forms and instructions and 
other pre-award matters to be used in applying for HUD awards.


<R05>
Sec. 84.11  Pre-award policies.

    (a) Use of Grants and Cooperative Agreements, and Contracts. In each 
instance, HUD shall decide on the appropriate award instrument (i.e., 
grant,

[[Page 372]]

cooperative agreement, or contract). The Federal Grant and Cooperative 
Agreement Act (31 U.S.C. 6301-08) governs the use of grants, cooperative 
agreements and contracts. A grant or cooperative agreement shall be used 
only when the principal purpose of a transaction is to accomplish a 
public purpose of support or stimulation authorized by Federal statute. 
The statutory criterion for choosing between grants and cooperative 
agreements is that for the latter, ``substantial involvement is expected 
between the executive agency and the State, local government, or other 
recipient when carrying out the activity contemplated in the 
agreement.'' Contracts shall be used when the principal purpose is 
acquisition of property or services for the direct benefit or use of the 
Federal Government.
    (b) Public Notice and Priority Setting. HUD shall notify the public 
of its intended funding priorities for discretionary grant programs, 
unless funding priorities are established by Federal statute.


<R05>
Sec. 84.12  Forms for applying for Federal assistance.

    (a) HUD shall comply with the applicable report clearance 
requirements of 5 CFR part 1320, ``Controlling Paperwork Burdens on the 
Public,'' with regard to all forms used by HUD in place of or as a 
supplement to the Standard Form 424 (SF-424) series.
    (b) Applicants shall use the SF-424 series or those forms and 
instructions prescribed by HUD.
    (c) For Federal programs covered by E.O. 12372, ``Intergovernmental 
Review of Federal Programs,'' the applicant shall complete the 
appropriate sections of the SF-424 (Application for Federal Assistance) 
indicating whether the application was subject to review by the State 
Single Point of Contact (SPOC). The name and address of the SPOC for a 
particular State can be obtained from the Catalog of Federal Domestic 
Assistance. The SPOC shall advise the applicant whether the program for 
which application is made has been selected by that State for review.


<R05>
Sec. 84.13  Debarment and suspension; Drug-Free Workplace.

    (a) HUD and its recipients and subrecipients shall comply with the 
nonprocurement debarment and suspension common rule implementing E.O.s 
12549 and 12689, ``Debarment and Suspension,'' at 24 CFR part 24. This 
common rule restricts subawards and contracts with certain parties that 
are debarred, suspended or otherwise excluded from or ineligible for 
participation in Federal assistance programs or activities.
    (b) HUD and its recipients and subrecipients shall comply with the 
certification requirements of the Drug-Free Workplace Act of 1988 (42 
U.S.C. 701), as set forth at 24 CFR part 24, subpart F.


<R05>
Sec. 84.14  Special award conditions.

    If an applicant or recipient:
    (a) Has a history of poor performance;
    (b) Is not financially stable;
    (c) Has a management system that does not meet the standards 
prescribed in this part;
    (d) Has not conformed to the terms and conditions of a previous 
award; or
    (e) Is not otherwise responsible, HUD may impose additional 
requirements as needed, provided that such applicant or recipient is 
notified in writing as to: the nature of the additional requirements, 
the reason why the additional requirements are being imposed, the nature 
of the corrective action needed, the time allowed for completing the 
corrective actions, and the method for requesting reconsideration of the 
additional requirements imposed. Any special conditions shall be 
promptly removed once the conditions that prompted them have been 
corrected.


<R05>
Sec. 84.15  Metric system of measurement.

    The Metric Conversion Act, as amended by the Omnibus Trade and 
Competitiveness Act (15 U.S.C. 205) declares that the metric system is 
the preferred measurement system for U.S. trade and commerce. The Act 
requires each Federal agency to establish a date or dates in 
consultation with the Secretary of Commerce, when the metric system of 
measurement will be used in the agency's procurements, grants, and

[[Page 373]]

other business-related activities. Metric implementation may take longer 
where the use of the system is initially impractical or likely to cause 
significant inefficiencies in the accomplishment of federally-funded 
activities. HUD shall follow the provisions of E.O. 12770, ``Metric 
Usage in Federal Government Programs.''


<R05>
Sec. 84.16  Resource Conservation and Recovery Act.

    Under the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA) (Pub. L. 94-
580, 42 U.S.C. 6962), any State agency or agency of a political 
subdivision of a State which is using appropriated Federal funds must 
comply with Section 6002. Section 6002 requires that preference be given 
in procurement programs to the purchase of specific products containing 
recycled materials identified in guidelines developed by the 
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) (40 CFR parts 247 through 254). 
Accordingly, State and local institutions of higher education, 
hospitals, commercial organizations and international organizations when 
operating domestically, and non-profit organizations that receive direct 
Federal awards or other Federal funds shall give preference in their 
procurement programs funded with Federal funds to the purchase of 
recycled products pursuant to the EPA guidelines.


<R05>
Sec. 84.17  Certifications and representations.

    Unless prohibited by statute or codified regulation, HUD is 
authorized and encouraged to allow recipients to submit certifications 
and representations required by statute, executive order, or regulation 
on an annual basis, if the recipients have ongoing and continuing 
relationships with the agency. Annual certifications and representations 
shall be signed by responsible officials with the authority to ensure 
recipients' compliance with the pertinent requirements.


<R04>
                   Subpart C--Post-Award Requirements

                    Financial and Program Management


<R05>
Sec. 84.20  Purpose of financial and program management.

    Sections 84.21 through 84.28 prescribe standards for financial 
management systems, methods for making payments and rules for: 
satisfying cost sharing and matching requirements, accounting for 
program income, budget revision approvals, making audits, determining 
allowability of cost, and establishing fund availability.


<R05>
Sec. 84.21  Standards for financial management systems.

    (a) HUD shall require recipients to relate financial data to 
performance data and develop unit cost information whenever practical.
    (b) Recipients' financial management systems shall provide for the 
following:
    (1) Accurate, current and complete disclosure of the financial 
results of each federally-sponsored project or program in accordance 
with the reporting requirements set forth in Sec. 84.52. If a recipient 
maintains its records on other than an accrual basis, the recipient 
shall not be required to establish an accrual accounting system. These 
recipients may develop such accrual data for their reports on the basis 
of an analysis of the documentation on hand.
    (2) Records that identify adequately the source and application of 
funds for federally-sponsored activities. These records shall contain 
information pertaining to Federal awards, authorizations, obligations, 
unobligated balances, assets, outlays, income and interest.
    (3) Effective control over and accountability for all funds, 
property and other assets. Recipients shall adequately safeguard all 
such assets and assure they are used solely for authorized purposes.
    (4) Comparison of outlays with budget amounts for each award. 
Whenever appropriate, financial information

[[Page 374]]

should be related to performance and unit cost data.
    (5) Written procedures to minimize the time elapsing between the 
transfer of funds to the recipient from the U.S. Treasury and the 
issuance or redemption of checks, warrants or payments by other means 
for program purposes by the recipient. To the extent that the provisions 
of the Cash Management Improvement Act (CMIA) (Pub. L. 101-453) govern, 
payment methods of State agencies, instrumentalities, and fiscal agents 
shall be consistent with CMIA Treasury-State Agreements or the CMIA 
default procedures codified at 31 CFR part 205, ``Withdrawal of Cash 
from the Treasury for Advances under Federal Grant and Other Programs.''
    (6) Written procedures for determining the reasonableness, 
allocability and allowability of costs in accordance with the provisions 
of the applicable Federal cost principles and the terms and conditions 
of the award.
    (7) Accounting records including cost accounting records that are 
supported by source documentation.
    (c) Where the Federal Government guarantees or insures the repayment 
of money borrowed by the recipient, HUD, at its discretion, may require 
adequate bonding and insurance if the bonding and insurance requirements 
of the recipient are not deemed adequate to protect the interest of the 
Federal Government.
    (d) HUD may require adequate fidelity bond coverage where the 
recipient lacks sufficient coverage to protect the Federal Government's 
interest.
    (e) Where bonds are required in the situations described above, the 
bonds shall be obtained from companies holding certificates of authority 
as acceptable sureties, as prescribed in 31 CFR part 223, ``Surety 
Companies Doing Business with the United States.''


<R05>
Sec. 84.22  Payment.

    (a) Payment methods shall minimize the time elapsing between the 
transfer of funds from the United States Treasury and the issuance or 
redemption of checks, warrants, or payment by other means by the 
recipients. Payment methods of State agencies or instrumentalities shall 
be consistent with Treasury-State CMIA agreements or default procedures 
codified at 31 CFR part 205.
    (b) Recipients are to be paid in advance, provided they maintain or 
demonstrate the willingness to maintain:
    (1) Written procedures that minimize the time elapsing between the 
transfer of funds and disbursement by the recipient; and
    (2) Financial management systems that meet the standards for fund 
control and accountability as established in Sec. 84.21. Cash advances 
to a recipient organization shall be limited to the minimum amounts 
needed and be timed to be in accordance with the actual, immediate cash 
requirements of the recipient organization in carrying out the purpose 
of the approved program or project. The timing and amount of cash 
advances shall be as close as is administratively feasible to the actual 
disbursements by the recipient organization for direct program or 
project costs and the proportionate share of any allowable indirect 
costs.
    (c) Whenever possible, advances shall be consolidated to cover 
anticipated cash needs for all awards made by HUD to the recipient.
    (1) Advance payment mechanisms include, but are not limited to, 
Treasury check and electronic funds transfer.
    (2) Advance payment mechanisms are subject to 31 CFR part 205.
    (3) Recipients shall be authorized to submit requests for advances 
and reimbursements at least monthly when electronic fund transfers are 
not used.
    (d) Requests for Treasury check advance payment shall be submitted 
on SF-270, ``Request for Advance or Reimbursement,'' or other forms as 
may be authorized by OMB. This form is not to be used when Treasury 
check advance payments are made to the recipient automatically through 
the use of a predetermined payment schedule or if precluded by special 
HUD instructions for electronic funds transfer.
    (e) Reimbursement is the preferred method when the requirements in 
paragraph (b) of this section cannot be met. HUD may also use this 
method on any construction agreement, or if the major portion of the 
construction project is accomplished through private market financing or 
Federal

[[Page 375]]

loans, and the Federal assistance constitutes a minor portion of the 
project.
    (1) When the reimbursement method is used, HUD shall make payment 
within 30 days after receipt of the billing, unless the billing is 
improper.
    (2) Recipients shall be authorized to submit request for 
reimbursement at least monthly when electronic funds transfers are not 
used.
    (f) If a recipient cannot meet the criteria for advance payments and 
HUD has determined that reimbursement is not feasible because the 
recipient lacks sufficient working capital, HUD may provide cash on a 
working capital advance basis. Under this procedure, HUD shall advance 
cash to the recipient to cover its estimated disbursement needs for an 
initial period generally geared to the awardee's disbursing cycle. 
Thereafter, HUD shall reimburse the recipient for its actual cash 
disbursements. The working capital advance method of payment shall not 
be used for recipients unwilling or unable to provide timely advances to 
their subrecipient to meet the subrecipient's actual cash disbursements.
    (g) To the extent available, recipients shall disburse funds 
available from repayments to and interest earned on a revolving fund, 
program income, rebates, refunds, contract settlements, audit recoveries 
and interest earned on such funds before requesting additional cash 
payments.
    (h) Unless otherwise required by statute, HUD shall not withhold 
payments for proper charges made by recipients at any time during the 
project period unless paragraphs (h)(1) or (h)(2) of this section apply.
    (1) A recipient has failed to comply with the project objectives, 
the terms and conditions of the award, or Federal reporting 
requirements.
    (2) The recipient or subrecipient is delinquent in a debt to the 
United States as defined in OMB Circular A-129, ``Managing Federal 
Credit Programs.'' Under such conditions, HUD may, upon reasonable 
notice, inform the recipient that payments shall not be made for 
obligations incurred after a specified date until the conditions are 
corrected or the indebtedness to the Federal Government is liquidated.
    (i) Standards governing the use of banks and other institutions as 
depositories of funds advanced under awards are as follows.
    (1) Except for situations described in paragraph (i)(2) of this 
section, HUD shall not require separate depository accounts for funds 
provided to a recipient or establish any eligibility requirements for 
depositories for funds provided to a recipient. However, recipients must 
be able to account for the receipt, obligation and expenditure of funds.
    (2) Advances of Federal funds shall be deposited and maintained in 
insured accounts whenever possible.
    (j) Consistent with the national goal of expanding the opportunities 
for women-owned and minority-owned business enterprises, recipients 
shall be encouraged to use women- owned and minority-owned banks (a bank 
which is owned at least 50 percent by women or minority group members).
    (k) Recipients shall maintain advances of Federal funds in interest 
bearing accounts, unless paragraphs (k)(1), (k)(2), or (k)(3) of this 
section apply.
    (1) The recipient receives less than $120,000 in Federal awards per 
year.
    (2) The best reasonably available interest bearing account would not 
be expected to earn interest in excess of $250 per year on Federal cash 
balances.
    (3) The depository would require an average or minimum balance so 
high that it would not be feasible within the expected Federal and non-
Federal cash resources.
    (l) For those entities where CMIA and its implementing regulations 
do not apply, interest earned on Federal advances deposited in interest 
bearing accounts shall be remitted annually to Department of Health and 
Human Services, Payment Management System, P.O. Box 6021, Rockville, MD 
20852. In keeping with Electronic Funds Transfer rules (31 CFR part 
206), interest should be remitted to the HHS Payment Management System 
through an electronic medium such as the FEDWIRE Deposit system. 
Recipients which do not have this capability should use a check. 
Interest amounts up to $250 per year may be retained by

[[Page 376]]

the recipient for administrative expense. State universities and 
hospitals shall comply with CMIA, as it pertains to interest. If an 
entity subject to CMIA uses its own funds to pay pre-award costs for 
discretionary awards without prior written approval from the Federal 
awarding agency, it waives its right to recover the interest under CMIA.
    (m) Except as noted elsewhere in this rule, only the following forms 
shall be authorized for the recipients in requesting advances and 
reimbursements. Federal agencies shall not require more than an original 
and two copies of these forms.
    (1) SF-270, Request for Advance or Reimbursement. HUD has adopted 
the SF-270 as a standard form for all nonconstruction programs when 
electronic funds transfer or predetermined advance methods are not used. 
HUD has the option of using this form for construction programs in lieu 
of the SF-271, ``Outlay Report and Request for Reimbursement for 
Construction Programs.''
    (2) SF-271, Outlay Report and Request for Reimbursement for 
Construction Programs. HUD has adopted the SF-271 as the standard form 
to be used for requesting reimbursement for construction programs. 
However, HUD may substitute the SF-270 when HUD determines that it 
provides adequate information to meet Federal needs.


<R05>
Sec. 84.23  Cost sharing or matching.

    (a) All contributions, including cash and third party in-kind, shall 
be accepted as part of the recipient's cost sharing or matching when 
such contributions meet all of the following criteria.
    (1) Are verifiable from the recipient's records.
    (2) Are not included as contributions for any other federally-
assisted project or program.
    (3) Are necessary and reasonable for proper and efficient 
accomplishment of project or program objectives.
    (4) Are allowable under the applicable cost principles.
    (5) Are not paid by the Federal Government under another award, 
except where authorized by Federal statute to be used for cost sharing 
or matching.
    (6) Are provided for in the approved budget when required by HUD.
    (7) Conform to other provisions of this part, as applicable.
    (b) Unrecovered indirect costs may be included as part of cost 
sharing or matching only with the prior approval of HUD.
    (c) Values for recipient contributions of services and property 
shall be established in accordance with the applicable cost principles. 
If HUD authorizes recipients to donate buildings or land for 
construction/facilities acquisition projects or long-term use, the value 
of the donated property for cost sharing or matching shall be the lesser 
of paragraphs (c)(1) or (c)(2) of this section.
    (1) The certified value of the remaining life of the property 
recorded in the recipient's accounting records at the time of donation.
    (2) The current fair market value. However, when there is sufficient 
justification, HUD may approve the use of the current fair market value 
of the donated property, even if it exceeds the certified value at the 
time of donation to the project.
    (d) Volunteer services furnished by professional and technical 
personnel, consultants, and other skilled and unskilled labor may be 
counted as cost sharing or matching if the service is an integral and 
necessary part of an approved project or program. Rates for volunteer 
services shall be consistent with those paid for similar work in the 
recipient's organization. In those instances in which the required 
skills are not found in the recipient organization, rates shall be 
consistent with those paid for similar work in the labor market in which 
the recipient competes for the kind of services involved. In either 
case, paid fringe benefits that are reasonable, allowable, and allocable 
may be included in the valuation.
    (e) When an employer other than the recipient furnishes the services 
of an employee, these services shall be valued at the employee's regular 
rate of pay (plus an amount of fringe benefits that are reasonable, 
allowable, and allocable, but exclusive of overhead costs), provided 
these services are in the same skill for which the employee is normally 
paid.

[[Page 377]]

    (f) Donated supplies may include such items as expendable equipment, 
office supplies, laboratory supplies or workshop and classroom supplies. 
Value assessed to donated supplies included in the cost sharing or 
matching share shall be reasonable and shall not exceed the fair market 
value of the property at the time of the donation.
    (g) The method used for determining cost sharing or matching for 
donated equipment, buildings and land for which title passes to the 
recipient may differ according to the purpose of the award, if 
paragraphs (g)(1) or (g)(2) of this section apply.
    (1) If the purpose of the award is to assist the recipient in the 
acquisition of equipment, buildings or land, the total value of the 
donated property may be claimed as cost sharing or matching.
    (2) If the purpose of the award is to support activities that 
require the use of equipment, buildings or land, normally only 
depreciation or use charges for equipment and buildings may be made. 
However, the full value of equipment or other capital assets and fair 
rental charges for land may be allowed, provided that HUD has approved 
the charges.
    (h) The value of donated property shall be determined in accordance 
with the usual accounting policies of the recipient, with the following 
qualifications.
    (1) The value of donated land and buildings shall not exceed its 
fair market value at the time of donation to the recipient as 
established by an independent appraiser (e.g., certified real property 
appraiser or General Services Administration representative) and 
certified by a responsible official of the recipient.
    (2) The value of donated equipment shall not exceed the fair market 
value of equipment of the same age and condition at the time of 
donation.
    (3) The value of donated space shall not exceed the fair rental 
value of comparable space as established by an independent appraisal of 
comparable space and facilities in a privately-owned building in the 
same locality.
    (4) The value of loaned equipment shall not exceed its fair rental 
value.
    (5) The following requirements pertain to the recipient's supporting 
records for in-kind contributions from third parties.
    (i) Volunteer services shall be documented and, to the extent 
feasible, supported by the same methods used by the recipient for its 
own employees.
    (ii) The basis for determining the valuation for personal service, 
material, equipment, buildings and land shall be documented.


<R05>
Sec. 84.24  Program income.

    (a) HUD shall apply the standards set forth in this section in 
requiring recipient organizations to account for program income related 
to projects financed in whole or in part with Federal funds.
    (b) Except as provided in paragraph (h) of this section, program 
income earned during the project period shall be retained by the 
recipient and, in accordance with HUD regulations or the terms and 
conditions of the award, shall be used in one or more of the ways listed 
in the following.
    (1) Added to funds committed to the project by HUD and recipient and 
used to further eligible project or program objectives.
    (2) Used to finance the non-Federal share of the project or program.
    (3) Deducted from the total project or program allowable cost in 
determining the net allowable costs on which the Federal share of costs 
is based.
    (c) When HUD authorizes the disposition of program income as 
described in paragraphs (b)(1) or (b)(2) of this section, program income 
in excess of any limits stipulated shall be used in accordance with 
paragraph (b)(3) of this section.
    (d) In the event that HUD does not specify in its regulations or the 
terms and conditions of the award how program income is to be used, 
paragraph (b)(3) of this section shall apply automatically to all 
projects or programs except research. For awards that support research, 
paragraph (b)(1) of this section shall apply automatically unless HUD 
indicates in the terms and conditions another alternative on the award 
or the recipient is subject to special award conditions, as indicated in 
Sec. 84.14.

[[Page 378]]

    (e) Unless HUD regulations or the terms and conditions of the award 
provide otherwise, recipients shall have no obligation to the Federal 
Government regarding program income earned after the end of the project 
period.
    (f) If authorized by HUD regulations or the terms and conditions of 
the award, costs incident to the generation of program income may be 
deducted from gross income to determine program income, provided these 
costs have not been charged to the award.
    (g) Proceeds from the sale of property shall be handled in 
accordance with the requirements of the Property Standards (See 
Secs. 84.30 through 84.37).
    (h) Unless HUD regulations or the terms and condition of the award 
provide otherwise, recipients shall have no obligation to the Federal 
Government with respect to program income earned from license fees and 
royalties for copyrighted material, patents, patent applications, 
trademarks, and inventions produced under an award. However, Patent and 
Trademark Amendments (35 U.S.C. 18) apply to inventions made under an 
experimental, developmental, or research award.


<R05>
Sec. 84.25  Revision of budget and program plans.

    (a) The budget plan is the financial expression of the project or 
program as approved during the award process. It may include either the 
Federal and non-Federal share, or only the Federal share, depending upon 
HUD requirements. It shall be related to performance for program 
evaluation purposes whenever appropriate.
    (b) Recipients are required to report deviations from budget and 
program plans, and request prior approvals for budget and program plan 
revisions, in accordance with this section.
    (c) For nonconstruction awards, recipients shall request prior 
approvals from HUD for one or more of the following program or budget 
related reasons.
    (1) Change in the scope or the objective of the project or program 
(even if there is no associated budget revision requiring prior written 
approval).
    (2) Change in a key person specified in the application or award 
document.
    (3) The absence for more than three months, or a 25 percent 
reduction in time devoted to the project, by the approved project 
director or principal investigator.
    (4) The need for additional Federal funding.
    (5) The transfer of amounts budgeted for indirect costs to absorb 
increases in direct costs, or vice versa, if approval is required by 
HUD.
    (6) The inclusion, unless waived by HUD, of costs that require prior 
approval in accordance with OMB Circular A-21, ``Cost Principles for 
Institutions of Higher Education,'' OMB Circular A-122, ``Cost 
Principles for Non-Profit Organizations,'' or 45 CFR part 74 Appendix E, 
``Principles for Determining Costs Applicable to Research and 
Development under Grants and Contracts with Hospitals,'' or 48 CFR part 
31, ``Contract Cost Principles and Procedures,'' as applicable.
    (7) The transfer of funds allotted for training allowances (direct 
payment to trainees) to other categories of expense.
    (8) Unless described in the application and funded in the approved 
awards, the subaward, transfer or contracting out of any work under an 
award. This provision does not apply to the purchase of supplies, 
material, equipment or general support services.
    (d) No other prior approval requirements for specific items may be 
imposed unless a deviation has been approved by OMB.
    (e) Except for requirements listed in paragraphs (c)(1) and (c)(4) 
of this section, HUD is authorized, at its option, to waive cost-related 
and administrative prior written approvals required by Circular A-110 
and OMB Circulars A-21 and A-122. Such waivers may include authorizing 
recipients to do any one or more of the following.
    (1) Incur pre-award costs 90 calendar days prior to award or more 
than 90 calendar days with the prior approval of HUD. All pre-award 
costs are incurred at the recipient's risk (i.e., HUD is under no 
obligation to reimburse such costs if for any reason the recipient does 
not receive an award or if the award is less than anticipated and 
inadequate to cover such costs).

[[Page 379]]

    (2) Initiate a one-time extension of the expiration date of the 
award of up to 12 months unless one or more of the following conditions 
apply. For one-time extensions, the recipient must notify HUD in writing 
with the supporting reasons and revised expiration date at least 10 days 
before the expiration date specified in the award. This one-time 
extension may not be exercised merely for the purpose of using 
unobligated balances.
    (i) The terms and conditions of award prohibit the extension.
    (ii) The extension requires additional Federal funds.
    (iii) The extension involves any change in the approved objectives 
or scope of the project.
    (3) Carry forward unobligated balances to subsequent funding 
periods.
    (4) For awards that support research, unless HUD provides otherwise 
in HUD's regulations, the prior approval requirements described in 
paragraph (e) of this section are automatically waived (i.e., recipients 
need not obtain such prior approvals) unless one of the conditions 
included in paragraph (e)(2) of this section applies.
    (f) HUD may, at its option, restrict the transfer of funds among 
direct cost categories or programs, functions and activities for awards 
in which the Federal share of the project exceeds $100,000 and the 
cumulative amount of such transfers exceeds or is expected to exceed 10 
percent of the total budget as last approved by HUD. HUD shall not 
permit a transfer that would cause any Federal appropriation or part 
thereof to be used for purposes other than those consistent with the 
original intent of the appropriation.
    (g) All other changes to nonconstruction budgets, except for the 
changes described in paragraph (j) of this section, do not require prior 
approval.
    (h) For construction awards, recipients shall request prior written 
approval promptly from HUD for budget revisions whenever paragraphs 
(h)(1), (h)(2) or (h)(3) of this section apply.
    (1) The revision results from changes in the scope or the objective 
of the project or program.
    (2) The need arises for additional Federal funds to complete the 
project.
    (3) A revision is desired which involves specific costs for which 
prior written approval requirements may be imposed consistent with 
applicable OMB cost principles listed in Sec. 84.27.
    (i) No other prior approval requirements for specific items may be 
imposed unless a deviation has been approved by OMB.
    (j) When HUD makes an award that provides support for both 
construction and nonconstruction work, HUD may require the recipient to 
request prior approval from HUD before making any fund or budget 
transfers between the two types of work supported.
    (k) For both construction and nonconstruction awards, HUD shall 
require recipients to notify HUD in writing promptly whenever the amount 
of Federal authorized funds is expected to exceed the needs of the 
recipient for the project period by more than $5000 or five percent of 
the Federal award, whichever is greater. This notification shall not be 
required if an application for additional funding is submitted for a 
continuation award.
    (l) When requesting approval for budget revisions, recipients shall 
use the budget forms that were used in the application unless HUD 
indicates a letter of request suffices.
    (m) Within 30 calendar days from the date of receipt of the request 
for budget revisions, HUD shall review the request and notify the 
recipient whether the budget revisions have been approved. If the 
revision is still under consideration at the end of 30 calendar days, 
HUD shall inform the recipient in writing of the date when the recipient 
may expect the decision.


<R05>
Sec. 84.26  Non-Federal audits.

    (a) Recipients and subrecipients that are institutions of higher 
education or other non-profit organization (including hospitals) shall 
be subject to the audit requirements contained in the Single Audit Act 
Amendments of 1996 (31 U.S.C. 7501-7507) and revised OMB Circular A-133, 
``Audits of States, Local Governments, and Non-Profit Organizations.''
    (1) Non-profit organizations subject to regulations in the part 200 
and part 800 series of this title which receive awards subject to part 
84 shall comply

[[Page 380]]

with the audit requirements of revised OMB Circular A-133, ``Audits of 
States, Local Governments, and Non-Profit Organizations.'' For HUD 
programs, a non-profit organization is the mortgagor or owner (as these 
terms are defined in the regulations in the part 200 and part 800 
series) and not a related or affiliated organization or entity.
    (2) [Reserved]
    (b) State and local governments shall be subject to the audit 
requirements contained in the Single Audit Act Amendments of 1996 (31 
U.S.C. 7501-7507) and revised OMB Circular A-133, ``Audits of States, 
Local Governments, and Non-Profit Organizations.''
    (c) For-profit hospitals not covered by the audit provisions of 
revised OMB Circular A-133 shall be subject to the audit requirements of 
the Federal awarding agencies.
    (d) Commercial organizations shall be subject to the audit 
requirements of HUD or the prime recipient as incorporated into the 
award document.

[59 FR 47011, Sept. 13, 1994, as amended at 62 FR 61617, Nov. 18, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 84.27  Allowable costs.

    For each kind of recipient, there is a set of Federal principles for 
determining allowable costs. Allowability of costs shall be determined 
in accordance with the cost principles applicable to the entity 
incurring the costs. Thus, allowability of costs incurred by State, 
local or federally-recognized Indian tribal governments is determined in 
accordance with the provisions of OMB Circular A-87, ``Cost Principles 
for State and Local Governments.'' The allowability of costs incurred by 
non-profit organizations is determined in accordance with the provisions 
of OMB Circular A-122, ``Cost Principles for Non-Profit Organizations.'' 
The allowability of costs incurred by institutions of higher education 
is determined in accordance with the provisions of OMB Circular A-21, 
``Cost Principles for Educational Institutions.'' The allowability of 
costs incurred by hospitals is determined in accordance with the 
provisions of Appendix E of 45 CFR part 74, ``Principles for Determining 
Costs Applicable to Research and Development Under Grants and Contracts 
with Hospitals.'' The allowability of costs incurred by commercial 
organizations and those non-profit organizations listed in Attachment C 
to Circular A-122 is determined in accordance with the provisions of the 
Federal Acquisition Regulation (FAR) at 48 CFR part 31.


<R05>
Sec. 84.28  Period of availability of funds.

    Where a funding period is specified, a recipient may charge to the 
grant only allowable costs resulting from obligations incurred during 
the funding period and any pre-award costs authorized by HUD.

                           Property Standards


<R05>
Sec. 84.30  Purpose of property standards.

    Sections 84.31 through 84.37 set forth uniform standards governing 
management and disposition of property furnished by the Federal 
Government whose cost was charged to a project supported by a Federal 
award. HUD shall require recipients to observe these standards under 
awards and shall not impose additional requirements, unless specifically 
required by Federal statute. The recipient may use its own property 
management standards and procedures provided it observes the provisions 
of Secs. 84.31 through 84.37.


<R05>
Sec. 84.31  Insurance coverage.

    Recipients shall, at a minimum, provide the equivalent insurance 
coverage for real property and equipment acquired with Federal funds as 
provided to property owned by the recipient. Federally-owned property 
need not be insured unless required by the terms and conditions of the 
award.


<R05>
Sec. 84.32  Real property.

    HUD prescribes the following requirements for recipients concerning 
the use and disposition of real property acquired in whole or in part 
under awards:
    (a) Title to real property shall vest in the recipient subject to 
the condition that the recipient shall use the real property for the 
authorized purpose of the project as long as it is needed and shall not 
encumber the property without approval of HUD.
    (b) The recipient shall obtain written approval by HUD for the use 
of real property in other federally-sponsored

[[Page 381]]

projects when the recipient determines that the property is no longer 
needed for the purpose of the original project. Use in other projects 
shall be limited to those under federally-sponsored projects (i.e., 
awards) or programs that have purposes consistent with those authorized 
for support by HUD.
    (c) When the real property is no longer needed as provided in 
paragraphs (a) and (b) of this section, the recipient shall request 
disposition instructions from HUD or its successor Federal awarding 
agency. HUD shall observe one or more of the following disposition 
instructions.
    (1) The recipient may be permitted to retain title without further 
obligation to the Federal Government after it compensates the Federal 
Government for that percentage of the current fair market value of the 
property attributable to the Federal participation in the project.
    (2) The recipient may be directed to sell the property under 
guidelines provided by HUD and pay the Federal Government for that 
percentage of the current fair market value of the property attributable 
to the Federal participation in the project (after deducting actual and 
reasonable selling and fix-up expenses, if any, from the sales 
proceeds). When the recipient is authorized or required to sell the 
property, proper sales procedures shall be established that provide for 
competition to the extent practicable and result in the highest possible 
return.
    (3) The recipient may be directed to transfer title to the property 
to the Federal Government or to an eligible third party provided that, 
in such cases, the recipient shall be entitled to compensation for its 
attributable percentage of the current fair market value of the 
property.


<R05>
Sec. 84.33  Federally-owned and exempt property.

    (a) Federally-owned property. (1) Title to federally-owned property 
remains vested in the Federal Government. Recipients shall submit 
annually an inventory listing of federally-owned property in their 
custody to HUD. Upon completion of the award or when the property is no 
longer needed, the recipient shall report the property to HUD for 
further HUD utilization.
    (2) If HUD has no further need for the property, it shall be 
declared excess and reported to the General Services Administration, 
unless HUD has statutory authority to dispose of the property by 
alternative methods (e.g., the authority provided by the Federal 
Technology Transfer Act (15 U.S.C. 3710 (I)) to donate research 
equipment to educational and non-profit organizations in accordance with 
E.O. 12821, ``Improving Mathematics and Science Education in Support of 
the National Education Goals.'') Appropriate instructions shall be 
issued to the recipient by HUD.
    (b) Exempt property. When statutory authority exists, HUD has the 
option to vest title to property acquired with Federal funds in the 
recipient without further obligation to the Federal Government and under 
conditions HUD considers appropriate. Such property is ``exempt 
property.'' Should HUD not establish conditions, title to exempt 
property upon acquisition shall vest in the recipient without further 
obligation to the Federal Government.


<R05>
Sec. 84.34  Equipment.

    (a) Title to equipment acquired by a recipient with Federal funds 
shall vest in the recipient, subject to conditions of this section.
    (b) The recipient shall not use equipment acquired with Federal 
funds to provide services to non-Federal outside organizations for a fee 
that is less than private companies charge for equivalent services, 
unless specifically authorized by Federal statute, for as long as the 
Federal Government retains an interest in the equipment.
    (c) The recipient shall use the equipment in the project or program 
for which it was acquired as long as needed, whether or not the project 
or program continues to be supported by Federal funds and shall not 
encumber the equipment without approval of HUD. When the equipment is no 
longer needed for the original project or program, the recipient shall 
use the equipment in connection with its other federally-sponsored 
activities, in the following order of priority:

[[Page 382]]

    (1) Activities sponsored by HUD which funded the original project; 
then
    (2) Activities sponsored by other Federal awarding agencies.
    (d) During the time that equipment is used on the project or program 
for which it was acquired, the recipient shall make it available for use 
on other projects or programs if such other use will not interfere with 
the work on the project or program for which the equipment was 
originally acquired. First preference for such other use shall be given 
to other projects or programs sponsored by HUD that financed the 
equipment; second preference shall be given to projects or programs 
sponsored by other Federal awarding agencies. If the equipment is owned 
by the Federal Government, use on other activities not sponsored by the 
Federal Government shall be permissible if authorized by HUD. User 
charges shall be treated as program income.
    (e) When acquiring replacement equipment, the recipient may use the 
equipment to be replaced as trade-in or sell the equipment and use the 
proceeds to offset the costs of the replacement equipment subject to the 
approval of HUD.
    (f) The recipient's property management standards for equipment 
acquired with Federal funds and federally-owned equipment shall include 
all of the following.
    (1) Equipment records shall be maintained accurately and shall 
include the following information.
    (i) A description of the equipment.
    (ii) Manufacturer's serial number, model number, Federal stock 
number, national stock number, or other identification number.
    (iii) Source of the equipment, including the award number.
    (iv) Whether title vests in the recipient or the Federal Government.
    (v) Acquisition date (or date received, if the equipment was 
furnished by the Federal Government) and cost.
    (vi) Information from which one can calculate the percentage of 
Federal participation in the cost of the equipment (not applicable to 
equipment furnished by the Federal Government).
    (vii) Location and condition of the equipment and the date the 
information was reported.
    (viii) Unit acquisition cost.
    (ix) Ultimate disposition data, including date of disposal and sales 
price or the method used to determine current fair market value where a 
recipient compensates HUD for its share.
    (2) Equipment owned by the Federal Government shall be identified to 
indicate Federal ownership.
    (3) A physical inventory of equipment shall be taken and the results 
reconciled with the equipment records at least once every two years. Any 
differences between quantities determined by the physical inspection and 
those shown in the accounting records shall be investigated to determine 
the causes of the difference. The recipient shall, in connection with 
the inventory, verify the existence, current utilization, and continued 
need for the equipment.
    (4) A control system shall be in effect to insure adequate 
safeguards to prevent loss, damage, or theft of the equipment. Any loss, 
damage, or theft of equipment shall be investigated and fully 
documented; if the equipment was owned by the Federal Government, the 
recipient shall promptly notify HUD.
    (5) Adequate maintenance procedures shall be implemented to keep the 
equipment in good condition.
    (6) Where the recipient is authorized or required to sell the 
equipment, proper sales procedures shall be established which provide 
for competition to the extent practicable and result in the highest 
possible return.
    (g) When the recipient no longer needs the equipment, the equipment 
may be used for other activities in accordance with the following 
standards. For equipment with a current per unit fair market value of 
$5000 or more, the recipient may retain the equipment for other uses 
provided that compensation is made to HUD or its successor. The amount 
of compensation shall be computed by applying the percentage of Federal 
participation in the cost of the original project or program to the 
current fair market value of the equipment. If the recipient has no need 
for the equipment, the recipient shall request disposition instructions 
from HUD. HUD shall determine whether the equipment can be used to meet 
HUD's requirements. If no requirement exists

[[Page 383]]

within HUD, the availability of the equipment shall be reported to the 
General Services Administration by HUD to determine whether a 
requirement for the equipment exists in other Federal agencies. HUD 
shall issue instructions to the recipient no later than 120 calendar 
days after the recipient's request and the following procedures shall 
govern.
    (1) If so instructed or if disposition instructions are not issued 
within 120 calendar days after the recipient's request, the recipient 
shall sell the equipment and reimburse HUD an amount computed by 
applying to the sales proceeds the percentage of Federal participation 
in the cost of the original project or program. However, the recipient 
shall be permitted to deduct and retain from the Federal share $500 or 
ten percent of the proceeds, whichever is less, for the recipient's 
selling and handling expenses.
    (2) If the recipient is instructed to ship the equipment elsewhere, 
the recipient shall be reimbursed by the Federal Government by an amount 
which is computed by applying the percentage of the recipient's 
participation in the cost of the original project or program to the 
current fair market value of the equipment, plus any reasonable shipping 
or interim storage costs incurred.
    (3) If the recipient is instructed to otherwise dispose of the 
equipment, the recipient shall be reimbursed by HUD for such costs 
incurred in its disposition.
    (4) HUD may reserve the right to transfer the title to the Federal 
Government or to a third party named by the Federal Government when such 
third party is otherwise eligible under existing statutes. Such transfer 
shall be subject to the following standards.
    (i) The equipment shall be appropriately identified in the award or 
otherwise made known to the recipient in writing.
    (ii) HUD shall issue disposition instructions within 120 calendar 
days after receipt of a final inventory. The final inventory shall list 
all equipment acquired with grant funds and federally-owned equipment. 
If HUD fails to issue disposition instructions within the 120 calendar 
day period, the recipient shall apply the standards of this section, as 
appropriate.
    (iii) When HUD exercises its right to take title, the equipment 
shall be subject to the provisions for federally-owned equipment.


<R05>
Sec. 84.35  Supplies and other expendable property.

    (a) Title to supplies and other expendable property shall vest in 
the recipient upon acquisition. If there is a residual inventory of 
unused supplies exceeding $5000 in total aggregate value upon 
termination or completion of the project or program and the supplies are 
not needed for any other federally-sponsored project or program, the 
recipient shall retain the supplies for use on non-Federal sponsored 
activities or sell them, but shall, in either case, compensate the 
Federal Government for its share. The amount of compensation shall be 
computed in the same manner as for equipment.
    (b) The recipient shall not use supplies acquired with Federal funds 
to provide services to non-Federal outside organizations for a fee that 
is less than private companies charge for equivalent services, unless 
specifically authorized by Federal statute, as long as the Federal 
Government retains an interest in the supplies.


<R05>
Sec. 84.36  Intangible property.

    (a) The recipient may copyright any work that is subject to 
copyright and was developed, or for which ownership was purchased, under 
an award. HUD reserves a royalty-free, nonexclusive and irrevocable 
right to reproduce, publish, or otherwise use the work for Federal 
purposes, and to authorize others to do so.
    (b) Recipients are subject to applicable regulations governing 
patents and inventions, including government-wide regulations issued by 
the Department of Commerce at 37 CFR part 401, ``Rights to Inventions 
Made by Nonprofit Organizations and Small Business Firms Under 
Government Grants, Contracts and Cooperative Agreements.''
    (c) Unless waived by HUD, the Federal Government has the right to 
paragraphs (c)(1) and (c)(2) of this section.

[[Page 384]]

    (1) Obtain, reproduce, publish or otherwise use the data first 
produced under an award.
    (2) Authorize others to receive, reproduce, publish, or otherwise 
use such data for Federal purposes.
    (d) Title to intangible property and debt instruments acquired under 
an award or subaward vests upon acquisition in the recipient. The 
recipient shall use that property for the originally-authorized purpose, 
and the recipient shall not encumber the property without approval of 
HUD. When no longer needed for the originally authorized purpose, 
disposition of the intangible property shall occur in accordance with 
the provisions of Sec. 84.34(g).


<R05>
Sec. 84.37  Property trust relationship.

    Real property, equipment, intangible property and debt instruments 
that are acquired or improved with Federal funds shall be held in trust 
by the recipient as trustee for the beneficiaries of the project or 
program under which the property was acquired or improved. HUD may 
require recipients to record liens or other appropriate notices of 
record to indicate that personal or real property has been acquired or 
improved with Federal funds and that use and disposition conditions 
apply to the property.

                          Procurement Standards


<R05>
Sec. 84.40  Purpose of procurement standards.

    Sections 84.41 through 84.48 set forth standards for use by 
recipients in establishing procedures for the procurement of supplies 
and other expendable property, equipment, real property and other 
services with Federal funds. These standards are furnished to ensure 
that such materials and services are obtained in an effective manner and 
in compliance with the provisions of applicable Federal statutes and 
executive orders. No additional procurement standards or requirements 
shall be imposed by HUD upon recipients, unless specifically required by 
Federal statute or executive order or approved by OMB.


<R05>
Sec. 84.41  Recipient responsibilities.

    The standards contained in this section do not relieve the recipient 
of the contractual responsibilities arising under its contract(s). The 
recipient is the responsible authority, without recourse to HUD, 
regarding the settlement and satisfaction of all contractual and 
administrative issues arising out of procurements entered into in 
support of an award or other agreement. This includes disputes, claims, 
protests of award, source evaluation or other matters of a contractual 
nature. Matters concerning violation of statute are to be referred to 
such Federal, State or local authority as may have proper jurisdiction.


<R05>
Sec. 84.42  Codes of conduct.

    The recipient shall maintain written standards of conduct governing 
the performance of its employees engaged in the award and administration 
of contracts. No employee, officer, or agent shall participate in the 
selection, award, or administration of a contract supported by Federal 
funds if a real or apparent conflict of interest would be involved. Such 
a conflict would arise when the employee, officer, or agent, any member 
of his or her immediate family, his or her partner, or an organization 
which employs or is about to employ any of the parties indicated herein, 
has a financial or other interest in the firm selected for an award. The 
officers, employees, and agents of the recipient shall neither solicit 
nor accept gratuities, favors, or anything of monetary value from 
contractors, or parties to subagreements. However, recipients may set 
standards for situations in which the financial interest is not 
substantial or the gift is an unsolicited item of nominal value. The 
standards of conduct shall provide for disciplinary actions to be 
applied for violations of such standards by officers, employees, or 
agents of the recipient.


<R05>
Sec. 84.43  Competition.

    All procurement transactions shall be conducted in a manner to 
provide, to the maximum extent practical, open and free competition. The 
recipient

[[Page 385]]

shall be alert to organizational conflicts of interest as well as 
noncompetitive practices among contractors that may restrict or 
eliminate competition or otherwise restrain trade. In order to ensure 
objective contractor performance and eliminate unfair competitive 
advantage, contractors that develop or draft specifications, 
requirements, statements of work, invitations for bids and/or requests 
for proposals shall be excluded from competing for such procurements. 
Awards shall be made to the bidder or offeror whose bid or offer is 
responsive to the solicitation and is most advantageous to the 
recipient, price, quality and other factors considered. The other 
factors shall include the bidder's or offeror's compliance with Section 
3 of the Housing and Urban Development Act of 1968 (12 U.S.C. 1701u), 
hereafter referred to as ``Section 3.'' Section 3 provides that, to the 
greatest extent feasible, and consistent with existing Federal, State, 
and local laws, and regulations, economic opportunities generated by 
certain HUD financial assistance shall be directed to low- and very low-
income persons. Solicitations shall clearly set forth all requirements 
that the bidder or offeror shall fulfill in order for the bid or offer 
to be evaluated by the recipient. Any and all bids or offers may be 
rejected when it is in the recipient's interest to do so.


<R05>
Sec. 84.44  Procurement procedures.

    (a) All recipients shall establish written procurement procedures. 
These procedures shall provide for, at a minimum, that paragraphs 
(a)(1), (a)(2) and (a)(3) of this section apply.
    (1) Recipients avoid purchasing unnecessary items.
    (2) Where appropriate, an analysis is made of lease and purchase 
alternatives to determine which would be the most economical and 
practical procurement for the Federal Government.
    (3) Solicitations for goods and services provide for all of the 
following.
    (i) A clear and accurate description of the technical requirements 
for the material, product or service to be procured. In competitive 
procurements, such a description shall not contain features which unduly 
restrict competition.
    (ii) Requirements which the bidder/offeror must fulfill and all 
other factors to be used in evaluating bids or proposals.
    (iii) A description, whenever practicable, of technical requirements 
in terms of functions to be performed or performance required, including 
the range of acceptable characteristics or minimum acceptable standards.
    (iv) The specific features of ``brand name or equal'' descriptions 
that bidders are required to meet when such items are included in the 
solicitation.
    (v) The acceptance, to the extent practicable and economically 
feasible, of products and services dimensioned in the metric system of 
measurement.
    (vi) Preference, to the extent practicable and economically 
feasible, for products and services that conserve natural resources and 
protect the environment and are energy efficient.
    (b) Positive efforts shall be made by recipients to utilize small 
businesses, minority-owned firms, and women's business enterprises, 
whenever possible. Recipients of Federal awards shall take all of the 
following steps to further this goal.
    (1) Ensure that small businesses, minority-owned firms, and women's 
business enterprises are used to the fullest extent practicable.
    (2) Make information on forthcoming opportunities available and 
arrange time frames for purchases and contracts to encourage and 
facilitate participation by small businesses, minority-owned firms, and 
women's business enterprises.
    (3) Consider in the contract process whether firms competing for 
larger contracts intend to subcontract with small businesses, minority-
owned firms, and women's business enterprises.
    (4) Encourage contracting with consortiums of small businesses, 
minority-owned firms and women's business enterprises when a contract is 
too large for one of these firms to handle individually.
    (5) Use the services and assistance, as appropriate, of such 
organizations as the Small Business Administration and the Department of 
Commerce's Minority Business Development Agency in the solicitation and 
utilization of

[[Page 386]]

small businesses, minority-owned firms and women's business enterprises.
    (c) The type of procuring instruments used (e.g., fixed price 
contracts, cost reimbursable contracts, purchase orders, and incentive 
contracts) shall be determined by the recipient but shall be appropriate 
for the particular procurement and for promoting the best interest of 
the program or project involved. The ``cost-plus-a-percentage-of-cost'' 
or ``percentage of construction cost'' methods of contracting shall not 
be used.
    (d) Contracts shall be made only with responsible contractors who 
possess the potential ability to perform successfully under the terms 
and conditions of the proposed procurement. Consideration shall be given 
to such matters as contractor integrity; compliance with public policy, 
including, where applicable, Section 3 of the Housing and Urban 
Development Act of 1968 (12 U.S.C. 1701u); record of past performance; 
financial and technical resources or accessibility to other necessary 
resources. In certain circumstances, contracts with certain parties are 
restricted by implementation of E.O.s 12549 and 12689, ``Debarment and 
Suspension,'' at 24 CFR part 24.
    (e) Recipients shall, on request, make available for the Federal 
awarding agency, pre-award review and procurement documents, such as 
requests for proposals or invitations for bids, independent cost 
estimates, etc., when any of the following conditions apply.
    (1) A recipient's procurement procedures or operation fails to 
comply with the procurement standards in HUD's implementation of 
Circular A-110.
    (2) The procurement is expected to exceed $100,000 or the small 
purchase threshold fixed at 41 U.S.C. 403 (11), whichever is greater, 
and is to be awarded without competition or only one bid or offer is 
received in response to a solicitation.
    (3) The procurement, which is expected to exceed the small purchase 
threshold, specifies a ``brand name'' product.
    (4) The proposed award over the small purchase threshold is to be 
awarded to other than the apparent low bidder under a sealed bid 
procurement.
    (5) A proposed contract modification changes the scope of a contract 
or increases the contract amount by more than the amount of the small 
purchase threshold.


<R05>
Sec. 84.45  Cost and price analysis.

    Some form of cost or price analysis shall be made and documented in 
the procurement files in connection with every procurement action. Price 
analysis may be accomplished in various ways, including the comparison 
of price quotations submitted, market prices and similar indicia, 
together with discounts. Cost analysis is the review and evaluation of 
each element of cost to determine reasonableness, allocability and 
allowability.


<R05>
Sec. 84.46  Procurement records.

    Procurement records and files for purchases in excess of the small 
purchase threshold shall include the following at a minimum:
    (a) Basis for contractor selection;
    (b) Justification for lack of competition when competitive bids or 
offers are not obtained; and
    (c) Basis for award cost or price.


<R05>
Sec. 84.47  Contract administration.

    A system for contract administration shall be maintained to ensure 
contractor conformance with the terms, conditions and specifications of 
the contract and to ensure adequate and timely follow up of all 
purchases. Recipients shall evaluate contractor performance and 
document, as appropriate, whether contractors have met the terms, 
conditions and specifications of the contract.


<R05>
Sec. 84.48  Contract provisions.

    The recipient shall include, in addition to provisions to define a 
sound and complete agreement, the following provisions in all contracts. 
The following provisions shall also be applied to subcontracts.
    (a) Contracts in excess of the small purchase threshold shall 
contain contractual provisions or conditions that allow for 
administrative, contractual, or legal remedies in instances in which a 
contractor violates or breaches the

[[Page 387]]

contract terms, and provide for such remedial actions as may be 
appropriate.
    (b) All contracts in excess of the small purchase threshold shall 
contain suitable provisions for termination by the recipient, including 
the manner by which termination shall be effected and the basis for 
settlement. In addition, such contracts shall describe conditions under 
which the contract may be terminated for default as well as conditions 
where the contract may be terminated because of circumstances beyond the 
control of the contractor.
    (c) Except as otherwise required by statute, an award that requires 
the contracting (or subcontracting) for construction or facility 
improvements shall provide for the recipient to follow its own 
requirements relating to bid guarantees, performance bonds, and payment 
bonds unless the construction contract or subcontract exceeds $100,000. 
For those contracts or subcontracts exceeding $100,000, HUD may accept 
the bonding policy and requirements of the recipient, provided HUD has 
made a determination that the Federal Government's interest is 
adequately protected. If such a determination has not been made, the 
minimum requirements shall be as follows:
    (1) A bid guarantee from each bidder equivalent to five percent of 
the bid price. The ``bid guarantee'' shall consist of a firm commitment 
such as a bid bond, certified check, or other negotiable instrument 
accompanying a bid as assurance that the bidder shall, upon acceptance 
of his bid, execute such contractual documents as may be required within 
the time specified.
    (2) A performance bond on the part of the contractor for 100 percent 
of the contract price. A ``performance bond'' is one executed in 
connection with a contract to secure fulfillment of all the contractor's 
obligations under such contract.
    (3) A payment bond on the part of the contractor for 100 percent of 
the contract price. A ``payment bond'' is one executed in connection 
with a contract to assure payment as required by statute of all persons 
supplying labor and material in the execution of the work provided for 
in the contract.
    (4) Where bonds are required in the situations described herein, the 
bonds shall be obtained from companies holding certificates of authority 
as acceptable sureties pursuant to 31 CFR part 223, ``Surety Companies 
Doing Business with the United States.''
    (d) All negotiated contracts (except those for less than the small 
purchase threshold) awarded by recipients shall include a provision to 
the effect that the recipient, HUD, the Comptroller General of the 
United States, or any of their duly authorized representatives, shall 
have access to any books, documents, papers and records of the 
contractor which are directly pertinent to a specific program for the 
purpose of making audits, examinations, excerpts and transcriptions.
    (e) All contracts, including small purchases, awarded by recipients 
and their contractors shall contain the procurement provisions of 
Appendix A to this rule, as applicable.

                           Reports and Records


<R05>
Sec. 84.50  Purpose of reports and records.

    Sections 84.51 through 84.53 set forth the procedures for monitoring 
and reporting on the recipient's financial and program performance and 
the necessary standard reporting forms. They also set forth record 
retention requirements.


<R05>
Sec. 84.51  Monitoring and reporting program performance.

    (a) Recipients are responsible for managing and monitoring each 
project, program, subaward, function or activity supported by the award. 
Recipients shall monitor subawards to ensure subrecipients have met the 
audit requirements as delineated in Sec. 84.26.
    (b) HUD shall prescribe the frequency with which the performance 
reports shall be submitted. Except as provided in Sec. 84.51(f), 
performance reports shall not be required more frequently than quarterly 
or less frequently than annually. Annual reports shall be due 90 
calendar days after the grant year; quarterly or semi-annual reports 
shall be due 30 days after the reporting period. HUD may require annual 
reports before the anniversary dates of multiple year awards in lieu of 
these requirements.

[[Page 388]]

The final performance reports are due 90 calendar days after the 
expiration or termination of the award.
    (c) If inappropriate, a final technical or performance report shall 
not be required after completion of the project.
    (d) When required, performance reports shall generally contain, for 
each award, brief information on each of the following:
    (1) A comparison of actual accomplishments with the goals and 
objectives established for the period, the findings of the investigator, 
or both. Whenever appropriate and the output of programs or projects can 
be readily quantified, such quantitative data should be related to cost 
data for computation of unit costs.
    (2) Reasons why established goals were not met, if appropriate.
    (3) Other pertinent information including, when appropriate, 
analysis and explanation of cost overruns or high unit costs.
    (e) Recipients shall not be required to submit more than the 
original and two copies of performance reports.
    (f) Recipients shall immediately notify HUD of developments that 
have a significant impact on the award-supported activities. Also, 
notification shall be given in the case of problems, delays, or adverse 
conditions which materially impair the ability to meet the objectives of 
the award. This notification shall include a statement of the action 
taken or contemplated, and any assistance needed to resolve the 
situation.
    (g) HUD may make site visits, as needed.
    (h) HUD shall comply with clearance requirements of 5 CFR part 1320 
when requesting performance data from recipients.


<R05>
Sec. 84.52  Financial reporting.

    (a) The following forms or such other forms as may be approved by 
OMB are authorized for obtaining financial information from recipients.
    (1) SF-269 or SF-269A, Financial Status Report.
    (i) HUD requires recipients to use the SF-269 or SF-269A to report 
the status of funds for all nonconstruction projects or programs. HUD 
has the option of not requiring the SF-269 or SF-269A when the SF-270, 
Request for Advance or Reimbursement, or SF-272, Report of Federal Cash 
Transactions, is determined to provide adequate information to meet its 
needs, except that a final SF-269 or SF-269A shall be required at the 
completion of the project when the SF-270 is used only for advances.
    (ii) HUD shall prescribe whether the report shall be on a cash or 
accrual basis. If HUD requires accrual information and the recipient's 
accounting records are not normally kept on the accrual basis, the 
recipient shall not be required to convert its accounting system, but 
shall develop such accrual information through best estimates based on 
an analysis of the documentation on hand.
    (iii) HUD shall determine the frequency of the Financial Status 
Report for each project or program, considering the size and complexity 
of the particular project or program. However, the report shall not be 
required more frequently than quarterly or less frequently than 
annually. A final report shall be required at the completion of the 
agreement.
    (iv) HUD requires recipients to submit the SF-269 or SF-269A (an 
original and no more than two copies) no later than 30 days after the 
end of each specified reporting period for quarterly and semi-annual 
reports, and 90 calendar days for annual and final reports. Extensions 
of reporting due dates may be approved by HUD upon request of the 
recipient.
    (2) SF-272, Report of Federal Cash Transactions.
    (i) When funds are advanced to recipients HUD shall require each 
recipient to submit the SF-272 and, when necessary, its continuation 
sheet, SF-272a. HUD shall use this report to monitor cash advanced to 
recipients and to obtain disbursement information for each agreement 
with the recipients.
    (ii) HUD may require forecasts of Federal cash requirements in the 
``Remarks'' section of the report.
    (iii) When practical and deemed necessary, HUD may require 
recipients to report in the ``Remarks'' section the amount of cash 
advances received and retained in excess of three days. Recipients shall 
provide short narrative

[[Page 389]]

explanations of actions taken to reduce the excess balances.
    (iv) Recipients shall be required to submit not more than the 
original and two copies of the SF-272 15 calendar days following the end 
of each quarter. HUD may require a monthly report from those recipients 
receiving advances totaling $1 million or more per year.
    (v) HUD may waive the requirement for submission of the SF-272 for 
any one of the following reasons:
    (A) When monthly advances do not exceed $25,000 per recipient, 
provided that such advances are monitored through other forms contained 
in this section;
    (B) If, in HUD's opinion, the recipient's accounting controls are 
adequate to minimize excessive Federal advances; or
    (C) When the electronic payment mechanisms provide adequate data.
    (b) When HUD needs additional information or more frequent reports, 
the following shall be observed.
    (1) When additional information is needed to comply with legislative 
requirements, HUD shall issue instructions to require recipients to 
submit such information under the ``Remarks'' section of the reports.
    (2) When HUD determines that a recipient's accounting system does 
not meet the standards in Sec. 84.21, additional pertinent information 
to further monitor awards may be obtained upon written notice to the 
recipient until such time as the system is brought up to standard. HUD, 
in obtaining this information, shall comply with report clearance 
requirements of 5 CFR part 1320.
    (3) HUD will shade out any line item on any report if not necessary.
    (4) HUD may accept the identical information from the recipients in 
machine readable format or computer printouts or electronic outputs in 
lieu of prescribed formats.
    (5) HUD may provide computer or electronic outputs to recipients 
when such expedites or contributes to the accuracy of reporting.


<R05>
Sec. 84.53  Retention and access requirements for records.

    (a) This section sets forth requirements for record retention and 
access to records for awards to recipients. HUD shall not impose any 
other record retention or access requirements upon recipients.
    (b) Financial records, supporting documents, statistical records, 
and all other records pertinent to an award shall be retained for a 
period of three years from the date of submission of the final 
expenditure report or, for awards that are renewed quarterly or 
annually, from the date of the submission of the quarterly or annual 
financial report, as authorized by HUD. The only exceptions are the 
following.
    (1) If any litigation, claim, or audit is started before the 
expiration of the 3-year period, the records shall be retained until all 
litigation, claims or audit findings involving the records have been 
resolved and final action taken.
    (2) Records for real property and equipment acquired with Federal 
funds shall be retained for 3 years after final disposition.
    (3) When records are transferred to or maintained by HUD, the 3-year 
retention requirement is not applicable to the recipient.
    (4) Indirect cost rate proposals, cost allocation plans, etc. as 
specified in Sec. 84.53(g).
    (c) Copies of original records may be substituted for the original 
records if authorized by HUD.
    (d) HUD shall request transfer of certain records to its custody 
from recipients when it determines that the records possess long term 
retention value. However, in order to avoid duplicate recordkeeping, HUD 
may make arrangements for recipients to retain any records that are 
continuously needed for joint use.
    (e) HUD, the Inspector General, Comptroller General of the United 
States, or any of their duly authorized representatives, have the right 
of timely and unrestricted access to any books, documents, papers, or 
other records of recipients that are pertinent to the awards, in order 
to make audits, examinations, excerpts, transcripts and copies of such 
documents. This right also includes timely and reasonable access to a 
recipient's personnel for the purpose of interview and discussion 
related to such documents. The rights of

[[Page 390]]

access in this paragraph (e) are not limited to the required retention 
period, but shall last as long as records are retained.
    (f) Unless required by statute, HUD shall not place restrictions on 
recipients that limit public access to the records of recipients that 
are pertinent to an award, except when HUD can demonstrate that such 
records shall be kept confidential and would have been exempted from 
disclosure pursuant to the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552) if 
the records had belonged to HUD.
    (g) Indirect cost rate proposals, cost allocation plans, etc. 
Paragraphs (g)(1) and (g)(2) of this section apply to the following 
types of documents, and their supporting records--indirect cost rate 
computations or proposals, cost allocation plans, and any similar 
accounting computations of the rate at which a particular group of costs 
is chargeable (such as computer usage chargeback rates or composite 
fringe benefit rates).
    (1) If submitted for negotiation. If the recipient submits to HUD or 
the subrecipient submits to the recipient the proposal, plan, or other 
computation to form the basis for negotiation of the rate, then the 3-
year retention period for its supporting records starts on the date of 
such submission.
    (2) If not submitted for negotiation. If the recipient is not 
required to submit to HUD or the subrecipient is not required to submit 
to the recipient the proposal, plan, or other computation for 
negotiation purposes, then the 3-year retention period for the proposal, 
plan, or other computation and its supporting records starts at the end 
of the fiscal year (or other accounting period) covered by the proposal, 
plan, or other computation.

                       Termination and Enforcement


<R05>
Sec. 84.60  Purpose of termination and enforcement.

    Sections 84.61 and 84.62 set forth uniform suspension, termination 
and enforcement procedures.


<R05>
Sec. 84.61  Termination.

    (a) Awards may be terminated in whole or in part only if paragraphs 
(a)(1), (a)(2) or (a)(3) of this section apply.
    (1) By HUD, if a recipient materially fails to comply with the terms 
and conditions of an award.
    (2) By HUD with the consent of the recipient, in which case the two 
parties shall agree upon the termination conditions, including the 
effective date and, in the case of partial termination, the portion to 
be terminated.
    (3) By the recipient upon sending to HUD written notification 
setting forth the reasons for such termination, the effective date, and, 
in the case of partial termination, the portion to be terminated. 
However, if HUD determines in the case of partial termination that the 
reduced or modified portion of the grant will not accomplish the 
purposes for which the grant was made, it may terminate the grant in its 
entirety under either paragraphs (a)(1) or (a)(2) of this section.
    (b) If costs are allowed under an award, the responsibilities of the 
recipient referred to in Sec. 84.71(a), including those for property 
management as applicable, shall be considered in the termination of the 
award, and provision shall be made for continuing responsibilities of 
the recipient after termination, as appropriate.


<R05>
Sec. 84.62  Enforcement.

    (a) Remedies for noncompliance. If a recipient materially fails to 
comply with the terms and conditions of an award, whether stated in a 
Federal statute, regulation, assurance, application, or notice of award, 
HUD may, in addition to imposing any of the special conditions outlined 
in Sec. 84.14, take one or more of the following actions, as appropriate 
in the circumstances.
    (1) Temporarily withhold cash payments pending correction of the 
deficiency by the recipient or more severe enforcement action by HUD.
    (2) Disallow (that is, deny both use of funds and any applicable 
matching credit for) all or part of the cost of the activity or action 
not in compliance.
    (3) Wholly or partly suspend or terminate the current award.
    (4) Withhold further awards for the project or program.
    (5) Take other remedies that may be legally available.

[[Page 391]]

    (b) Hearings and appeals. In taking an enforcement action, HUD shall 
provide the recipient an opportunity for hearing, appeal, or other 
administrative proceeding to which the recipient is entitled under any 
statute or regulation applicable to the action involved.
    (c) Effects of suspension and termination. Costs of a recipient 
resulting from obligations incurred by the recipient during a suspension 
or after termination of an award are not allowable unless HUD expressly 
authorizes them in the notice of suspension or termination or 
subsequently. Other recipient costs during suspension or after 
termination which are necessary and not reasonably avoidable are 
allowable if paragraphs (c)(1) and (c)(2) of this section apply.
    (1) The costs result from obligations which were properly incurred 
by the recipient before the effective date of suspension or termination, 
are not in anticipation of it, and in the case of a termination, are 
noncancellable.
    (2) The costs would be allowable if the award were not suspended or 
expired normally at the end of the funding period in which the 
termination takes effect.
    (d) Relationship to debarment and suspension. The enforcement 
remedies identified in this section, including suspension and 
termination, do not preclude a recipient from being subject to debarment 
and suspension under E.O.s 12549 and 12689 and HUD's implementing 
regulations at 24 CFR part 24 (see Sec. 84.13).


<R04>
                 Subpart D--After-the-Award Requirements


<R05>
Sec. 84.70  Purpose.

    Sections 84.71 through 84.73 contain closeout procedures and other 
procedures for subsequent disallowances and adjustments.


<R05>
Sec. 84.71  Closeout procedures.

    (a) Recipients shall submit, within 90 calendar days after the date 
of completion of the award, all financial, performance, and other 
reports as required by the terms and conditions of the award. HUD may 
approve extensions when requested by the recipient.
    (b) Unless HUD authorizes an extension, a recipient shall liquidate 
all obligations incurred under the award not later than 90 calendar days 
after the funding period or the date of completion as specified in the 
terms and conditions of the award or in HUD instructions.
    (c) HUD shall make prompt payments to a recipient for allowable 
reimbursable costs under the award being closed out.
    (d) The recipient shall promptly refund any balances of unobligated 
cash that HUD has advanced or paid and that is not authorized to be 
retained by the recipient for use in other projects. OMB Circular A-129 
governs unreturned amounts that become delinquent debts.
    (e) When authorized by the terms and conditions of the award, HUD 
shall make a settlement for any upward or downward adjustments to the 
Federal share of costs after closeout reports are received.
    (f) The recipient shall account for any real and personal property 
acquired with Federal funds or received from the Federal Government in 
accordance with Secs. 84.31 through 84.37.
    (g) In the event a final audit has not been performed prior to the 
closeout of an award, HUD shall retain the right to recover an 
appropriate amount after fully considering the recommendations on 
disallowed costs resulting from the final audit.


<R05>
Sec. 84.72  Subsequent adjustments and continuing responsibilities.

    (a) The closeout of an award does not affect any of the following.
    (1) The right of HUD to disallow costs and recover funds on the 
basis of a later audit or other review.
    (2) The obligation of the recipient to return any funds due as a 
result of later refunds, corrections, or other transactions.
    (3) Audit requirements in Sec. 84.26.
    (4) Property management requirements in Secs. 84.31 through 84.37.
    (5) Records retention as required in Sec. 84.53.
    (b) After closeout of an award, a relationship created under an 
award may be modified or ended in whole or in part with the consent of 
HUD and the recipient, provided the responsibilities

[[Page 392]]

of the recipient referred to in Sec. 84.73(a), including those for 
property management as applicable, are considered and provisions made 
for continuing responsibilities of the recipient, as appropriate.


<R05>
Sec. 84.73  Collection of amounts due.

    (a) Any funds paid to a recipient in excess of the amount to which 
the recipient is finally determined to be entitled under the terms and 
conditions of the award constitute a debt to the Federal Government. If 
not paid within a reasonable period after the demand for payment, HUD 
may reduce the debt by paragraphs (a)(1), (a)(2) or (a)(3) of this 
section.
    (1) Making an administrative offset against other requests for 
reimbursements.
    (2) Withholding advance payments otherwise due to the recipient.
    (3) Taking other action permitted by statute.
    (b) Except as otherwise provided by law, HUD shall charge interest 
on an overdue debt in accordance with 4 CFR Chapter II, ``Federal Claims 
Collection Standards.''


<R04>
                    Subpart E--Use of Lump Sum Grants


<R05>
Sec. 84.80  Conditions for use of Lump Sum (fixed price or fixed amount) grants.

    (a) Heads of awarding activities (HAAs) shall determine and publish 
the funding arrangement for award programs having a published program 
regulation or Notice of Funding Availability. For other awards, 
discretion may be provided to Grant Officers to determine the funding 
arrangement on a transaction basis. In such cases, Grant Officers shall 
document the basis for selection of the funding arrangement in the 
negotiation record. Appropriate consideration to fixed amount (lump sum) 
awards shall be made if one or more of the following conditions are 
present:
    (1) The HUD funding amount is definitely less than the total actual 
cost of the project.
    (2) The HUD funding amount does not exceed $100,000 or the small 
purchase threshold fixed at 41 U.S.C. 403 (11), whichever is greater.
    (3) The project scope is very specific and adequate cost, 
historical, or unit pricing data is available to establish a fixed 
amount award with assurance that the recipient will realize no increment 
above actual cost.
    (b) [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 84.81  Definition.

    (a) A lump sum award is an award for a predetermined amount, as set 
forth in the grant agreement, which amount does not vary with the amount 
of the recipient's actual incurred costs. Under this type of award, HUD 
does not pay the recipient for its incurred costs but rather for 
completing certain defined events in the work or achievement of some 
other well-defined milestone. Some of the ways in which the grant amount 
may be paid are, but are not limited to:
    (1) In several partial payments, the amount of each agreed upon in 
advance, and the ``milestone'' or event triggering the payment also 
agreed upon in advance, and set forth in the grant;
    (2) On a unit price basis, for a defined unit or units (such as a 
housing counseling unit), at a defined price or prices, agreed to in 
advance of performance of the grant and set forth in the grant; or,
    (3) In one payment at grant completion.
    (b) The key distinction between a lump sum and a cost reimbursement 
grant is the lack of a direct relationship between the costs incurred by 
the recipient and the amount paid by HUD in the lump sum arrangement.


<R05>
Sec. 84.82  Provisions applicable only to lump sum grants.

    In addition to the provisions of this subpart E, subparts A and B of 
this part apply to lump sum grants.
    (a) Financial and program management. Paragraphs (b) through (e) of 
this section prescribe standards for financial management systems, 
methods for making payments, budget revision approvals, and making 
audits.
    (b) Standards for financial management systems. (1) Records that 
identify adequately the source and application of

[[Page 393]]

funds for federally-sponsored activities are required. These records 
shall contain information pertaining to Federal awards, authorizations, 
obligations, unobligated balances, assets, outlays, income and interest.
    (2) Effective control over and accountability for all funds, 
property and other assets are required. Recipients shall adequately 
safeguard all such assets and assure they are used solely for authorized 
purposes.
    (3) Comparison of outlays with budget amounts for each award is 
required. Whenever appropriate, financial information should be related 
to performance and unit cost data.
    (4) Where HUD guarantees or insures the repayment of money borrowed 
by the recipient, HUD, at its discretion, may require adequate bonding 
and insurance if the bonding and insurance requirements of the recipient 
are not deemed adequate to protect the interest of the Federal 
Government.
    (5) HUD may require adequate fidelity bond coverage where the 
recipient lacks sufficient coverage to protect the Federal Government's 
interest.
    (6) Where bonds are required in the situations described above, the 
bonds shall be obtained from companies holding certificates of authority 
as acceptable sureties, as prescribed in 31 CFR part 223, ``Surety 
Companies Doing Business with the United States.''
    (c) Payment. (1) The standard governing the use of banks and other 
institutions as depositories of funds advanced under awards is, HUD 
shall not require separate depository accounts for funds provided to a 
recipient or establish any eligibility requirements for depositories for 
funds provided to a recipient. However, recipients must be able to 
account for the receipt, obligation and expenditure of funds.
    (2) Consistent with the national goal of expanding the opportunities 
for women-owned and minority-owned business enterprises, recipients 
shall be encouraged to use women-owned and minority-owned banks (a bank 
which is owned at least 50 percent by women or minority group members).
    (3) Except as noted elsewhere in this part, only the following forms 
shall be authorized for the recipients in requesting payments. HUD shall 
not require more than an original and two copies of these forms.
    (i) SF-270, Request for Advance or Reimbursement. HUD has adopted 
the SF-270 as a standard form for all nonconstruction programs when 
electronic funds transfer or predetermined advance methods are not used. 
The SF-270 shall also be used for lump sum payment requests. HUD, 
however, has the option of using this form for construction programs in 
lieu of the SF-271, ``Outlay Report and Request for Reimbursement for 
Construction Programs.''
    (ii) SF-271, Outlay Report and Request for Reimbursement for 
Construction Programs. HUD has adopted the SF-271 as the standard form 
to be used for requesting reimbursement for construction programs. 
However, HUD may substitute the SF-270 when HUD determines that it 
provides adequate information to meet HUD's needs.
    (d) Revision of budget and program plans. (1) The budget plan is the 
financial expression of the project or program as approved during the 
award process. It may include either the Federal and non-Federal share, 
or only the Federal share, depending upon HUD requirements. It shall be 
related to performance for program evaluation purposes whenever 
appropriate.
    (2) Recipients are required to report deviations from program plans, 
and request prior approvals for budget and program plan revisions, in 
accordance with this section.
    (3) For nonconstruction awards, recipients shall request prior 
approvals from HUD for one or more of the following program or budget 
related reasons.
    (i) Change in the scope or the objective of the project or program 
(even if there is no associated budget revision requiring prior written 
approval).
    (ii) The need for additional Federal funding.
    (iii) Unless described in the application and funded in the approved 
awards, the subaward, transfer or contracting out of any work under an 
award. This provision does not apply to the purchase of supplies, 
material, equipment or general support services.

[[Page 394]]

    (4) No other prior approval requirements for specific items may be 
imposed unless a deviation has been approved by OMB.
    (5) Except for requirements listed in paragraphs (d)(3)(i) and 
(d)(3)(ii) of this section, HUD is authorized, at its option, to waive 
cost-related and administrative prior written approvals required by 
Circular A-110 and OMB Circulars A-21 and A-122. Such waivers may 
include authorizing recipients to do any one or more of the following.
    (i) Initiate a one-time extension of the expiration date of the 
award of up to 12 months unless one or more of the following conditions 
apply. For one-time extensions, the recipient must notify HUD in writing 
with the supporting reasons and revised expiration date at least 10 days 
before the expiration date specified in the award. This action may be 
taken unless:
    (A) The terms and conditions of award prohibit the extension.
    (B) The extension requires additional Federal funds.
    (C) The extension involves any change in the approved objectives or 
scope of the project.
    (6) For construction awards, recipients shall request prior written 
approval promptly from HUD for budget revisions whenever paragraphs 
(d)(6)(i) or (d)(6)(ii) of this section apply.
    (i) The revision results from changes in the scope or the objective 
of the project or program.
    (ii) The need arises for additional Federal funds to complete the 
project.
    (7) No other prior approval requirements for specific items may be 
imposed unless a deviation has been approved by OMB.
    (8) When HUD makes an award that provides support for both 
construction and nonconstruction work, HUD may require the recipient to 
request prior approval from HUD before making any fund or budget 
transfers between the two types of work supported.
    (e) Non-Federal audits. (1) Recipients and subrecipients that are 
institutions of higher education or other non-profit organizations 
(including hospitals) shall be subject to the audit requirements 
contained in the Single Audit Act Amendments of 1996 (31 U.S.C. 7501-
7507) and revised OMB Circular A-133, ``Audits of States, Local 
Governments, and Non-Profit Organizations.''
    (i) Non-profit organizations subject to regulations in the part 200 
and part 800 series of this title which receive awards subject to part 
84 shall comply with the audit requirements of revised OMB Circular A-
133, ``Audits of States, Local Governments, and Non-Profit 
Organizations.'' For HUD programs, a non-profit organization is the 
mortgagor or owner (as these terms are defined in the regulations in the 
part 200 and part 800 series) and not a related or affiliated 
organization or entity.
    (ii) [Reserved]
    (2) State and local governments shall be subject to the audit 
requirements contained in the Single Audit Act Amendments of 1996 (31 
U.S.C. 7501-7507) and revised OMB Circular A-133, ``Audits of States, 
Local Governments, and Non-Profit Organizations.''
    (3) For-profit hospitals not covered by the audit provisions of 
revised OMB Circular A-133 shall be subject to the audit requirements of 
the Federal awarding agencies.
    (4) Commercial organizations shall be subject to the audit 
requirements of HUD or the prime recipient as incorporated into the 
award document.

[59 FR 47011, Sept. 13, 1994, as amended at 62 FR 61617, Nov. 18, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 84.83  Property standards.

    (a) Purpose of property standards. Paragraphs (b) through (g) of 
this section set forth uniform standards governing management and 
disposition of property furnished by the Federal Government whose cost 
was charged to a project supported by a Federal award. HUD shall require 
recipients to observe these standards under awards and shall not impose 
additional requirements, unless specifically required by Federal 
statute. The recipient may use its own property management standards and 
procedures provided it observes the provisions of paragraphs (b) through 
(g) of this section.
    (b) Insurance coverage. Recipients shall, at a minimum, provide the 
equivalent insurance coverage for real property and equipment acquired 
with Federal funds as provided to property owned by the recipient. 
Federally-

[[Page 395]]

owned property need not be insured unless required by the terms and 
conditions of the award.
    (c) Real property. HUD prescribes the following requirements for 
recipients concerning the use and disposition of real property acquired 
in whole or in part under awards:
    (1) Title to real property shall vest in the recipient subject to 
the condition that the recipient shall use the real property for the 
authorized purpose of the project as long as it is needed and shall not 
encumber the property without approval of HUD.
    (2) The recipient shall obtain written approval by HUD for the use 
of real property in other federally-sponsored projects when the 
recipient determines that the property is no longer needed for the 
purpose of the original project. Use in other projects shall be limited 
to those under federally-sponsored projects (i.e., awards) or programs 
that have purposes consistent with those authorized for support by HUD.
    (d) Federally-owned and exempt property--(1) Federally-owned 
property--(i) Title to federally-owned property remains vested in the 
Federal Government. Recipients shall submit annually an inventory 
listing of federally-owned property in their custody to HUD. Upon 
completion of the award or when the property is no longer needed, the 
recipient shall report the property to HUD for further HUD utilization.
    (ii) If HUD has no further need for the property, it shall be 
declared excess and reported to the General Services Administration, 
unless HUD has statutory authority to dispose of the property by 
alternative methods (e.g., the authority provided by the Federal 
Technology Transfer Act (15 U.S.C. 3710 (I)) to donate research 
equipment to educational and non-profit organizations in accordance with 
E.O. 12821, ``Improving Mathematics and Science Education in Support of 
the National Education Goals.'') Appropriate instructions shall be 
issued to the recipient by HUD.
    (2) Exempt property. When statutory authority exists, HUD has the 
option to vest title to property acquired with Federal funds in the 
recipient without further obligation to the Federal Government and under 
conditions HUD considers appropriate. Such property is ``exempt 
property.'' Should HUD not establish conditions, title to exempt 
property upon acquisition shall vest in the recipient without further 
obligation to the Federal Government.
    (e) Equipment. (1) Title to equipment acquired by a recipient with 
Federal funds shall vest in the recipient, subject to conditions of this 
section.
    (2) The recipient shall use the equipment in the project or program 
for which it was acquired as long as needed, whether or not the project 
or program continues to be supported by Federal funds and shall not 
encumber the equipment without approval of HUD. When the equipment is no 
longer needed for the original project or program, the recipient shall 
use the equipment in connection with its other federally-sponsored 
activities, in the following order of priority:
    (i) Activities sponsored by HUD which funded the original project; 
then
    (ii) Activities sponsored by other Federal awarding agencies.
    (3) During the time that equipment is used on the project or program 
for which it was acquired, the recipient shall make it available for use 
on other projects or programs if such other use will not interfere with 
the work on the project or program for which the equipment was 
originally acquired. First preference for such other use shall be given 
to other projects or programs sponsored by HUD that financed the 
equipment; second preference shall be given to projects or programs 
sponsored by other Federal awarding agencies. If the equipment is owned 
by the Federal Government, use on other activities not sponsored by the 
Federal Government shall be permissible if authorized by HUD.
    (4) The recipient's property management standards for equipment 
acquired with Federal funds and federally-owned equipment shall include 
all of the following.
    (i) Equipment records shall be maintained accurately and shall 
include the following information.
    (A) A description of the equipment.
    (B) Manufacturer's serial number, model number, Federal stock 
number, national stock number, or other identification number.

[[Page 396]]

    (C) Source of the equipment, including the award number.
    (D) Whether title vests in the recipient or the Federal Government.
    (E) Acquisition date (or date received, if the equipment was 
furnished by the Federal Government) and cost.
    (F) Location and condition of the equipment and the date the 
information was reported.
    (ii) Equipment owned by the Federal Government shall be identified 
to indicate Federal ownership.
    (iii) A physical inventory of equipment shall be taken and the 
results reconciled with the equipment records at least once every two 
years. Any differences between quantities determined by the physical 
inspection and those shown in the accounting records shall be 
investigated to determine the causes of the difference. The recipient 
shall, in connection with the inventory, verify the existence, current 
utilization, and continued need for the equipment.
    (iv) A control system shall be in effect to insure adequate 
safeguards to prevent loss, damage, or theft of the equipment. Any loss, 
damage, or theft of equipment shall be investigated and fully 
documented; if the equipment was owned by the Federal Government, the 
recipient shall promptly notify HUD.
    (v) Adequate maintenance procedures shall be implemented to keep the 
equipment in good condition.
    (5) HUD may reserve the right to transfer the title to the Federal 
Government or to a third party named by the Federal Government when such 
third party is otherwise eligible under existing statutes. Such transfer 
shall be subject to the following standards.
    (i) The equipment shall be appropriately identified in the award or 
otherwise made known to the recipient in writing.
    (ii) HUD shall issue disposition instructions within 120 calendar 
days after receipt of a final inventory. The final inventory shall list 
all equipment acquired with grant funds and federally-owned equipment. 
If HUD fails to issue disposition instructions within the 120 calendar 
day period, the recipient shall apply the standards of this section, as 
appropriate.
    (iii) When HUD exercises its right to take title, the equipment 
shall be subject to the provisions for federally-owned equipment.
    (f) Intangible property. (1) The recipient may copyright any work 
that is subject to copyright and was developed, or for which ownership 
was purchased, under an award. HUD reserves a royalty-free, nonexclusive 
and irrevocable right to reproduce, publish, or otherwise use the work 
for Federal purposes, and to authorize others to do so.
    (2) Recipients are subject to applicable regulations governing 
patents and inventions, including government-wide regulations issued by 
the Department of Commerce at 37 CFR part 401, ``Rights to Inventions 
Made by Nonprofit Organizations and Small Business Firms Under 
Government Grants, Contracts and Cooperative Agreements.''
    (3) Unless waived by HUD, the Federal Government has the right to 
paragraphs (f)(3)(i) and (f)(3)(ii) of this section.
    (i) Obtain, reproduce, publish or otherwise use the data first 
produced under an award.
    (ii) Authorize others to receive, reproduce, publish, or otherwise 
use such data for Federal purposes.
    (4) Title to intangible property and debt instruments acquired under 
an award or subaward vests upon acquisition in the recipient. The 
recipient shall use that property for the originally-authorized purpose.
    (g) Property trust relationship. Real property, equipment, 
intangible property and debt instruments that are acquired or improved 
with Federal funds shall be held in trust by the recipient as trustee 
for the beneficiaries of the project or program under which the property 
was acquired or improved. HUD may require recipients to record liens or 
other appropriate notices of record to indicate that personal or real 
property has been acquired or improved with Federal funds and that use 
and disposition conditions apply to the property.

[[Page 397]]


<R05>
Sec. 84.84  Procurement standards.

    (a) Purpose of procurement standards. Paragraphs (b) through (i) of 
this section set forth standards for use by recipients in establishing 
procedures for the procurement of supplies and other expendable 
property, equipment, real property and other services with Federal 
funds. These standards are furnished to ensure that such materials and 
services are obtained in an effective manner and in compliance with the 
provisions of applicable Federal statutes and executive orders. No 
additional procurement standards or requirements shall be imposed by HUD 
upon recipients, unless specifically required by Federal statute or 
executive order or approved by OMB.
    (b) Recipient responsibilities. The standards contained in this 
section do not relieve the recipient of the contractual responsibilities 
arising under its contract(s). The recipient is the responsible 
authority, without recourse to HUD, regarding the settlement and 
satisfaction of all contractual and administrative issues arising out of 
procurements entered into in support of an award or other agreement. 
This includes disputes, claims, protests of award, source evaluation or 
other matters of a contractual nature. Matters concerning violation of 
statute are to be referred to such Federal, State or local authority as 
may have proper jurisdiction.
    (c) Codes of conduct. The recipient shall maintain written standards 
of conduct governing the performance of its employees engaged in the 
award and administration of contracts. No employee, officer, or agent 
shall participate in the selection, award, or administration of a 
contract supported by Federal funds if a real or apparent conflict of 
interest would be involved. Such a conflict would arise when the 
employee, officer, or agent, any member of his or her immediate family, 
his or her partner, or an organization which employs or is about to 
employ any of the parties indicated herein, has a financial or other 
interest in the firm selected for an award. The officers, employees, and 
agents of the recipient shall neither solicit nor accept gratuities, 
favors, or anything of monetary value from contractors, or parties to 
subagreements. However, recipients may set standards for situations in 
which the financial interest is not substantial or the gift is an 
unsolicited item of nominal value. The standards of conduct shall 
provide for disciplinary actions to be applied for violations of such 
standards by officers, employees, or agents of the recipient.
    (d) Competition. All procurement transactions shall be conducted in 
a manner to provide, to the maximum extent practical, open and free 
competition. The recipient shall be alert to organizational conflicts of 
interest as well as noncompetitive practices among contractors that may 
restrict or eliminate competition or otherwise restrain trade. In order 
to ensure objective contractor performance and eliminate unfair 
competitive advantage, contractors that develop or draft specifications, 
requirements, statements of work, invitations for bids and/or requests 
for proposals shall be excluded from competing for such procurements. 
Awards shall be made to the bidder or offeror whose bid or offer is 
responsive to the solicitation and is most advantageous to the 
recipient, price, quality and other factors considered. The other 
factors shall include the bidder's or offeror's compliance with Section 
3 of the Housing and Urban Development Act of 1968 (12 U.S.C. 1701u), 
hereafter referred to as ``Section 3.'' Section 3 provides that, to the 
greatest extent feasible, and consistent with existing Federal, State, 
and local laws, and regulations, economic opportunities generated by 
certain HUD financial assistance shall be directed to low- and very low-
income persons. Solicitations shall clearly set forth all requirements 
that the bidder or offeror shall fulfill in order for the bid or offer 
to be evaluated by the recipient. Any and all bids or offers may be 
rejected when it is in the recipient's interest to do so.
    (e) Procurement procedures. (1) All recipients shall establish 
written procurement procedures. These procedures shall provide for, at a 
minimum, that paragraphs (e)(1)(i), (e)(1)(ii) and (e)(1)(iii) of this 
section apply.
    (i) Recipients avoid purchasing unnecessary items.

[[Page 398]]

    (ii) Where appropriate, an analysis is made of lease and purchase 
alternatives to determine which would be the most economical and 
practical procurement for the recipient.
    (iii) Solicitations for goods and services provide for all of the 
following.
    (A) A clear and accurate description of the technical requirements 
for the material, product or service to be procured. In competitive 
procurements, such a description shall not contain features which unduly 
restrict competition.
    (B) Requirements which the bidder/offeror must fulfill and all other 
factors to be used in evaluating bids or proposals.
    (C) A description, whenever practicable, of technical requirements 
in terms of functions to be performed or performance required, including 
the range of acceptable characteristics or minimum acceptable standards.
    (D) The specific features of ``brand name or equal'' descriptions 
that bidders are required to meet when such items are included in the 
solicitation.
    (E) The acceptance, to the extent practicable and economically 
feasible, of products and services dimensioned in the metric system of 
measurement.
    (F) Preference, to the extent practicable and economically feasible, 
for products and services that conserve natural resources and protect 
the environment and are energy efficient.
    (2) Positive efforts shall be made by recipients to utilize small 
businesses, minority-owned firms, and women's business enterprises, 
whenever possible. Recipients of Federal awards shall take all of the 
following steps to further this goal.
    (i) Ensure that small businesses, minority-owned firms, and women's 
business enterprises are used to the fullest extent practicable.
    (ii) Make information on forthcoming opportunities available and 
arrange time frames for purchases and contracts to encourage and 
facilitate participation by small businesses, minority-owned firms, and 
women's business enterprises.
    (iii) Consider in the contract process whether firms competing for 
larger contracts intend to subcontract with small businesses, minority-
owned firms, and women's business enterprises.
    (iv) Encourage contracting with consortiums of small businesses, 
minority-owned firms and women's business enterprises when a contract is 
too large for one of these firms to handle individually.
    (v) Use the services and assistance, as appropriate, of such 
organizations as the Small Business Administration and the Department of 
Commerce's Minority Business Development Agency in the solicitation and 
utilization of small businesses, minority-owned firms and women's 
business enterprises.
    (3) The type of procuring instruments used (e.g., fixed price 
contracts, cost reimbursable contracts, purchase orders, and incentive 
contracts) shall be determined by the recipient but shall be appropriate 
for the particular procurement and for promoting the best interest of 
the program or project involved. The ``cost-plus-a-percentage-of-cost'' 
or ``percentage of construction cost'' methods of contracting shall not 
be used.
    (4) Contracts shall be made only with responsible contractors who 
possess the potential ability to perform successfully under the terms 
and conditions of the proposed procurement. Consideration shall be given 
to such matters as contractor integrity; compliance with public policy, 
including, where applicable, Section 3 of the Housing and Urban 
Development Act of 1968 (12 U.S.C. 1701u); record of past performance; 
financial and technical resources or accessibility to other necessary 
resources. In certain circumstances, contracts with certain parties are 
restricted by agencies' implementation of E.O.'s 12549 and 12689, 
``Debarment and Suspension,'' as set forth at 24 CFR part 24.
    (5) Recipients shall, on request, make available for the Federal 
awarding agency, pre-award review and procurement documents, such as 
requests for proposals or invitations for bids, independent cost 
estimates, etc., when any of the following conditions apply.
    (i) A recipient's procurement procedures or operation fails to 
comply with the procurement standards in HUD's implementation of 
Circular A-110.

[[Page 399]]

    (ii) The procurement is expected to exceed $100,000 or the small 
purchase threshold fixed at 41 U.S.C. 403 (11), whichever is greater, 
and is to be awarded without competition or only one bid or offer is 
received in response to a solicitation.
    (iii) The procurement, which is expected to exceed the small 
purchase threshold, specifies a ``brand name'' product.
    (iv) The proposed award over the small purchase threshold is to be 
awarded to other than the apparent low bidder under a sealed bid 
procurement.
    (v) A proposed contract modification changes the scope of a contract 
or increases the contract amount by more than the amount of the small 
purchase threshold.
    (f) Cost and price analysis. Some form of cost or price analysis 
shall be made and documented in the procurement files in connection with 
every procurement action. Price analysis may be accomplished in various 
ways, including the comparison of price quotations submitted, market 
prices and similar indicia, together with discounts. Cost analysis is 
the review and evaluation of each element of cost to determine 
reasonableness, allocability and allowability.
    (g) Procurement records. Procurement records and files for purchases 
in excess of the small purchase threshold shall include the following at 
a minimum:
    (1) Basis for contractor selection;
    (2) Justification for lack of competition when competitive bids or 
offers are not obtained; and
    (3) Basis for award cost or price.
    (h) Contract administration. A system for contract administration 
shall be maintained to ensure contractor conformance with the terms, 
conditions and specifications of the contract and to ensure adequate and 
timely follow up of all purchases. Recipients shall evaluate contractor 
performance and document, as appropriate, whether contractors have met 
the terms, conditions and specifications of the contract.
    (i) Contract provisions. The recipient shall include, in addition to 
provisions to define a sound and complete agreement, the following 
provisions in all contracts. The following provisions shall also be 
applied to subcontracts.
    (1) Contracts in excess of the small purchase threshold shall 
contain contractual provisions or conditions that allow for 
administrative, contractual, or legal remedies in instances in which a 
contractor violates or breaches the contract terms, and provide for such 
remedial actions as may be appropriate.
    (2) All contracts in excess of the small purchase threshold shall 
contain suitable provisions for termination by the recipient, including 
the manner by which termination shall be effected and the basis for 
settlement. In addition, such contracts shall describe conditions under 
which the contract may be terminated for default as well as conditions 
where the contract may be terminated because of circumstances beyond the 
control of the contractor.
    (3) Except as otherwise required by statute, an award that requires 
the contracting (or subcontracting) for construction or facility 
improvements shall provide for the recipient to follow its own 
requirements relating to bid guarantees, performance bonds, and payment 
bonds unless the construction contract or subcontract exceeds $100,000. 
For those contracts or subcontracts exceeding $100,000, HUD may accept 
the bonding policy and requirements of the recipient, provided HUD has 
made a determination that the Federal Government's interest is 
adequately protected. If such a determination has not been made, the 
minimum requirements shall be as follows:
    (i) A bid guarantee from each bidder equivalent to five percent of 
the bid price. The ``bid guarantee'' shall consist of a firm commitment 
such as a bid bond, certified check, or other negotiable instrument 
accompanying a bid as assurance that the bidder shall, upon acceptance 
of his bid, execute such contractual documents as may be required within 
the time specified.
    (ii) A performance bond on the part of the contractor for 100 
percent of the contract price. A ``performance bond'' is one executed in 
connection with a contract to secure fulfillment of all the contractor's 
obligations under such contract.

[[Page 400]]

    (iii) A payment bond on the part of the contractor for 100 percent 
of the contract price. A ``payment bond'' is one executed in connection 
with a contract to assure payment as required by statute of all persons 
supplying labor and material in the execution of the work provided for 
in the contract.
    (iv) Where bonds are required in the situations described herein, 
the bonds shall be obtained from companies holding certificates of 
authority as acceptable sureties pursuant to 31 CFR part 223, ``Surety 
Companies Doing Business with the United States.''
    (4) All negotiated contracts (except those for less than the small 
purchase threshold) awarded by recipients shall include a provision to 
the effect that the recipient, HUD, the Comptroller General of the 
United States, or any of their duly authorized representatives, shall 
have access to any books, documents, papers and records of the 
contractor which are directly pertinent to a specific program for the 
purpose of making audits, examinations, excerpts and transcriptions.
    (5) All contracts, including small purchases, awarded by recipients 
and their contractors shall contain the procurement provisions of 
Appendix A to this rule, as applicable.


<R05>
Sec. 84.85  Reports and records.

    (a) Purpose of reports and records. Paragraphs (b) and (c) of this 
section set forth the procedures for monitoring and reporting on the 
recipient's financial and program performance and the necessary standard 
reporting forms. They also set forth record retention requirements.
    (b) Monitoring and reporting program performance. (1) Recipients are 
responsible for managing and monitoring each project, program, subaward, 
function or activity supported by the award. Recipients shall monitor 
subawards to ensure subrecipients have met the audit requirements as 
delineated in Sec. 84.82(e).
    (2) The Federal awarding agency shall prescribe the frequency with 
which the performance reports shall be submitted. Except as provided in 
paragraph (b)(6) of this section, performance reports shall not be 
required more frequently than quarterly or less frequently than 
annually. Annual reports shall be due 90 calendar days after the grant 
year; quarterly or semi-annual reports shall be due 30 days after the 
reporting period. The Federal awarding agency may require annual reports 
before the anniversary dates of multiple year awards in lieu of these 
requirements. The final performance reports are due 90 calendar days 
after the expiration or termination of the award.
    (3) If inappropriate, a final technical or performance report shall 
not be required after completion of the project.
    (4) When required, performance reports shall generally contain, for 
each award, brief information on each of the following:
    (i) A comparison of actual accomplishments with the goals and 
objectives established for the period, the findings of the investigator, 
or both. Whenever appropriate and the output of programs or projects can 
be readily quantified, such quantitative data should be related to cost 
data for computation of unit costs.
    (ii) Reasons why established goals were not met, if appropriate.
    (5) Recipients shall not be required to submit more than the 
original and two copies of performance reports.
    (6) Recipients shall immediately notify HUD of developments that 
have a significant impact on the award-supported activities. Also, 
notification shall be given in the case of problems, delays, or adverse 
conditions which materially impair the ability to meet the objectives of 
the award. This notification shall include a statement of the action 
taken or contemplated, and any assistance needed to resolve the 
situation.
    (7) HUD may make site visits, as needed.
    (8) HUD shall comply with clearance requirements of 5 CFR part 1320 
when requesting performance data from recipients.
    (c) Retention and access requirements for records. (1) This 
paragraph (c) sets forth requirements for record retention and access to 
records for awards to recipients. Federal awarding agencies shall not 
impose any other record retention or access requirements upon 
recipients.

[[Page 401]]

    (2) Financial records, supporting documents, statistical records, 
and all other records pertinent to an award shall be retained for a 
period of three years from the date of submission of the final 
expenditure report or, for awards that are renewed quarterly or 
annually, from the date of the submission of the quarterly or annual 
financial report, as authorized by HUD. The only exceptions are the 
following.
    (i) If any litigation, claim, or audit is started before the 
expiration of the 3-year period, the records shall be retained until all 
litigation, claims or audit findings involving the records have been 
resolved and final action taken.
    (ii) Records for real property and equipment acquired with Federal 
funds shall be retained for 3 years after final disposition.
    (iii) When records are transferred to or maintained by the Federal 
awarding agency, the 3-year retention requirement is not applicable to 
the recipient.
    (3) Copies of original records may be substituted for the original 
records if authorized by HUD.
    (4) HUD shall request transfer of certain records to its custody 
from recipients when it determines that the records possess long term 
retention value. However, in order to avoid duplicate recordkeeping, HUD 
may make arrangements for recipients to retain any records that are 
continuously needed for joint use.
    (5) HUD, the Inspector General, Comptroller General of the United 
States, or any of their duly authorized representatives, have the right 
of timely and unrestricted access to any books, documents, papers, or 
other records of recipients that are pertinent to the awards, in order 
to make audits, examinations, excerpts, transcripts and copies of such 
documents. This right also includes timely and reasonable access to a 
recipient's personnel for the purpose of interview and discussion 
related to such documents. The rights of access in this paragraph (c)(5) 
are not limited to the required retention period, but shall last as long 
as records are retained.
    (6) Unless required by statute, HUD shall not place restrictions on 
recipients that limit public access to the records of recipients that 
are pertinent to an award, except when HUD can demonstrate that such 
records shall be kept confidential and would have been exempted from 
disclosure pursuant to the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552) if 
the records had belonged to HUD.


<R05>
Sec. 84.86  Termination and enforcement.

    (a) Termination. (1) Awards may be terminated in whole or in part 
only if paragraphs (a)(1)(i), (a)(1)(ii), or (a)(1)(iii) of this section 
apply.
    (i) By HUD, if a recipient materially fails to comply with the terms 
and conditions of an award.
    (ii) By HUD with the consent of the recipient, in which case the two 
parties shall agree upon the termination conditions, including the 
effective date and, in the case of partial termination, the portion to 
be terminated.
    (iii) By the recipient upon sending to HUD written notification 
setting forth the reasons for such termination, the effective date, and, 
in the case of partial termination, the portion to be terminated. 
However, if HUD determines in the case of partial termination that the 
reduced or modified portion of the grant will not accomplish the 
purposes for which the grant was made, it may terminate the grant in its 
entirety under either paragraphs (a)(1)(i) or (a)(1)(ii) of this 
section.
    (2) If costs are allowed under an award, the responsibilities of the 
recipient referred to in Sec. 84.87(a)(1), including those for property 
management as applicable, shall be considered in the termination of the 
award, and provision shall be made for continuing responsibilities of 
the recipient after termination, as appropriate.
    (3) If costs are allowed, the cost principles in Sec. 84.27 apply, 
even though the award was made on a lump-sum basis. Alternatively, a 
termination settlement may be reached by prorating the grant amount 
against the percentage of completion or by some other method as 
determined by the Grant Officer, as long as the method used results in 
an equitable settlement to both parties.
    (b) Enforcement. (1) Remedies for noncompliance. If a recipient 
materially fails to comply with the terms and conditions of an award, 
whether stated in

[[Page 402]]

a Federal statute, regulation, assurance, application, or notice of 
award, HUD may, in addition to imposing any of the special conditions 
outlined in Sec. 84.14, take one or more of the following actions, as 
appropriate in the circumstances.
    (i) Temporarily withhold cash payments pending correction of the 
deficiency by the recipient or more severe enforcement action by HUD.
    (ii) Wholly or partly suspend or terminate the current award.
    (iii) Withhold further awards for the project or program.
    (iv) Take other remedies that may be legally available.
    (2) Hearings and appeals. In taking an enforcement action, HUD shall 
provide the recipient an opportunity for hearing, appeal, or other 
administrative proceeding to which the recipient is entitled under any 
statute or regulation applicable to the action involved.
    (3) Effects of suspension and termination. Costs of a recipient 
resulting from obligations incurred by the recipient during a suspension 
or after termination of an award are not allowable unless HUD expressly 
authorizes them in the notice of suspension or termination or 
subsequently. Other recipient costs during suspension or after 
termination which are necessary and not reasonably avoidable are 
allowable if paragraphs (b)(3)(i) and (b)(3)(ii) of this section apply.
    (i) The costs result from obligations which were properly incurred 
by the recipient before the effective date of suspension or termination, 
are not in anticipation of it, and in the case of a termination, are 
noncancellable.
    (ii) The costs would be allowable if the award were not suspended or 
expired normally at the end of the funding period in which the 
termination takes effect.
    (4) Relationship to debarment and suspension. The enforcement 
remedies identified in this section, including suspension and 
termination, do not preclude a recipient from being subject to debarment 
and suspension under E.O.s 12549 and 12689 and HUD's implementing 
regulations at 24 CFR part 24 (see Sec. 84.13).


<R05>
Sec. 84.87  Closeout procedures, subsequent adjustments and continuing responsibilities.

    (a) Closeout procedures. (1) Recipients shall submit, within 90 
calendar days after the date of completion of the award, all financial, 
performance, and other reports as required by the terms and conditions 
of the award. HUD may approve extensions when requested by the 
recipient.
    (2) The recipient shall account for any real and personal property 
acquired with Federal funds or received from the Federal Government in 
accordance with Secs. 84.83(b) through (g).
    (b) Subsequent adjustments and continuing responsibilities. (1) The 
closeout of an award does not affect any of the following:
    (i) Audit requirements in Sec. 84.26.
    (ii) Property management requirements in Secs. 84.83(b) through (g).
    (iii) Records retention as required in Sec. 84.53.
    (2) After closeout of an award, a relationship created under an 
award may be modified or ended in whole or in part with the consent of 
HUD and the recipient, provided the responsibilities of the recipient 
are considered and provisions made for continuing responsibilities of 
the recipient, as appropriate.

               Appendix A to Part 84--Contract Provisions

    All contracts, awarded by a recipient including small purchases, 
shall contain the following provisions as applicable:
    1. Equal Employment Opportunity--All contracts shall contain a 
provision requiring compliance with E.O. 11246, ``Equal Employment 
Opportunity,'' as amended by E.O. 11375, ``Amending Executive Order 
11246 Relating to Equal Employment Opportunity,'' and as supplemented by 
regulations at 41 CFR part 60, ``Office of Federal Contract Compliance 
Programs, Equal Employment Opportunity, Department of Labor.''
    2. Copeland ``Anti-Kickback'' Act (18 U.S.C. 874 and 40 U.S.C. 
276c)--All contracts and subgrants in excess of $2000 for construction 
or repair awarded by recipients and subrecipients shall include a 
provision for compliance with the Copeland ``Anti-Kickback'' Act (18 
U.S.C. 874), as supplemented by Department of Labor regulations (29 CFR 
part 3, ``Contractors and Subcontractors on Public Building or Public 
Work Financed in Whole or in Part by Loans or Grants from the United

[[Page 403]]

States''). The Act provides that each contractor or subrecipient shall 
be prohibited from inducing, by any means, any person employed in the 
construction, completion, or repair of public work, to give up any part 
of the compensation to which he is otherwise entitled. The recipient 
shall report all suspected or reported violations to HUD.
    3. Davis-Bacon Act, as amended (40 U.S.C. 276a to a-7)--When 
required by Federal program legislation, all construction contracts 
awarded by the recipients and subrecipients of more than $2000 shall 
include a provision for compliance with the Davis-Bacon Act (40 U.S.C. 
276a to a-7) and as supplemented by Department of Labor regulations (29 
CFR part 5, ``Labor Standards Provisions Applicable to Contracts 
Governing Federally Financed and Assisted Construction''). Under this 
Act, contractors shall be required to pay wages to laborers and 
mechanics at a rate not less than the minimum wages specified in a wage 
determination made by the Secretary of Labor. In addition, contractors 
shall be required to pay wages not less than once a week. The recipient 
shall place a copy of the current prevailing wage determination issued 
by the Department of Labor in each solicitation and the award of a 
contract shall be conditioned upon the acceptance of the wage 
determination. The recipient shall report all suspected or reported 
violations to HUD.
    4. Contract Work Hours and Safety Standards Act (40 U.S.C. 327 
through 333)--Where applicable, all contracts awarded by recipients in 
excess of $2000 for construction contracts and in excess of $2500 for 
other contracts that involve the employment of mechanics or laborers 
shall include a provision for compliance with Sections 102 and 107 of 
the Contract Work Hours and Safety Standards Act (40 U.S.C. 327-333), as 
supplemented by Department of Labor regulations (29 CFR part 5). Under 
Section 102 of the Act, each contractor shall be required to compute the 
wages of every mechanic and laborer on the basis of a standard workweek 
of 40 hours. Work in excess of the standard workweek is permissible 
provided that the worker is compensated at a rate of not less than 1\1/
2\ times the basic rate of pay for all hours worked in excess of 40 
hours in the workweek. Section 107 of the Act is applicable to 
construction work and provides that no laborer or mechanic shall be 
required to work in surroundings or under working conditions which are 
unsanitary, hazardous or dangerous. These requirements do not apply to 
the purchases of supplies or materials or articles ordinarily available 
on the open market, or contracts for transportation or transmission of 
intelligence.
    5. Rights to Inventions Made Under a Contract or Agreement-- 
Contracts or agreements for the performance of experimental, 
developmental, or research work shall provide for the rights of the 
Federal Government and the recipient in any resulting invention in 
accordance with 37 CFR part 401, ``Rights to Inventions Made by 
Nonprofit Organizations and Small Business Firms Under Government 
Grants, Contracts and Cooperative Agreements,'' and any implementing 
regulations issued by HUD.
    6. Clean Air Act (42 U.S.C. 7401 et seq.) and the Federal Water 
Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq.), as amended--Contracts 
and subgrants of amounts in excess of $100,000 shall contain a provision 
that requires the recipient to agree to comply with all applicable 
standards, orders or regulations issued pursuant to the Clean Air Act 
(42 U.S.C. 7401 et seq.) and the Federal Water Pollution Control Act as 
amended (33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq.). Violations shall be reported to HUD 
and the Regional Office of the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).
    7. Byrd Anti-Lobbying Amendment (31 U.S.C. 1352)-- Contractors who 
apply or bid for an award of $100,000 or more shall file the required 
certification. Each tier certifies to the tier above that it will not 
and has not used Federal appropriated funds to pay any person or 
organization for influencing or attempting to influence an officer or 
employee of any agency, a member of Congress, officer or employee of 
Congress, or an employee of a member of Congress in connection with 
obtaining any Federal contract, grant or any other award covered by 31 
U.S.C. 1352. Each tier shall also disclose any lobbying with non-Federal 
funds that takes place in connection with obtaining any Federal award. 
Such disclosures are forwarded from tier to tier up to the recipient.
    8. Debarment and Suspension (E.O.s 12549 and 12689)--No contract 
shall be made to parties listed on the General Services Administration's 
List of Parties Excluded from Federal Procurement or Nonprocurement 
Programs in accordance with E.O.s 12549 and 12689, ``Debarment and 
Suspension,'' as set forth at 24 CFR part 24. This list contains the 
names of parties debarred, suspended, or otherwise excluded by agencies, 
and contractors declared ineligible under statutory or regulatory 
authority other than E.O. 12549. Contractors with awards that exceed the 
small purchase threshold shall provide the required certification 
regarding its exclusion status and that of its principal employees.
    9. Drug-Free Workplace Requirements--The Drug-Free Workplace Act of 
1988 (42 U.S.C. 701) requires grantees (including individuals) of 
federal agencies, as a prior condition of being awarded a grant, to 
certify that they will provide drug-free workplaces. Each potential 
recipient must certify that it will comply with drug-free workplace 
requirements in accordance with the Act and with HUD's rules at 24 CFR 
part 24, subpart F.

[[Page 404]]


<R03>
PART 85--ADMINISTRATIVE REQUIREMENTS FOR GRANTS AND COOPERATIVE AGREEMENTS TO STATE, LOCAL AND FEDERALLY RECOGNIZED INDIAN TRIBAL GOVERNMENTS--Table of Contents

<R05>


                           Subpart A--General

Sec.
85.1  Purpose and scope of this part.
85.2  Scope of subpart.
85.3  Definitions.
85.4  Applicability.
85.5  Effect on other issuances.
85.6  Additions and exceptions.

                    Subpart B--Pre-Award Requirements

85.10  Forms for applying for grants.
85.11  State plans.
85.12  Special grant or subgrant conditions for ``high-risk'' grantees.

                   Subpart C--Post-Award Requirements

                        Financial Administration

85.20  Standards for financial management systems.
85.21  Payment.
85.22  Allowable costs.
85.23  Period of availability of funds.
85.24  Matching or cost sharing.
85.25  Program income.
85.26  Non-Federal audit.

                    Changes, Property, and Subawards

85.30  Changes.
85.31  Real property.
85.32  Equipment.
85.33  Supplies.
85.34  Copyrights.
85.35  Subawards to debarred and suspended parties.
85.36  Procurement.
85.37  Subgrants.

              Reports, Records, Retention, and Enforcement

85.40  Monitoring and reporting program performance.
85.41  Financial reporting.
85.42  Retention and access requirements for records.
85.43  Enforcement.
85.44  Termination for convenience.

                 Subpart D--After-the-Grant Requirements

85.50  Closeout.
85.51  Later disallowances and adjustments.
85.52  Collection of amounts due.

                    Subpart E--Entitlement [Reserved]

    Authority: 42 U.S.C. 3535(d).

    Source: 53 FR 8068, 8087, Mar. 11, 1988, unless otherwise noted.


<R04>
                           Subpart A--General


<R05>
Sec. 85.1  Purpose and scope of this part.

    This part establishes uniform administrative rules for Federal 
grants and cooperative agreements and subawards to State, local and 
Indian tribal governments.


<R05>
Sec. 85.2  Scope of subpart.

    This subpart contains general rules pertaining to this part and 
procedures for control of exceptions from this part.


<R05>
Sec. 85.3  Definitions.

    As used in this part:
    Accrued expenditures mean the charges incurred by the grantee during 
a given period requiring the provision of funds for: (1) Goods and other 
tangible property received; (2) services performed by employees, 
contractors, subgrantees, subcontractors, and other payees; and (3) 
other amounts becoming owed under programs for which no current services 
or performance is required, such as annuities, insurance claims, and 
other benefit payments.
    Accrued income means the sum of: (1) Earnings during a given period 
from services performed by the grantee and goods and other tangible 
property delivered to purchasers, and (2) amounts becoming owed to the 
grantee for which no current services or performance is required by the 
grantee.
    Acquisition cost of an item of purchased equipment means the net 
invoice unit price of the property including the cost of modifications, 
attachments, accessories, or auxiliary apparatus necessary to make the 
property usable for the purpose for which it was acquired. Other charges 
such as the cost of installation, transportation, taxes, duty or 
protective in-transit insurance, shall be included or excluded from the 
unit acquisition cost in accordance with the grantee's regular 
accounting practices.

[[Page 405]]

    Administrative requirements mean those matters common to grants in 
general, such as financial management, kinds and frequency of reports, 
and retention of records. These are distinguished from programmatic 
requirements, which concern matters that can be treated only on a 
program-by-program or grant-by-grant basis, such as kinds of activities 
that can be supported by grants under a particular program.
    Awarding agency means (1) with respect to a grant, the Federal 
agency, and (2) with respect to a subgrant, the party that awarded the 
subgrant.
    Cash contributions means the grantee's cash outlay, including the 
outlay of money contributed to the grantee or subgrantee by other public 
agencies and institutions, and private organizations and individuals. 
When authorized by Federal legislation, Federal funds received from 
other assistance agreements may be considered as grantee or subgrantee 
cash contributions.
    Contract means (except as used in the definitions for grant and 
subgrant in this section and except where qualified by Federal) a 
procurement contract under a grant or subgrant, and means a procurement 
subcontract under a contract.
    Cost sharing or matching means the value of the third party in-kind 
contributions and the portion of the costs of a federally assisted 
project or program not borne by the Federal Government.
    Cost-type contract means a contract or subcontract under a grant in 
which the contractor or subcontractor is paid on the basis of the costs 
it incurs, with or without a fee.
    Equipment means tangible, nonexpendable, personal property having a 
useful life of more than one year and an acquisition cost of $5,000 or 
more per unit. A grantee may use its own definition of equipment 
provided that such definition would at least include all equipment 
defined above.
    Expenditure report means: (1) For nonconstruction grants, the SF-269 
``Financial Status Report'' (or other equivalent report); (2) for 
construction grants, the SF-271 ``Outlay Report and Request for 
Reimbursement'' (or other equivalent report).
    Federally recognized Indian tribal government means the governing 
body or a governmental agency of any Indian tribe, band, nation, or 
other organized group or community (including any Native village as 
defined in section 3 of the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act, 85 Stat 
688) certified by the Secretary of the Interior as eligible for the 
special programs and services provided by him through the Bureau of 
Indian Affairs.
    Government means a State or local government or a federally 
recognized Indian tribal government.
    Grant means an award of financial assistance, including cooperative 
agreements, in the form of money, or property in lieu of money, by the 
Federal Government to an eligible grantee. The term does not include 
technical assistance which provides services instead of money, or other 
assistance in the form of revenue sharing, loans, loan guarantees, 
interest subsidies, insurance, or direct appropriations. Also, the term 
does not include assistance, such as a fellowship or other lump sum 
award, which the grantee is not required to account for.
    Grantee means the government to which a grant is awarded and which 
is accountable for the use of the funds provided. The grantee is the 
entire legal entity even if only a particular component of the entity is 
designated in the grant award document.
    Local government means a county, municipality, city, town, township, 
local public authority (including any public and Indian housing agency 
under the United States Housing Act of 1937) school district, special 
district, intrastate district, council of governments (whether or not 
incorporated as a nonprofit corporation under state law), any other 
regional or interstate government entity, or any agency or 
instrumentality of a local government.
    Obligations means the amounts of orders placed, contracts and 
subgrants awarded, goods and services received, and similar transactions 
during a given period that will require payment by the grantee during 
the same or a future period.
    OMB means the United States Office of Management and Budget.

[[Page 406]]

    Outlays (expenditures) mean charges made to the project or program. 
They may be reported on a cash or accrual basis. For reports prepared on 
a cash basis, outlays are the sum of actual cash disbursement for direct 
charges for goods and services, the amount of indirect expense incurred, 
the value of in-kind contributions applied, and the amount of cash 
advances and payments made to contractors and subgrantees. For reports 
prepared on an accrued expenditure basis, outlays are the sum of actual 
cash disbursements, the amount of indirect expense incurred, the value 
of inkind contributions applied, and the new increase (or decrease) in 
the amounts owed by the grantee for goods and other property received, 
for services performed by employees, contractors, subgrantees, 
subcontractors, and other payees, and other amounts becoming owed under 
programs for which no current services or performance are required, such 
as annuities, insurance claims, and other benefit payments.
    Percentage of completion method refers to a system under which 
payments are made for construction work according to the percentage of 
completion of the work, rather than to the grantee's cost incurred.
    Prior approval means documentation evidencing consent prior to 
incurring specific cost.
    Real property means land, including land improvements, structures 
and appurtenances thereto, excluding movable machinery and equipment.
    Share, when referring to the awarding agency's portion of real 
property, equipment or supplies, means the same percentage as the 
awarding agency's portion of the acquiring party's total costs under the 
grant to which the acquisition costs under the grant to which the 
acquisition cost of the property was charged. Only costs are to be 
counted--not the value of third-party in-kind contributions.
    State means any of the several States of the United States, the 
District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, any territory or 
possession of the United States, or any agency or instrumentality of a 
State exclusive of local governments. The term does not include any 
public and Indian housing agency under United States Housing Act of 
1937.
    Subgrant means an award of financial assistance in the form of 
money, or property in lieu of money, made under a grant by a grantee to 
an eligible subgrantee. The term includes financial assistance when 
provided by contractual legal agreement, but does not include 
procurement purchases, nor does it include any form of assistance which 
is excluded from the definition of grant in this part.
    Subgrantee means the government or other legal entity to which a 
subgrant is awarded and which is accountable to the grantee for the use 
of the funds provided.
    Supplies means all tangible personal property other than equipment 
as defined in this part.
    Suspension means depending on the context, either (1) temporary 
withdrawal of the authority to obligate grant funds pending corrective 
action by the grantee or subgrantee or a decision to terminate the 
grant, or (2) an action taken by a suspending official in accordance 
with agency regulations implementing E.O. 12549 to immediately exclude a 
person from participating in grant transactions for a period, pending 
completion of an investigation and such legal or debarment proceedings 
as may ensue.
    Termination means permanent withdrawal of the authority to obligate 
previously-awarded grant funds before that authority would otherwise 
expire. It also means the voluntary relinquishment of that authority by 
the grantee or subgrantee. Termination does not include: (1) Withdrawal 
of funds awarded on the basis of the grantee's underestimate of the 
unobligated balance in a prior period; (2) Withdrawal of the unobligated 
balance as of the expiration of a grant; (3) Refusal to extend a grant 
or award additional funds, to make a competing or noncompeting 
continuation, renewal, extension, or supplemental award; or (4) voiding 
of a grant upon determination that the award was obtained fraudulently, 
or was otherwise illegal or invalid from inception.
    Terms of a grant or subgrant mean all requirements of the grant or 
subgrant, whether in statute, regulations, or the award document.

[[Page 407]]

    Third party in-kind contributions mean property or services which 
benefit a federally assisted project or program and which are 
contributed by non-Federal third parties without charge to the grantee, 
or a cost-type contractor under the grant agreement.
    Unliquidated obligations for reports prepared on a cash basis mean 
the amount of obligations incurred by the grantee that has not been 
paid. For reports prepared on an accrued expenditure basis, they 
represent the amount of obligations incurred by the grantee for which an 
outlay has not been recorded.
    Unobligated balance means the portion of the funds authorized by the 
Federal agency that has not been obligated by the grantee and is 
determined by deducting the cumulative obligations from the cumulative 
funds authorized.


<R05>
Sec. 85.4  Applicability.

    (a) General. Subparts A--D of this part apply to all grants and 
subgrants to governments, except where inconsistent with Federal 
statutes or with regulations authorized in accordance with the exception 
provision of Sec. 85.6, or:
    (1) Grants and subgrants to State and local institutions of higher 
education or State and local hospitals.
    (2) The block grants authorized by the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation 
Act of 1981 (Community Services; Preventive Health and Health Services; 
Alcohol, Drug Abuse, and Mental Health Services; Maternal and Child 
Health Services; Social Services; Low-Income Home Energy Assistance; 
States' Program of Community Development Block Grants for Small Cities; 
and Elementary and Secondary Education other than programs administered 
by the Secretary of Education under title V, subtitle D, chapter 2, 
section 583--the Secretary's discretionary grant program) and titles I-
III of the Job Training Partnership Act of 1982 and under the Public 
Health Services Act (section 1921), Alcohol and Drug Abuse Treatment and 
Rehabilitation Block Grant and part C of title V, Mental Health Service 
for the Homeless Block Grant).
    (3) Entitlement grants to carry out the following programs of the 
Social Security Act:
    (i) Aid to Needy Families with Dependent Children (title IV-A of the 
Act, not including the Work Incentive Program (WIN) authorized by 
section 402(a)19(G); HHS grants for WIN are subject to this part);
    (ii) Child Support Enforcement and Establishment of Paternity (title 
IV-D of the Act);
    (iii) Foster Care and Adoption Assistance (title IV-E of the Act);
    (iv) Aid to the Aged, Blind, and Disabled (titles I, X, XIV, and 
XVI-AABD of the Act); and
    (v) Medical Assistance (Medicaid) (title XIX of the Act) not 
including the State Medicaid Fraud Control program authorized by section 
1903(a)(6)(B).
    (4) Entitlement grants under the following programs of The National 
School Lunch Act:
    (i) School Lunch (section 4 of the Act),
    (ii) Commodity Assistance (section 6 of the Act),
    (iii) Special Meal Assistance (section 11 of the Act),
    (iv) Summer Food Service for Children (section 13 of the Act), and
    (v) Child Care Food Program (section 17 of the Act).
    (5) Entitlement grants under the following programs of The Child 
Nutrition Act of 1966:
    (i) Special Milk (section 3 of the Act), and
    (ii) School Breakfast (section 4 of the Act).
    (6) Entitlement grants for State Administrative expenses under The 
Food Stamp Act of 1977 (section 16 of the Act).
    (7) A grant for an experimental, pilot, or demonstration project 
that is also supported by a grant listed in paragraph (a)(3) of this 
section;
    (8) Grant funds awarded under subsection 412(e) of the Immigration 
and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1522(e)) and subsection 501(a) of the 
Refugee Education Assistance Act of 1980 (Pub. L.

[[Page 408]]

96-422, 94 Stat. 1809), for cash assistance, medical assistance, and 
supplemental security income benefits to refugees and entrants and the 
administrative costs of providing the assistance and benefits;
    (9) Grants to local education agencies under 20 U.S.C. 236 through 
241-1(a), and 242 through 244 (portions of the Impact Aid program), 
except for 20 U.S.C. 238(d)(2)(c) and 240(f) (Entitlement Increase for 
Handicapped Children); and
    (10) Payments under the Veterans Administration's State Home Per 
Diem Program (38 U.S.C. 641(a)).
    (b) Entitlement programs. Entitlement programs enumerated above in 
Sec. 85.4(a) (3) through (8) are subject to subpart E.


<R05>
Sec. 85.5  Effect on other issuances.

    All other grants administration provisions of codified program 
regulations, program manuals, handbooks and other nonregulatory 
materials which are inconsistent with this part are superseded, except 
to the extent they are required by statute, or authorized in accordance 
with the exception provision in Sec. 85.6.


<R05>
Sec. 85.6  Additions and exceptions.

    (a) For classes of grants and grantees subject to this part, Federal 
agencies may not impose additional administrative requirements except in 
codified regulations published in the Federal Register.
    (b) Exceptions for classes of grants or grantees may be authorized 
only by OMB.
    (c) Exceptions on a case-by-case basis and for subgrantees may be 
authorized by the affected Federal agencies.


<R04>
                    Subpart B--Pre-Award Requirements


<R05>
Sec. 85.10  Forms for applying for grants.

    (a) Scope. (1) This section prescribes forms and instructions to be 
used by governmental organizations (except hospitals and institutions of 
higher education operated by a government) in applying for grants. This 
section is not applicable, however, to formula grant programs which do 
not require applicants to apply for funds on a project basis.
    (2) This section applies only to applications to Federal agencies 
for grants, and is not required to be applied by grantees in dealing 
with applicants for subgrants. However, grantees are encouraged to avoid 
more detailed or burdensome application requirements for subgrants.
    (b) Authorized forms and instructions for governmental 
organizations. (1) In applying for grants, applicants shall only use 
standard application forms or those prescribed by the granting agency 
with the approval of OMB under the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1980.
    (2) Applicants are not required to submit more than the original and 
two copies of preapplications or applications.
    (3) Applicants must follow all applicable instructions that bear OMB 
clearance numbers. Federal agencies may specify and describe the 
programs, functions, or activities that will be used to plan, budget, 
and evaluate the work under a grant. Other supplementary instructions 
may be issued only with the approval of OMB to the extent required under 
the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1980. For any standard form, except the 
SF-424 facesheet, Federal agencies may shade out or instruct the 
applicant to disregard any line item that is not needed.
    (4) When a grantee applies for additional funding (such as a 
continuation or supplemental award) or amends a previously submitted 
application, only the affected pages need be submitted. Previously 
submitted pages with information that is still current need not be 
resubmitted.


<R05>
Sec. 85.11  State plans.

    (a) Scope. The statutes for some programs require States to submit 
plans before receiving grants. Under regulations implementing Executive 
Order 12372, ``Intergovernmental Review of Federal Programs,'' States 
are allowed to simplify, consolidate and substitute plans. This section 
contains additional provisions for plans that are subject to regulations 
implementing the Executive order.
    (b) Requirements. A State need meet only Federal administrative or 
programmatic requirements for a plan

[[Page 409]]

that are in statutes or codified regulations.
    (c) Assurances. In each plan the State will include an assurance 
that the State shall comply with all applicable Federal statutes and 
regulations in effect with respect to the periods for which it receives 
grant funding. For this assurance and other assurances required in the 
plan, the State may:
    (1) Cite by number the statutory or regulatory provisions requiring 
the assurances and affirm that it gives the assurances required by those 
provisions,
    (2) Repeat the assurance language in the statutes or regulations, or
    (3) Develop its own language to the extent permitted by law.
    (d) Amendments. A State will amend a plan whenever necessary to 
reflect:
    (1) New or revised Federal statutes or regulations or;
    (2) A material change in any State law, organization, policy, or 
State agency operation. The State will obtain approval for the amendment 
and its effective date but need submit for approval only the amended 
portions of the plan.


<R05>
Sec. 85.12  Special grant or subgrant conditions for ``high-risk'' grantees.

    (a) A grantee or subgrantee may be considered high risk if an 
awarding agency determines that a grantee or subgrantee:
    (1) Has a history of unsatisfactory performance, or
    (2) Is not financially stable, or
    (3) Has a management system which does not meet the management 
standards set forth in this part, or
    (4) Has not conformed to terms and conditions of previous awards, or
    (5) Is otherwise not responsible; and if the awarding agency 
determines that an award will be made, special conditions and/or 
restrictions shall correspond to the high risk condition and shall be 
included in the award.
    (b) Special conditions or restrictions may include:
    (1) Payment on a reimbursement basis;
    (2) Withholding authority to proceed to the next phase until receipt 
of evidence of acceptable performance within a given funding period;
    (3) Requiring additional, more detailed financial reports;
    (4) Additional project monitoring;
    (5) Requiring the grantee or subgrantee to obtain technical or 
management assistance; or
    (6) Establishing additional prior approvals.
    (c) If an awarding agency decides to impose such conditions, the 
awarding official will notify the grantee or subgrantee as early as 
possible, in writing, of:
    (1) The nature of the special conditions/restrictions;
    (2) The reason(s) for imposing them;
    (3) The corrective actions which must be taken before they will be 
removed and the time allowed for completing the corrective actions and
    (4) The method of requesting reconsideration of the conditions/
restrictions imposed.


<R04>
                   Subpart C--Post-Award Requirements

                        Financial Administration


<R05>
Sec. 85.20  Standards for financial management systems.

    (a) A State must expand and account for grant funds in accordance 
with State laws and procedures for expending and accounting for its own 
funds. Fiscal control and accounting procedures of the State, as well as 
its subgrantees and cost-type contractors, must be sufficient to--
    (1) Permit preparation of reports required by this part and the 
statutes authorizing the grant, and
    (2) Permit the tracing of funds to a level of expenditures adequate 
to establish that such funds have not been used in violation of the 
restrictions and prohibitions of applicable statutes.
    (b) The financial management systems of other grantees and 
subgrantees must meet the following standards:
    (1) Financial reporting. Accurate, current, and complete disclosure 
of the financial results of financially assisted activities must be made 
in accordance with the financial reporting requirements of the grant or 
subgrant.
    (2) Accounting records. Grantees and subgrantees must maintain 
records which adequately identify the source

[[Page 410]]

and application of funds provided for financially-assisted activities. 
These records must contain information pertaining to grant or subgrant 
awards and authorizations, obligations, unobligated balances, assets, 
liabilities, outlays or expenditures, and income.
    (3) Internal control. Effective control and accountability must be 
maintained for all grant and subgrant cash, real and personal property, 
and other assets. Grantees and subgrantees must adequately safeguard all 
such property and must assure that it is used solely for authorized 
purposes.
    (4) Budget control. Actual expenditures or outlays must be compared 
with budgeted amounts for each grant or subgrant. Financial information 
must be related to performance or productivity data, including the 
development of unit cost information whenever appropriate or 
specifically required in the grant or subgrant agreement. If unit cost 
data are required, estimates based on available documentation will be 
accepted whenever possible.
    (5) Allowable cost. Applicable OMB cost principles, agency program 
regulations, and the terms of grant and subgrant agreements will be 
followed in determining the reasonableness, allowability, and 
allocability of costs.
    (6) Source documentation. Accounting records must be supported by 
such source documentation as cancelled checks, paid bills, payrolls, 
time and attendance records, contract and subgrant award documents, etc.
    (7) Cash management. Procedures for minimizing the time elapsing 
between the transfer of funds from the U.S. Treasury and disbursement by 
grantees and subgrantees must be followed whenever advance payment 
procedures are used. Grantees must establish reasonable procedures to 
ensure the receipt of reports on subgrantees' cash balances and cash 
disbursements in sufficient time to enable them to prepare complete and 
accurate cash transactions reports to the awarding agency. When advances 
are made by letter-of-credit or electronic transfer of funds methods, 
the grantee must make drawdowns as close as possible to the time of 
making disbursements. Grantees must monitor cash drawdowns by their 
subgrantees to assure that they conform substantially to the same 
standards of timing and amount as apply to advances to the grantees.
    (c) An awarding agency may review the adequacy of the financial 
management system of any applicant for financial assistance as part of a 
preaward review or at any time subsequent to award.


<R05>
Sec. 85.21  Payment.

    (a) Scope. This section prescribes the basic standard and the 
methods under which a Federal agency will make payments to grantees, and 
grantees will make payments to subgrantees and contractors.
    (b) Basic standard. Methods and procedures for payment shall 
minimize the time elapsing between the transfer of funds and 
disbursement by the grantee or subgrantee, in accordance with Treasury 
regulations at 31 CFR part 205.
    (c) Advances. Grantees and subgrantees shall be paid in advance, 
provided they maintain or demonstrate the willingness and ability to 
maintain procedures to minimize the time elapsing between the transfer 
of the funds and their disbursement by the grantee or subgrantee.
    (d) Reimbursement. Reimbursement shall be the preferred method when 
the requirements in paragraph (c) of this section are not met. Grantees 
and subgrantees may also be paid by reimbursement for any construction 
grant. Except as otherwise specified in regulation, Federal agencies 
shall not use the percentage of completion method to pay construction 
grants. The grantee or subgrantee may use that method to pay its 
construction contractor, and if it does, the awarding agency's payments 
to the grantee or subgrantee will be based on the grantee's or 
subgrantee's actual rate of disbursement.
    (e) Working capital advances. If a grantee cannot meet the criteria 
for advance payments described in paragraph (c) of this section, and the 
Federal agency has determined that reimbursement is not feasible because 
the grantee lacks sufficient working capital, the awarding agency may 
provide cash or a working capital advance

[[Page 411]]

basis. Under this procedure the awarding agency shall advance cash to 
the grantee to cover its estimated disbursement needs for an initial 
period generally geared to the grantee's disbursing cycle. Thereafter, 
the awarding agency shall reimburse the grantee for its actual cash 
disbursements. The working capital advance method of payment shall not 
be used by grantees or subgrantees if the reason for using such method 
is the unwillingness or inability of the grantee to provide timely 
advances to the subgrantee to meet the subgrantee's actual cash 
disbursements.
    (f) Effect of program income, refunds, and audit recoveries on 
payment. (1) Grantees and subgrantees shall disburse repayments to and 
interest earned on a revolving fund before requesting additional cash 
payments for the same activity.
    (2) Except as provided in paragraph (f)(1) of this section, grantees 
and subgrantees shall disburse program income, rebates, refunds, 
contract settlements, audit recoveries and interest earned on such funds 
before requesting additional cash payments.
    (g) Withholding payments. (1) Unless otherwise required by Federal 
statute, awarding agencies shall not withhold payments for proper 
charges incurred by grantees or subgrantees unless--
    (i) The grantee or subgrantee has failed to comply with grant award 
conditions or
    (ii) The grantee or subgrantee is indebted to the United States.
    (2) Cash withheld for failure to comply with grant award condition, 
but without suspension of the grant, shall be released to the grantee 
upon subsequent compliance. When a grant is suspended, payment 
adjustments will be made in accordance with Sec. 85.43(c).
    (3) A Federal agency shall not make payment to grantees for amounts 
that are withheld by grantees or subgrantees from payment to contractors 
to assure satisfactory completion of work. Payments shall be made by the 
Federal agency when the grantees or subgrantees actually disburse the 
withheld funds to the contractors or to escrow accounts established to 
assure satisfactory completion of work.
    (h) Cash depositories. (1) Consistent with the national goal of 
expanding the opportunities for minority business enterprises, grantees 
and subgrantees are encouraged to use minority banks (a bank which is 
owned at least 50 percent by minority group members). A list of minority 
owned banks can be obtained from the Minority Business Development 
Agency, Department of Commerce, Washington, DC 20230.
    (2) A grantee or subgrantee shall maintain a separate bank account 
only when required by Federal-State agreement.
    (i) Interest earned on advances. Except for interest earned on 
advances of funds exempt under the Intergovernmental Cooperation Act (31 
U.S.C. 6501 et seq.) and the Indian Self-Determination Act (23 U.S.C. 
450), grantees and subgrantees shall promptly, but at least quarterly, 
remit interest earned on advances to the Federal agency. The grantee or 
subgrantee may keep interest amounts up to $100 per year for 
administrative expenses.


<R05>
Sec. 85.22  Allowable costs.

    (a) Limitation on use of funds. Grant funds may be used only for:
    (1) The allowable costs of the grantees, subgrantees and cost-type 
contractors, including allowable costs in the form of payments to fixed-
price contractors; and
    (2) Reasonable fees or profit to cost-type contractors but not any 
fee or profit (or other increment above allowable costs) to the grantee 
or subgrantee.
    (b) Applicable cost principles. For each kind of organization, there 
is a set of Federal principles for determining allowable costs. 
Allowable costs will be determined in accordance with the cost 
principles applicable to the organization incurring the costs. The 
following chart lists the kinds of organizations and the applicable cost 
principles.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
           For the costs of a--                Use the principles in--
------------------------------------------------------------------------
State, local or Indian tribal government..  OMB Circular A-87.
Private nonprofit organization other than   OMB Circular A-122.
 an (1) institution of higher education,
 (2) hospital, or (3) organization named
 in OMB Circular A-122 as not subject to
 that circular.

[[Page 412]]

 
Educational institutions..................  OMB Circular A-21.
For-profit organization other than a        48 CFR part 31. Contract
 hospital and an organization named in OBM   Cost Principles and
 Circular A-122 as not subject to that       Procedures, or uniform cost
 circular.                                   accounting standards that
                                             comply with cost principles
                                             acceptable to the Federal
                                             agency.
------------------------------------------------------------------------


<R05>
Sec. 85.23  Period of availability of funds.

    (a) General. Where a funding period is specified, a grantee may 
charge to the award only costs resulting from obligations of the funding 
period unless carryover of unobligated balances is permitted, in which 
case the carryover balances may be charged for costs resulting from 
obligations of the subsequent funding period.
    (b) Liquidation of obligations. A grantee must liquidate all 
obligations incurred under the award not later than 90 days after the 
end of the funding period (or as specified in a program regulation) to 
coincide with the submission of the annual Financial Status Report (SF-
269). The Federal agency may extend this deadline at the request of the 
grantee.


<R05>
Sec. 85.24  Matching or cost sharing.

    (a) Basic rule: Costs and contributions acceptable. With the 
qualifications and exceptions listed in paragraph (b) of this section, a 
matching or cost sharing requirement may be satisfied by either or both 
of the following:
    (1) Allowable costs incurred by the grantee, subgrantee or a cost-
type contractor under the assistance agreement. This includes allowable 
costs borne by non-Federal grants or by others cash donations from non-
Federal third parties.
    (2) The value of third party in-kind contributions applicable to the 
period to which the cost sharing or matching requirements applies.
    (b) Qualifications and exceptions--(1) Costs borne by other Federal 
grant agreements. Except as provided by Federal statute, a cost sharing 
or matching requirement may not be met by costs borne by another Federal 
grant. This prohibition does not apply to income earned by a grantee or 
subgrantee from a contract awarded under another Federal grant.
    (2) General revenue sharing. For the purpose of this section, 
general revenue sharing funds distributed under 31 U.S.C. 6702 are not 
considered Federal grant funds.
    (3) Cost or contributions counted towards other Federal costs-
sharing requirements. Neither costs nor the values of third party in-
kind contributions may count towards satisfying a cost sharing or 
matching requirement of a grant agreement if they have been or will be 
counted towards satisfying a cost sharing or matching requirement of 
another Federal grant agreement, a Federal procurement contract, or any 
other award of Federal funds.
    (4) Costs financed by program income. Costs financed by program 
income, as defined in Sec. 85.25, shall not count towards satisfying a 
cost sharing or matching requirement unless they are expressly permitted 
in the terms of the assistance agreement. (This use of general program 
income is described in Sec. 85.25(g).)
    (5) Services or property financed by income earned by contractors. 
Contractors under a grant may earn income from the activities carried 
out under the contract in addition to the amounts earned from the party 
awarding the contract. No costs of services or property supported by 
this income may count toward satisfying a cost sharing or matching 
requirement unless other provisions of the grant agreement expressly 
permit this kind of income to be used to meet the requirement.
    (6) Records. Costs and third party in-kind contributions counting 
towards satisfying a cost sharing or matching requirement must be 
verifiable from the records of grantees and subgrantee or cost-type 
contractors. These records must show how the value placed on third party 
in-kind contributions was derived. To the extent feasible, volunteer 
services will be supported by the same methods that the organization 
uses to support the allocability of regular personnel costs.
    (7) Special standards for third party in-kind contributions. (i) 
Third party in-kind contributions count towards satisfying a cost 
sharing or matching requirement only where, if the party receiving the 
contributions were to pay

[[Page 413]]

for them, the payments would be allowable costs.
    (ii) Some third party in-kind contributions are goods and services 
that, if the grantee, subgrantee, or contractor receiving the 
contribution had to pay for them, the payments would have been an 
indirect costs. Costs sharing or matching credit for such contributions 
shall be given only if the grantee, subgrantee, or contractor has 
established, along with its regular indirect cost rate, a special rate 
for allocating to individual projects or programs the value of the 
contributions.
    (iii) A third party in-kind contribution to a fixed-price contract 
may count towards satisfying a cost sharing or matching requirement only 
if it results in:
    (A) An increase in the services or property provided under the 
contract (without additional cost to the grantee or subgrantee) or
    (B) A cost savings to the grantee or subgrantee.
    (iv) The values placed on third party in-kind contributions for cost 
sharing or matching purposes will conform to the rules in the succeeding 
sections of this part. If a third party in-kind contribution is a type 
not treated in those sections, the value placed upon it shall be fair 
and reasonable.
    (c) Valuation of donated services--(1) Volunteer services. Unpaid 
services provided to a grantee or subgrantee by individuals will be 
valued at rates consistent with those ordinarily paid for similar work 
in the grantee's or subgrantee's organization. If the grantee or 
subgrantee does not have employees performing similar work, the rates 
will be consistent with those ordinarily paid by other employers for 
similar work in the same labor market. In either case, a reasonable 
amount for fringe benefits may be included in the valuation.
    (2) Employees of other organizations. When an employer other than a 
grantee, subgrantee, or cost-type contractor furnishes free of charge 
the services of an employee in the employee's normal line of work, the 
services will be valued at the employee's regular rate of pay exclusive 
of the employee's fringe benefits and overhead costs. If the services 
are in a different line of work, paragraph (c)(1) of this section 
applies.
    (d) Valuation of third party donated supplies and loaned equipment 
or space. (1) If a third party donates supplies, the contribution will 
be valued at the market value of the supplies at the time of donation.
    (2) If a third party donates the use of equipment or space in a 
building but retains title, the contribution will be valued at the fair 
rental rate of the equipment or space.
    (e) Valuation of third party donated equipment, buildings, and land. 
If a third party donates equipment, buildings, or land, and title passes 
to a grantee or subgrantee, the treatment of the donated property will 
depend upon the purpose of the grant or subgrant, as follows:
    (1) Awards for capital expenditures. If the purpose of the grant or 
subgrant is to assist the grantee or subgrantee in the acquisition of 
property, the market value of that property at the time of donation may 
be counted as cost sharing or matching,
    (2) Other awards. If assisting in the acquisition of property is not 
the purpose of the grant or subgrant, paragraphs (e)(2) (i) and (ii) of 
this section apply:
    (i) If approval is obtained from the awarding agency, the market 
value at the time of donation of the donated equipment or buildings and 
the fair rental rate of the donated land may be counted as cost sharing 
or matching. In the case of a subgrant, the terms of the grant agreement 
may require that the approval be obtained from the Federal agency as 
well as the grantee. In all cases, the approval may be given only if a 
purchase of the equipment or rental of the land would be approved as an 
allowable direct cost. If any part of the donated property was acquired 
with Federal funds, only the non-federal share of the property may be 
counted as cost-sharing or matching.
    (ii) If approval is not obtained under paragraph (e)(2)(i) of this 
section, no amount may be counted for donated land, and only 
depreciation or use allowances may be counted for donated equipment and 
buildings. The depreciation or use allowances for this property are not 
treated as third party in-kind

[[Page 414]]

contributions. Instead, they are treated as costs incurred by the 
grantee or subgrantee. They are computed and allocated (usually as 
indirect costs) in accordance with the cost principles specified in 
Sec. 85.22, in the same way as depreciation or use allowances for 
purchased equipment and buildings. The amount of depreciation or use 
allowances for donated equipment and buildings is based on the 
property's market value at the time it was donated.
    (f) Valuation of grantee or subgrantee donated real property for 
construction/acquisition. If a grantee or subgrantee donates real 
property for a construction or facilities acquisition project, the 
current market value of that property may be counted as cost sharing or 
matching. If any part of the donated property was acquired with Federal 
funds, only the non-federal share of the property may be counted as cost 
sharing or matching.
    (g) Appraisal of real property. In some cases under paragraphs (d), 
(e) and (f) of this section, it will be necessary to establish the 
market value of land or a building or the fair rental rate of land or of 
space in a building. In these cases, the Federal agency may require the 
market value or fair rental value be set by an independent appraiser, 
and that the value or rate be certified by the grantee. This requirement 
will also be imposed by the grantee on subgrantees.


<R05>
Sec. 85.25  Program income.

    (a) General. Grantees are encouraged to earn income to defray 
program costs. Program income includes income from fees for services 
performed, from the use or rental of real or personal property acquired 
with grant funds, from the sale of commodities or items fabricated under 
a grant agreement, and from payments of principal and interest on loans 
made with grant funds. Except as otherwise provided in regulations of 
the Federal agency, program income does not include interest on grant 
funds, rebates, credits, discounts, refunds, etc. and interest earned on 
any of them.
    (b) Definition of program income. Program income means gross income 
received by the grantee or subgrantee directly generated by a grant 
supported activity, or earned only as a result of the grant agreement 
during the grant period. During the grant period is the time between the 
effective date of the award and the ending date of the award reflected 
in the final financial report.
    (c) Cost of generating program income. If authorized by Federal 
regulations or the grant agreement, costs incident to the generation of 
program income may be deducted from gross income to determine program 
income.
    (d) Governmental revenues. Taxes, special assessments, levies, 
fines, and other such revenues raised by a grantee or subgrantee are not 
program income unless the revenues are specifically identified in the 
grant agreement or Federal agency regulations as program income.
    (e) Royalties. Income from royalties and license fees for 
copyrighted material, patents, and inventions developed by a grantee or 
subgrantee is program income only if the revenues are specifically 
identified in the grant agreement or Federal agency regulations as 
program income. (See Sec. 85.34.)
    (f) Property. Proceeds from the sale of real property or equipment 
will be handled in accordance with the requirements of Secs. 85.31 and 
85.32.
    (g) Use of program income. Program income shall be deducted from 
outlays which may be both Federal and non-Federal as described below, 
unless the Federal agency regulations or the grant agreement specify 
another alternative (or a combination of the alternatives). In 
specifying alternatives, the Federal agency may distinguish between 
income earned by the grantee and income earned by subgrantees and 
between the sources, kinds, or amounts of income. When Federal agencies 
authorize the alternatives in paragraphs (g) (2) and (3) of this 
section, program income in excess of any limits stipulated shall also be 
deducted from outlays.
    (1) Deduction. Ordinarily program income shall be deducted from 
total allowable costs to determine the net allowable costs. Program 
income shall be used for current costs unless the Federal agency 
authorizes otherwise. Program income which the grantee did not 
anticipate at the time of the award shall be used to reduce the Federal

[[Page 415]]

agency and grantee contributions rather than to increase the funds 
committed to the project.
    (2) Addition. When authorized, program income may be added to the 
funds committed to the grant agreement by the Federal agency and the 
grantee. The program income shall be used for the purposes and under the 
conditions of the grant agreement.
    (3) Cost sharing or matching. When authorized, program income may be 
used to meet the cost sharing or matching requirement of the grant 
agreement. The amount of the Federal grant award remains the same.
    (h) Income after the award period. There are no Federal requirements 
governing the disposition of program income earned after the end of the 
award period (i.e., until the ending date of the final financial report, 
see paragraph (a) of this section), unless the terms of the agreement or 
the Federal agency regulations provide otherwise.


<R05>
Sec. 85.26  Non-Federal audit.

    (a) Basic rule. Grantees and subgrantees are responsible for 
obtaining audits in accordance with the Single Audit Act Amendments of 
1996 (31 U.S.C. 7501-7507) and revised OMB Circular A-133, ``Audits of 
States, Local Governments, and Non-Profit Organizations.'' The audits 
shall be made by an independent auditor in accordance with generally 
accepted government auditing standards covering financial audits.
    (b) Subgrantees. State or local governments, as those terms are 
defined for purposes of the Single Audit Act Amendments of 1996, that 
provide Federal awards to a subgrantee which expends $300,000 or more 
(or other amount as specified by OMB) in Federal awards in a fiscal 
year, shall:
    (1) Determine whether State or local subgrantees have met the audit 
requirements of the Act and whether subgrantees covered by OMB Circular 
A-110, ``Uniform Administrative Requirements for Grants and Agreements 
with Institutions of Higher Education, Hospitals, and Other Non-Profit 
Organizations,'' have met the audit requirements of the Act. Commercial 
contractors (private for-profit and private and governmental 
organizations) providing goods and services to State and local 
governments are not required to have a single audit performed. State and 
local governments should use their own procedures to ensure that the 
contractor has complied with laws and regulations affecting the 
expenditure of Federal funds;
    (2) Determine whether the subgrantee spent Federal assistance funds 
provided in accordance with applicable laws and regulations. This may be 
accomplished by reviewing an audit of the subgrantee made in accordance 
with the Act, Circular A-133 (as set forth in 24 CFR part 45), or 
through other means (e.g., program reviews) if the subgrantee has not 
had such an audit;
    (3) Ensure that appropriate corrective action is taken within six 
months after receipt of the audit report in instance of noncompliance 
with Federal laws and regulations;
    (4) Consider whether subgrantee audits necessitate adjustment of the 
grantee's own records; and
    (5) Require each subgrantee to permit independent auditors to have 
access to the records and financial statements.
    (c) Auditor selection. In arranging for audit services, Sec. 85.36 
shall be followed.

[53 FR 8068, 8087, Mar. 11, 1988, as amended at 57 FR 33255, July 27, 
1992; 62 FR 61617, Nov. 18, 1997]

                    Changes, Property, and Subawards


<R05>
Sec. 85.30  Changes.

    (a) General. Grantees and subgrantees are permitted to rebudget 
within the approved direct cost budget to meet unanticipated 
requirements and may make limited program changes to the approved 
project. However, unless waived by the awarding agency, certain types of 
post-award changes in budgets and projects shall require the prior 
written approval of the awarding agency.
    (b) Relation to cost principles. The applicable cost principles (see 
Sec. 85.22) contain requirements for prior approval of certain types of 
costs. Except where waived, those requirements apply to all grants and 
subgrants even if paragraphs (c) through (f) of this section do not.

[[Page 416]]

    (c) Budget changes--(1) Nonconstruction projects. Except as stated 
in other regulations or an award document, grantees or subgrantees shall 
obtain the prior approval of the awarding agency whenever any of the 
following changes is anticipated under a nonconstruction award:
    (i) Any revision which would result in the need for additional 
funding.
    (ii) Unless waived by the awarding agency, cumulative transfers 
among direct cost categories, or, if applicable, among separately 
budgeted programs, projects, functions, or activities which exceed or 
are expected to exceed ten percent of the current total approved budget, 
whenever the awarding agency's share exceeds $100,000.
    (iii) Transfer of funds allotted for training allowances (i.e., from 
direct payments to trainees to other expense categories).
    (2) Construction projects. Grantees and subgrantees shall obtain 
prior written approval for any budget revision which would result in the 
need for additional funds.
    (3) Combined construction and nonconstruction projects. When a grant 
or subgrant provides funding for both construction and nonconstruction 
activities, the grantee or subgrantee must obtain prior written approval 
from the awarding agency before making any fund or budget transfer from 
nonconstruction to construction or vice versa.
    (d) Programmatic changes. Grantees or subgrantees must obtain the 
prior approval of the awarding agency whenever any of the following 
actions is anticipated:
    (1) Any revision of the scope or objectives of the project 
(regardless of whether there is an associated budget revision requiring 
prior approval).
    (2) Need to extend the period of availability of funds.
    (3) Changes in key persons in cases where specified in an 
application or a grant award. In research projects, a change in the 
project director or principal investigator shall always require approval 
unless waived by the awarding agency.
    (4) Under nonconstruction projects, contracting out, subgranting (if 
authorized by law) or otherwise obtaining the services of a third party 
to perform activities which are central to the purposes of the award. 
This approval requirement is in addition to the approval requirements of 
Sec. 85.36 but does not apply to the procurement of equipment, supplies, 
and general support services.
    (e) Additional prior approval requirements. The awarding agency may 
not require prior approval for any budget revision which is not 
described in paragraph (c) of this section.
    (f) Requesting prior approval. (1) A request for prior approval of 
any budget revision will be in the same budget formal the grantee used 
in its application and shall be accompanied by a narrative justification 
for the proposed revision.
    (2) A request for a prior approval under the applicable Federal cost 
principles (see Sec. 85.22) may be made by letter.
    (3) A request by a subgrantee for prior approval will be addressed 
in writing to the grantee. The grantee will promptly review such request 
and shall approve or disapprove the request in writing. A grantee will 
not approve any budget or project revision which is inconsistent with 
the purpose or terms and conditions of the Federal grant to the grantee. 
If the revision, requested by the subgrantee would result in a change to 
the grantee's approved project which requires Federal prior approval, 
the grantee will obtain the Federal agency's approval before approving 
the subgrantee's request.


<R05>
Sec. 85.31  Real property.

    (a) Title. Subject to the obligations and conditions set forth in 
this section, title to real property acquired under a grant or subgrant 
will vest upon acquisition in the grantee or subgrantee respectively.
    (b) Use. Except as otherwise provided by Federal statutes, real 
property will be used for the originally authorized purposes as long as 
needed for that purposes, and the grantee or subgrantee shall not 
dispose of or encumber its title or other interests.

[[Page 417]]

    (c) Disposition. When real property is no longer needed for the 
originally authorized purpose, the grantee or subgrantee will request 
disposition instructions from the awarding agency. The instructions will 
provide for one of the following alternatives:
    (1) Retention of title. Retain title after compensating the awarding 
agency. The amount paid to the awarding agency will be computed by 
applying the awarding agency's percentage of participation in the cost 
of the original purchase to the fair market value of the property. 
However, in those situations where a grantee or subgrantee is disposing 
of real property acquired with grant funds and acquiring replacement 
real property under the same program, the net proceeds from the 
disposition may be used as an offset to the cost of the replacement 
property.
    (2) Sale of property. Sell the property and compensate the awarding 
agency. The amount due to the awarding agency will be calculated by 
applying the awarding agency's percentage of participation in the cost 
of the original purchase to the proceeds of the sale after deduction of 
any actual and reasonable selling and fixing-up expenses. If the grant 
is still active, the net proceeds from sale may be offset against the 
original cost of the property. When a grantee or subgrantee is directed 
to sell property, sales procedures shall be followed that provide for 
competition to the extent practicable and result in the highest possible 
return.
    (3) Transfer of title. Transfer title to the awarding agency or to a 
third-party designated/approved by the awarding agency. The grantee or 
subgrantee shall be paid an amount calculated by applying the grantee or 
subgrantee's percentage of participation in the purchase of the real 
property to the current fair market value of the property.


<R05>
Sec. 85.32  Equipment.

    (a) Title. Subject to the obligations and conditions set forth in 
this section, title to equipment acquired under a grant or subgrant will 
vest upon acquisition in the grantee or subgrantee respectively.
    (b) States. A State will use, manage, and dispose of equipment 
acquired under a grant by the State in accordance with State laws and 
procedures. Other grantees and subgrantees will follow paragraphs (c) 
through (e) of this section.
    (c) Use. (1) Equipment shall be used by the grantee or subgrantee in 
the program or project for which it was acquired as long as needed, 
whether or not the project or program continues to be supported by 
Federal funds. When no longer needed for the original program or 
project, the equipment may be used in other activities currently or 
previously supported by a Federal agency.
    (2) The grantee or subgrantee shall also make equipment available 
for use on other projects or programs currently or previously supported 
by the Federal Government, providing such use will not interfere with 
the work on the projects or program for which it was originally 
acquired. First preference for other use shall be given to other 
programs or projects supported by the awarding agency. User fees should 
be considered if appropriate.
    (3) Notwithstanding the encouragement in Sec. 85.25(a) to earn 
program income, the grantee or subgrantee must not use equipment 
acquired with grant funds to provide services for a fee to compete 
unfairly with private companies that provide equivalent services, unless 
specifically permitted or contemplated by Federal statute.
    (4) When acquiring replacement equipment, the grantee or subgrantee 
may use the equipment to be replaced as a trade-in or sell the property 
and use the proceeds to offset the cost of the replacement property, 
subject to the approval of the awarding agency.
    (d) Management requirements. Procedures for managing equipment 
(including replacement equipment), whether acquired in whole or in part 
with grant funds, until disposition takes place will, as a minimum, meet 
the following requirements:
    (1) Property records must be maintained that include a description 
of the property, a serial number or other identification number, the 
source of property, who holds title, the acquisition date, and cost of 
the property, percentage of Federal participation in the cost of the 
property, the location, use

[[Page 418]]

and condition of the property, and any ultimate disposition data 
including the date of disposal and sale price of the property.
    (2) A physical inventory of the property must be taken and the 
results reconciled with the property records at least once every two 
years.
    (3) A control system must be developed to ensure adequate safeguards 
to prevent loss, damage, or theft of the property. Any loss, damage, or 
theft shall be investigated.
    (4) Adequate maintenance procedures must be developed to keep the 
property in good condition.
    (5) If the grantee or subgrantee is authorized or required to sell 
the property, proper sales procedures must be established to ensure the 
highest possible return.
    (e) Disposition. When original or replacement equipment acquired 
under a grant or subgrant is no longer needed for the original project 
or program or for other activities currently or previously supported by 
a Federal agency, disposition of the equipment will be made as follows:
    (1) Items of equipment with a current per-unit fair market value of 
less than $5,000 may be retained, sold or otherwise disposed of with no 
further obligation to the awarding agency.
    (2) Items of equipment with a current per unit fair market value in 
excess of $5,000 may be retained or sold and the awarding agency shall 
have a right to an amount calculated by multiplying the current market 
value or proceeds from sale by the awarding agency's share of the 
equipment.
    (3) In cases where a grantee or subgrantee fails to take appropriate 
disposition actions, the awarding agency may direct the grantee or 
subgrantee to take excess and disposition actions.
    (f) Federal equipment. In the event a grantee or subgrantee is 
provided federally-owned equipment:
    (1) Title will remain vested in the Federal Government.
    (2) Grantees or subgrantees will manage the equipment in accordance 
with Federal agency rules and procedures, and submit an annual inventory 
listing.
    (3) When the equipment is no longer needed, the grantee or 
subgrantee will request disposition instructions from the Federal 
agency.
    (g) Right to transfer title. The Federal awarding agency may reserve 
the right to transfer title to the Federal Government or a third part 
named by the awarding agency when such a third party is otherwise 
eligible under existing statutes. Such transfers shall be subject to the 
following standards:
    (1) The property shall be identified in the grant or otherwise made 
known to the grantee in writing.
    (2) The Federal awarding agency shall issue disposition instruction 
within 120 calendar days after the end of the Federal support of the 
project for which it was acquired. If the Federal awarding agency fails 
to issue disposition instructions within the 120 calendar-day period the 
grantee shall follow Sec. 85.32(e).
    (3) When title to equipment is transferred, the grantee shall be 
paid an amount calculated by applying the percentage of participation in 
the purchase to the current fair market value of the property.


<R05>
Sec. 85.33  Supplies.

    (a) Title. Title to supplies acquired under a grant or subgrant will 
vest, upon acquisition, in the grantee or subgrantee respectively.
    (b) Disposition. If there is a residual inventory of unused supplies 
exceeding $5,000 in total aggregate fair market value upon termination 
or completion of the award, and if the supplies are not needed for any 
other federally sponsored programs or projects, the grantee or 
subgrantee shall compensate the awarding agency for its share.


<R05>
Sec. 85.34  Copyrights.

    The Federal awarding agency reserves a royalty-free, nonexclusive, 
and irrevocable license to reproduce, publish or otherwise use, and to 
authorize others to use, for Federal Government purposes:
    (a) The copyright in any work developed under a grant, subgrant, or 
contract under a grant or subgrant; and
    (b) Any rights of copyright to which a grantee, subgrantee or a 
contractor purchases ownership with grant support.

[[Page 419]]


<R05>
Sec. 85.35  Subawards to debarred and suspended parties.

    Grantees and subgrantees must not make any award or permit any award 
(subgrant or contract) at any tier to any party which is debarred or 
suspended or is otherwise excluded from or ineligible for participation 
in Federal assistance programs under Executive Order 12549, ``Debarment 
and Suspension.''


<R05>
Sec. 85.36  Procurement.

    (a) States. When procuring property and services under a grant, a 
State will follow the same policies and procedures it uses for 
procurements from its non-Federal funds. The State will ensure that 
every purchase order or other contract includes any clauses required by 
Federal statutes and executive orders and their implementing 
regulations. Other grantees and subgrantees will follow paragraphs (b) 
through (i) in this section.
    (b) Procurement standards. (1) Grantees and subgrantees will use 
their own procurement procedures which reflect applicable State and 
local laws and regulations, provided that the procurements conform to 
applicable Federal law and the standards identified in this section.
    (2) Grantees and subgrantees will maintain a contract administration 
system which ensures that contractors perform in accordance with the 
terms, conditions, and specifications of their contracts or purchase 
orders.
    (3) Grantees and subgrantees will maintain a written code of 
standards of conduct governing the performance of their employees 
engaged in the award and administration of contracts. No employee, 
officer or agent of the grantee or subgrantee shall participate in 
selection, or in the award or administration of a contract supported by 
Federal funds if a conflict of interest, real or apparent, would be 
involved. Such a conflict would arise when:
    (i) The employee, officer or agent,
    (ii) Any member of his immediate family,
    (iii) His or her partner, or
    (iv) An organization which employs, or is about to employ, any of 
the above, has a financial or other interest in the firm selected for 
award. The grantee's or subgrantee's officers, employees or agents will 
neither solicit nor accept gratuities, favors or anything of monetary 
value from contractors, potential contractors, or parties to 
subagreements. Grantee and subgrantees may set minimum rules where the 
financial interest is not substantial or the gift is an unsolicited item 
of nominal intrinsic value. To the extent permitted by State or local 
law or regulations, such standards or conduct will provide for 
penalties, sanctions, or other disciplinary actions for violations of 
such standards by the grantee's and subgrantee's officers, employees, or 
agents, or by contractors or their agents. The awarding agency may in 
regulation provide additional prohibitions relative to real, apparent, 
or potential conflicts of interest.
    (4) Grantee and subgrantee procedures will provide for a review of 
proposed procurements to avoid purchase of unnecessary or duplicative 
items. Consideration should be given to consolidating or breaking out 
procurements to obtain a more economical purchase. Where appropriate, an 
analysis will be made of lease versus purchase alternatives, and any 
other appropriate analysis to determine the most economical approach.
    (5) To foster greater economy and efficiency, grantees and 
subgrantees are encouraged to enter into State and local 
intergovernmental agreements for procurement or use of common goods and 
services.
    (6) Grantees and subgrantees are encouraged to use Federal excess 
and surplus property in lieu of purchasing new equipment and property 
whenever such use is feasible and reduces project costs.
    (7) Grantees and subgrantees are encouraged to use value engineering 
clauses in contracts for construction projects of sufficient size to 
offer reasonable opportunities for cost reductions. Value engineering is 
a systematic and creative analysis of each contract item or task to 
ensure that its essential function is provided at the overall lower 
cost.
    (8) Grantees and subgrantees will make awards only to responsible 
contractors possessing the ability to perform successfully under the 
terms and

[[Page 420]]

conditions of a proposed procurement. Consideration will be given to 
such matters as contractor integrity, compliance with public policy, 
record of past performance, and financial and technical resources.
    (9) Grantees and subgrantees will maintain records sufficient to 
detail the significant history of a procurement. These records will 
include, but are not necessarily limited to the following: rationale for 
the method of procurement, selection of contract type, contractor 
selection or rejection, and the basis for the contract price.
    (10) Grantees and subgrantees will use time and material type 
contracts only--
    (i) After a determination that no other contract is suitable, and
    (ii) If the contract includes a ceiling price that the contractor 
exceeds at its own risk.
    (11) Grantees and subgrantees alone will be responsible, in 
accordance with good administrative practice and sound business 
judgment, for the settlement of all contractual and administrative 
issues arising out of procurements. These issues include, but are not 
limited to source evaluation, protests, disputes, and claims. These 
standards do not relieve the grantee or subgrantee of any contractual 
responsibilities under its contracts. Federal agencies will not 
substitute their judgment for that of the grantee or subgrantee unless 
the matter is primarily a Federal concern. Violations of law will be 
referred to the local, State, or Federal authority having proper 
jurisdiction.
    (12) Grantees and subgrantees will have protest procedures to handle 
and resolve disputes relating to their procurements and shall in all 
instances disclose information regarding the protest to the awarding 
agency. A protestor must exhaust all administrative remedies with the 
grantee and subgrantee before pursuing a protest with the Federal 
agency. Reviews of protests by the Federal agency will be limited to:
    (i) Violations of Federal law or regulations and the standards of 
this section (violations of State or local law will be under the 
jurisdiction of State or local authorities) and
    (ii) Violations of the grantee's or subgrantee's protest procedures 
for failure to review a complaint or protest. Protests received by the 
Federal agency other than those specified above will be referred to the 
grantee or subgrantee.
    (c) Competition. (1) All procurement transactions will be conducted 
in a manner providing full and open competition consistent with the 
standards of Sec. 85.36. Some of the situations considered to be 
restrictive of competition include but are not limited to:
    (i) Placing unreasonable requirements on firms in order for them to 
qualify to do business,
    (ii) Requiring unnecessary experience and excessive bonding,
    (iii) Noncompetitive pricing practices between firms or between 
affiliated companies,
    (iv) Noncompetitive awards to consultants that are on retainer 
contracts,
    (v) Organizational conflicts of interest,
    (vi) Specifying only a brand name product instead of allowing an 
equal product to be offered and describing the performance of other 
relevant requirements of the procurement, and
    (vii) Any arbitrary action in the procurement process.
    (2) Grantees and subgrantees will conduct procurements in a manner 
that prohibits the use of statutorily or administratively imposed in-
State or local geographical preferences in the evaluation of bids or 
proposals, except in those cases where applicable Federal statutes 
expressly mandate or encourage geographic preference. Nothing in this 
section preempts State licensing laws. When contracting for 
architectural and engineering (A/E) services, geographic location may be 
a selection criteria provided its application leaves an appropriate 
number of qualified firms, given the nature and size of the project, to 
compete for the contract.
    (3) Grantees will have written selection procedures for procurement 
transactions. These procedures will ensure that all solicitations:
    (i) Incorporate a clear and accurate description of the technical 
requirements for the material, product, or service to be procured. Such 
description shall not, in competitive procurements, contain features 
which unduly

[[Page 421]]

restrict competition. The description may include a statement of the 
qualitative nature of the material, product or service to be procured, 
and when necessary, shall set forth those minimum essential 
characteristics and standards to which it must conform if it is to 
satisfy its intended use. Detailed product specifications should be 
avoided if at all possible. When it is impractical or uneconomical to 
make a clear and accurate description of the technical requirements, a 
brand name or equal description may be used as a means to define the 
performance or other salient requirements of a procurement. The specific 
features of the named brand which must be met by offerors shall be 
clearly stated; and
    (ii) Identify all requirements which the offerors must fulfill and 
all other factors to be used in evaluating bids or proposals.
    (4) Grantees and subgrantees will ensure that all prequalified lists 
of persons, firms, or products which are used in acquiring goods and 
services are current and include enough qualified sources to ensure 
maximum open and free competition. Also, grantees and subgrantees will 
not preclude potential bidders from qualifying during the solicitation 
period.
    (d) Methods of procurement to be followed. (1) Procurement by small 
purchase procedures. Small purchase procedures are those relatively 
simple and informal procurement methods for securing services, supplies, 
or other property that do not cost more than the simplified acquisition 
threshold fixed at 41 U.S.C. 403(11) (currently set at $100,000). If 
small purchase procedures are used, price or rate quotations shall be 
obtained from an adequate number of qualified sources.
    (2) Procurement by sealed bids (formal advertising). Bids are 
publicly solicited and a firm-fixed-price contract (lump sum or unit 
price) is awarded to the responsible bidder whose bid, conforming with 
all the material terms and conditions of the invitation for bids, is the 
lowest in price. The sealed bid method is the preferred method for 
procuring construction, if the conditions in Sec. 85.36(d)(2)(i) apply.
    (i) In order for sealed bidding to be feasible, the following 
conditions should be present:
    (A) A complete, adequate, and realistic specification or purchase 
description is available;
    (B) Two or more responsible bidders are willing and able to compete 
effectively and for the business; and
    (C) The procurement lends itself to a firm fixed price contract and 
the selection of the successful bidder can be made principally on the 
basis of price.
    (ii) If sealed bids are used, the following requirements apply:
    (A) The invitation for bids will be publicly advertised and bids 
shall be solicited from an adequate number of known suppliers, providing 
them sufficient time prior to the date set for opening the bids;
    (B) The invitation for bids, which will include any specifications 
and pertinent attachments, shall define the items or services in order 
for the bidder to properly respond;
    (C) All bids will be publicly opened at the time and place 
prescribed in the invitation for bids;
    (D) A firm fixed-price contract award will be made in writing to the 
lowest responsive and responsible bidder. Where specified in bidding 
documents, factors such as discounts, transportation cost, and life 
cycle costs shall be considered in determining which bid is lowest. 
Payment discounts will only be used to determine the low bid when prior 
experience indicates that such discounts are usually taken advantage of; 
and
    (E) Any or all bids may be rejected if there is a sound documented 
reason.
    (3) Procurement by competitive proposals. The technique of 
competitive proposals is normally conducted with more than one source 
submitting an offer, and either a fixed-price or cost-reimbursement type 
contract is awarded. It is generally used when conditions are not 
appropriate for the use of sealed bids. If this method is used, the 
following requirements apply:
    (i) Requests for proposals will be publicized and identify all 
evaluation factors and their relative importance. Any response to 
publicized requests for proposals shall be honored to the maximum extent 
practical;

[[Page 422]]

    (ii) Proposals will be solicited from an adequate number of 
qualified sources;
    (iii) Grantees and subgrantees will have a method for conducting 
technical evaluations of the proposals received and for selecting 
awardees;
    (iv) Awards will be made to the responsible firm whose proposal is 
most advantageous to the program, with price and other factors 
considered; and
    (v) Grantees and subgrantees may use competitive proposal procedures 
for qualifications-based procurement of architectural/engineering (A/E) 
professional services whereby competitors' qualifications are evaluated 
and the most qualified competitor is selected, subject to negotiation of 
fair and reasonable compensation. The method, where price is not used as 
a selection factor, can only be used in procurement of A/E professional 
services. It cannot be used to purchase other types of services though 
A/E firms are a potential source to perform the proposed effort.
    (4) Procurement by noncompetitive proposals is procurement through 
solicitation of a proposal from only one source, or after solicitation 
of a number of sources, competition is determined inadequate.
    (i) Procurement by noncompetitive proposals may be used only when 
the award of a contract is infeasible under small purchase procedures, 
sealed bids or competitive proposals and one of the following 
circumstances applies:
    (A) The item is available only from a single source;
    (B) The public exigency or emergency for the requirement will not 
permit a delay resulting from competitive solicitation;
    (C) The awarding agency authorizes noncompetitive proposals; or
    (D) After solicitation of a number of sources, competition is 
determined inadequate.
    (ii) Cost analysis, i.e., verifying the proposed cost data, the 
projections of the data, and the evaluation of the specific elements of 
costs and profits, is required.
    (iii) Grantees and subgrantees may be required to submit the 
proposed procurement to the awarding agency for pre-award review in 
accordance with paragraph (g) of this section.
    (e) Contracting with small and minority firms, women's business 
enterprise and labor surplus area firms. (1) The grantee and subgrantee 
will take all necessary affirmative steps to assure that minority firms, 
women's business enterprises, and labor surplus area firms are used when 
possible.
    (2) Affirmative steps shall include:
    (i) Placing qualified small and minority businesses and women's 
business enterprises on solicitation lists;
    (ii) Assuring that small and minority businesses, and women's 
business enterprises are solicited whenever they are potential sources;
    (iii) Dividing total requirements, when economically feasible, into 
smaller tasks or quantities to permit maximum participation by small and 
minority business, and women's business enterprises;
    (iv) Establishing delivery schedules, where the requirement permits, 
which encourage participation by small and minority business, and 
women's business enterprises;
    (v) Using the services and assistance of the Small Business 
Administration, and the Minority Business Development Agency of the 
Department of Commerce; and
    (vi) Requiring the prime contractor, if subcontracts are to be let, 
to take the affirmative steps listed in paragraphs (e)(2) (i) through 
(v) of this section.
    (f) Contract cost and price. (1) Grantees and subgrantees must 
perform a cost or price analysis in connection with every procurement 
action including contract modifications. The method and degree of 
analysis is dependent on the facts surrounding the particular 
procurement situation, but as a starting point, grantees must make 
independent estimates before receiving bids or proposals. A cost 
analysis must be performed when the offeror is required to submit the 
elements of his estimated cost, e.g., under professional, consulting, 
and architectural engineering services contracts. A cost analysis will 
be necessary when adequate price competition is lacking, and for sole 
source procurements, including contract modifications or change orders,

[[Page 423]]

unless price reasonableness can be established on the basis of a catalog 
or market price of a commercial product sold in substantial quantities 
to the general public or based on prices set by law or regulation. A 
price analysis will be used in all other instances to determine the 
reasonableness of the proposed contract price.
    (2) Grantees and subgrantees will negotiate profit as a separate 
element of the price for each contract in which there is no price 
competition and in all cases where cost analysis is performed. To 
establish a fair and reasonable profit, consideration will be given to 
the complexity of the work to be performed, the risk borne by the 
contractor, the contractor's investment, the amount of subcontracting, 
the quality of its record of past performance, and industry profit rates 
in the surrounding geographical area for similar work.
    (3) Costs or prices based on estimated costs for contracts under 
grants will be allowable only to the extent that costs incurred or cost 
estimates included in negotiated prices are consistent with Federal cost 
principles (see Sec. 85.22). Grantees may reference their own cost 
principles that comply with the applicable Federal cost principles.
    (4) The cost plus a percentage of cost and percentage of 
construction cost methods of contracting shall not be used.
    (g) Awarding agency review. (1) Grantees and subgrantees must make 
available, upon request of the awarding agency, technical specifications 
on proposed procurements where the awarding agency believes such review 
is needed to ensure that the item and/or service specified is the one 
being proposed for purchase. This review generally will take place prior 
to the time the specification is incorporated into a solicitation 
document. However, if the grantee or subgrantee desires to have the 
review accomplished after a solicitation has been developed, the 
awarding agency may still review the specifications, with such review 
usually limited to the technical aspects of the proposed purchase.
    (2) Grantees and subgrantees must on request make available for 
awarding agency pre-award review procurement documents, such as requests 
for proposals or invitations for bids, independent cost estimates, etc. 
when:
    (i) A grantee's or subgrantee's procurement procedures or operation 
fails to comply with the procurement standards in this section; or
    (ii) The procurement is expected to exceed the simplified 
acquisition threshold and is to be awarded without competition or only 
one bid or offer is received in response to a solicitation; or
    (iii) The procurement, which is expected to exceed the simplified 
acquisition threshold, specifies a ``brand name'' product; or
    (iv) The proposed award is more than the simplified acquisition 
threshold and is to be awarded to other than the apparent low bidder 
under a sealed bid procurement; or
    (v) A proposed contract modification changes the scope of a contract 
or increases the contract amount by more than the simplified acquisition 
threshold.
    (3) A grantee or subgrantee will be exempt from the pre-award review 
in paragraph (g)(2) of this section if the awarding agency determines 
that its procurement systems comply with the standards of this section.
    (i) A grantee or subgrantee may request that its procurement system 
be reviewed by the awarding agency to determine whether its system meets 
these standards in order for its system to be certified. Generally, 
these reviews shall occur where there is a continuous high-dollar 
funding, and third-party contracts are awarded on a regular basis.
    (ii) A grantee or subgrantee may self-certify its procurement 
system. Such self-certification shall not limit the awarding agency's 
right to survey the system. Under a self-certification procedure, 
awarding agencies may wish to rely on written assurances from the 
grantee or subgrantee that it is complying with these standards. A 
grantee or subgrantee will cite specific procedures, regulations, 
standards, etc., as being in compliance with these requirements and have 
its system available for review.

[[Page 424]]

    (h) Bonding requirements. For construction or facility improvement 
contracts or subcontracts exceeding the simplified acquisition 
threshold, the awarding agency may accept the bonding policy and 
requirements of the grantee or subgrantee provided the awarding agency 
has made a determination that the awarding agency's interest is 
adequately protected. If such a determination has not been made, the 
minimum requirements shall be as follows:
    (1) A bid guarantee from each bidder equivalent to five percent of 
the bid price. The ``bid guarantee'' shall consist of a firm commitment 
such as a bid bond, certified check, or other negotiable instrument 
accompanying a bid as assurance that the bidder will, upon acceptance of 
his bid, execute such contractual documents as may be required within 
the time specified.
    (2) A performance bond on the part of the contractor for 100 percent 
of the contract price. A ``performance bond'' is one executed in 
connection with a contract to secure fulfillment of all the contractor's 
obligations under such contract.
    (3) A payment bond on the part of the contractor for 100 percent of 
the contract price. A ``payment bond'' is one executed in connection 
with a contract to assure payment as required by law of all persons 
supplying labor and material in the execution of the work provided for 
in the contract.
    (i) Contract provisions. A grantee's and subgrantee's contracts must 
contain provisions in paragraph (i) of this section. Federal agencies 
are permitted to require changes, remedies, changed conditions, access 
and records retention, suspension of work, and other clauses approved by 
the Office of Federal Procurement Policy.
    (1) Administrative, contractual, or legal remedies in instances 
where contractors violate or breach contract terms, and provide for such 
sanctions and penalties as may be appropriate. (Contracts more than the 
simplified acquisition threshold)
    (2) Termination for cause and for convenience by the grantee or 
subgrantee including the manner by which it will be effected and the 
basis for settlement. (All contracts in excess of $10,000)
    (3) Compliance with Executive Order 11246 of September 24, 1965, 
entitled ``Equal Employment Opportunity,'' as amended by Executive Order 
11375 of October 13, 1967, and as supplemented in Department of Labor 
regulations (41 CFR chapter 60). (All construction contracts awarded in 
excess of $10,000 by grantees and their contractors or subgrantees)
    (4) Compliance with the Copeland ``Anti-Kickback'' Act (18 U.S.C. 
874) as supplemented in Department of Labor regulations (29 CFR part 3). 
(All contracts and subgrants for construction or repair)
    (5) Compliance with the Davis-Bacon Act (40 U.S.C. 276a to 276a-7) 
as supplemented by Department of Labor regulations (29 CFR part 5). 
(Construction contracts in excess of $2000 awarded by grantees and 
subgrantees when required by Federal grant program legislation)
    (6) Compliance with Sections 103 and 107 of the Contract Work Hours 
and Safety Standards Act (40 U.S.C. 327-330) as supplemented by 
Department of Labor regulations (29 CFR part 5). (Construction contracts 
awarded by grantees and subgrantees in excess of $2000, and in excess of 
$2500 for other contracts which involve the employment of mechanics or 
laborers)
    (7) Notice of awarding agency requirements and regulations 
pertaining to reporting.
    (8) Notice of awarding agency requirements and regulations 
pertaining to patent rights with respect to any discovery or invention 
which arises or is developed in the course of or under such contract.
    (9) Awarding agency requirements and regulations pertaining to 
copyrights and rights in data.
    (10) Access by the grantee, the subgrantee, the Federal grantor 
agency, the Comptroller General of the United States, or any of their 
duly authorized representatives to any books, documents, papers, and 
records of the contractor which are directly pertinent to that specific 
contract for the purpose of making audit, examination, excerpts, and 
transcriptions.

[[Page 425]]

    (11) Retention of all required records for three years after 
grantees or subgrantees make final payments and all other pending 
matters are closed.
    (12) Compliance with all applicable standards, orders, or 
requirements issued under section 306 of the Clean Air Act (42 U.S.C. 
1857(h)), section 508 of the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. 1368), Executive 
Order 11738, and Environmental Protection Agency regulations (40 CFR 
part 15). (Contracts, subcontracts, and subgrants of amounts in excess 
of $100,000).
    (13) Mandatory standards and policies relating to energy efficiency 
which are contained in the state energy conservation plan issued in 
compliance with the Energy Policy and Conservation Act (Pub. L. 94-163, 
89 Stat. 871).

[53 FR 8068, 8087, Mar. 11, 1988, as amended at 60 FR 19639, 19642, Apr. 
19, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 85.37  Subgrants.

    (a) States. States shall follow state law and procedures when 
awarding and administering subgrants (whether on a cost reimbursement or 
fixed amount basis) of financial assistance to local and Indian tribal 
governments. States shall:
    (1) Ensure that every subgrant includes any clauses required by 
Federal statute and executive orders and their implementing regulations;
    (2) Ensure that subgrantees are aware of requirements imposed upon 
them by Federal statute and regulation;
    (3) Ensure that a provision for compliance with Sec. 85.42 is placed 
in every cost reimbursement subgrant; and
    (4) Conform any advances of grant funds to subgrantees substantially 
to the same standards of timing and amount that apply to cash advances 
by Federal agencies.
    (b) All other grantees. All other grantees shall follow the 
provisions of this part which are applicable to awarding agencies when 
awarding and administering subgrants (whether on a cost reimbursement or 
fixed amount basis) of financial assistance to local and Indian tribal 
governments. Grantees shall:
    (1) Ensure that every subgrant includes a provision for compliance 
with this part;
    (2) Ensure that every subgrant includes any clauses required by 
Federal statute and executive orders and their implementing regulations; 
and
    (3) Ensure that subgrantees are aware of requirements imposed upon 
them by Federal statutes and regulations.
    (c) Exceptions. By their own terms, certain provisions of this part 
do not apply to the award and administration of subgrants:
    (1) Section 85.10;
    (2) Section 85.11;
    (3) The letter-of-credit procedures specified in Treasury 
Regulations at 31 CFR part 205, cited in Sec. 85.21; and
    (4) Section 85.50.

              Reports, Records, Retention, and Enforcement


<R05>
Sec. 85.40  Monitoring and reporting program performance.

    (a) Monitoring by grantees. Grantees are responsible for managing 
the day-to-day operations of grant and subgrant supported activities. 
Grantees must monitor grant and subgrant supported activities to assure 
compliance with applicable Federal requirements and that performance 
goals are being achieved. Grantee monitoring must cover each program, 
function or activity.
    (b) Nonconstruction performance reports. The Federal agency may, if 
it decides that performance information available from subsequent 
applications contains sufficient information to meet its programmatic 
needs, require the grantee to submit a performance report only upon 
expiration or termination of grant support. Unless waived by the Federal 
agency this report will be due on the same date as the final Financial 
Status Report.
    (1) Grantees shall submit annual performance reports unless the 
awarding agency requires quarterly or semi-annual reports. However, 
performance reports will not be required more frequently than quarterly. 
Annual reports shall be due 90 days after the grant year, quarterly or 
semi-annual reports shall be due 30 days after the reporting period. The 
final performance report will be due 90 days after the expiration or 
termination of grant support. If a

[[Page 426]]

justified request is submitted by a grantee, the Federal agency may 
extend the due date for any performance report. Additionally, 
requirements for unnecessary performance reports may be waived by the 
Federal agency.
    (2) Performance reports will contain, for each grant, brief 
information on the following:
    (i) A comparison of actual accomplishments to the objectives 
established for the period. Where the output of the project can be 
quantified, a computation of the cost per unit of output may be required 
if that information will be useful.
    (ii) The reasons for slippage if established objectives were not 
met.
    (iii) Additional pertinent information including, when appropriate, 
analysis and explanation of cost overruns or high unit costs.
    (3) Grantees will not be required to submit more than the original 
and two copies of performance reports.
    (4) Grantees will adhere to the standards in this section in 
prescribing performance reporting requirements for subgrantees.
    (c) Construction performance reports. For the most part, on-site 
technical inspections and certified percentage-of-completion data are 
relied on heavily by Federal agencies to monitor progress under 
construction grants and subgrants. The Federal agency will require 
additional formal performance reports only when considered necessary, 
and never more frequently than quarterly.
    (d) Significant developments. Events may occur between the scheduled 
performance reporting dates which have significant impact upon the grant 
or subgrant supported activity. In such cases, the grantee must inform 
the Federal agency as soon as the following types of conditions become 
known:
    (1) Problems, delays, or adverse conditions which will materially 
impair the ability to meet the objective of the award. This disclosure 
must include a statement of the action taken, or contemplated, and any 
assistance needed to resolve the situation.
    (2) Favorable developments which enable meeting time schedules and 
objectives sooner or at less cost than anticipated or producing more 
beneficial results than originally planned.
    (e) Federal agencies may make site visits as warranted by program 
needs.
    (f) Waivers, extensions. (1) Federal agencies may waive any 
performance report required by this part if not needed.
    (2) The grantee may waive any performance report from a subgrantee 
when not needed. The grantee may extend the due date for any performance 
report from a subgrantee if the grantee will still be able to meet its 
performance reporting obligations to the Federal agency.


<R05>
Sec. 85.41  Financial reporting.

    (a) General. (1) Except as provided in paragraphs (a) (2) and (5) of 
this section, grantees will use only the forms specified in paragraphs 
(a) through (e) of this section, and such supplementary or other forms 
as may from time to time be authorized by OMB, for:
    (i) Submitting financial reports to Federal agencies, or
    (ii) Requesting advances or reimbursements when letters of credit 
are not used.
    (2) Grantees need not apply the forms prescribed in this section in 
dealing with their subgrantees. However, grantees shall not impose more 
burdensome requirements on subgrantees.
    (3) Grantees shall follow all applicable standard and supplemental 
Federal agency instructions approved by OMB to the extend required under 
the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1980 for use in connection with forms 
specified in paragraphs (b) through (e) of this section. Federal 
agencies may issue substantive supplementary instructions only with the 
approval of OMB. Federal agencies may shade out or instruct the grantee 
to disregard any line item that the Federal agency finds unnecessary for 
its decisionmaking purposes.
    (4) Grantees will not be required to submit more than the original 
and two copies of forms required under this part.
    (5) Federal agencies may provide computer outputs to grantees to 
expedite or contribute to the accuracy of reporting. Federal agencies 
may accept the required information from grantees

[[Page 427]]

in machine usable format or computer printouts instead of prescribed 
forms.
    (6) Federal agencies may waive any report required by this section 
if not needed.
    (7) Federal agencies may extend the due date of any financial report 
upon receiving a justified request from a grantee.
    (b) Financial Status Report--(1) Form. Grantees will use Standard 
Form 269 or 269A, Financial Status Report, to report the status of funds 
for all nonconstruction grants and for construction grants when required 
in accordance with Sec. 85.41(e)(2)(iii) of this section.
    (2) Accounting basis. Each grantee will report program outlays and 
program income on a cash or accrual basis as prescribed by the awarding 
agency. If the Federal agency requires accrual information and the 
grantee's accounting records are not normally kept on the accural basis, 
the grantee shall not be required to convert its accounting system but 
shall develop such accrual information through and analysis of the 
documentation on hand.
    (3) Frequency. The Federal agency may prescribe the frequency of the 
report for each project or program. However, the report will not be 
required more frequently than quarterly. If the Federal agency does not 
specify the frequency of the report, it will be submitted annually. A 
final report will be required upon expiration or termination of grant 
support.
    (4) Due date. When reports are required on a quarterly or semiannual 
basis, they will be due 30 days after the reporting period. When 
required on an annual basis, they will be due 90 days after the grant 
year. Final reports will be due 90 days after the expiration or 
termination of grant support.
    (c) Federal Cash Transactions Report--(1) Form. (i) For grants paid 
by letter or credit, Treasury check advances or electronic transfer of 
funds, the grantee will submit the Standard Form 272, Federal Cash 
Transactions Report, and when necessary, its continuation sheet, 
Standard Form 272a, unless the terms of the award exempt the grantee 
from this requirement.
    (ii) These reports will be used by the Federal agency to monitor 
cash advanced to grantees and to obtain disbursement or outlay 
information for each grant from grantees. The format of the report may 
be adapted as appropriate when reporting is to be accomplished with the 
assistance of automatic data processing equipment provided that the 
information to be submitted is not changed in substance.
    (2) Forecasts of Federal cash requirements. Forecasts of Federal 
cash requirements may be required in the ``Remarks'' section of the 
report.
    (3) Cash in hands of subgrantees. When considered necessary and 
feasible by the Federal agency, grantees may be required to report the 
amount of cash advances in excess of three days' needs in the hands of 
their subgrantees or contractors and to provide short narrative 
explanations of actions taken by the grantee to reduce the excess 
balances.
    (4) Frequency and due date. Grantees must submit the report no later 
than 15 working days following the end of each quarter. However, where 
an advance either by letter of credit or electronic transfer of funds is 
authorized at an annualized rate of one million dollars or more, the 
Federal agency may require the report to be submitted within 15 working 
days following the end of each month.
    (d) Request for advance or reimbursement--(1) Advance payments. 
Requests for Treasury check advance payments will be submitted on 
Standard Form 270, Request for Advance or Reimbursement. (This form will 
not be used for drawdowns under a letter of credit, electronic funds 
transfer or when Treasury check advance payments are made to the grantee 
automatically on a predetermined basis.)
    (2) Reimbursements. Requests for reimbursement under nonconstruction 
grants will also be submitted on Standard Form 270. (For reimbursement 
requests under construction grants, see paragraph (e)(1) of this 
section.)
    (3) The frequency for submitting payment requests is treated in 
Sec. 85.41(b)(3).
    (e) Outlay report and request for reimbursement for construction 
programs--(1) Grants that support construction activities paid by 
reimbursement method. (i) Requesters for reimbursement under 
construction grants will be submitted

[[Page 428]]

on Standard Form 271, Outlay Report and Request for Reimbursement for 
Construction Programs. Federal agencies may, however, prescribe the 
Request for Advance or Reimbursement form, specified in Sec. 85.41(d), 
instead of this form.
    (ii) The frequency for submitting reimbursement requests is treated 
in Sec. 85.41(b)(3).
    (2) Grants that support construction activities paid by letter of 
credit, electronic funds transfer or Treasury check advance. (i) When a 
construction grant is paid by letter of credit, electronic funds 
transfer or Treasury check advances, the grantee will report its outlays 
to the Federal agency using Standard Form 271, Outlay Report and Request 
for Reimbursement for Construction Programs. The Federal agency will 
provide any necessary special instruction. However, frequency and due 
date shall be governed by Sec. 85.41(b) (3) and (4).
    (ii) When a construction grant is paid by Treasury check advances 
based on periodic requests from the grantee, the advances will be 
requested on the form specified in Sec. 85.41(d).
    (iii) The Federal agency may substitute the Financial Status Report 
specified in Sec. 85.41(b) for the Outlay Report and Request for 
Reimbursement for Construction Programs.
    (3) Accounting basis. The accounting basis for the Outlay Report and 
Request for Reimbursement for Construction Programs shall be governed by 
Sec. 85.41(b)(2).


<R05>
Sec. 85.42  Retention and access requirements for records.

    (a) Applicability. (1) This section applies to all financial and 
programmatic records, supporting documents, statistical records, and 
other records of grantees or subgrantees which are:
    (i) Required to be maintained by the terms of this part, program 
regulations or the grant agreement, or
    (ii) Otherwise reasonably considered as pertinent to program 
regulations or the grant agreement.
    (2) This section does not apply to records maintained by contractors 
or subcontractors. For a requirement to place a provision concerning 
records in certain kinds of contracts, see Sec. 85.36(i)(10).
    (b) Length of retention period. (1) Except as otherwise provided, 
records must be retained for three years from the starting date 
specified in paragraph (c) of this section.
    (2) If any litigation, claim, negotiation, audit or other action 
involving the records has been started before the expiration of the 3-
year period, the records must be retained until completion of the action 
and resolution of all issues which arise from it, or until the end of 
the regular 3-year period, whichever is later.
    (3) To avoid duplicate recordkeeping, awarding agencies may make 
special arrangements with grantees and subgrantees to retain any records 
which are continuously needed for joint use. The awarding agency will 
request transfer of records to its custody when it determines that the 
records possess long-term retention value. When the records are 
transferred to or maintained by the Federal agency, the 3-year retention 
requirement is not applicable to the grantee or subgrantee.
    (c) Starting date of retention period--(1) General. When grant 
support is continued or renewed at annual or other intervals, the 
retention period for the records of each funding period starts on the 
day the grantee or subgrantee submits to the awarding agency its single 
or last expenditure report for that period. However, if grant support is 
continued or renewed quarterly, the retention period for each year's 
records starts on the day the grantee submits its expenditure report for 
the last quarter of the Federal fiscal year. In all other cases, the 
retention period starts on the day the grantee submits its final 
expenditure report. If an expenditure report has been waived, the 
retention period starts on the day the report would have been due.
    (2) Real property and equipment records. The retention period for 
real property and equipment records starts from the date of the 
disposition or replacement or transfer at the direction of the awarding 
agency.
    (3) Records for income transactions after grant or subgrant support. 
In some cases grantees must report income after the period of grant 
support.

[[Page 429]]

Where there is such a requirement, the retention period for the records 
pertaining to the earning of the income starts from the end of the 
grantee's fiscal year in which the income is earned.
    (4) Indirect cost rate proposals, cost allocations plans, etc. This 
paragraph applies to the following types of documents, and their 
supporting records: Indirect cost rate computations or proposals, cost 
allocation plans, and any similar accounting computations of the rate at 
which a particular group of costs is chargeable (such as computer usage 
chargeback rates or composite fringe benefit rates).
    (i) If submitted for negotiation. If the proposal, plan, or other 
computation is required to be submitted to the Federal Government (or to 
the grantee) to form the basis for negotiation of the rate, then the 3-
year retention period for its supporting records starts from the date of 
such submission.
    (ii) If not submitted for negotiation. If the proposal, plan, or 
other computation is not required to be submitted to the Federal 
Government (or to the grantee) for negotiation purposes, then the 3-year 
retention period for the proposal plan, or computation and its 
supporting records starts from end of the fiscal year (or other 
accounting period) covered by the proposal, plan, or other computation.
    (d) Substitution of microfilm. Copies made by microfilming, 
photocopying, or similar methods may be substituted for the original 
records.
    (e) Access to records--(1) Records of grantees and subgrantees. The 
awarding agency and the Comptroller General of the United States, or any 
of their authorized representatives, shall have the right of access to 
any pertinent books, documents, papers, or other records of grantees and 
subgrantees which are pertinent to the grant, in order to make audits, 
examinations, excerpts, and transcripts.
    (2) Expiration of right of access. The rights of access in this 
section must not be limited to the required retention period but shall 
last as long as the records are retained.
    (f) Restrictions on public access. The Federal Freedom of 
Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552) does not apply to records Unless required 
by Federal, State, or local law, grantees and subgrantees are not 
required to permit public access to their records.


<R05>
Sec. 85.43  Enforcement.

    (a) Remedies for noncompliance. If a grantee or subgrantee 
materially fails to comply with any term of an award, whether stated in 
a Federal statute or regulation, an assurance, in a State plan or 
application, a notice of award, or elsewhere, the awarding agency may 
take one or more of the following actions, as appropriate in the 
circumstances:
    (1) Temporarily withhold cash payments pending correction of the 
deficiency by the grantee or subgrantee or more severe enforcement 
action by the awarding agency,
    (2) Disallow (that is, deny both use of funds and matching credit 
for) all or part of the cost of the activity or action not in 
compliance,
    (3) Wholly or partly suspend or terminate the current award for the 
grantee's or subgrantee's program,
    (4) Withhold further awards for the program, or
    (5) Take other remedies that may be legally available.
    (b) Hearings, appeals. In taking an enforcement action, the awarding 
agency will provide the grantee or subgrantee an opportunity for such 
hearing, appeal, or other administrative proceeding to which the grantee 
or subgrantee is entitled under any statute or regulation applicable to 
the action involved.
    (c) Effects of suspension and termination. Costs of grantee or 
subgrantee resulting from obligations incurred by the grantee or 
subgrantee during a suspension or after termination of an award are not 
allowable unless the awarding agency expressly authorizes them in the 
notice of suspension or termination or subsequently. Other grantee or 
subgrantee costs during suspension or after termination which are 
necessary and not reasonably avoidable are allowable if:
    (1) The costs result from obligations which were properly incurred 
by the grantee or subgrantee before the effective date of suspension or 
termination, are not in anticipation of it, and, in the

[[Page 430]]

case of a termination, are noncancellable, and,
    (2) The costs would be allowable if the award were not suspended or 
expired normally at the end of the funding period in which the 
termination takes effect.
    (d) Relationship to debarment and suspension. The enforcement 
remedies identified in this section, including suspension and 
termination, do not preclude grantee or subgrantee from being subject to 
``Debarment and Suspension'' under E.O. 12549 (see Sec. 85.35).


<R05>
Sec. 85.44  Termination for convenience.

    Except as provided in Sec. 85.43 awards may be terminated in whole 
or in part only as follows:
    (a) By the awarding agency with the consent of the grantee or 
subgrantee in which case the two parties shall agree upon the 
termination conditions, including the effective date and in the case of 
partial termination, the portion to be terminated, or
    (b) By the grantee or subgrantee upon written notification to the 
awarding agency, setting forth the reasons for such termination, the 
effective date, and in the case of partial termination, the portion to 
be terminated. However, if, in the case of a partial termination, the 
awarding agency determines that the remaining portion of the award will 
not accomplish the purposes for which the award was made, the awarding 
agency may terminate the award in its entirety under either Sec. 85.43 
or paragraph (a) of this section.


<R04>
                 Subpart D--After-The-Grant Requirements


<R05>
Sec. 85.50  Closeout.

    (a) General. The Federal agency will close out the award when it 
determines that all applicable administrative actions and all required 
work of the grant has been completed.
    (b) Reports. Within 90 days after the expiration or termination of 
the grant, the grantee must submit all financial, performance, and other 
reports required as a condition of the grant. Upon request by the 
grantee, Federal agencies may extend this timeframe. These may include 
but are not limited to:
    (1) Final performance or progress report.
    (2) Financial Status Report (SF 269) or Outlay Report and Request 
for Reimbursement for Construction Programs (SF-271) (as applicable).
    (3) Final request for payment (SF-270) (if applicable).
    (4) Invention disclosure (if applicable).
    (5) Federally-owned property report:

In accordance with Sec. 85.32(f), a grantee must submit an inventory of 
all federally owned property (as distinct from property acquired with 
grant funds) for which it is accountable and request disposition 
instructions from the Federal agency of property no longer needed.
    (c) Cost adjustment. The Federal agency will, within 90 days after 
receipt of reports in paragraph (b) of this section, make upward or 
downward adjustments to the allowable costs.
    (d) Cash adjustments. (1) The Federal agency will make prompt 
payment to the grantee for allowable reimbursable costs.
    (2) The grantee must immediately refund to the Federal agency any 
balance of unobligated (unencumbered) cash advanced that is not 
authorized to be retained for use on other grants.


<R05>
Sec. 85.51  Later disallowances and adjustments.

    The closeout of a grant does not affect:
    (a) The Federal agency's right to disallow costs and recover funds 
on the basis of a later audit or other review;
    (b) The grantee's obligation to return any funds due as a result of 
later refunds, corrections, or other transactions;
    (c) Records retention as required in Sec. 85.42;
    (d) Property management requirements in Secs. 85.31 and 85.32; and
    (e) Audit requirements in Sec. 85.26.


<R05>
Sec. 85.52  Collection of amounts due.

    (a) Any funds paid to a grantee in excess of the amount to which the 
grantee is finally determined to be entitled under the terms of the 
award constitute a debt to the Federal Government. If not paid within a 
reasonable period after demand, the Federal agency may reduce the debt 
by:

[[Page 431]]

    (1) Making an adminstrative offset against other requests for 
reimbursements,
    (2) Withholding advance payments otherwise due to the grantee, or
    (3) Other action permitted by law.
    (b) Except where otherwise provided by statutes or regulations, the 
Federal agency will charge interest on an overdue debt in accordance 
with the Federal Claims Collection Standards (4 CFR Ch. II). The date 
from which interest is computed is not extended by litigation or the 
filing of any form of appeal.


<R04>
                    Subpart E--Entitlement [Reserved]


<R03>
PART 87--NEW RESTRICTIONS ON LOBBYING--Table of Contents

<R05>


                           Subpart A--General

Sec.
87.100  Conditions on use of funds.
87.105  Definitions.
87.110  Certification and disclosure.

                 Subpart B--Activities by Own Employees

87.200  Agency and legislative liaison.
87.205  Professional and technical services.
87.210  Reporting.

            Subpart C--Activities by Other Than Own Employees

87.300  Professional and technical services.

                  Subpart D--Penalties and Enforcement

87.400  Penalties.
87.405  Penalty procedures.
87.410  Enforcement.

                          Subpart E--Exemptions

87.500  Secretary of Defense.

                        Subpart F--Agency Reports

87.600  Semi-annual compilation.
87.605  Inspector General report.

Appendix A to Part 87--Certification Regarding Lobbying
Appendix B to Part 87--Disclosure Form to Report Lobbying

    Authority: 31 U.S.C. 1352; 42 U.S.C. 3535(d).

    Source: 55 FR 6737, 6750, Feb. 26, 1990, unless otherwise noted.
    Cross reference: See also OMB notice published at 54 FR 52306, 
December 20, 1989.


<R04>
                           Subpart A--General


<R05>
Sec. 87.100  Conditions on use of funds.

    (a) No appropriated funds may be expended by the recipient of a 
Federal contract, grant, loan, or cooperative ageement to pay any person 
for influencing or attempting to influence an officer or employee of any 
agency, a Member of Congress, an officer or employee of Congress, or an 
employee of a Member of Congress in connection with any of the following 
covered Federal actions: the awarding of any Federal contract, the 
making of any Federal grant, the making of any Federal loan, the 
entering into of any cooperative agreement, and the extension, 
continuation, renewal, amendment, or modification of any Federal 
contract, grant, loan, or cooperative agreement.
    (b) Each person who requests or receives from an agency a Federal 
contract, grant, loan, or cooperative agreement shall file with that 
agency a certification, set forth in appendix A, that the person has not 
made, and will not make, any payment prohibited by paragraph (a) of this 
section.
    (c) Each person who requests or receives from an agency a Federal 
contract, grant, loan, or a cooperative agreement shall file with that 
agency a disclosure form, set forth in appendix B, if such person has 
made or has agreed to make any payment using nonappropriated funds (to 
include profits from any covered Federal action), which would be 
prohibited under paragraph (a) of this section if paid for with 
appropriated funds.
    (d) Each person who requests or receives from an agency a commitment 
providing for the United States to insure or guarantee a loan shall file 
with that agency a statement, set forth in appendix A, whether that 
person has made or has agreed to make any payment to influence or 
attempt to influence an officer or employee of any agency, a Member of 
Congress, an officer or employee of Congress, or an employee of a Member 
of Congress in connection with that loan insurance or guarantee.
    (e) Each person who requests or receives from an agency a commitment 
providing for the United States to insure or guarantee a loan shall file 
with

[[Page 432]]

that agency a disclosure form, set forth in appendix B, if that person 
has made or has agreed to make any payment to influence or attempt to 
influence an officer or employee of any agency, a Member of Congress, an 
officer or employee of Congress, or an employee of a Member of Congress 
in connection with that loan insurance or guarantee.


<R05>
Sec. 87.105  Definitions.

    For purposes of this part:
    (a) Agency, as defined in 5 U.S.C. 552(f), includes Federal 
executive departments and agencies as well as independent regulatory 
commissions and Government corporations, as defined in 31 U.S.C. 
9101(1).
    (b) Covered Federal action means any of the following Federal 
actions:
    (1) The awarding of any Federal contract;
    (2) The making of any Federal grant;
    (3) The making of any Federal loan;
    (4) The entering into of any cooperative agreement; and,
    (5) The extension, continuation, renewal, amendment, or modification 
of any Federal contract, grant, loan, or cooperative agreement.

Covered Federal action does not include receiving from an agency a 
commitment providing for the United States to insure or guarantee a 
loan. Loan guarantees and loan insurance are addressed independently 
within this part.
    (c) Federal contract means an acquisition contract awarded by an 
agency, including those subject to the Federal Acquisition Regulation 
(FAR), and any other acquisition contract for real or personal property 
or services not subject to the FAR.
    (d) Federal cooperative agreement means a cooperative agreement 
entered into by an agency.
    (e) Federal grant means an award of financial assistance in the form 
of money, or property in lieu of money, by the Federal Government or a 
direct appropriation made by law to any person. The term does not 
include technical assistance which provides services instead of money, 
or other assistance in the form of revenue sharing, loans, loan 
guarantees, loan insurance, interest subsidies, insurance, or direct 
United States cash assistance to an individual.
    (f) Federal loan means a loan made by an agency. The term does not 
include loan guarantee or loan insurance.
    (g) Indian tribe and tribal organization have the meaning provided 
in section 4 of the Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance 
Act (25 U.S.C. 450B). Alaskan Natives are included under the definitions 
of Indian tribes in that Act.
    (h) Influencing or attempting to influence means making, with the 
intent to influence, any communication to or appearance before an 
officer or employee or any agency, a Member of Congress, an officer or 
employee of Congress, or an employee of a Member of Congress in 
connection with any covered Federal action.
    (i) Loan guarantee and loan insurance means an agency's guarantee or 
insurance of a loan made by a person.
    (j) Local government means a unit of government in a State and, if 
chartered, established, or otherwise recognized by a State for the 
performance of a governmental duty, including a local public authority, 
a special district, an intrastate district, a council of governments, a 
sponsor group representative organization, and any other instrumentality 
of a local government.
    (k) Officer or employee of an agency includes the following 
individuals who are employed by an agency:
    (1) An individual who is appointed to a position in the Government 
under title 5, U.S. Code, including a position under a temporary 
appointment;
    (2) A member of the uniformed services as defined in section 101(3), 
title 37, U.S. Code;
    (3) A special Government employee as defined in section 202, title 
18, U.S. Code; and,
    (4) An individual who is a member of a Federal advisory committee, 
as defined by the Federal Advisory Committee Act, title 5, U.S. Code 
appendix 2.
    (l) Person means an individual, corporation, company, association, 
authority, firm, partnership, society, State, and local government, 
regardless of whether such entity is operated for profit or not for 
profit. This term

[[Page 433]]

excludes an Indian tribe, tribal organization, or any other Indian 
organization with respect to expenditures specifically permitted by 
other Federal law.
    (m) Reasonable compensation means, with respect to a regularly 
employed officer or employee of any person, compensation that is 
consistent with the normal compensation for such officer or employee for 
work that is not furnished to, not funded by, or not furnished in 
cooperation with the Federal Government.
    (n) Reasonable payment means, with respect to perfessional and other 
technical services, a payment in an amount that is consistent with the 
amount normally paid for such services in the private sector.
    (o) Recipient includes all contractors, subcontractors at any tier, 
and subgrantees at any tier of the recipient of funds received in 
connection with a Federal contract, grant, loan, or cooperative 
agreement. The term excludes an Indian tribe, tribal organization, or 
any other Indian organization with respect to expenditures specifically 
permitted by other Federal law.
    (p) Regularly employed means, with respect to an officer or employee 
of a person requesting or receiving a Federal contract, grant, loan, or 
cooperative agreement or a commitment providing for the United States to 
insure or guarantee a loan, an officer or employee who is employed by 
such person for at least 130 working days within one year immediately 
preceding the date of the submission that initiates agency consideration 
of such person for receipt of such contract, grant, loan, cooperative 
agreement, loan insurance commitment, or loan guarantee commitment. An 
officer or employee who is employed by such person for less than 130 
working days within one year immediately preceding the date of the 
submission that initiates agency consideration of such person shall be 
considered to be regularly employed as soon as he or she is employed by 
such person for 130 working days.
    (q) State means a State of the United States, the District of 
Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, a territory or possession of 
the United States, an agency or instrumentality of a State, and a multi-
State, regional, or interstate entity having governmental duties and 
powers.


<R05>
Sec. 87.110  Certification and disclosure.

    (a) Each person shall file a certification, and a disclosure form, 
if required, with each submission that initiates agency consideration of 
such person for:
    (1) Award of a Federal contract, grant, or cooperative agreement 
exceeding $100,000; or
    (2) An award of a Federal loan or a commitment providing for the 
United States to insure or guarantee a loan exceeding $150,000 or the 
single family maximum mortgage limit for affected programs, whichever is 
greater.
    (b) Each person shall file a certification, and a disclosure form, 
if required, upon receipt by such person of:
    (1) A Federal contract, grant, or cooperative agreement exceeding 
$100,000; or
    (2) A Federal loan or a commitment providing for the United States 
to insure or guarantee a loan exceeding $150,000 or the single family 
maximum mortgage limit for affected programs, whichever is greater.

Unless such person previously filed a certification, and a disclosure 
form, if required, under paragraph (a) of this section.
    (c) Each person shall file a disclosure form at the end of each 
calendar quarter in which there occurs any event that requires 
disclosure or that materially affects the accuracy of the information 
contained in any disclosure form previously filed by such person under 
paragraphs (a) or (b) of this section. An event that materially affects 
the accuracy of the information reported includes:
    (1) A cumulative increase of $25,000 or more in the amount paid or 
expected to be paid for influencing or attempting to influence a covered 
Federal action; or
    (2) A change in the person(s) or individual(s) influencing or 
attempting to influence a covered Federal action; or,
    (3) A change in the officer(s), employee(s), or Member(s) contacted 
to influence or attempt to influence a covered Federal action.

[[Page 434]]

    (d) Any person who requests or receives from a person referred to in 
paragraphs (a) or (b) of this section:
    (1) A subcontract exceeding $100,000 at any tier under a Federal 
contract;
    (2) A subgrant, contract, or subcontract exceeding $100,000 at any 
tier under a Federal grant;
    (3) A contract or subcontract exceeding $100,000 at any tier under a 
Federal loan exceeding $150,000; or,
    (4) A contract or subcontract exceeding $100,000 at any tier under a 
Federal cooperative agreement,

Shall file a certification, and a disclosure form, if required, to the 
next tier above.
    (e) All disclosure forms, but not certifications, shall be forwarded 
from tier to tier until received by the person referred to in paragraphs 
(a) or (b) of this section. That person shall forward all disclosure 
forms to the agency.
    (f) Any certification or disclosure form filed under paragraph (e) 
of this section shall be treated as a material representation of fact 
upon which all receiving tiers shall rely. All liability arising from an 
erroneous representation shall be borne solely by the tier filing that 
representation and shall not be shared by any tier to which the 
erroneous representation is forwarded. Submitting an erroneous 
certification or disclosure constitutes a failure to file the required 
certification or disclosure, respectively. If a person fails to file a 
required certification or disclosure, the United States may pursue all 
available remedies, including those authorized by section 1352, title 
31, U.S. Code.
    (g) For awards and commitments in process prior to December 23, 
1989, but not made before that date, certifications shall be required at 
award or commitment, covering activities occurring between December 23, 
1989, and the date of award or commitment. However, for awards and 
commitments in process prior to the December 23, 1989 effective date of 
these provisions, but not made before December 23, 1989, disclosure 
forms shall not be required at time of award or commitment but shall be 
filed within 30 days.
    (h) No reporting is required for an activity paid for with 
appropriated funds if that activity is allowable under either subpart B 
or C.

[55 FR 6737, 6750, Feb. 26, 1990, as amended at 59 FR 5321, Feb. 4, 
1994]


<R04>
                 Subpart B--Activities by Own Employees


<R05>
Sec. 87.200  Agency and legislative liaison.

    (a) The prohibition on the use of appropriated funds, in Sec. 87.100 
(a), does not apply in the case of a payment of reasonable compensation 
made to an officer or employee of a person requesting or receiving a 
Federal contract, grant, loan, or cooperative agreement if the payment 
is for agency and legislative liaison activities not directly related to 
a covered Federal action.
    (b) For purposes of paragraph (a) of this section, providing any 
information specifically requested by an agency or Congress is allowable 
at any time.
    (c) For purposes of paragraph (a) of this section, the following 
agency and legislative liaison activities are allowable at any time only 
where they are not related to a specific solicitation for any covered 
Federal action:
    (1) Discussing with an agency (including individual demonstrations) 
the qualities and characteristics of the person's products or services, 
conditions or terms of sale, and service capabilities; and,
    (2) Technical discussions and other activities regarding the 
application or adaptation of the person's products or services for an 
agency's use.
    (d) For purposes of paragraph (a) of this section, the following 
agencies and legislative liaison activities are allowable only where 
they are prior to formal solicitation of any covered Federal action:
    (1) Providing any information not specifically requested but 
necessary for an agency to make an informed decision about initiation of 
a covered Federal action;
    (2) Technical discussions regarding the preparation of an 
unsolicited proposal prior to its official submission; and,
    (3) Capability presentations by persons seeking awards from an 
agency pursuant to the provisions of the Small Business Act, as amended 
by Pub. L.

[[Page 435]]

95-507 and other subsequent amendments.
    (e) Only those activities expressly authorized by this section are 
allowable under this section.


<R05>
Sec. 87.205  Professional and technical services.

    (a) The prohibition on the use of appropriated funds, in Sec. 87.100 
(a), does not apply in the case of a payment of reasonable compensation 
made to an officer or employee of a person requesting or receiving a 
Federal contract, grant, loan, or cooperative agreement or an extension, 
continuation, renewal, amendment, or modification of a Federal contract, 
grant, loan, or cooperative agreement if payment is for professional or 
technical services rendered directly in the preparation, submission, or 
negotiation of any bid, proposal, or application for that Federal 
contract, grant, loan, or cooperative agreement or for meeting 
requirements imposed by or pursuant to law as a condition for receiving 
that Federal contract, grant, loan, or cooperative agreement.
    (b) For purposes of paragraph (a) of this section, professional and 
technical services shall be limited to advice and analysis directly 
applying any professional or technical discipline. For example, drafting 
of a legal document accompanying a bid or proposal by a lawyer is 
allowable. Similarly, technical advice provided by an engineer on the 
performance or operational capability of a piece of equipment rendered 
directly in the negotiation of a contract is allowable. However, 
communications with the intent to influence made by a professional (such 
as a licensed lawyer) or a technical person (such as a licensed 
accountant) are not allowable under this section unless they provide 
advice and analysis directly applying their professional or technical 
expertise and unless the advice or analysis is rendered directly and 
solely in the preparation, submission or negotiation of a covered 
Federal action. Thus, for example, communications with the intent to 
influence made by a lawyer that do not provide legal advice or analysis 
directly and solely related to the legal aspects of his or her client's 
proposal, but generally advocate one proposal over another are not 
allowable under this section because the lawyer is not providing 
professional legal services. Similarly, communications with the intent 
to influence made by an engineer providing an engineering analysis prior 
to the preparation or submission of a bid or proposal are not allowable 
under this section since the engineer is providing technical services 
but not directly in the preparation, submission or negotiation of a 
covered Federal action.
    (c) Requirements imposed by or pursuant to law as a condition for 
receiving a covered Federal award include those required by law or 
regulation, or reasonably expected to be required by law or regulation, 
and any other requirements in the actual award documents.
    (d) Only those services expressly authorized by this section are 
allowable under this section.


<R05>
Sec. 87.210  Reporting.

    No reporting is required with respect to payments of reasonable 
compensation made to regularly employed officers or employees of a 
person.


<R04>
            Subpart C--Activities by Other Than Own Employees


<R05>
Sec. 87.300  Professional and technical services.

    (a) The prohibition on the use of appropriated funds, in Sec. 87.100 
(a), does not apply in the case of any reasonable payment to a person, 
other than an officer or employee of a person requesting or receiving a 
covered Federal action, if the payment is for professional or technical 
services rendered directly in the preparation, submission, or 
negotiation of any bid, proposal, or application for that Federal 
contract, grant, loan, or cooperative agreement or for meeting 
requirements imposed by or pursuant to law as a condition for receiving 
that Federal contract, grant, loan, or cooperative agreement.
    (b) The reporting requirements in Sec. 87.110 (a) and (b) regarding 
filing a disclosure form by each person, if required, shall not apply 
with respect to

[[Page 436]]

professional or technical services rendered directly in the preparation, 
submission, or negotiation of any commitment providing for the United 
States to insure or guarantee a loan.
    (c) For purposes of paragraph (a) of this section, professional and 
technical services shall be limited to advice and analysis directly 
applying any professional or technical discipline. For example, drafting 
or a legal document accompanying a bid or proposal by a lawyer is 
allowable. Similarly, technical advice provided by an engineer on the 
performance or operational capability of a piece of equipment rendered 
directly in the negotiation of a contract is allowable. However, 
communications with the intent to influence made by a professional (such 
as a licensed lawyer) or a technical person (such as a licensed 
accountant) are not allowable under this section unless they provide 
advice and analysis directly applying their professional or technical 
expertise and unless the advice or analysis is rendered directly and 
solely in the preparation, submission or negotiation of a covered 
Federal action. Thus, for example, communications with the intent to 
influence made by a lawyer that do not provide legal advice or analysis 
directly and solely related to the legal aspects of his or her client's 
proposal, but generally advocate one proposal over another are not 
allowable under this section because the lawyer is not providing 
professional legal services. Similarly, communications with the intent 
to influence made by an engineer providing an engineering analysis prior 
to the preparation or submission of a bid or proposal are not allowable 
under this section since the engineer is providing technical services 
but not directly in the preparation, submission or negotiation of a 
covered Federal action.
    (d) Requirements imposed by or pursuant to law as a condition for 
receiving a covered Federal award include those required by law or 
regulation, or reasonably expected to be required by law or regulation, 
and any other requirements in the actual award documents.
    (e) Persons other than officers or employees of a person requesting 
or receiving a covered Federal action include consultants and trade 
associations.
    (f) Only those services expressly authorized by this section are 
allowable under this section.


<R04>
                  Subpart D--Penalties and Enforcement


<R05>
Sec. 87.400  Penalties.

    (a) Any person who makes an expenditure prohibited herein shall be 
subject to a civil penalty of not less than $10,000 and not more than 
$100,000 for each such expenditure.
    (b) Any person who fails to file or amend the disclosure form (see 
appendix B) to be filed or amended if required herein, shall be subject 
to a civil penalty of not less than $10,000 and not more than $100,000 
for each such failure.
    (c) A filing or amended filing on or after the date on which an 
administrative action for the imposition of a civil penalty is commenced 
does not prevent the imposition of such civil penalty for a failure 
occurring before that date. An administrative action is commenced with 
respect to a failure when an investigating official determines in 
writing to commence an investigation of an allegation of such failure.
    (d) In determining whether to impose a civil penalty, and the amount 
of any such penalty, by reason of a violation by any person, the agency 
shall consider the nature, circumstances, extent, and gravity of the 
violation, the effect on the ability of such person to continue in 
business, any prior violations by such person, the degree of culpability 
of such person, the ability of the person to pay the penalty, and such 
other matters as may be appropriate.
    (e) First offenders under paragraphs (a) or (b) of this section 
shall be subject to a civil penalty of $10,000, absent aggravating 
circumstances. Second and subsequent offenses by persons shall be 
subject to an appropriate civil penalty between $10,000 and $100,000, as 
determined by the agency head or his or her designee.
    (f) An imposition of a civil penalty under this section does not 
prevent the United States from seeking any other remedy that may apply 
to the same

[[Page 437]]

conduct that is the basis for the imposition of such civil penalty.


<R05>
Sec. 87.405  Penalty procedures.

    Agencies shall impose and collect civil penalties pursuant to the 
provisions of the Program Fraud and Civil Remedies Act, 31 U.S.C. 
sections 3803 (except subsection (c)), 3804, 3805, 3806, 3807, 3808, and 
3812, insofar as these provisions are not inconsistent with the 
requirements herein.


<R05>
Sec. 87.410  Enforcement.

    The head of each agency shall take such actions as are necessary to 
ensure that the provisions herein are vigorously implemented and 
enforced in that agency.


<R04>
                          Subpart E--Exemptions


<R05>
Sec. 87.500  Secretary of Defense.

    (a) The Secretary of Defense may exempt, on a case-by-case basis, a 
covered Federal action from the prohibition whenever the Secretary 
determines, in writing, that such an exemption is in the national 
interest. The Secretary shall transmit a copy of each such written 
exemption to Congress immediately after making such a determination.
    (b) The Department of Defense may issue supplemental regulations to 
implement paragraph (a) of this section.


<R04>
                        Subpart F--Agency Reports


<R05>
Sec. 87.600  Semi-annual compilation.

    (a) The head of each agency shall collect and compile the disclosure 
reports (see appendix B) and, on May 31 and November 30 of each year, 
submit to the Secretary of the Senate and the Clerk of the House of 
Representatives a report containing a compilation of the information 
contained in the disclosure reports received during the six-month period 
ending on March 31 or September 30, respectively, of that year.
    (b) The report, including the compilation, shall be available for 
public inspection 30 days after receipt of the report by the Secretary 
and the Clerk.
    (c) Information that involves intelligence matters shall be reported 
only to the Select Committee on Intelligence of the Senate, the 
Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence of the House of 
Representatives, and the Committees on Appropriations of the Senate and 
the House of Representatives in accordance with procedures agreed to by 
such committees. Such information shall not be available for public 
inspection.
    (d) Information that is classified under Executive Order 12356 or 
any successor order shall be reported only to the Committee on Foreign 
Relations of the Senate and the Committee on Foreign Affairs of the 
House of Representatives or the Committees on Armed Services of the 
Senate and the House of Representatives (whichever such committees have 
jurisdiction of matters involving such information) and to the 
Committees on Appropriations of the Senate and the House of 
Representatives in accordance with procedures agreed to by such 
committees. Such information shall not be available for public 
inspection.
    (e) The first semi-annual compilation shall be submitted on May 31, 
1990, and shall contain a compilation of the disclosure reports received 
from December 23, 1989 to March 31, 1990.
    (f) Major agencies, designated by the Office of Management and 
Budget (OMB), are required to provide machine-readable compilations to 
the Secretary of the Senate and the Clerk of the House of 
Representatives no later than with the compilations due on May 31, 1991. 
OMB shall provide detailed specifications in a memorandum to these 
agencies.
    (g) Non-major agencies are requested to provide machine-readable 
compilations to the Secretary of the Senate and the Clerk of the House 
of Representatives.
    (h) Agencies shall keep the originals of all disclosure reports in 
the official files of the agency.


<R05>
Sec. 87.605  Inspector General report.

    (a) The Inspector General, or other official as specified in 
paragraph (b) of this section, of each agency shall prepare and submit 
to Congress each year, commencing with submission of the President's 
Budget in 1991, an evaluation of the compliance of that agency

[[Page 438]]

with, and the effectiveness of, the requirements herein. The evaluation 
may include any recommended changes that may be necessary to strengthen 
or improve the requirements.
    (b) In the case of an agency that does not have an Inspector 
General, the agency official comparable to an Inspector General shall 
prepare and submit the annual report, or, if there is no such comparable 
official, the head of the agency shall prepare and submit the annual 
report.
    (c) The annual report shall be submitted at the same time the agency 
submits its annual budget justifications to Congress.
    (d) The annual report shall include the following: All alleged 
violations relating to the agency's covered Federal actions during the 
year covered by the report, the actions taken by the head of the agency 
in the year covered by the report with respect to those alleged 
violations and alleged violations in previous years, and the amounts of 
civil penalties imposed by the agency in the year covered by the report.

         Appendix A to Part 87--Certification Regarding Lobbying

 Certification for Contracts, Grants, Loans, and Cooperative Agreements

    The undersigned certifies, to the best of his or her knowledge and 
belief, that:
    (1) No Federal appropriated funds have been paid or will be paid, by 
or on behalf of the undersigned, to any person for influencing or 
attempting to influence an officer or employee of an agency, a Member of 
Congress, an officer or employee of Congress, or an employee of a Member 
of Congress in connection with the awarding of any Federal contract, the 
making of any Federal grant, the making of any Federal loan, the 
entering into of any cooperative agreement, and the extension, 
continuation, renewal, amendment, or modification of any Federal 
contract, grant, loan, or cooperative agreement.
    (2) If any funds other than Federal appropriated funds have been 
paid or will be paid to any person for influencing or attempting to 
influence an officer or employee of any agency, a Member of Congress, an 
officer or employee of Congress, or an employee of a Member of Congress 
in connection with this Federal contract, grant, loan, or cooperative 
agreement, the undersigned shall complete and submit Standard Form-LLL, 
``Disclosure Form to Report Lobbying,'' in accordance with its 
instructions.
    (3) The undersigned shall require that the language of this 
certification be included in the award documents for all subawards at 
all tiers (including subcontracts, subgrants, and contracts under 
grants, loans, and cooperative agreements) and that all subrecipients 
shall certify and disclose accordingly.
    This certification is a material representation of fact upon which 
reliance was placed when this transaction was made or entered into. 
Submission of this certification is a prerequisite for making or 
entering into this transaction imposed by section 1352, title 31, U.S. 
Code. Any person who fails to file the required certification shall be 
subject to a civil penalty of not less than $10,000 and not more than 
$100,000 for each such failure.

            Statement for Loan Guarantees and Loan Insurance

    The undersigned states, to the best of his or her knowledge and 
belief, that:
    If any funds have been paid or will be paid to any person for 
influencing or attempting to influence an officer or employee of any 
agency, a Member of Congress, an officer or employee of Congress, or an 
employee of a Member of Congress in connection with this commitment 
providing for the United States to insure or guarantee a loan, the 
undersigned shall complete and submit Standard Form-LLL, ``Disclosure 
Form to Report Lobbying,'' in accordance with its instructions.
    Submission of this statement is a prerequisite for making or 
entering into this transaction imposed by section 1352, title 31, U.S. 
Code. Any person who fails to file the required statement shall be 
subject to a civil penalty of not less than $10,000 and not more than 
$100,000 for each such failure.

[[Page 439]]


        Appendix B to Part 87--Disclosure Form to Report Lobbying
      [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC12OC91.004
      

[[Page 440]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC12OC91.005


[[Page 441]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC12OC91.006


[[Page 442]]




<R03>
PART 91--CONSOLIDATED SUBMISSIONS FOR COMMUNITY PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMS--Table of Contents

<R05>


                           Subpart A--General

Sec.
91.1  Purpose.
91.2  Applicability.
91.5  Definitions.
91.10  Consolidated program year.
91.15  Submission date.
91.20  Exceptions.

            Subpart B--Citizen Participation and Consultation

91.100  Consultation; local governments.
91.105  Citizen participation plan; local governments.
91.110  Consultation; States.
91.115  Citizen participation plan; States.

       Subpart C--Local Governments; Contents of Consolidated Plan

91.200  General.
91.205  Housing and homeless needs assessment.
91.210  Housing market analysis.
91.215  Strategic plan.
91.220  Action plan.
91.225  Certifications.
91.230  Monitoring.
91.235  Special case; abbreviated consolidated plan.
91.236  Special case; District of Columbia.

       Subpart D--State Governments; Contents of Consolidated Plan

91.300  General.
91.305  Housing and homeless needs assessment.
91.310  Housing market analysis.
91.315  Strategic plan.
91.320  Action plan.
91.325  Certifications.
91.330  Monitoring.

           Subpart E--Consortia; Contents of Consolidated Plan

91.400  Applicability.
91.401  Citizen participation plan.
91.402  Consolidated program year.
91.405  Housing and homeless needs assessment.
91.410  Housing market analysis.
91.415  Strategic plan.
91.420  Action plan.
91.425  Certifications.
91.430  Monitoring.

                  Subpart F--Other General Requirements

91.500  HUD approval action.
91.505  Amendments to the consolidated plan.
91.510  Consistency determinations.
91.515  Funding determinations by HUD.
91.520  Performance reports.
91.525  Performance review by HUD.
91.600  Waiver authority.

    Authority: 42 U.S.C. 3535(d), 3601-3619, 5301-5315, 11331-11388, 
12701-12711, 12741-12756, and 12901-12912.

    Source: 60 FR 1896, Jan. 5, 1995, unless otherwise noted.


<R04>
                           Subpart A--General


<R05>
Sec. 91.1  Purpose.

    (a) Overall goals. (1) The overall goal of the community planning 
and development programs covered by this part is to develop viable urban 
communities by providing decent housing and a suitable living 
environment and expanding economic opportunities principally for low- 
and moderate-income persons. The primary means towards this end is to 
extend and strengthen partnerships among all levels of government and 
the private sector, including for-profit and non-profit organizations, 
in the production and operation of affordable housing.
    (i) Decent housing includes assisting homeless persons to obtain 
appropriate housing and assisting persons at risk of becoming homeless; 
retention of the affordable housing stock; and increasing the 
availability of permanent housing in standard condition and affordable 
cost to low-income and moderate-income families, particularly to members 
of disadvantaged minorities, without discrimination on the basis of 
race, color, religion, sex, national origin, familial status, or 
disability. Decent housing also includes increasing the supply of 
supportive housing, which combines structural features and services 
needed to enable persons with special needs, including persons with HIV/
AIDS and their families, to live with dignity and independence; and 
providing housing affordable to low-income persons accessible to job 
opportunities.

[[Page 443]]

    (ii) A suitable living environment includes improving the safety and 
livability of neighborhoods; increasing access to quality public and 
private facilities and services; reducing the isolation of income groups 
within a community or geographical area through the spatial 
deconcentration of housing opportunities for persons of lower income and 
the revitalization of deteriorating or deteriorated neighborhoods; 
restoring and preserving properties of special historic, architectural, 
or aesthetic value; and conservation of energy resources.
    (iii) Expanded economic opportunities includes job creation and 
retention; establishment, stabilization and expansion of small 
businesses (including microbusinesses); the provision of public services 
concerned with employment; the provision of jobs involved in carrying 
out activities under programs covered by this plan to low-income persons 
living in areas affected by those programs and activities; availability 
of mortgage financing for low-income persons at reasonable rates using 
nondiscriminatory lending practices; access to capital and credit for 
development activities that promote the long-term economic and social 
viability of the community; and empowerment and self-sufficiency 
opportunities for low-income persons to reduce generational poverty in 
federally assisted and public housing.
    (2) The consolidated submission described in this part 91 requires 
the jurisdiction to state in one document its plan to pursue these goals 
for all the community planning and development programs, as well as for 
housing programs. It is these goals against which the plan and the 
jurisdiction's performance under the plan will be evaluated by HUD.
    (b) Functions of plan. The consolidated plan serves the following 
functions:
    (1) A planning document for the jurisdiction, which builds on a 
participatory process at the lowest levels;
    (2) An application for federal funds under HUD's formula grant 
programs;
    (3) A strategy to be followed in carrying out HUD programs; and
    (4) An action plan that provides a basis for assessing performance.


<R05>
Sec. 91.2  Applicability.

    (a) The following formula grant programs are covered by the 
consolidated plan:
    (1) The Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) programs (see 24 
CFR part 570, subparts D and I);
    (2) The Emergency Shelter Grants (ESG) program (see 24 CFR part 
576);
    (3) The HOME Investment Partnerships (HOME) program (see 24 CFR part 
92); and
    (4) The Housing Opportunities for Persons With AIDS (HOPWA) program 
(see 24 CFR part 574).
    (b) The following programs require either that the jurisdiction 
receiving funds directly from HUD have a consolidated plan that is 
approved by HUD or that the application for HUD funds contain a 
certification that the application is consistent with a HUD-approved 
consolidated plan:
    (1) The HOPE I Public Housing Homeownership (HOPE I) program (see 24 
CFR Subtitle A, Appendix A);
    (2) The HOPE II Homeownership of Multifamily Units (HOPE II) program 
(see 24 CFR Subtitle A, Appendix B);
    (3) The HOPE III Homeownership of Single Family Homes (HOPE III) 
program (see 24 CFR part 572);
    (4) The Low-Income Housing Preservation (prepayment avoidance 
incentives) program, when administered by a State agency (see 24 CFR 
248.177);
    (5) The Supportive Housing for the Elderly (Section 202) program 
(see 24 CFR part 889);
    (6) The Supportive Housing for Persons with Disabilities program 
(see 24 CFR part 890);
    (7) The Supportive Housing program (see 24 CFR part 583);
    (8) The Single Room Occupancy Housing (SRO) program (see 24 CFR part 
882, subpart H);
    (9) The Shelter Plus Care program (see 24 CFR part 582);
    (10) The Community Development Block Grant program--Small Cities 
(see 24 CFR part 570, subpart F);
    (11) HOME program reallocations;
    (12) Revitalization of Severely Distressed Public Housing (section 
24 of

[[Page 444]]

the United States Housing Act of 1937, (42 U.S.C. 1437 et seq.));
    (13) Hope for Youth: Youthbuild (see 24 CFR part 585);
    (14) The John Heinz Neighborhood Development program (see 24 CFR 
part 594);
    (15) The Lead-Based Paint Hazard Reduction program (see 24 CFR part 
35);
    (16) Grants for Regulatory Barrier Removal Strategies and 
Implementation (section 1204, Housing and Community Development Act of 
1992 (42 U.S.C. 12705c)); and
    (17) Competitive grants under the Housing Opportunities for Persons 
With AIDS (HOPWA) program (see 24 CFR part 574).
    (c) Other programs do not require consistency with an approved 
consolidated plan. However, HUD funding allocations for the Section 8 
Certificate and Voucher Programs are to be made in a way that enables 
participating jurisdictions to carry out their consolidated plans.

[60 FR 1896, Jan. 5, 1995, as amended at 60 FR 16379, Mar. 30, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 91.5  Definitions.

    The terms Elderly person and HUD are defined in 24 CFR part 5.
    Certification. A written assertion, based on supporting evidence, 
that must be kept available for inspection by HUD, by the Inspector 
General of HUD, and by the public. The assertion shall be deemed to be 
accurate unless HUD determines otherwise, after inspecting the evidence 
and providing due notice and opportunity for comment.
    Consolidated plan (or ``the plan''). The document that is submitted 
to HUD that serves as the planning document (comprehensive housing 
affordability strategy and community development plan) of the 
jurisdiction and an application for funding under any of the Community 
Planning and Development formula grant programs (CDBG, ESG, HOME, or 
HOPWA), which is prepared in accordance with the process prescribed in 
this part.
    Consortium. An organization of geographically contiguous units of 
general local government that are acting as a single unit of general 
local government for purposes of the HOME program (see 24 CFR part 92).
    Cost burden. The extent to which gross housing costs, including 
utility costs, exceed 30 percent of gross income, based on data 
available from the U.S. Census Bureau.
    Emergency shelter. Any facility with overnight sleeping 
accommodations, the primary purpose of which is to provide temporary 
shelter for the homeless in general or for specific populations of the 
homeless.
    Extremely low-income family. Family whose income is between 0 and 30 
percent of the median income for the area, as determined by HUD with 
adjustments for smaller and larger families, except that HUD may 
establish income ceilings higher or lower than 30 percent of the median 
for the area on the basis of HUD's findings that such variations are 
necessary because of prevailing levels of construction costs or fair 
market rents, or unusually high or low family incomes.
    Homeless family with children. A family composed of the following 
types of homeless persons: at least one parent or guardian and one child 
under the age of 18; a pregnant woman; or a person in the process of 
securing legal custody of a person under the age of 18.
    Homeless person. A youth (17 years or younger) not accompanied by an 
adult (18 years or older) or an adult without children, who is homeless 
(not imprisoned or otherwise detained pursuant to an Act of Congress or 
a State law), including the following:
    (1) An individual who lacks a fixed, regular, and adequate nighttime 
residence; and
    (2) An individual who has a primary nighttime residence that is:
    (i) A supervised publicly or privately operated shelter designed to 
provide temporary living accommodations (including welfare hotels, 
congregate shelters, and transitional housing for the mentally ill);
    (ii) An institution that provides a temporary residence for 
individuals intended to be institutionalized; or
    (iii) A public or private place not designed for, or ordinarily used 
as, a regular sleeping accommodation for human beings.

[[Page 445]]

    Homeless subpopulations. Include but are not limited to the 
following categories of homeless persons: severely mentally ill only, 
alcohol/drug addicted only, severely mentally ill and alcohol/drug 
addicted, fleeing domestic violence, youth, and persons with HIV/AIDS.
    Jurisdiction. A State or unit of general local government.
    Large family. Family of five or more persons.
    Lead-based paint hazards. Any condition that causes exposure to lead 
from lead-contaminated dust, lead-contaminated soil, lead-contaminated 
paint that is deteriorated or present in accessible surfaces, friction 
surfaces, or impact surfaces that would result in adverse human health 
effects as established by the appropriate Federal agency.
    Low-income families. Low-income families whose incomes do not exceed 
50 percent of the median family income for the area, as determined by 
HUD with adjustments for smaller and larger families, except that HUD 
may establish income ceilings higher or lower than 50 percent of the 
median for the area on the basis of HUD's findings that such variations 
are necessary because of prevailing levels of construction costs or fair 
market rents, or unusually high or low family incomes.
    Middle-income family. Family whose income is between 80 percent and 
95 percent of the median income for the area, as determined by HUD, with 
adjustments for smaller and larger families, except that HUD may 
establish income ceilings higher or lower than 95 percent of the median 
for the area on the basis of HUD's findings that such variations are 
necessary because of prevailing levels of construction costs or fair 
market rents, or unusually high or low family incomes. (This corresponds 
to the term ``moderate income family'' under the CHAS statute, 42 U.S.C. 
12705.)
    Moderate-income family. Family whose income does not exceed 80 
percent of the median income for the area, as determined by HUD with 
adjustments for smaller and larger families, except that HUD may 
establish income ceilings higher or lower than 80 percent of the median 
for the area on the basis of HUD's findings that such variations are 
necessary because of prevailing levels of construction costs or fair 
market rents, or unusually high or low family incomes.
    Overcrowding. For purposes of describing relative housing needs, a 
housing unit containing more than one person per room, as defined by the 
U.S. Census Bureau, for which data are made available by the Census 
Bureau. (See 24 CFR 791.402(b).)
    Person with a disability. A person who is determined to:
    (1) Have a physical, mental or emotional impairment that:
    (i) Is expected to be of long-continued and indefinite duration;
    (ii) Substantially impedes his or her ability to live independently; 
and
    (iii) Is of such a nature that the ability could be improved by more 
suitable housing conditions; or
    (2) Have a developmental disability, as defined in section 102(7) of 
the Developmental Disabilities Assistance and Bill of Rights Act (42 
U.S.C. 6001-6007); or
    (3) Be the surviving member or members of any family that had been 
living in an assisted unit with the deceased member of the family who 
had a disability at the time of his or her death.
    Poverty level family. Family with an income below the poverty line, 
as defined by the Office of Management and Budget and revised annually.
    Severe cost burden. The extent to which gross housing costs, 
including utility costs, exceed 50 percent of gross income, based on 
data available from the U.S. Census Bureau.
    State. Any State of the United States and the Commonwealth of Puerto 
Rico.
    Transitional housing. A project that is designed to provide housing 
and appropriate supportive services to homeless persons to facilitate 
movement to independent living within 24 months, or a longer period 
approved by HUD. For purposes of the HOME program, there is no HUD-
approved time period for moving to independent living.
    Unit of general local government. A city, town, township, county, 
parish, village, or other general purpose political subdivision of a 
State; an urban county; and a consortium of such political subdivisions 
recognized by HUD in

[[Page 446]]

accordance with the HOME program (24 CFR part 92) or the CDBG program 
(24 CFR part 570).
    Urban county. See definition in 24 CFR 570.3.

[60 FR 1896, Jan. 5, 1995; 60 FR 4861, Jan. 25, 1995, as amended at 61 
FR 5205, Feb. 9, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 91.10  Consolidated program year.

    (a) Each of the following programs shall be administered by a 
jurisdiction on a single consolidated program year, established by the 
jurisdiction: CDBG, ESG, HOME, and HOPWA. Except as provided in 
paragraph (b) of this section, the program year shall run for a twelve 
month period and begin on the first calendar day of a month.
    (b) Once a program year is established, the jurisdiction may either 
shorten or lengthen its program year to change the beginning date of the 
following program year, provided that it notifies HUD in writing at 
least two months before the date the program year would have ended if it 
had not been lengthened or at least two months before the end of a 
proposed shortened program year.
    (c) See subpart E of this part for requirements concerning program 
year for units of general local government that are part of a 
consortium.


<R05>
Sec. 91.15  Submission date.

    (a) General. (1) In order to facilitate continuity in its program 
and to provide accountability to citizens, each jurisdiction should 
submit its consolidated plan to HUD at least 45 days before the start of 
its program year. (But see Sec. 92.52(b) of this subtitle with respect 
to newly eligible jurisdictions under the HOME program.) With the 
exception of the August 16 date noted in paragraph (a)(2) of this 
section, HUD may grant a jurisdiction an extension of the submission 
deadline for good cause.
    (2) In no event will HUD accept a submission earlier than November 
15 or later than August 16 of the Federal fiscal year for which the 
grant funds are appropriated, except for Fiscal Year 1995 in which HUD 
will accept a submission no later than September 30, 1995. (Failure to 
submit the plan by August 16 will automatically result in a loss of the 
CDBG funds to which the jurisdiction would otherwise be entitled, except 
for Fiscal Year 1995).
    (3) A jurisdiction may have a program year that coincides with the 
Federal fiscal year (e.g., October 1, 1995 through September 30, 1996 
for Federal fiscal year 1996 funds. However, the consolidated plan may 
not be submitted earlier than November 15 of the Federal fiscal year and 
HUD has the period specified in Sec. 91.500 to review the consolidated 
plan.
    (4) See Sec. 91.20 for HUD field office authorization to grant 
exceptions to these provisions.
    (b) Frequency of submission. (1) The action plan and the 
certifications must be submitted on an annual basis.
    (2) The complete submission must be submitted less frequently, in 
accordance with a period to be specified by the jurisdiction; however, 
in no event shall the complete submission be submitted less frequently 
that every five years.

[60 FR 1896, Jan. 5, 1995, as amended at 60 FR 45043, Aug. 30, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 91.20  Exceptions.

    The HUD field office may grant a jurisdiction an exception from 
submitting all or part of the consolidated plan in FY 1995, from the 
submission deadline, or from a requirement in the implementation 
guidelines for good cause, as determined by the field office, and 
reported in writing to HUD Headquarters--to the extent the requirement 
is not required by statute or regulation.


<R04>
            Subpart B--Citizen Participation and Consultation


<R05>
Sec. 91.100  Consultation; local governments.

    (a) General. (1) When preparing the consolidated plan, the 
jurisdiction shall consult with other public and private agencies that 
provide assisted housing, health services, and social services 
(including those focusing on services to children, elderly persons, 
persons with disabilities, persons with HIV/AIDS and their families, 
homeless persons) during preparation of the consolidated plan.

[[Page 447]]

    (2) When preparing the portion of its consolidated plan concerning 
lead-based paint hazards, the jurisdiction shall consult with State or 
local health and child welfare agencies and examine existing data 
related to lead-based paint hazards and poisonings, including health 
department data on the addresses of housing units in which children have 
been identified as lead poisoned.
    (3) When preparing the description of priority nonhousing community 
development needs, a unit of general local government must notify 
adjacent units of general local government, to the extent practicable. 
The nonhousing community development plan must be submitted to the 
state, and, if the jurisdiction is a CDBG entitlement grantee other than 
an urban county, to the county.
    (4) The jurisdiction also should consult with adjacent units of 
general local government, including local government agencies with 
metropolitan-wide planning responsibilities where they exist, 
particularly for problems and solutions that go beyond a single 
jurisdiction.
    (b) HOPWA. The largest city in each eligible metropolitan 
statistical area (EMSA) that is eligible to receive a HOPWA formula 
allocation must consult broadly to develop a metropolitan-wide strategy 
for addressing the needs of persons with HIV/AIDS and their families 
living throughout the EMSA. All jurisdictions within the EMSA must 
assist the jurisdiction that is applying for a HOPWA allocation in the 
preparation of the HOPWA submission.
    (c) Public housing. The jurisdiction shall consult with the local 
public housing agency participating in an approved Comprehensive Grant 
program concerning consideration of public housing needs and planned 
Comprehensive Grant program activities. This consultation will help 
provide a better basis for the certification by the local Chief 
Executive Officer that the Comprehensive Grant Plan/annual statement is 
consistent with the local government's assessment of low-income housing 
needs (as evidenced in the consolidated plan) and that the local 
government will cooperate in providing resident programs and services 
(as required by Sec. 968.320(d) of this title for the Comprehensive 
Grant program). It will also help ensure that activities with regard to 
local drug elimination, neighborhood improvement programs, and resident 
programs and services, funded under the public housing program and those 
funded under a program covered by the consolidated plan are fully 
coordinated to achieve comprehensive community development goals.


<R05>
Sec. 91.105  Citizen participation plan; local governments.

    (a) Applicability and adoption of the citizen participation plan. 
(1) The jurisdiction is required to adopt a citizen participation plan 
that sets forth the jurisdiction's policies and procedures for citizen 
participation. (Where a jurisdiction, before February 6, 1995, adopted a 
citizen participation plan that complies with section 104(a)(3) of the 
Housing and Community Development Act of 1974 (42 U.S.C. 5304(A)(3)) but 
will need to amend the citizen participation plan to comply with 
provisions of this section, the citizen participation plan shall be 
amended by the first day of the jurisdiction's program year that begins 
on or after 180 days following February 6, 1995.)
    (2) Encouragement of citizen participation. (i) The citizen 
participation plan must provide for and encourage citizens to 
participate in the development of the consolidated plan, any substantial 
amendments to the consolidated plan, and the performance report.
    (ii) These requirements are designed especially to encourage 
participation by low- and moderate-income persons, particularly those 
living in slum and blighted areas and in areas where CDBG funds are 
proposed to be used, and by residents of predominantly low- and 
moderate-income neighborhoods, as defined by the jurisdiction. A 
jurisdiction also is expected to take whatever actions are appropriate 
to encourage the participation of all its citizens, including minorities 
and non-English speaking persons, as well as persons with disabilities.
    (iii) The jurisdiction shall encourage, in conjunction with 
consultation with public housing authorities, the participation of 
residents of public and assisted housing developments, in the

[[Page 448]]

process of developing and implementing the consolidated plan, along with 
other low-income residents of targeted revitalization areas in which the 
developments are located. The jurisdiction shall make an effort to 
provide information to the housing agency about consolidated plan 
activities related to its developments and surrounding communities so 
that the housing agency can make this information available at the 
annual public hearing required under the Comprehensive Grant program.
    (3) Citizen comment on the citizen participation plan and 
amendments. The jurisdiction must provide citizens with a reasonable 
opportunity to comment on the original citizen participation plan and on 
substantial amendments to the citizen participation plan, and must make 
the citizen participation plan public. The citizen participation plan 
must be in a format accessible to persons with disabilities, upon 
request.
    (b) Development of the consolidated plan. The citizen participation 
plan must include the following minimum requirements for the development 
of the consolidated plan.
    (1) The citizen participation plan must require that, before the 
jurisdiction adopts a consolidated plan, the jurisdiction will make 
available to citizens, public agencies, and other interested parties 
information that includes the amount of assistance the jurisdiction 
expects to receive (including grant funds and program income) and the 
range of activities that may be undertaken, including the estimated 
amount that will benefit persons of low- and moderate-income. The 
citizen participation plan also must set forth the jurisdiction's plans 
to minimize displacement of persons and to assist any persons displaced, 
specifying the types and levels of assistance the jurisdiction will make 
available (or require others to make available) to persons displaced, 
even if the jurisdiction expects no displacement to occur. The citizen 
participation plan must state when and how the jurisdiction will make 
this information available.
    (2) The citizen participation plan must require the jurisdiction to 
publish the proposed consolidated plan in a manner that affords 
citizens, public agencies, and other interested parties a reasonable 
opportunity to examine its contents and to submit comments. The citizen 
participation plan must set forth how the jurisdiction will publish the 
proposed consolidated plan and give reasonable opportunity to examine 
the contents of the proposed consolidated plan. The requirement for 
publishing may be met by publishing a summary of the proposed 
consolidated plan in one or more newspapers of general circulation, and 
by making copies of the proposed consolidated plan available at 
libraries, government offices, and public places. The summary must 
describe the contents and purpose of the consolidated plan, and must 
include a list of the locations where copies of the entire proposed 
consolidated plan may be examined. In addition, the jurisdiction must 
provide a reasonable number of free copies of the plan to citizens and 
groups that request it.
    (3) The citizen participation plan must provide for at least one 
public hearing during the development of the consolidated plan. See 
paragraph (e) of this section for public hearing requirements, 
generally.
    (4) The citizen participation plan must provide a period, not less 
than 30 days, to receive comments from citizens on the consolidated 
plan.
    (5) The citizen participation plan shall require the jurisdiction to 
consider any comments or views of citizens received in writing, or 
orally at the public hearings, in preparing the final consolidated plan. 
A summary of these comments or views, and a summary of any comments or 
views not accepted and the reasons therefor, shall be attached to the 
final consolidated plan.
    (c) Amendments--(1) Criteria for amendment to consolidated plan. The 
citizen participation plan must specify the criteria the jurisdiction 
will use for determining what changes in the jurisdiction's planned or 
actual activities constitute a substantial amendment to the consolidated 
plan. (See Sec. 91.505.) It must include among the criteria for a 
substantial amendment changes in the use of CDBG funds from one eligible 
activity to another.
    (2) The citizen participation plan must provide citizens with 
reasonable

[[Page 449]]

notice and an opportunity to comment on substantial amendments. The 
citizen participation plan must state how reasonable notice and an 
opportunity to comment will be given. The citizen participation plan 
must provide a period, not less than 30 days, to receive comments on the 
substantial amendment before the amendment is implemented.
    (3) The citizen participation plan shall require the jurisdiction to 
consider any comments or views of citizens received in writing, or 
orally at public hearings, if any, in preparing the substantial 
amendment of the consolidated plan. A summary of these comments or 
views, and a summary of any comments or views not accepted and the 
reasons therefor, shall be attached to the substantial amendment of the 
consolidated plan.
    (d) Performance reports. (1) The citizen participation plan must 
provide citizens with reasonable notice and an opportunity to comment on 
performance reports. The citizen participation plan must state how 
reasonable notice and an opportunity to comment will be given. The 
citizen participation plan must provide a period, not less than 15 days, 
to receive comments on the performance report that is to be submitted to 
HUD before its submission.
    (2) The citizen participation plan shall require the jurisdiction to 
consider any comments or views of citizens received in writing, or 
orally at public hearings in preparing the performance report. A summary 
of these comments or views shall be attached to the performance report.
    (e) Public hearings. (1) The citizen participation plan must provide 
for at least two public hearings per year to obtain citizens' views and 
to respond to proposals and questions, to be conducted at a minimum of 
two different stages of the program year. Together, the hearings must 
address housing and community development needs, development of proposed 
activities, and review of program performance. To obtain the views of 
citizens on housing and community development needs, including priority 
nonhousing community development needs, the citizen participation plan 
must provide that at least one of these hearings is held before the 
proposed consolidated plan is published for comment.
    (2) The citizen participation plan must state how and when adequate 
advance notice will be given to citizens of each hearing, with 
sufficient information published about the subject of the hearing to 
permit informed comment. (Publishing small print notices in the 
newspaper a few days before the hearing does not constitute adequate 
notice. Although HUD is not specifying the length of notice required, it 
would consider two weeks adequate.)
    (3) The citizen participation plan must provide that hearings be 
held at times and locations convenient to potential and actual 
beneficiaries, and with accommodation for persons with disabilities. The 
citizen participation plan must specify how it will meet these 
requirements.
    (4) The citizen participation plan must identify how the needs of 
non-English speaking residents will be met in the case of public 
hearings where a significant number of non-English speaking residents 
can be reasonably expected to participate.
    (f) Meetings. The citizen participation plan must provide citizens 
with reasonable and timely access to local meetings.
    (g) Availability to the public. The citizen participation plan must 
provide that the consolidated plan as adopted, substantial amendments, 
and the performance report will be available to the public, including 
the availability of materials in a form accessible to persons with 
disabilities, upon request. The citizen participation plan must state 
how these documents will be available to the public.
    (h) Access to records. The citizen participation plan must require 
the jurisdiction to provide citizens, public agencies, and other 
interested parties with reasonable and timely access to information and 
records relating to the jurisdiction's consolidated plan and the 
jurisdiction's use of assistance under the programs covered by this part 
during the preceding five years.
    (i) Technical assistance. The citizen participation plan must 
provide for

[[Page 450]]

technical assistance to groups representative of persons of low- and 
moderate-income that request such assistance in developing proposals for 
funding assistance under any of the programs covered by the consolidated 
plan, with the level and type of assistance determined by the 
jurisdiction. The assistance need not include the provision of funds to 
the groups.
    (j) Complaints. The citizen participation plan shall describe the 
jurisdiction's appropriate and practicable procedures to handle 
complaints from citizens related to the consolidated plan, amendments, 
and performance report. At a minimum, the citizen participation plan 
shall require that the jurisdiction must provide a timely, substantive 
written response to every written citizen complaint, within an 
established period of time (within 15 working days, where practicable, 
if the jurisdiction is a CDBG grant recipient).
    (k) Use of citizen participation plan. The jurisdiction must follow 
its citizen participation plan.
    (l) Jurisdiction responsibility. The requirements for citizen 
participation do not restrict the responsibility or authority of the 
jurisdiction for the development and execution of its consolidated plan.

(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 
2506-0117)

[60 FR 1896, Jan. 5, 1995; 60 FR 10427, Feb. 24, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 91.110  Consultation; States.

    When preparing the consolidated plan, the State shall consult with 
other public and private agencies that provide assisted housing 
(including any State housing agency administering public housing), 
health services, and social services (including those focusing on 
services to children, elderly persons, persons with disabilities, 
persons with HIV/AIDS and their families, homeless persons) during 
preparation of the consolidated plan. When preparing the portion of its 
consolidated plan concerning lead-based paint hazards, the State shall 
consult with State or local health and child welfare agencies and 
examine existing data related to lead-based paint hazards and 
poisonings, including health department data on the addresses of housing 
units in which children have been identified as lead poisoned. When 
preparing its method of distribution of assistance under the CDBG 
program, a State must consult with local governments in nonentitlement 
areas of the State.

(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 
2506-0117)


<R05>
Sec. 91.115  Citizen participation plan; States.

    (a) Applicability and adoption of the citizen participation plan. 
(1) The State is required to adopt a citizen participation plan that 
sets forth the State's policies and procedures for citizen 
participation. (Where a State, before March 6, 1995, adopted a citizen 
participation plan that complies with section 104(a)(3) of the Housing 
and Community Development Act of 1974 (42 U.S.C. 5304(A)(3)) but will 
need to amend the citizen participation plan to comply with provisions 
of this section, the citizen participation plan shall be amended by the 
first day of the State's program year that begins on or after 180 days 
following March 6, 1995.)
    (2) Encouragement of citizen participation. The citizen 
participation plan must provide for and encourage citizens to 
participate in the development of the consolidated plan, any substantial 
amendments to the consolidated plan, and the performance report. These 
requirements are designed especially to encourage participation by low- 
and moderate-income persons, particularly those living in slum and 
blighted areas and in areas where CDBG funds are proposed to be used and 
by residents of predominantly low- and moderate-income neighborhoods, as 
defined by the State. A State also is expected to take whatever actions 
are appropriate to encourage the participation of all its citizens, 
including minorities and non-English speaking persons, as well as 
persons with disabilities.
    (3) Citizen and local government comment on the citizen 
participation plan and amendments. The State must provide citizens and 
units of general local government a reasonable opportunity to comment on 
the original citizen participation plan and on substantial amendments to 
the citizen participation plan, and must make the citizen

[[Page 451]]

participation plan public. The citizen participation plan must be in a 
format accessible to persons with disabilities, upon request.
    (b) Development of the consolidated plan. The citizen participation 
plan must include the following minimum requirements for the development 
of the consolidated plan.
    (1) The citizen participation plan must require that, before the 
State adopts a consolidated plan, the State will make available to 
citizens, public agencies, and other interested parties information that 
includes the amount of assistance the State expects to receive and the 
range of activities that may be undertaken, including the estimated 
amount that will benefit persons of low- and moderate-income and the 
plans to minimize displacement of persons and to assist any persons 
displaced. The citizen participation plan must state when and how the 
State will make this information available.
    (2) The citizen participation plan must require the State to publish 
the proposed consolidated plan in a manner that affords citizens, units 
of general local governments, public agencies, and other interested 
parties a reasonable opportunity to examine its contents and to submit 
comments. The citizen participation plan must set forth how the State 
will publish the proposed consolidated plan and give reasonable 
opportunity to examine the contents of the proposed consolidated plan. 
The requirement for publishing may be met by publishing a summary of the 
proposed consolidated plan in one or more newspapers of general 
circulation, and by making copies of the proposed consolidated plan 
available at libraries, government offices, and public places. The 
summary must describe the contents and purpose of the consolidated plan, 
and must include a list of the locations where copies of the entire 
proposed consolidated plan may be examined. In addition, the State must 
provide a reasonable number of free copies of the plan to citizens and 
groups that request it.
    (3) The citizen participation plan must provide for at least one 
public hearing on housing and community development needs before the 
proposed consolidated plan is published for comment.
    (i) The citizen participation plan must state how and when adequate 
advance notice will be given to citizens of the hearing, with sufficient 
information published about the subject of the hearing to permit 
informed comment. (Publishing small print notices in the newspaper a few 
days before the hearing does not constitute adequate notice. Although 
HUD is not specifying the length of notice required, it would consider 
two weeks adequate.)
    (ii) The citizen participation plan must provide that the hearing be 
held at a time and location convenient to potential and actual 
beneficiaries, and with accommodation for persons with disabilities. The 
citizen participation plan must specify how it will meet these 
requirements.
    (iii) The citizen participation plan must identify how the needs of 
non-English speaking residents will be met in the case of a public 
hearing where a significant number of non-English speaking residents can 
be reasonably expected to participate.
    (4) The citizen participation plan must provide a period, not less 
than 30 days, to receive comments from citizens and units of general 
local government on the consolidated plan.
    (5) The citizen participation plan shall require the State to 
consider any comments or views of citizens and units of general received 
in writing, or orally at the public hearings, in preparing the final 
consolidated plan. A summary of these comments or views, and a summary 
of any comments or views not accepted and the reasons therefore, shall 
be attached to the final consolidated plan.
    (c) Amendments--(1) Criteria for amendment to consolidated plan. The 
citizen participation plan must specify the criteria the State will use 
for determining what changes in the State's planned or actual activities 
constitute a substantial amendment to the consolidated plan. (See 
Sec. 91.505.) It must include among the criteria for a substantial 
amendment changes in the method of distribution of such funds.
    (2) The citizen participation plan must provide citizens and units 
of general local government with reasonable

[[Page 452]]

notice and an opportunity to comment on substantial amendments. The 
citizen participation plan must state how reasonable notice and an 
opportunity to comment will be given. The citizen participation plan 
must provide a period, not less than 30 days, to receive comments on the 
substantial amendment before the amendment is implemented.
    (3) The citizen participation plan shall require the State to 
consider any comments or views of citizens and units of general local 
government received in writing, or orally at public hearings, if any, in 
preparing the substantial amendment of the consolidated plan. A summary 
of these comments or views, and a summary of any comments or views not 
accepted and the reasons therefore, shall be attached to the substantial 
amendment of the consolidated plan.
    (d) Performance Reports. (1) The citizen participation plan must 
provide citizens with reasonable notice and an opportunity to comment on 
performance reports. The citizen participation plan must state how 
reasonable notice and an opportunity to comment will be given. The 
citizen participation plan must provide a period, not less than 15 days, 
to receive comments on the performance report that is to be submitted to 
HUD before its submission.
    (2) The citizen participation plan shall require the state to 
consider any comments or views of citizens received in writing, or 
orally at public hearings in preparing the performance report. A summary 
of these comments or views shall be attached to the performance report.
    (e) Citizen participation requirements for local governments. The 
citizen participation plan must describe the citizen participation 
requirements for units of general local government receiving CDBG funds 
from the State in 24 CFR 570.486. The citizen participation plan must 
explain how the requirements will be met.
    (f) Availability to the public. The citizen participation plan must 
provide that the consolidated plan as adopted, substantial amendments, 
and the performance report will be available to the public, including 
the availability of materials in a form accessible to persons with 
disabilities, upon request. The citizen participation plan must state 
how these documents will be available to the public.
    (g) Access to records. The citizen participation plan must require 
the state to provide citizens, public agencies, and other interested 
parties with reasonable and timely access to information and records 
relating to the state's consolidated plan and the state's use of 
assistance under the programs covered by this part during the preceding 
five years.
    (h) Complaints. The citizen participation plan shall describe the 
State's appropriate and practicable procedures to handle complaints from 
citizens related to the consolidated plan, amendments, and performance 
report. At a minimum, the citizen participation plan shall require that 
the State must provide a timely, substantive written response to every 
written citizen complaint, within an established period of time (within 
15 working days, where practicable, if the State is a CDBG grant 
recipient).
    (i) Use of citizen participation plan. The State must follow its 
citizen participation plan.

(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 
2506-0117)


<R04>
       Subpart C--Local Governments; Contents of Consolidated Plan


<R05>
Sec. 91.200  General.

    (a) A complete consolidated plan consists of the information 
required in Secs. 91.205 through 91.230, submitted in accordance with 
instructions prescribed by HUD (including tables and narratives), or in 
such other format as jointly agreed upon by HUD and the jurisdiction.
    (b) The jurisdiction shall describe the lead agency or entity 
responsible for overseeing the development of the plan and the 
significant aspects of the process by which the consolidated plan was 
developed, the identity of the agencies, groups, organizations, and 
others who participated in the process, and a description of the 
jurisdiction's consultations with social service agencies and other 
entities. It also shall include a summary of the citizen participation

[[Page 453]]

process, public comments, and efforts made to broaden public 
participation in the development of the consolidated plan.

(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 
2506-0117)


<R05>
Sec. 91.205  Housing and homeless needs assessment.

    (a) General. The consolidated plan must describe the jurisdiction's 
estimated housing needs projected for the ensuing five-year period. 
Housing data included in this portion of the plan shall be based on U.S. 
Census data, as provided by HUD, as updated by any properly conducted 
local study, or any other reliable source that the jurisdiction clearly 
identifies and should reflect the consultation with social service 
agencies and other entities conducted in accordance with Sec. 91.100 and 
the citizen participation process conducted in accordance with 
Sec. 91.105. For a jurisdiction seeking funding on behalf of an eligible 
metropolitan statistical area under the HOPWA program, the needs 
described for housing and supportive services must address the needs of 
persons with HIV/AIDS and their families throughout the eligible 
metropolitan statistical area.
    (b) Categories of persons affected. (1) The plan shall estimate the 
number and type of families in need of housing assistance for extremely 
low-income, low-income, moderate-income, and middle-income families, for 
renters and owners, for elderly persons, for single persons, for large 
families, for persons with HIV/AIDS and their families, and for persons 
with disabilities. The description of housing needs shall include a 
discussion of the cost burden and severe cost burden, overcrowding 
(especially for large families), and substandard housing conditions 
being experienced by extremely low-income, low-income, moderate-income, 
and middle-income renters and owners compared to the jurisdiction as a 
whole. (The jurisdiction must define in its consolidated plan the terms 
``standard condition'' and ``substandard condition but suitable for 
rehabilitation.'')
    (2) For any of the income categories enumerated in paragraph (b)(1) 
of this section, to the extent that any racial or ethnic group has 
disproportionately greater need in comparison to the needs of that 
category as a whole, assessment of that specific need shall be included. 
For this purpose, disproportionately greater need exists when the 
percentage of persons in a category of need who are members of a 
particular racial or ethnic group is at least 10 percentage points 
higher than the percentage of persons in the category as a whole.
    (c) Homeless needs. The plan must describe the nature and extent of 
homelessness (including rural homelessness), addressing separately the 
need for facilities and services for homeless individuals and homeless 
families with children, both sheltered and unsheltered, and homeless 
subpopulations, in accordance with a table prescribed by HUD. This 
description must include the characteristics and needs of low-income 
individuals and families with children (especially extremely low-income) 
who are currently housed but threatened with homelessness. The plan also 
must contain a narrative description of the nature and extent of 
homelessness by racial and ethnic group, to the extent information is 
available.
    (d) Other special needs. (1) The jurisdiction shall estimate, to the 
extent practicable, the number of persons who are not homeless but 
require supportive housing, including the elderly, frail elderly, 
persons with disabilities (mental, physical, developmental), persons 
with alcohol or other drug addiction, persons with HIV/AIDS and their 
families, public housing residents, and any other categories the 
jurisdiction may specify, and describe their supportive housing needs.
    (2) With respect to a jurisdiction seeking funding on behalf of an 
eligible metropolitan statistical area under the HOPWA program, the plan 
must identify the size and characteristics of the population with HIV/
AIDS and their families within the eligible metropolitan statistical 
area it will serve.
    (e) Lead-based paint hazards. The plan must estimate the number of 
housing units within the jurisdiction that are occupied by low-income 
families or moderate-income families that contain

[[Page 454]]

lead-based paint hazards, as defined in this part.

(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 
2506-0117)

[60 FR 1896, Jan. 5, 1995, as amended at 61 FR 51760, Oct. 3, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 91.210  Housing market analysis.

    (a) General characteristics. Based on information available to the 
jurisdiction, the plan must describe the significant characteristics of 
the jurisdiction's housing market, including the supply, demand, and 
condition and cost of housing and the housing stock available to serve 
persons with disabilities and to serve persons with HIV/AIDS and their 
families. The jurisdiction must identify and describe any areas within 
the jurisdiction with concentrations of racial/ethnic minorities and/or 
low-income families, stating how it defines the terms ``area of low-
income concentration'' and ``area of minority concentration'' for this 
purpose. The locations and degree of these concentrations must be 
identified, either in a narrative or on one or more maps.
    (b) Public and assisted housing. (1) The plan must describe the 
number of public housing units in the jurisdiction, the physical 
condition of such units, the restoration and revitalization needs, 
results from the Section 504 needs assessment (i.e., assessment of needs 
of tenants and applicants on waiting list for accessible units, as 
required by 24 CFR 8.25), and the public housing agency's strategy for 
improving the management and operation of such public housing and for 
improving the living environment of low- and moderate-income families 
residing in public housing. The consolidated plan must identify the 
public housing developments in the jurisdictions that are participating 
in an approved HUD Comprehensive Grant program. Activities covered by 
the consolidated plan that are being coordinated or jointly funded with 
the public housing Comprehensive Grant program must be identified by 
project and referenced to the approved Comprehensive Grant program. 
Examples of supportive activities for Comprehensive Grant program 
activities are efforts to revitalize neighborhoods surrounding public 
housing projects (either current or proposed); cooperation in provision 
of resident programs and services; coordination of local drug 
elimination or anti-crime strategies; upgrading of police, fire, 
schools, and other services; and economic development projects in or 
near public housing projects to tie in with self-sufficiency efforts for 
residents.
    (2) The jurisdiction shall include a description of the number and 
targeting (income level and type of family served) of units currently 
assisted by local, state, or federally funded programs, and an 
assessment of whether any such units are expected to be lost from the 
assisted housing inventory for any reason.
    (c) Homeless facilities. The plan must include a brief inventory of 
facilities and services that meet the emergency shelter, transitional 
housing, permanent supportive housing, and permanent housing needs of 
homeless persons within the jurisdiction.
    (d) Special need facilities and services. The plan must describe, to 
the extent information is available, the facilities and services that 
assist persons who are not homeless but who require supportive housing, 
and programs for ensuring that persons returning from mental and 
physical health institutions receive appropriate supportive housing.
    (e) Barriers to affordable housing. The plan must explain whether 
the cost of housing or the incentives to develop, maintain, or improve 
affordable housing in the jurisdiction are affected by public policies, 
particularly by policies of the jurisdiction, including tax policies 
affecting land and other property, land use controls, zoning ordinances, 
building codes, fees and charges, growth limits, and policies that 
affect the return on residential investment.

(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 
2506-0117)


<R05>
Sec. 91.215  Strategic plan.

    (a) General. For the categories described in paragraphs (b), (c), 
(d), and (e) of this section, the consolidated plan must do the 
following:
    (1) Indicate the general priorities for allocating investment 
geographically within the jurisdiction (or within the EMSA for the HOPWA 
program) and among priority needs, as identified in

[[Page 455]]

the priority needs table prescribed by HUD;
    (2) Describe the basis for assigning the priority (including the 
relative priority, where required) given to each category of priority 
needs;
    (3) Identify any obstacles to meeting underserved needs;
    (4) Summarize the priorities and specific objectives, describing how 
funds that are reasonably expected to be made available will be used to 
address identified needs; and
    (5) For each specific objective, identify proposed accomplishments 
the jurisdictions hopes to achieve in quantitative terms over a 
specified time period (i.e., one, two, three or more years), or in other 
measurable terms as identified and defined by the jurisdiction.
    (b) Affordable housing. With respect to affordable housing, the 
consolidated plan must include the priority housing needs table 
prescribed by HUD and must do the following:
    (1) The description of the basis for assigning relative priority to 
each category of priority need shall state how the analysis of the 
housing market and the severity of housing problems and needs of 
extremely low-income, low-income, and moderate-income renters and owners 
identified in accordance with Sec. 91.205 provided the basis for 
assigning the relative priority given to each priority need category in 
the priority housing needs table prescribed by HUD. Family and income 
types may be grouped together for discussion where the analysis would 
apply to more than one of them;
    (2) The statement of specific objectives must indicate how the 
characteristics of the housing market will influence the use of funds 
made available for rental assistance, production of new units, 
rehabilitation of old units, or acquisition of existing units; and
    (3) The description of proposed accomplishments shall specify the 
number of extremely low-income, low-income, and moderate-income families 
to whom the jurisdiction will provide affordable housing as defined in 
24 CFR 92.252 for rental housing and 24 CFR 92.254 for homeownership 
over a specific time period.
    (c) Homelessness. With respect to homelessness, the consolidated 
plan must include the priority homeless needs table prescribed by HUD 
and must describe the jurisdiction's strategy for the following:
    (1) Helping low-income families avoid becoming homeless;
    (2) Reaching out to homeless persons and assessing their individual 
needs;
    (3) Addressing the emergency shelter and transitional housing needs 
of homeless persons; and
    (4) Helping homeless persons make the transition to permanent 
housing and independent living.
    (d) Other special needs. With respect to supportive needs of the 
non-homeless, the consolidated plan must describe the priority housing 
and supportive service needs of persons who are not homeless but require 
supportive housing (i.e., elderly, frail elderly, persons with 
disabilities (mental, physical, developmental), persons with alcohol or 
other drug addiction, persons with HIV/AIDS and their families, and 
public housing residents).
    (e) Nonhousing community development plan. (1) If the jurisdiction 
seeks assistance under the Community Development Block Grant program, 
the consolidated plan must describe the jurisdiction's priority non-
housing community development needs eligible for assistance under HUD's 
community development programs by CDBG eligibility category, reflecting 
the needs of families for each type of activity, as appropriate, in 
terms of dollar amounts estimated to meet the priority need for the type 
of activity, in accordance with a table prescribed by HUD. This 
community development component of the plan must state the 
jurisdiction's specific long-term and short-term community development 
objectives (including economic development activities that create jobs), 
which must be developed in accordance with the statutory goals described 
in Sec. 91.1 and the primary objective of the CDBG program to develop 
viable urban communities by providing decent housing and a suitable 
living environment and expanding economic opportunities, principally for 
low-income and moderate-income persons.

[[Page 456]]

    (2) A jurisdiction that elects to carry out a neighborhood 
revitalization strategy that includes the economic empowerment of low-
income residents with respect to one or more of their areas may submit 
this strategy as part of its community development plan. If HUD approves 
such a strategy, the jurisdiction can obtain greater flexibility in the 
use of the CDBG funds in the revitalization area(s). The additional 
flexibility that the jurisdiction would be entitled to for this purpose 
will be described in 24 CFR part 570, subpart C, at a future date. The 
criteria for approval of the strategy will not be established by 
regulation, but jurisdictions will be notified of these criteria.
    (f) Barriers to affordable housing. The consolidated plan must 
describe the jurisdiction's strategy to remove or ameliorate negative 
effects of public policies that serve as barriers to affordable housing, 
as identified in accordance with Sec. 91.210(d), except that, if a State 
requires a unit of general local government to submit a regulatory 
barrier assessment that is substantially equivalent to the information 
required under this paragraph (f), as determined by HUD, the unit of 
general local government may submit its assessment submitted to the 
State to HUD and shall be considered to have complied with this 
requirement.
    (g) Lead-based paint hazards. The consolidated plan must outline the 
actions proposed or being taken to evaluate and reduce lead-based paint 
hazards, and describe how the lead-based paint hazard reduction will be 
integrated into housing policies and programs.
    (h) Anti-poverty strategy. The consolidated plan must describe the 
jurisdiction's goals, programs, and policies for reducing the number of 
poverty level families and how the jurisdiction's goals, programs, and 
policies for producing and preserving affordable housing, set forth in 
the housing component of the consolidated plan, will be coordinated with 
other programs and services for which the jurisdiction is responsible 
and the extent to which they will reduce (or assist in reducing) the 
number of poverty level families, taking into consideration factors over 
which the jurisdiction has control.
    (i) Institutional structure. (1) The consolidated plan must explain 
the institutional structure, including private industry, nonprofit 
organizations, and public institutions, through which the jurisdiction 
will carry out its housing and community development plan, assessing the 
strengths and gaps in that delivery system.
    (2) The jurisdiction shall describe the organizational relationship 
between the jurisdiction and the public housing agency, including the 
appointing authority for the commissioners or board of the housing 
agency; relationships regarding hiring, contracting and procurement; 
provision of services funded by the jurisdiction; and review by the 
jurisdiction of proposed development sites, of the comprehensive plan of 
the public housing agency, and of any proposed demolition or disposition 
of public housing developments.
    (3) The plan must describe what the jurisdiction will do to overcome 
gaps in the institutional structure for carrying out its strategy for 
addressing its priority needs. If the public housing agency is 
designated as ``troubled'' by HUD, or otherwise is performing poorly, 
the jurisdiction shall describe any actions it is taking to assist the 
public housing agency in addressing these problems.
    (j) Coordination. The consolidated plan must describe the 
jurisdiction's activities to enhance coordination between public and 
assisted housing providers and private and governmental health, mental 
health, and service agencies. With respect to the public entities 
involved, the plan must describe the means of cooperation and 
coordination among the State and any units of general local government 
in the metropolitan area in the implementation of its consolidated plan.
    (k) Public housing resident initiatives. The consolidated plan must 
describe the jurisdiction's activities to encourage public housing 
residents to become more involved in management and participate in 
homeownership.


<R05>
Sec. 91.220  Action plan.

    The action plan must include the following:
    (a) Form application. Standard Form 424;

[[Page 457]]

    (b) Resources. (1) Federal resources. The consolidated plan must 
describe the Federal resources expected to be available to address the 
priority needs and specific objectives identified in the strategic plan, 
in accordance with Sec. 91.215. These resources include grant funds and 
program income.
    (2) Other resources. The consolidated plan must indicate resources 
from private and non-Federal public sources that are reasonably expected 
to be made available to address the needs identified in the plan. The 
plan must explain how Federal funds will leverage those additional 
resources, including a description of how matching requirements of the 
HUD programs will be satisfied. Where the jurisdiction deems it 
appropriate, it may indicate publicly owned land or property located 
within the jurisdiction that may be used to carry out the purposes 
stated in Sec. 91.1;
    (c) Activities to be undertaken. A description of the activities the 
jurisdiction will undertake during the next year to address priority 
needs in terms of local objectives that were identified in Sec. 91.215. 
This description of activities shall estimate the number and type of 
families that will benefit from the proposed activities, the specific 
local objectives and priority needs (identified in accordance with 
Sec. 91.215) that will be addressed by the activities using formula 
grant funds and program income the jurisdiction expects to receive 
during the program year, proposed accomplishments, and a target date for 
completion of the activity. This information is to be presented in the 
form of a table prescribed by HUD;
    (d) Geographic distribution. A description of the geographic areas 
of the jurisdiction (including areas of minority concentration) in which 
it will direct assistance during the ensuing program year, giving the 
rationale for the priorities for allocating investment geographically;
    (e) Homeless and other special needs activities. Activities it plans 
to undertake during the next year to address emergency shelter and 
transitional housing needs of homeless individuals and families 
(including subpopulations), to prevent low-income individuals and 
families with children (especially those with incomes below 30 percent 
of median) from becoming homeless, to help homeless persons make the 
transition to permanent housing and independent living, and to address 
the special needs of persons who are not homeless identified in 
accordance with Sec. 91.215(d);
    (f) Other actions--(1) General. Actions it plans to take during the 
next year to address obstacles to meeting underserved needs, foster and 
maintain affordable housing, remove barriers to affordable housing, 
evaluate and reduce lead-based paint hazards, reduce the number of 
poverty level families, develop institutional structure, and enhance 
coordination between public and private housing and social service 
agencies and foster public housing improvements and resident initiatives 
(see Sec. 91.215 (a), (b), (f), (g), (h), (i), (j), and (k)).
    (2) Public housing. Appropriate reference to the annual revisions of 
the action plan prepared for the Comprehensive Grant program. If the 
public housing agency is designated as ``troubled'' by HUD, or otherwise 
is performing poorly, the jurisdiction's plan, if any, to assist the 
public housing agency in addressing these problems; and
    (g) Program-specific requirements--(1) CDBG. (i) A jurisdiction must 
describe activities planned with respect to all CDBG funds expected to 
be available during the program year (including program income that will 
have been received before the start of the next program year), except 
that an amount generally not to exceed ten percent of such total 
available CDBG funds may be excluded from the funds for which eligible 
activities are described if it has been identified for the contingency 
of cost overruns.
    (ii) CDBG funds expected to be available during the program year 
includes the following:
    (A) Any program income that will have been received before the start 
of the next program year and that has not yet been programmed;
    (B) Surplus from urban renewal settlements;
    (C) Grant funds returned to the line of credit for which the planned 
use has not been included in a prior statement or plan; and

[[Page 458]]

    (D) Income from float-funded activities. The full amount of income 
expected to be generated by a float-funded activity must be shown, 
whether or not some or all of the income is expected to be received in a 
future program year. To assure that citizens understand the risks 
inherent in undertaking float-funded activities, the recipient must 
specify the total amount of program income expected to be received and 
the month(s) and year(s) that it expects the float-funded activity to 
generate such program income.
    (iii) An ``urgent needs'' activity (one that is expected to qualify 
under Sec. 570.208(c) of this title) may be included only if the 
jurisdiction identifies the activity in the action plan and certifies 
that the activity is designed to meet other community development needs 
having a particular urgency because existing conditions pose a serious 
and immediate threat to the health or welfare of the community and other 
financial resources are not available.
    (iv) This information about activities shall be in sufficient 
detail, including location, to allow citizens to determine the degree to 
which they are affected.
    (2) HOME. (i) For HOME funds, a participating jurisdiction shall 
describe other forms of investment that are not described in 
Sec. 92.205(b) of this title.
    (ii) If the participating jurisdiction intends to use HOME funds for 
homebuyers, it must state the guidelines for resale or recapture, as 
required in Sec. 92.254 of this subtitle.
    (iii) If the participating jurisdiction intends to use HOME funds to 
refinance existing debt secured by multifamily housing that is being 
rehabilitated with HOME funds, it must state its refinancing guidelines 
required under 24 CFR 92.206(b). The guidelines shall describe the 
conditions under which the participating jurisdictions will refinance 
existing debt. At minimum, the guidelines must:
    (A) Demonstrate that rehabilitation is the primary eligible activity 
and ensure that this requirement is met by establishing a minimum level 
of rehabilitation per unit or a required ratio between rehabilitation 
and refinancing.
    (B) Require a review of management practices to demonstrate that 
disinvestment in the property has not occurred; that the long term needs 
of the project can be met; and that the feasibility of serving the 
targeted population over an extended affordability period can be 
demonstrated.
    (C) State whether the new investment is being made to maintain 
current affordable units, create additional affordable units, or both.
    (D) Specify the required period of affordability, whether it is the 
minimum 15 years or longer.
    (E) Specify whether the investment of HOME funds may be 
jurisdiction-wide or limited to a specific geographic area, such as a 
neighborhood identified in a neighborhood revitalization strategy under 
24 CFR 91.215(e)(2) or a Federally designated Empowerment Zone or 
Enterprise Community.
    (F) State that HOME funds cannot be used to refinance multifamily 
loans made or insured by any Federal program, including CDBG.

(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 
2506-0117)

[60 FR 1896, Jan. 5, 1995; 60 FR 4861, Jan. 25, 1995, as amended at 61 
FR 48750, Sept. 16, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 91.225  Certifications.

    (a) General. The following certifications, satisfactory to HUD, must 
be included in the annual submission to HUD. (See definition of 
``certification'' in Sec. 91.5.)
    (1) Affirmatively furthering fair housing. Each jurisdiction is 
required to submit a certification that it will affirmatively further 
fair housing, which means that it will conduct an analysis to identify 
impediments to fair housing choice within the jurisdiction, take 
appropriate actions to overcome the effects of any impediments 
identified through that analysis, and maintain records reflecting the 
analysis and actions in this regard.
    (2) Anti-displacement and relocation plan. Each jurisdiction is 
required to submit a certification that it has in effect and is 
following a residential antidisplacement and relocation assistance plan 
in connection with any activity assisted with funding under the CDBG or 
HOME programs.
    (3) Drug-free workplace. The jurisdiction must submit a 
certification with

[[Page 459]]

regard to drug-free workplace required by 24 CFR part 24, subpart F.
    (4) Anti-lobbying. The jurisdiction must submit a certification with 
regard to compliance with restrictions on lobbying required by 24 CFR 
part 87, together with disclosure forms, if required by that part.
    (5) Authority of jurisdiction. The jurisdiction must submit a 
certification that the consolidated plan is authorized under State and 
local law (as applicable) and that the jurisdiction possesses the legal 
authority to carry out the programs for which it is seeking funding, in 
accordance with applicable HUD regulations.
    (6) Consistency with plan. The jurisdiction must submit a 
certification that the housing activities to be undertaken with CDBG, 
HOME, ESG, and HOPWA funds are consistent with the strategic plan. Where 
the HOPWA funds are to be received by a city that is the most populous 
unit of general local government in an EMSA, it must obtain and keep on 
file certifications of consistency from the authorized public officials 
for each other locality in the EMSA in which housing assistance is 
provided.
    (7) Acquisition and relocation. The jurisdiction must submit a 
certification that it will comply with the acquisition and relocation 
requirements of the Uniform Relocation Assistance and Real Property 
Acquisition Policies Act of 1970, as amended (42 U.S.C. 4601), and 
implementing regulations at 49 CFR part 24.
    (8) Section 3. The jurisdiction must submit a certification that it 
will comply with section 3 of the Housing and Urban Development Act of 
1968 (12 U.S.C. 1701u), and implementing regulations at 24 CFR part 135.
    (b) Community Development Block Grant program. For jurisdictions 
that seek funding under CDBG, the following certifications are required:
    (1) Citizen participation. Each jurisdiction must certify that it is 
in full compliance and following a detailed citizen participation plan 
that satisfies the requirements of Sec. 91.105.
    (2) Community development plan. A certification that this 
consolidated housing and community development plan identifies community 
development and housing needs and specifies both short-term and long-
term community development objectives that have been developed in 
accordance with the primary objective of the statute authorizing the 
CDBG program, as described in 24 CFR 570.2, and requirements of this 
part and 24 CFR part 570.
    (3) Following a plan. A certification that the jurisdiction is 
following a current consolidated plan (or Comprehensive Housing 
Affordability Strategy) that has been approved by HUD.
    (4) Use of funds. A certification that the jurisdiction has complied 
with the following criteria:
    (i) With respect to activities expected to be assisted with CDBG 
funds, the Action Plan has been developed so as to give the maximum 
feasible priority to activities that will benefit low- and moderate-
income families or aid in the prevention or elimination of slums or 
blight. The plan may also include CDBG-assisted activities that are 
certified to be designed to meet other community development needs 
having particular urgency because existing conditions pose a serious and 
immediate threat to the health or welfare of the community where other 
financial resources are not available to meet such needs;
    (ii) The aggregate use of CDBG funds, including section 108 
guaranteed loans, during a period specified by the jurisdiction, 
consisting of one, two, or three specific consecutive program years, 
shall principally benefit low- and moderate-income families in a manner 
that ensures that at least 70 percent of the amount is expended for 
activities that benefit such persons during the designated period (see 
24 CFR 570.3 for definition of ``CDBG funds''); and
    (iii) The jurisdiction will not attempt to recover any capital costs 
of public improvements assisted with CDBG funds, including Section 108 
loan guaranteed funds, by assessing any amount against properties owned 
and occupied by persons of low- and moderate-income, including any fee 
charged or assessment made as a condition of obtaining access to such 
public improvements. However, if CDBG funds are used to pay the 
proportion of a fee or assessment attributable to the capital costs of 
public improvements (assisted

[[Page 460]]

in part with CDBG funds) financed from other revenue sources, an 
assessment or charge may be made against the property with respect to 
the public improvements financed by a source other than CDBG funds. In 
addition, with respect to properties owned and occupied by moderate-
income (but not low-income) families, an assessment or charge may be 
made against the property with respect to the public improvements 
financed by a source other than CDBG funds if the jurisdiction certifies 
that it lacks CDBG funds to cover the assessment.
    (5) Excessive force. A certification that the jurisdiction has 
adopted and is enforcing:
    (i) A policy prohibiting the use of excessive force by law 
enforcement agencies within its jurisdiction against any individuals 
engaged in non-violent civil rights demonstrations; and
    (ii) A policy of enforcing applicable State and local laws against 
physically barring entrance to or exit from, a facility or location that 
is the subject of such non-violent civil rights demonstrations within 
its jurisdiction.
    (6) Compliance with anti-discrimination laws. The jurisdiction must 
submit a certification that the grant will be conducted and administered 
in conformity with title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 
2000d), the Fair Housing Act (42 U.S.C. 3601-3619), and implementing 
regulations.
    (7) Compliance with lead-based paint procedures. The jurisdiction 
must submit a certification that its notification, inspection, testing, 
and abatement procedures concerning lead-based paint will comply with 
the requirements of 24 CFR 570.608.
    (8) Compliance with laws. A certification that the jurisdiction will 
comply with applicable laws.
    (c) Emergency Shelter Grant program. For jurisdictions that seek 
funding under the Emergency Shelter Grant program, the following 
certifications are required:
    (1) In the case of assistance involving major rehabilitation or 
conversion, the applicant will maintain any building for which 
assistance is used under the ESG program as a shelter for homeless 
individuals and families for not less than a 10-year period;
    (2) In the case of assistance involving rehabilitation less than 
that covered under paragraph (d)(1) of this section, the applicant will 
maintain any building for which assistance is used under the ESG program 
as a shelter for homeless individuals and families for not less than a 
three-year period;
    (3) In the case of assistance involving essential services 
(including but not limited to employment, health, drug abuse, or 
education) or maintenance, operation, insurance, utilities and 
furnishings, the applicant will provide services or shelter to homeless 
individuals and families for the period during which the ESG assistance 
is provided, without regard to a particular site or structure as long as 
the same general population is served;
    (4) Any renovation carried out with ESG assistance shall be 
sufficient to ensure that the building involved is safe and sanitary;
    (5) It will assist homeless individuals in obtaining appropriate 
supportive services, including permanent housing, medical and mental 
health treatment, counseling, supervision, and other services essential 
for achieving independent living, and other Federal, State, local, and 
private assistance available for such individuals;
    (6) It will obtain matching amounts required under Sec. 576.71 of 
this title;
    (7) It will develop and implement procedures to ensure the 
confidentiality of records pertaining to any individual provided family 
violence prevention or treatment services under any project assisted 
under the ESG program, including protection against the release of the 
address or location of any family violence shelter project except with 
the written authorization of the person responsible for the operation of 
that shelter;
    (8) To the maximum extent practicable, it will involve, through 
employment, volunteer services, or otherwise, homeless individuals and 
families in constructing, renovating, maintaining, and operating 
facilities assisted under this program, in providing services assisted 
under the program, and in providing services for occupants of facilities 
assisted under the program; and
    (9) It is following a current HUD-approved consolidated plan (or 
CHAS).

[[Page 461]]

    (d) HOME program. Each participating jurisdiction must provide the 
following certifications:
    (1) If it plans to use HOME funds for tenant-based rental 
assistance, a certification that rental-based assistance is an essential 
element of its consolidated plan;
    (2) A certification that it is using and will use HOME funds for 
eligible activities and costs, as described in Secs. 92.205 through 
92.209 of this subtitle and that it is not using and will not use HOME 
funds for prohibited activities, as described in Sec. 92.214 of this 
subtitle; and
    (3) A certification that before committing funds to a project, the 
participating jurisdiction will evaluate the project in accordance with 
guidelines that it adopts for this purpose and will not invest any more 
HOME funds in combination with other federal assistance than is 
necessary to provide affordable housing.
    (e) Housing Opportunities for Persons With AIDS. For jurisdictions 
that seek funding under the Housing Opportunities for Persons With AIDS 
program, a certification is required by the jurisdiction that:
    (1) Activities funded under the program will meet urgent needs that 
are not being met by available public and private sources; and
    (2) Any building or structure assisted under that program shall be 
operated for the purpose specified in the plan:
    (i) For a period of not less than 10 years in the case of assistance 
involving new construction, substantial rehabilitation, or acquisition 
of a facility; or
    (ii) For a period of not less than three years in the case of 
assistance involving non-substantial rehabilitation or repair of a 
building or structure.

(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 
2506-0117)

[60 FR 1896, Jan. 5, 1995; 60 FR 4861, Jan. 25, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 91.230  Monitoring.

    The plan must describe the standards and procedures that the 
jurisdiction will use to monitor activities carried out in furtherance 
of the plan and will use to ensure long-term compliance with 
requirements of the programs involved, including minority business 
outreach and the comprehensive planning requirements.

(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 
2506-0117)

[60 FR 1896, Jan. 5, 1995; 60 FR 4861, Jan. 25, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 91.235  Special case; abbreviated consolidated plan.

    (a) Who may submit an abbreviated plan? A jurisdiction that is not a 
CDBG entitlement community under 24 CFR part 570, subpart D, and is not 
expected to be a participating jurisdiction in the HOME program under 24 
CFR part 92, may submit an abbreviated consolidated plan that is 
appropriate to the types and amounts of assistance sought from HUD 
instead of a full consolidated plan.
    (b) When is an abbreviated plan necessary?--(1) Jurisdiction. When a 
jurisdiction that is permitted to use an abbreviated plan applies to HUD 
for funds under a program that requires an approved consolidated plan 
(see Sec. 91.2(b)), it must obtain approval of an abbreviated plan (or 
full consolidated plan) and submit a certification that the housing 
activities are consistent with the plan.
    (2) Other applicants. When an eligible applicant other than a 
jurisdiction (e.g., a public housing agency or nonprofit organization) 
seeks to apply for funding under a program requiring certification of 
consistency with an approved consolidated plan, the jurisdiction--if it 
is permitted to use an abbreviated plan--may prepare an abbreviated plan 
appropriate to the project. See Sec. 91.510.
    (3) Limitation. For the HOME program, an abbreviated consolidated 
plan is only permitted with respect to reallocations to other than 
participating jurisdictions (see 24 CFR part 92, subpart J). For the 
CDBG program, an abbreviated plan may be submitted for the HUD-
administered Small Cities program, except an abbreviated plan may not be 
submitted for the HUD-administered Small Cities program in the State of 
Hawaii.
    (c) What is an abbreviated plan?--(1) Assessment of needs, 
resources, planned activities. An abbreviated plan must contain 
sufficient information about needs, resources, and planned activities

[[Page 462]]

to address the needs to cover the type and amount of assistance 
anticipated to be funded by HUD.
    (2) Nonhousing community development plan. If the jurisdiction seeks 
assistance under the Community Development Block Grant program, it must 
describe the jurisdiction's priority non-housing community development 
needs eligible for assistance under HUD's community development programs 
by CDBG eligibility category, reflecting the needs of families for each 
type of activity, as appropriate, in terms of dollar amounts estimated 
to meet the priority need for the type of activity, in accordance with a 
table prescribed by HUD. This community development component of the 
plan must state the jurisdiction's specific long-term and short-term 
community development objectives (including economic development 
activities that create jobs), which must be developed in accordance with 
the statutory goals described in Sec. 91.1 and the primary objective of 
the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974, 42 U.S.C. 5301(c), of 
the development of viable urban communities by providing decent housing 
and a suitable living environment and expanding economic opportunities, 
principally for low-income and moderate-income persons.
    (3) Separate application for funding. In addition to submission of 
the abbreviated consolidated plan, an application must be submitted for 
funding is sought under a competitive program. The applicable program 
requirements are found in the regulations for the program and in the 
Notice of Funding Availability published for the applicable fiscal year. 
For the CDBG Small Cities program, the applicable regulations are found 
at 24 CFR part 570, subpart F.
    (d) What consultation is applicable? The jurisdiction must make 
reasonable efforts to consult with appropriate public and private social 
service agencies regarding the needs to be served with the funding 
sought from HUD. The jurisdiction must attempt some consultation with 
the State. (Section 91.100 does not apply.)
    (e) What citizen participation process is applicable? If the 
jurisdiction is seeking CDBG funds under the CDBG Small Cities program, 
before submitting the abbreviated consolidated plan and application to 
HUD for funding, the jurisdiction must comply with the citizen 
participation requirements of 24 CFR 570.431. If it is not seeking such 
funding, the jurisdiction must conduct a citizen participation process 
as provided in section 107 of the Cranston-Gonzalez National Affordable 
Housing Act (42 U.S.C. 12707). (Section 91.105 does not apply.)

(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 
2506-0117)

[60 FR 1896, Jan. 5, 1995; 60 FR 4861, Jan. 25, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 91.236  Special case; District of Columbia.

    For consolidated planning purposes, the District of Columbia must 
follow the requirements applicable to local jurisdictions (Secs. 91.100, 
91.105, and 91.200 through 91.230). In addition, it must submit the 
component of the State requirements dealing with the use of Low Income 
Housing Tax Credits (Sec. 91.315(j)).

(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 
2506-0117)


<R04>
       Subpart D--State Governments; Contents of Consolidated Plan


<R05>
Sec. 91.300  General.

    (a) A complete consolidated plan consists of the information 
required in Secs. 91.305 through 91.330, submitted in accordance with 
instructions prescribed by HUD (including tables and narratives), or in 
such other format as jointly agreed upon by HUD and the State.
    (b) The State shall describe the lead agency or entity responsible 
for overseeing the development of the plan and the significant aspects 
of the process by which the consolidated plan was developed, the 
identity of the agencies, groups, organizations, and others who 
participated in the process, and a description of the State's 
consultations with social service agencies and other entities. It also 
shall include a summary of the citizen participation process, public 
comments, and efforts made

[[Page 463]]

to broaden public participation in the development of the consolidated 
plan.

(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 
2506-0117)


<R05>
Sec. 91.305  Housing and homeless needs assessment.

    (a) General. The consolidated plan must describe the State's 
estimated housing needs projected for the ensuing five-year period. 
Housing data included in this portion of the plan shall be based on U.S. 
Census data, as provided by HUD, as updated by any properly conducted 
local study, or any other reliable source that the State clearly 
identifies and should reflect the consultation with social service 
agencies and other entities conducted in accordance with Sec. 91.110 and 
the citizen participation process conducted in accordance with 
Sec. 91.115. For a State seeking funding under the HOPWA program, the 
needs described for housing and supportive services must address the 
needs of persons with HIV/AIDS and their families in areas outside of 
eligible metropolitan statistical areas.
    (b) Categories of persons affected. (1) The consolidated plan shall 
estimate the number and type of families in need of housing assistance 
for extremely low-income, low-income, moderate-income, and middle-income 
families, for renters and owners, for elderly persons, for single 
persons, for large families, for persons with HIV/AIDS and their 
families, and for persons with disabilities. The description of housing 
needs shall include a discussion of the cost burden and severe cost 
burden, overcrowding (especially for large families), and substandard 
housing conditions being experienced by extremely low-income, low-
income, moderate-income, and middle-income renters and owners compared 
to the State as a whole. (The State must define in its consolidated plan 
the terms ``standard condition'' and ``substandard condition but 
suitable for rehabilitation.'')
    (2) For any of the income categories enumerated in paragraph (b)(1) 
of this section, to the extent that any racial or ethnic group has 
disproportionately greater need in comparison to the needs of that 
category as a whole, assessment of that specific need shall be included. 
For this purpose, disproportionately greater need exists when the 
percentage of persons in a category of need who are members of a 
particular racial or ethnic group is at least 10 percentage points 
higher than the percentage of persons in the category as a whole.
    (c) Homeless needs. The plan must describe the nature and extent of 
homelessness (including rural homelessness) within the State, addressing 
separately the need for facilities and services for homeless individuals 
and homeless families with children, both sheltered and unsheltered, and 
homeless subpopulations, in accordance with a table prescribed by HUD. 
This description must include the characteristics and needs of low-
income individuals and families with children (especially extremely low-
income) who are currently housed but threatened with homelessness. The 
plan also must contain a narrative description of the nature and extent 
of homelessness by racial and ethnic group, to the extent information is 
available.
    (d) Other special needs. (1) The State shall estimate, to the extent 
practicable, the number of persons who are not homeless but require 
supportive housing, including the elderly, frail elderly, persons with 
disabilities (mental, physical, developmental), persons with alcohol or 
other drug addiction, persons with HIV/AIDS and their families, and any 
other categories the State may specify, and describe their supportive 
housing needs.
    (2) With respect to a State seeking assistance under the HOPWA 
program, the plan must identify the size and characteristics of the 
population with HIV/AIDS and their families within the area it will 
serve.
    (e) Lead-based paint hazards. The plan must estimate the number of 
housing units within the State that are occupied by low-income families 
or moderate-income families that contain lead-based paint hazards, as 
defined in this part.

(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 
2506-0117)

[60 FR 1896, Jan. 5, 1995, as amended at 61 FR 51760, Oct. 3, 1996]

[[Page 464]]


<R05>
Sec. 91.310  Housing market analysis.

    (a) General characteristics. Based on data available to the State, 
the plan must describe the significant characteristics of the State's 
housing markets (including such aspects as the supply, demand, and 
condition and cost of housing).
    (b) Homeless facilities. The plan must include a brief inventory of 
facilities and services that meet the needs for emergency shelter and 
transitional housing needs of homeless persons within the State.
    (c) Special need facilities and services. The plan must describe, to 
the extent information is available, the facilities and services that 
assist persons who are not homeless but who require supportive housing, 
and programs for ensuring that persons returning from mental and 
physical health institutions receive appropriate supportive housing.
    (d) Barriers to affordable housing. The plan must explain whether 
the cost of housing or the incentives to develop, maintain, or improve 
affordable housing in the State are affected by its policies, including 
tax policies affecting land and other property, land use controls, 
zoning ordinances, building codes, fees and charges, growth limits, and 
policies that affect the return on residential investment.

(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 
2506-0117)

[60 FR 1896, Jan. 5, 1995; 60 FR 4861, Jan. 25, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 91.315  Strategic plan.

    (a) General. For the categories described in paragraphs (b), (c), 
(d), and (e) of this section, the consolidated plan must do the 
following:
    (1) Indicate the general priorities for allocating investment 
geographically within the State and among priority needs;
    (2) Describe the basis for assigning the priority (including the 
relative priority, where required) given to each category of priority 
needs;
    (3) Identify any obstacles to meeting underserved needs;
    (4) Summarize the priorities and specific objectives, describing how 
the proposed distribution of funds will address identified needs;
    (5) For each specific objective, identify the proposed 
accomplishments the State hopes to achieve in quantitative terms over a 
specific time period (i.e., one, two, three or more years), or in other 
measurable terms as identified and defined by the State.
    (b) Affordable housing. With respect to affordable housing, the 
consolidated plan must do the following:
    (1) The description of the basis for assigning relative priority to 
each category of priority need shall state how the analysis of the 
housing market and the severity of housing problems and needs of 
extremely low-income, low-income, and moderate-income renters and owners 
identified in accordance with Sec. 91.305 provided the basis for 
assigning the relative priority given to each priority need category in 
the priority housing needs table prescribed by HUD. Family and income 
types may be grouped together for discussion where the analysis would 
apply to more than one of them;
    (2) The statement of specific objectives must indicate how the 
characteristics of the housing market will influence the use of funds 
made available for rental assistance, production of new units, 
rehabilitation of old units, or acquisition of existing units; and
    (3) The description of proposed accomplishments shall specify the 
number of extremely low-income, low-income, and moderate-income families 
to whom the jurisdiction will provide affordable housing as defined in 
Sec. 92.252 of this subtitle for rental housing and Sec. 92.254 of this 
subtitle for homeownership over a specific time period.
    (c) Homelessness. With respect to homelessness, the consolidated 
plan must include the priority homeless needs table prescribed by HUD 
and must describe the State's strategy for the following:
    (1) Helping low-income families avoid becoming homeless;
    (2) Reaching out to homeless persons and assessing their individual 
needs;
    (3) Addressing the emergency shelter and transitional housing needs 
of homeless persons; and

[[Page 465]]

    (4) Helping homeless persons make the transition to permanent 
housing and independent living.
    (d) Other special needs. With respect to supportive needs of the 
non-homeless, the consolidated plan must describe the priority housing 
and supportive service needs of persons who are not homeless but require 
supportive housing (i.e., elderly, frail elderly, persons with 
disabilities (mental, physical, developmental), persons with alcohol or 
other drug addiction, persons with HIV/AIDS and their families, and 
public housing residents).
    (e) Nonhousing community development plan. (1) If the State seeks 
assistance under the Community Development Block Grant program, the 
consolidated plan must describe the State's priority nonhousing 
community development needs that affect more than one unit of general 
local government and involve activities typically funded by the State 
under the CDBG program. These priority needs must be described by CDBG 
eligibility category, reflecting the needs of persons or families for 
each type of activity. This community development component of the plan 
must state the State's specific long-term and short-term community 
development objectives (including economic development activities that 
create jobs), which must be developed in accordance with the statutory 
goals described in Sec. 91.1 and the primary objective of the CDBG 
program to develop viable urban communities by providing decent housing 
and a suitable living environment and expanding economic opportunities, 
principally for low-income and moderate-income persons.
    (2) A State may elect to allow units of general local government to 
carry out a community revitalization strategy that includes the economic 
empowerment of low income residents, in order to obtain the additional 
flexibility available as provided in 24 CFR part 570, subpart I. A State 
must approve a local government's revitalization strategy before it may 
be implemented. If a State elects to allow revitalization strategies in 
its program, the method of distribution contained in a State's action 
plan pursuant to Sec. 91.320(g)(1) must reflect the State's process and 
criteria for approving local governments' revitalization strategies. The 
State's process and criteria are subject to HUD approval.
    (f) Barriers to affordable housing. The consolidated plan must 
describe the State's strategy to remove or ameliorate negative effects 
of its policies that serve as barriers to affordable housing, as 
identified in accordance with Sec. 91.310.
    (g) Lead-based paint hazards. The consolidated plan must outline the 
actions proposed or being taken to evaluate and reduce lead-based paint 
hazards, and describe how the lead-based paint hazard reduction will be 
integrated into housing policies and programs.
    (h) Anti-poverty strategy. The consolidated plan must describe the 
State's goals, programs, and policies for reducing the number of poverty 
level families and how the State's goals, programs, and policies for 
producing and preserving affordable housing, set forth in the housing 
component of the consolidated plan, will be coordinated with other 
programs and services for which the State is responsible and the extent 
to which they will reduce (or assist in reducing) the number of poverty 
level families, taking into consideration factors over which the State 
has control.
    (i) Institutional structure. The consolidated plan must explain the 
institutional structure, including private industry, nonprofit 
organizations, and public institutions, through which the State will 
carry out its housing and community development plan, assessing the 
strengths and gaps in that delivery system. The plan must describe what 
the State will do to overcome gaps in the institutional structure for 
carrying out its strategy for addressing its priority needs.
    (j) Coordination. The consolidated plan must describe the State's 
activities to enhance coordination between public and assisted housing 
providers and private and governmental health, mental health, and 
service agencies. With respect to the public entities involved, the plan 
must describe the means of cooperation and coordination among the State 
and any units of general local government in the implementation of its 
consolidated plan.
    (k) Low-income housing tax credit use. The consolidated plan must 
describe

[[Page 466]]

the strategy to coordinate the Low-income Housing Tax Credit with the 
development of housing that is affordable to low-income and moderate-
income families.
    (l) Public housing resident initiatives. For a State that has a 
State housing agency administering public housing funds, the 
consolidated plan must describe the State's activities to encourage 
public housing residents to become more involved in management and 
participate in homeownership.

(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 
2506-0117)

[60 FR 1896, Jan. 5, 1995, as amended at 61 54920, Oct. 22, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 91.320  Action plan.

    The action plan must include the following:
    (a) Form application. Standard Form 424;
    (b) Resources--(1) Federal resources. The consolidated plan must 
describe the Federal resources expected to be available to address the 
priority needs and specific objectives identified in the strategic plan, 
in accordance with Sec. 91.315. These resources include grant funds and 
program income.
    (2) Other resources. The consolidated plan must indicate resources 
from private and non-Federal public sources that are reasonably expected 
to be made available to address the needs identified in the plan. The 
plan must explain how Federal funds will leverage those additional 
resources, including a description of how matching requirements of the 
HUD programs will be satisfied. Where the State deems it appropriate, it 
may indicate publicly owned land or property located within the State 
that may be used to carry out the purposes stated in Sec. 91.1;
    (c) Activities. A description of the State's method for distributing 
funds to local governments and nonprofit organizations to carry out 
activities, or the activities to be undertaken by the State, using funds 
that are expected to be received under formula allocations (and related 
program income) and other HUD assistance during the program year and how 
the proposed distribution of funds will address the priority needs and 
specific objectives described in the consolidated plan;
    (d) Geographic distribution. A description of the geographic areas 
of the State (including areas of minority concentration) in which it 
will direct assistance during the ensuing program year, giving the 
rationale for the priorities for allocating investment geographically;
    (e) Homeless and other special needs activities. Activities it plans 
to undertake during the next year to address emergency shelter and 
transitional housing needs of homeless individuals and families 
(including subpopulations), to prevent low-income individuals and 
families with children (especially those with incomes below 30 percent 
of median) from becoming homeless, to help homeless persons make the 
transition to permanent housing and independent living, and to address 
the special needs of persons who are not homeless identified in 
accordance with Sec. 91.315(d);
    (f) Other actions. Actions it plans to take during the next year to 
address obstacles to meeting underserved needs, foster and maintain 
affordable housing (including the coordination of Low-Income Housing Tax 
Credits with the development of affordable housing), remove barriers to 
affordable housing, evaluate and reduce lead-based paint hazards, reduce 
the number of poverty level families, develop institutional structure, 
and enhance coordination between public and private housing and social 
service agencies and foster public housing resident initiatives. (See 
Sec. 91.315 (a), (b), (f), (g), (h), (i), (j), (k), and (l).)
    (g) Program-specific requirements. In addition, the plan must 
include the following specific information:
    (1) The method of distribution shall contain a description of all 
criteria used to select applications from local governments for funding, 
including the relative importance of the criteria--if the relative 
importance has been developed. The action plan must include a 
description of how all CDBG resources will be allocated among all 
funding categories and the threshold factors and grant size limits that 
are to be applied. If the State intends to aid nonentitlement units of 
general local government in applying for guaranteed loan funds under 24 
CFR part 570, subpart M, it must describe available

[[Page 467]]

guarantee amounts and how applications will be selected for assistance. 
If a State elects to allow units of general local government to carry 
out community revitalization strategies, the method of distribution 
shall reflect the State's process and criteria for approving local 
governments' revitalization strategies. (The statement of the method of 
distribution must provide sufficient information so that units of 
general local government will be able to understand and comment on it 
and be able to prepare responsive applications.)
    (2) HOME. (i) The State shall describe other forms of investment 
that are not described in Sec. 92.205(b) of this subtitle.
    (ii) If the State intends to use HOME funds for homebuyers, it must 
state the guidelines for resale or recapture, as required in Sec. 92.254 
of this subtitle.
    (iii) If the State intends to use HOME funds to refinance existing 
debt secured by multifamily housing that is being rehabilitated with 
HOME funds, it must state its refinancing guidelines required under 24 
CFR 92.206(b). The guidelines shall describe the conditions under which 
the State will refinance existing debt. At minimum, the guidelines must:
    (A) Demonstrate that rehabilitation is the primary eligible activity 
and ensure that this requirement is met by establishing a minimum level 
of rehabilitation per unit or a required ratio between rehabilitation 
and refinancing.
    (B) Require a review of management practices to demonstrate that 
disinvestment in the property has not occurred; that the long term needs 
of the project can be met; and that the feasibility of serving the 
targeted population over an extended affordability period can be 
demonstrated.
    (C) State whether the new investment is being made to maintain 
current affordable units, create additional affordable units or both.
    (D) Specify the required period of affordability, whether it is the 
minimum 15 years or longer.
    (E) Specify whether the investment of HOME funds may be 
jurisdiction-wide or limited to a specific geographic area, such as a 
neighborhood identified in a neighborhood revitalization strategy under 
24 CFR Sec. 91.215(e)(2) or a Federally designated Empowerment Zone or 
Enterprise Community.
    (F) State HOME funds cannot be used to refinance multifamily loans 
made or insured by any Federal program, including CDBG.
    (3) ESG. The State shall state the process for awarding grants to 
State recipients and a description of how the State intends to make its 
allocation available to units of local government and nonprofit 
organizations.
    (4) HOPWA. The State shall state the method of selecting project 
sponsors.

(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 
2506-0117)

[60 FR 1896, Jan. 5, 1995; 60 FR 4861, Jan. 25, 1995, as amended at 60 
FR 16379, Mar. 30, 1995; 61 FR 48750, Sept. 16, 1996; 61 FR 54920, Oct. 
22, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 91.325  Certifications.

    (a) General--(1) Affirmatively furthering fair housing. Each State 
is required to submit a certification that it will affirmatively further 
fair housing, which means that it will conduct an analysis to identify 
impediments to fair housing choice within the State, take appropriate 
actions to overcome the effects of any impediments identified through 
that analysis, and maintain records reflecting the analysis and actions 
in this regard. (See Sec. 570.487(b)(2)(ii) of this title.)
    (2) Anti-displacement and relocation plan. The State is required to 
submit a certification that it has in effect and is following a 
residential antidisplacement and relocation assistance plan in 
connection with any activity assisted with funding under the CDBG or 
HOME programs.
    (3) Drug-free workplace. The State must submit a certification with 
regard to drug-free workplace required by 24 CFR part 24, subpart F.
    (4) Anti-lobbying. The State must submit a certification with regard 
to compliance with restrictions on lobbying required by 24 CFR part 87, 
together with disclosure forms, if required by that part.
    (5) Authority of State. The State must submit a certification that 
the consolidated plan is authorized under State law and that the State 
possesses the

[[Page 468]]

legal authority to carry out the programs for which it is seeking 
funding, in accordance with applicable HUD regulations.
    (6) Consistency with plan. The State must submit a certification 
that the housing activities to be undertaken with CDBG, HOME, ESG, and 
HOPWA funds are consistent with the strategic plan.
    (7) Acquisition and relocation. The State must submit a 
certification that it will comply with the acquisition and relocation 
requirements of the Uniform Relocation Assistance and Real Property 
Acquisition Policies Act of 1970, as amended, and implementing 
regulations at 49 CFR part 24.
    (8) Section 3. The State must submit a certification that it will 
comply with section 3 of the Housing and Urban Development Act of 1968 
(12 U.S.C. 1701u), and implementing regulations at 24 CFR part 135.
    (b) Community Development Block Grant program. For States that seek 
funding under CDBG, the following certifications are required:
    (1) Citizen participation. A certification that the State is 
following a detailed citizen participation plan that satisfies the 
requirements of Sec. 91.115, and that each unit of general local 
government that is receiving assistance from the State is following a 
detailed citizen participation plan that satisfies the requirements of 
Sec. 570.486 of this title.
    (2) Consultation with local governments. A certification that:
    (i) It has consulted with affected units of local government in the 
nonentitlement area of the State in determining the method of 
distribution of funding;
    (ii) It engages or will engage in planning for community development 
activities;
    (iii) It provides or will provide technical assistance to units of 
general local government in connection with community development 
programs;
    (iv) It will not refuse to distribute funds to any unit of general 
local government on the basis of the particular eligible activity 
selected by the unit of general local government to meet its community 
development needs, except that a State is not prevented from 
establishing priorities in distributing funding on the basis of the 
activities selected; and
    (v) Each unit of general local government to be distributed funds 
will be required to identify its community development and housing 
needs, including the needs of the low-income and moderate-income 
families, and the activities to be undertaken to meet these needs.
    (3) Community development plan. A certification that this 
consolidated plan identifies community development and housing needs and 
specifies both short-term and long-term community development objectives 
that have been developed in accordance with the primary objective of the 
statute authorizing the CDBG program, as described in 24 CFR 570.2, and 
requirements of this part and 24 CFR part 570.
    (4) Use of funds. A certification that the State has complied with 
the following criteria:
    (i) With respect to activities expected to be assisted with CDBG 
funds, the action plan has been developed so as to give the maximum 
feasible priority to activities that will benefit low- and moderate-
income families or aid in the prevention or elimination of slums or 
blight. The plan may also include CDBG-assisted activities that are 
certified to be designed to meet other community development needs 
having particular urgency because existing conditions pose a serious and 
immediate threat to the health or welfare of the community where other 
financial resources are not available to meet such needs;
    (ii) The aggregate use of CDBG funds, including section 108 
guaranteed loans, during a period specified by the State, consisting of 
one, two, or three specific consecutive program years, shall principally 
benefit low- and moderate-income families in a manner that ensures that 
at least 70 percent of the amount is expended for activities that 
benefit such persons during the designated period (see 24 CFR 570.481 
for definition of ``CDBG funds''); and
    (iii) The State will not attempt to recover any capital costs of 
public improvements assisted with CDBG funds, including Section 108 loan 
guaranteed funds, by assessing any amount against

[[Page 469]]

properties owned and occupied by persons of low- and moderate-income, 
including any fee charged or assessment made as a condition of obtaining 
access to such public improvements. However, if CDBG funds are used to 
pay the proportion of a fee or assessment attributable to the capital 
costs of public improvements (assisted in part with CDBG funds) financed 
from other revenue sources, an assessment or charge may be made against 
the property with respect to the public improvements financed by a 
source other than with CDBG funds. In addition, with respect to 
properties owned and occupied by moderate-income (but not low-income) 
families, an assessment or charge may be made against the property with 
respect to the public improvements financed by a source other than CDBG 
funds if the State certifies that it lacks CDBG funds to cover the 
assessment.
    (5) Compliance with anti-discrimination laws. A certification that 
the grant will be conducted and administered in conformity with title VI 
of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000d) and the Fair Housing 
Act (42 U.S.C. 3601-3619) and implementing regulations.
    (6) Excessive force. A certification that the State will require 
units of general local government that receive CDBG funds to certify 
that they have adopted and are enforcing:
    (i) A policy prohibiting the use of excessive force by law 
enforcement agencies within its jurisdiction against any individuals 
engaged in non-violent civil rights demonstrations; and
    (ii) A policy of enforcing applicable State and local laws against 
physically barring entrance to or exit from a facility or location that 
is the subject of such non-violent civil rights demonstrations within 
its jurisdiction.
    (7) Compliance with laws. A certification that the State will comply 
with applicable laws.
    (c) Emergency Shelter Grant program. For States that seek funding 
under the Emergency Shelter Grant program, a certification is required 
by the State that it will ensure that its State recipients comply with 
the following criteria:
    (1) In the case of assistance involving major rehabilitation or 
conversion, it will maintain any building for which assistance is used 
under the ESG program as a shelter for homeless individuals and families 
for not less than a 10-year period;
    (2) In the case of assistance involving rehabilitation less than 
that covered under paragraph (d)(1) of this section, it will maintain 
any building for which assistance is used under the ESG program as a 
shelter for homeless individuals and families for not less than a three-
year period;
    (3) In the case of assistance involving essential services 
(including but not limited to employment, health, drug abuse, or 
education) or maintenance, operation, insurance, utilities and 
furnishings, it will provide services or shelter to homeless individuals 
and families for the period during which the ESG assistance is provided, 
without regard to a particular site or structure as long as the same 
general population is served;
    (4) Any renovation carried out with ESG assistance shall be 
sufficient to ensure that the building involved is safe and sanitary;
    (5) It will assist homeless individuals in obtaining appropriate 
supportive services, including permanent housing, medical and mental 
health treatment, counseling, supervision, and other services essential 
for achieving independent living, and other Federal, State, local, and 
private assistance available for such individuals;
    (6) It will obtain matching amounts required under Sec. 576.71 of 
this title;
    (7) It will develop and implement procedures to ensure the 
confidentiality of records pertaining to any individual provided family 
violence prevention or treatment services under any project assisted 
under the ESG program, including protection against the release of the 
address or location of any family violence shelter project except with 
the written authorization of the person responsible for the operation of 
that shelter;
    (8) To the maximum extent practicable, it will involve, through 
employment, volunteer services, or otherwise, homeless individuals and 
families in constructing, renovating, maintaining, and operating 
facilities assisted under this program, in providing services assisted 
under the program, and in

[[Page 470]]

providing services for occupants of facilities assisted under the 
program; and
    (9) It is following a current HUD-approved consolidated plan.
    (d) HOME program. Each State must provide the following 
certifications:
    (1) If it plans to use program funds for tenant-based rental 
assistance, a certification that rental-based assistance is an essential 
element of its consolidated plan;
    (2) A certification that it is using and will use HOME funds for 
eligible activities and costs, as described in Secs. 92.205 through 
92.209 of this subtitle and that it is not using and will not use HOME 
funds for prohibited activities, as described in Sec. 92.214 of this 
subtitle; and
    (3) A certification that before committing funds to a project, the 
State or its recipients will evaluate the project in accordance with 
guidelines that it adopts for this purpose and will not invest any more 
HOME funds in combination with other federal assistance than is 
necessary to provide affordable housing.
    (e) Housing Opportunities for Persons With AIDS. For States that 
seek funding under the Housing Opportunities for Persons With AIDS 
program, a certification is required by the State that:
    (1) Activities funded under the program will meet urgent needs that 
are not being met by available public and private sources; and
    (2) Any building or structure purchased, leased, rehabilitated, 
renovated, or converted with assistance under that program shall be 
operated for not less than 10 years specified in the plan, or for a 
period of not less than three years in cases involving non-substantial 
rehabilitation or repair of a building or structure.

(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 
2506-0117)


<R05>
Sec. 91.330  Monitoring.

    The consolidated plan must describe the standards and procedures 
that the State will use to monitor activities carried out in furtherance 
of the plan and will use to ensure long-term compliance with 
requirements of the programs involved, including the comprehensive 
planning requirements.

(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 
2506-0117)

[60 FR 1896, Jan. 5, 1995; 60 FR 4861, Jan. 25, 1995]


<R04>
           Subpart E--Consortia; Contents of Consolidated Plan


<R05>
Sec. 91.400  Applicability.

    This subpart applies to HOME program consortia, as defined in 
Sec. 91.5 (see 24 CFR part 92). Units of local government that 
participate in a consortium must participate in submission of a 
consolidated plan for the consortium, prepared in accordance with this 
subpart. CDBG entitlement communities that are members of a consortium 
must provide additional information for the consolidated plan, as 
described in this subpart.


<R05>
Sec. 91.401  Citizen participation plan.

    The consortium must have a citizen participation plan that complies 
with the requirements of Sec. 91.105. If the consortium contains one or 
more CDBG entitlement communities, the consortium's citizen 
participation plan must provide for citizen participation within each 
CDBG entitlement community, either by the consortium or by the CDBG 
entitlement community, in a manner sufficient for the CDBG entitlement 
community to certify that it is following a citizen participation plan.


<R05>
Sec. 91.402  Consolidated program year.

    (a) Same program year for consortia members. All units of general 
local government that are members of a consortium must be on the same 
program year for CDBG, HOME, ESG, and HOPWA. The program year shall run 
for a twelve month period and begin on the first calendar day of a 
month.
    (b) Transition period. (1) A consortium in existence on February 6, 
1995, with all members having aligned program years must comply with 
paragraph (a) of this section. A consortium in existence on February 6, 
1995, in which all members do not have aligned program years will be 
allowed a transition period during the balance of its current

[[Page 471]]

consortium agreement to bring the program year for all members into 
alignment.
    (2) During any such transition period, the lead agency (if it is a 
CDBG entitlement community) must submit, as its consolidated plan, a 
plan that complies with this subpart for the consortium, plus its 
nonhousing Community Development Plan (in accordance with Sec. 91.215). 
All other CDBG entitlement communities in the consortium may submit 
their respective nonhousing Community Development Plans 
(Sec. 91.215(e)), an Action Plan (Sec. 91.220) and the certifications 
(Sec. 91.425(a) and (b)) in accordance with their individual program 
years.

(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 
2506-0117)

[60 FR 1896, Jan. 5, 1995; 60 FR 10427, Feb. 24, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 91.405  Housing and homeless needs assessment.

    Housing and homeless needs must be described in the consolidated 
plan in accordance with the provisions of Sec. 91.205 for the entire 
consortium. In addition to describing these needs for the entire 
consortium, the consolidated plan may also describe these needs for 
individual communities that are members of the consortium.

(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 
2506-0117)


<R05>
Sec. 91.410  Housing market analysis.

    Housing market analysis must be described in the consolidated plan 
in accordance with the provisions of Sec. 91.210 for the entire 
consortium. In addition to describing market conditions for the entire 
consortium, the consolidated plan may also describe these conditions for 
individual communities that are members of the consortium.

(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 
2506-0117)


<R05>
Sec. 91.415  Strategic plan.

    Strategies and priority needs must be described in the consolidated 
plan in accordance with the provisions of Sec. 91.215 for the entire 
consortium. The consortium is not required to submit a nonhousing 
Community Development Plan; however, if the consortium includes CDBG 
entitlement communities, the consolidated plan must include the 
nonhousing Community Development Plans of the CDBG entitlement community 
members of the consortium. The consortium must set forth its priorities 
for allocating housing (including CDBG and ESG, where applicable) 
resources geographically within the consortium, describing how the 
consolidated plan will address the needs identified (in accordance with 
Sec. 91.405), describing the reasons for the consortium's allocation 
priorities, and identifying any obstacles there are to addressing 
underserved needs.

(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 
2506-0117)


<R05>
Sec. 91.420  Action plan.

    (a) Form application. The action plan for the consortium must 
include a Standard Form 424 for the consortium for the HOME program. 
Each entitlement jurisdiction also must submit a Standard Form 424 for 
its funding under the CDBG program and, if applicable, the ESG and HOPWA 
programs.
    (b) Description of resources and activities. The action plan must 
describe the resources to be used and activities to be undertaken to 
pursue its strategic plan. The consolidated plan must provide this 
description for all resources and activities within the entire 
consortium as a whole, as well as a description for each individual 
community that is a member of the consortium.

(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 
2506-0117)


<R05>
Sec. 91.425  Certifications.

    (a) Consortium certifications--(1) General--(i) Affirmatively 
furthering fair housing. Each consortium must certify that it will 
affirmatively further fair housing, which means that it will conduct an 
analysis to identify impediments to fair housing choice within the area, 
take appropriate actions to overcome the effects of any impediments 
identified through that analysis, and maintain records reflecting the 
analysis and actions in this regard.
    (ii) Anti-displacement and relocation plan. Each consortium must 
certify that it has in effect and is following a

[[Page 472]]

residential antidisplacement and relocation assistance plan in 
connection with any activity assisted with funding under the HOME or 
CDBG program.
    (iii) Drug-free workplace. The consortium must submit a 
certification with regard to drug-free workplace required by 24 CFR part 
24, subpart F.
    (iv) Anti-lobbying. The consortium must submit a certification with 
regard to compliance with restrictions on lobbying required by 24 CFR 
part 87, together with disclosure forms, if required by that part.
    (v) Authority of consortium. The consortium must submit a 
certification that the consolidated plan is authorized under State and 
local law (as applicable) and that the consortium possesses the legal 
authority to carry out the programs for which it is seeking funding, in 
accordance with applicable HUD regulations.
    (vi) Consistency with plan. The consortium must certify that the 
housing activities to be undertaken with CDBG, HOME, ESG, and HOPWA 
funds are consistent with the strategic plan.
    (vii) Acquisition and relocation. The consortium must certify that 
it will comply with the acquisition and relocation requirements of the 
Uniform Relocation Assistance and Real Property Acquisition Policies Act 
of 1970, as amended (42 U.S.C. 4601), and implementing regulations at 49 
CFR part 24.
    (viii) Section 3. The consortium must certify that it will comply 
with section 3 of the Housing and Urban Development Act of 1968 (12 
U.S.C. 1701u), and implementing regulations at 24 CFR part 135.
    (2) HOME program. The consortium must provide the following 
certifications:
    (i) If it plans to use HOME funds for tenant-based rental 
assistance, a certification that rental-based assistance is an essential 
element of its consolidated plan;
    (ii) That it is using and will use HOME funds for eligible 
activities and costs, as described in Secs. 92.205 through 92.209 of 
this subtitle and that it is not using and will not use HOME funds for 
prohibited activities, as described in Sec. 92.214 of this subtitle; and
    (iii) That before committing funds to a project, the consortium will 
evaluate the project in accordance with guidelines that it adopts for 
this purpose and will not invest any more HOME funds in combination with 
other federal assistance than is necessary to provide affordable 
housing.
    (b) CDBG entitlement community certifications. A CDBG entitlement 
community that is a member of a consortium must submit the 
certifications required by Sec. 91.225 (a) and (b), and, if applicable, 
of Sec. 91.225 (c) and (d).

(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 
2506-0117)


<R05>
Sec. 91.430  Monitoring.

    The consolidated plan must describe the standards and procedures 
that the consortium will use to monitor activities carried out in 
furtherance of the plan and will use to ensure long-term compliance with 
requirements of the programs involved, including minority business 
outreach and the comprehensive planning requirements.

(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 
2506-0117)

[60 FR 1896, Jan. 5, 1995; 60 FR 4861, Jan. 25, 1995]


<R04>
                  Subpart F--Other General Requirements


<R05>
Sec. 91.500  HUD approval action.

    (a) General. HUD will review the plan upon receipt. The plan will be 
deemed approved 45 days after HUD receives the plan, unless before that 
date HUD has notified the jurisdiction that the plan is disapproved.
    (b) Standard of review. HUD may disapprove a plan or a portion of a 
plan if it is inconsistent with the purposes of the Cranston-Gonzalez 
National Affordable Housing Act (42 U.S.C. 12703), if it is 
substantially incomplete, or, in the case of certifications applicable 
to the CDBG program under Secs. 91.225 (a) and (b) or 91.325 (a) and 
(b), if it is not satisfactory to the Secretary in accordance with 
Secs. 570.304, 570.429(g), or 570.485(c) of this title, as applicable. 
The following are examples of consolidated plans that are substantially 
incomplete:
    (1) A plan that was developed without the required citizen 
participation or the required consultation;

[[Page 473]]

    (2) A plan that fails to satisfy all the required elements in this 
part; and
    (3) A plan for which a certification is rejected by HUD as 
inaccurate, after HUD has inspected the evidence and provided due notice 
and opportunity to the jurisdiction for comment.
    (c) Written notice of disapproval. Within 15 days after HUD notifies 
a jurisdiction that it is disapproving its plan, it must inform the 
jurisdiction in writing of the reasons for disapproval and actions that 
the jurisdiction could take to meet the criteria for approval. 
Disapproval of a plan with respect to one program does not affect 
assistance distributed on the basis of a formula under other programs.
    (d) Revisions and resubmission. The jurisdiction may revise or 
resubmit a plan within 45 days after the first notification of 
disapproval. HUD must respond to approve or disapprove the plan within 
30 days of receiving the revisions or resubmission.

(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 
2506-0117)

[60 FR 1896, Jan. 5, 1995, as amended at 60 FR 56909, Nov. 9, 1995; 61 
FR 54920, Oct. 22, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 91.505  Amendments to the consolidated plan.

    (a) Amendments to the plan. The jurisdiction shall amend its 
approved plan whenever it makes one of the following decisions:
    (1) To make a change in its allocation priorities or a change in the 
method of distribution of funds;
    (2) To carry out an activity, using funds from any program covered 
by the consolidated plan (including program income), not previously 
described in the action plan; or
    (3) To change the purpose, scope, location, or beneficiaries of an 
activity.
    (b) Criteria for substantial amendment. The jurisdiction shall 
identify in its citizen participation plan the criteria it will use for 
determining what constitutes a substantial amendment. It is these 
substantial amendments that are subject to a citizen participation 
process, in accordance with the jurisdiction's citizen participation 
plan. (See Secs. 91.105 and 91.115.)
    (c) Submission to HUD. (1) Upon completion, the jurisdiction must 
make the amendment public and must notify HUD that an amendment has been 
made. The jurisdiction may submit a copy of each amendment to HUD as it 
occurs, or at the end of the program year. Letters transmitting copies 
of amendments must be signed by the official representative of the 
jurisdiction authorized to take such action.
    (2) See subpart B of this part for the public notice procedures 
applicable to substantial amendments. For any amendment affecting the 
HOPWA program that would involve acquisition, rehabilitation, 
conversion, lease, repair or construction of properties to provide 
housing, an environmental review of the revised proposed use of funds 
must be completed by HUD in accordance with 24 CFR 574.510.

(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 
2506-0117)


<R05>
Sec. 91.510  Consistency determinations.

    (a) Applicability. For competitive programs, a certification of 
consistency of the application with the approved consolidated plan for 
the jurisdiction may be required, whether the applicant is the 
jurisdiction or another applicant.
    (b) Certifying authority. (1) The certification must be obtained 
from the unit of general local government if the project will be located 
in a unit of general local government that: is required to have a 
consolidated plan, is authorized to use an abbreviated consolidated plan 
but elects to prepare and has submitted a full consolidated plan, or is 
authorized to use an abbreviated consolidated plan and is applying for 
the same program as the applicant pursuant to the same Notice of Funding 
Availability (and therefore has or will have an abbreviated consolidated 
plan for the fiscal year for that program).
    (2) If the project will not be located in a unit of general local 
government, the certification may be obtained from the State or, if the 
project will be located in a unit of general local government authorized 
to use an abbreviated consolidated plan, from the unit of general local 
government if it is willing to prepare such a plan.
    (3) Where the recipient of a HOPWA grant is a city that is the most 
populous unit of general local government in an EMSA, it also must 
obtain and

[[Page 474]]

keep on file certifications of consistency from such public officials 
for each other locality in the EMSA in which housing assistance is 
provided.
    (c) Meaning. A jurisdiction's certification that an application is 
consistent with its consolidated plan means the jurisdiction's plan 
shows need, the proposed activities are consistent with the 
jurisdiction's strategic plan, and the location of the proposed 
activities is consistent with the geographic areas specified in the 
plan. The jurisdiction shall provide the reasons for the denial when it 
fails to provide a certification of consistency.

(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 
2506-0117)


<R05>
Sec. 91.515  Funding determinations by HUD.

    (a) Formula funding. The action plan submitted by the jurisdiction 
will be considered as the application for the CDBG, HOME, ESG, and HOPWA 
formula grant programs. The Department will make its funding award 
determination after reviewing the plan submission in accordance with 
Sec. 91.500.
    (b) Other funding. For other funding, the jurisdiction must still 
respond to Notices of Funding Availability for the individual programs 
in order to receive funding.

(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 
2506-0117)


<R05>
Sec. 91.520  Performance reports.

    (a) General. Each jurisdiction that has an approved consolidated 
plan shall annually review and report, in a form prescribed by HUD, on 
the progress it has made in carrying out its strategic plan and its 
action plan. The performance report must include a description of the 
resources made available, the investment of available resources, the 
geographic distribution and location of investments, the families and 
persons assisted (including the racial and ethnic status of persons 
assisted), actions taken to affirmatively further fair housing, and 
other actions indicated in the strategic plan and the action plan. This 
performance report shall be submitted to HUD within 90 days after the 
close of the jurisdiction's program year.
    (b) Affordable housing. The report shall include an evaluation of 
the jurisdiction's progress in meeting its specific objective of 
providing affordable housing, including the number and types of families 
served. This element of the report must include the number of extremely 
low-income, low-income, moderate-income, and middle-income persons 
served.
    (c) CDBG. For CDBG recipients, the report shall include a 
description of the use of CDBG funds during the program year and an 
assessment by the jurisdiction of the relationship of that use to the 
priorities and specific objectives identified in the plan, giving 
special attention to the highest priority activities that were 
identified. This element of the report must specify the nature of and 
reasons for any changes in its program objectives and indications of how 
the jurisdiction would change its programs as a result of its 
experiences. This element of the report also must include the number of 
extremely low-income, low-income, and moderate-income persons served by 
each activity where information on income by family size is required to 
determine the eligibility of the activity.
    (d) HOME. For HOME participating jurisdictions, the report shall 
include the results of on-site inspections of affordable rental housing 
assisted under the program to determine compliance with housing codes 
and other applicable regulations, an assessment of the jurisdiction's 
affirmative marketing actions and outreach to minority-owned and women-
owned businesses, and data on the amount and use of program income for 
projects, including the number of projects and owner and tenant 
characteristics.
    (e) HOPWA. For jurisdictions receiving funding under the Housing 
Opportunities for Persons With AIDS program, the report must include the 
number of individuals assisted and the types of assistance provided.
    (f) Evaluation by HUD. HUD shall review the performance report and 
determine whether it is satisfactory. If a satisfactory report is not 
submitted in a timely manner, HUD may suspend funding until a 
satisfactory report is submitted, or may withdraw and reallocate funding 
if HUD determines,

[[Page 475]]

after notice and opportunity for a hearing, that the jurisdiction will 
not submit a satisfactory report.

(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 
2506-0117)


<R05>
Sec. 91.525  Performance review by HUD.

    (a) General. HUD shall review the performance of each jurisdiction 
covered by this part at least annually, including site visits by 
employees--insofar as practicable, assessing the following:
    (1) Management of funds made available under programs administered 
by HUD;
    (2) Compliance with the consolidated plan;
    (3) Accuracy of performance reports;
    (4) Extent to which the jurisdiction made progress towards the 
statutory goals identified in Sec. 91.1; and
    (5) Efforts to ensure that housing assisted under programs 
administered by HUD is in compliance with contractual agreements and the 
requirements of law.
    (b) Report by HUD. HUD shall report on the performance review in 
writing, stating the length of time the jurisdiction has to review and 
comment on the report, which will be at least 30 days. HUD may revise 
the report after considering the jurisdiction's views, and shall make 
the report, the jurisdiction's comments, and any revisions available to 
the public within 30 days after receipt of the jurisdiction's comments.


<R05>
Sec. 91.600  Waiver authority.

    Upon determination of good cause, HUD may, subject to statutory 
limitations, waive any provision of this part. Each such waiver must be 
in writing and must be supported by documentation of the pertinent facts 
and grounds.

[60 FR 50802, Sept. 29, 1995]


<R03>
PART 92--HOME INVESTMENT PARTNERSHIPS PROGRAM--Table of Contents

<R05>


                           Subpart A--General

Sec.
92.1  Overview.
92.2  Definitions.
92.4  Waivers and suspension of requirements for disaster areas.

                      Subpart B--Allocation Formula

92.50  Formula allocation.

                          Insular Areas Program

92.60  Allocation amounts for insular areas.
92.61  Program description.
92.62  Review of program description and certifications.
92.63  Amendments to program description.
92.64  Applicability of requirements to insular areas.
92.65  Funding sanctions.
92.66  Reallocation.

  Subpart C--Consortia; Designation and Revocation of Designation as a 
                       Participating Jurisdiction

92.100  [Reserved]
92.101  Consortia.
92.102  Participation threshold amount.
92.103  Notification of intent to participate.
92.104  Submission of a consolidated plan.
92.105  Designation as a participating jurisdiction.
92.106  Continuous designation as a participating jurisdiction.
92.107  Revocation of designation as a participating jurisdiction.

                   Subpart D--Submission Requirements

92.150  Submission requirements.

                     Subpart E--Program Requirements

92.200  Private-public partnership.
92.201  Distribution of assistance.
92.202  Site and neighborhood standards.
92.203  Income determinations.
92.204  Applicability of requirements to entities that receive a 
          reallocation of HOME funds, other than participating 
          jurisdictions.

                   Eligible and Prohibited Activities

92.205  Eligible activities: general.
92.206  Eligible project costs.
92.207  Eligible administrative and planning costs.
92.208  Eligible community housing development organization (CHDO) 
          operating expense and capacity building costs.
92.209  Tenant-based rental assistance: Eligible costs and requirements.
92.212  Pre-award costs.
92.213  [Reserved]
92.214  Prohibited activities.
92.215  Limitation on jurisdictions under court order.

                            Income Targeting

92.216  Income targeting: Tenant-based rental assistance and rental 
          units.
92.217  Income targeting: Homeownership.

[[Page 476]]

                    Matching Contribution Requirement

92.218  Amount of matching contribution.
92.219  Recognition of matching contribution.
92.220  Form of matching contribution.
92.221  Match credit.
92.222  Reduction of matching contribution requirement.

                     Subpart F--Project Requirements

92.250  Maximum per-unit subsidy amount and subsidy layering.
92.251  Property standards.
92.252  Qualification as affordable housing: Rental housing.
92.253  Tenant and participant protections.
92.254  Qualification as affordable housing: Homeownership.
92.255  Converting rental units to homeownership units for existing 
          tenants.
92.256  [Reserved].
92.257  Religious organizations.
92.258  Elder cottage housing opportunity (ECHO) units.

         Subpart G--Community Housing Development Organizations

92.300  Set-aside for community housing development organizations 
          (CHDOs).
92.301  Project-specific assistance to community housing development 
          organizations.
92.302  Housing education and organizational support.
92.303  Tenant participation plan.

                  Subpart H--Other Federal Requirements

92.350  Other Federal requirements and nondiscrimination.
92.351  Affirmative marketing; minority outreach program.
92.352  Environmental review.
92.353  Displacement, relocation, and acquisition.
92.354  Labor.
92.355  Lead-based paint.
92.356  Conflict of interest.
92.357  Executive Order 12372.
92.358  Consultant activities.

                     Subpart I--Technical Assistance

92.400  Coordinated Federal support for housing strategies.

                        Subpart J--Reallocations

92.450  General.
92.451  Reallocation of HOME funds from a jurisdiction that is not 
          designated a participating jurisdiction or has its designation 
          revoked.
92.452  Reallocation of community housing development organization set-
          aside.
92.453  Competitive reallocations.
92.454  Reallocations by formula.

                    Subpart K--Program Administration

92.500  The HOME Investment Trust Fund.
92.501  HOME Investment Partnership Agreement.
92.502  Program disbursement and information system.
92.503  Program income, repayments, and recaptured funds.
92.504  Participating jurisdiction responsibilities; written agreements; 
          on-site inspections.
92.505  Applicability of uniform administrative requirements.
92.506  Audit.
92.507  Closeout.
92.508  Recordkeeping.
92.509  Performance reports.

              Subpart L--Performance Reviews and Sanctions

92.550  Performance reviews.
92.551  Corrective and remedial actions.
92.552  Notice and opportunity for hearing; sanctions.

    Authority: 42 U.S.C. 3535(d) and 12701-12839.

    Source: 61 FR 48750, Sept. 16, 1996, unless otherwise noted.


<R04>
                           Subpart A--General


<R05>
Sec. 92.1  Overview.

    This part implements the HOME Investment Partnerships Act (the HOME 
Investment Partnerships Program). In general, under the HOME Investment 
Partnerships Program, HUD allocates funds by formula among eligible 
State and local governments to strengthen public-private partnerships 
and to expand the supply of decent, safe, sanitary, and affordable 
housing, with primary attention to rental housing, for very low-income 
and low-income families. Generally, HOME funds must be matched by 
nonfederal resources. State and local governments that become 
participating jurisdictions may use HOME funds to carry out multi-year 
housing strategies through acquisition, rehabilitation, and new 
construction of housing, and tenant-based rental assistance. 
Participating jurisdictions may provide assistance in a number of 
eligible forms, including loans, advances, equity investments, interest 
subsidies and other forms of investment that HUD approves.

[[Page 477]]


<R05>
Sec. 92.2  Definitions.

    The terms ``1937 Act'', ``ALJ'', ``Fair Housing Act'', ``HUD'', 
``Indian Housing Authority (IHA)'', ``Public Housing Agency (PHA)'', and 
``Secretary'' are defined in 24 CFR 5.100.
    Act means the HOME Investment Partnerships Act at title II of the 
Cranston-Gonzalez National Affordable Housing Act, as amended, 42 U.S.C. 
12701 et seq.
    Adjusted income. See Sec. 92.203.
    Annual income. See Sec. 92.203.
    Certification shall have the meaning provided in section 104(21) of 
the Cranston-Gonzalez National Affordable Housing Act, as amended, 42 
U.S.C. 12704.
    Commitment means:
    (1) The participating jurisdiction has executed a legally binding 
agreement with a State recipient, a subrecipient or a contractor to use 
a specific amount of HOME funds to produce affordable housing or provide 
tenant-based rental assistance; or has executed a written agreement 
reserving a specific amount of funds to a community housing development 
organization; or has met the requirements to commit to a specific local 
project, as defined in paragraph (2), of this definition.
    (2) Commit to a specific local project means:
    (i) If the project consists of rehabilitation or new construction 
(with or without acquisition) the participating jurisdiction (or State 
recipient or subrecipient) and project owner have executed a written 
legally binding agreement under which HOME assistance will be provided 
to the owner for an identifiable project under which construction can 
reasonably be expected to start within twelve months of the agreement 
date. If the project is owned by the participating jurisdiction or State 
recipient, the project has been set up in the disbursement and 
information system established by HUD, and construction can reasonably 
be expected to start within twelve months of the project set-up date.
    (ii)(A) If the project consists of acquisition of standard housing 
and the participating jurisdiction (or State recipient or subrecipient) 
is acquiring the property with HOME funds, the participating 
jurisdiction (or State recipient or subrecipient) and the property owner 
have executed a legally binding contract for sale of an identifiable 
property and the property title will be transferred to the participating 
jurisdiction (or State recipient or subrecipient) within six months of 
the date of the contract.
    (B) If the project consists of acquisition of standard housing and 
the participating jurisdiction (or State recipient or subrecipient) is 
providing HOME funds to a family to acquire single family housing for 
homeownership or to a purchaser to acquire rental housing, the 
participating jurisdiction (or State recipient or subrecipient) and the 
family or purchaser have executed a written agreement under which HOME 
assistance will be provided for the purchase of the single family 
housing or rental housing and the property title will be transferred to 
the family or purchaser within six months of the agreement date.
    (iii) If the project consists of tenant-based rental assistance, the 
participating jurisdiction (or State recipient, or subrecipient) has 
entered into a rental assistance contract with the owner or the tenant 
in accordance with the provisions of Sec. 92.209.
    Community housing development organization means a private nonprofit 
organization that:
    (1) Is organized under State or local laws;
    (2) Has no part of its net earnings inuring to the benefit of any 
member, founder, contributor, or individual;
    (3) Is neither controlled by, nor under the direction of, 
individuals or entities seeking to derive profit or gain from the 
organization. A community housing development organization may be 
sponsored or created by a for-profit entity, but:
    (i) The for-profit entity may not be an entity whose primary purpose 
is the development or management of housing, such as a builder, 
developer, or real estate management firm.
    (ii) The for-profit entity may not have the right to appoint more 
than one-third of the membership of the organization's governing body. 
Board members appointed by the for-profit

[[Page 478]]

entity may not appoint the remaining two-thirds of the board members; 
and
    (iii) The community housing development organization must be free to 
contract for goods and services from vendors of its own choosing;
    (4) Has a tax exemption ruling from the Internal Revenue Service 
under section 501(c) (3) or (4) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (26 
CFR 1.501(c)(3)-1);
    (5) Does not include a public body (including the participating 
jurisdiction). An organization that is State or locally chartered may 
qualify as a community housing development organization; however, the 
State or local government may not have the right to appoint more than 
one-third of the membership of the organization's governing body and no 
more than one-third of the board members may be public officials or 
employees of the participating jurisdiction or State recipient. Board 
members appointed by the State or local government may not appoint the 
remaining two-thirds of the board members;
    (6) Has standards of financial accountability that conform to 24 CFR 
84.21, ``Standards for Financial Management Systems;''
    (7) Has among its purposes the provision of decent housing that is 
affordable to low-income and moderate-income persons, as evidenced in 
its charter, articles of incorporation, resolutions or by-laws;
    (8) Maintains accountability to low-income community residents by:
    (i) Maintaining at least one-third of its governing board's 
membership for residents of low-income neighborhoods, other low-income 
community residents, or elected representative of low-income 
neighborhood organizations. For urban areas, ``community'' may be a 
neighborhood or neighborhoods, city, county or metropolitan area; for 
rural areas, it may be a neighborhood or neighborhoods, town, village, 
county, or multi-county area (but not the entire State); and
    (ii) Providing a formal process for low-income program beneficiaries 
to advise the organization in its decisions regarding the design, 
siting, development, and management of affordable housing;
    (9) Has a demonstrated capacity for carrying out activities assisted 
with HOME funds. An organization may satisfy this requirement by hiring 
experienced key staff members who have successfully completed similar 
projects, or a consultant with the same type of experience and a plan to 
train appropriate key staff members of the organization; and
    (10) Has a history of serving the community within which housing to 
be assisted with HOME funds is to be located. In general, an 
organization must be able to show one year of serving the community 
before HOME funds are reserved for the organization. However, a newly 
created organization formed by local churches, service organizations or 
neighborhood organizations may meet this requirement by demonstrating 
that its parent organization has at least a year of serving the 
community.
    Family has the same meaning given that term in 24 CFR 5.403.
    HOME funds means funds made available under this part through 
allocations and reallocations, plus program income.
    Homeownership means ownership in fee simple title or a 99 year 
leasehold interest in a one- to four-unit dwelling or in a condominium 
unit, or equivalent form of ownership approved by HUD. The ownership 
interest may be subject only to the restrictions on resale required 
under Sec. 92.254(a); mortgages, deeds of trust, or other liens or 
instruments securing debt on the property as approved by the 
participating jurisdiction; or any other restrictions or encumbrances 
that do not impair the good and marketable nature of title to the 
ownership interest. For purposes of the insular areas, homeownership 
includes leases of 40 years or more. The participating jurisdiction must 
determine whether or not ownership or membership in a cooperative or 
mutual housing project constitutes homeownership under State law.
    Household means one or more persons occupying a housing unit.
    Housing includes manufactured housing and manufactured housing lots, 
permanent housing for disabled homeless persons, transitional housing, 
single-room occupancy housing, and group

[[Page 479]]

homes. Housing also includes elder cottage housing opportunity (ECHO) 
units that are small, free-standing, barrier-free, energy-efficient, 
removable, and designed to be installed adjacent to existing single-
family dwellings. Housing does not include emergency shelters (including 
shelters for disaster victims) or facilities such as nursing homes, 
convalescent homes, hospitals, residential treatment facilities, 
correctional facilities and student dormitories.
    Insular areas means Guam, the Northern Mariana Islands, the United 
States Virgin Islands, and American Samoa.
    Jurisdiction means a State or unit of general local government.
    Low-income families means families whose annual incomes do not 
exceed 80 percent of the median income for the area, as determined by 
HUD with adjustments for smaller and larger families, except that HUD 
may establish income ceilings higher or lower than 80 percent of the 
median for the area on the basis of HUD findings that such variations 
are necessary because of prevailing levels of construction costs or fair 
market rents, or unusually high or low family incomes.
    Metropolitan city has the meaning given the term in 24 CFR 570.3.
    Neighborhood means a geographic location designated in comprehensive 
plans, ordinances, or other local documents as a neighborhood, village, 
or similar geographical designation that is within the boundary but does 
not encompass the entire area of a unit of general local government; 
except that if the unit of general local government has a population 
under 25,000, the neighborhood may, but need not, encompass the entire 
area of a unit of general local government.
    Participating jurisdiction means a jurisdiction (as defined in this 
section) that has been so designated by HUD in accordance with 
Sec. 92.105.
    Person with disabilities means a household composed of one or more 
persons, at least one of whom is an adult, who has a disability.
    (1) A person is considered to have a disability if the person has a 
physical, mental, or emotional impairment that:
    (i) Is expected to be of long-continued and indefinite duration;
    (ii) Substantially impedes his or her ability to live independently; 
and
    (iii) Is of such a nature that such ability could be improved by 
more suitable housing conditions.
    (2) A person will also be considered to have a disability if he or 
she has a developmental disability, which is a severe, chronic 
disability that:
    (i) Is attributable to a mental or physical impairment or 
combination of mental and physical impairments;
    (ii) Is manifested before the person attains age 22;
    (iii) Is likely to continue indefinitely;
    (iv) Results in substantial functional limitations in three or more 
of the following areas of major life activity: self-care, receptive and 
expressive language, learning, mobility, self-direction, capacity for 
independent living, and economic self-sufficiency; and
    (v) Reflects the person's need for a combination and sequence of 
special, interdisciplinary, or generic care, treatment, or other 
services that are of lifelong or extended duration and are individually 
planned and coordinated. Notwithstanding the preceding provisions of 
this definition, the term ``person with disabilities'' includes two or 
more persons with disabilities living together, one or more such persons 
living with another person who is determined to be important to their 
care or well-being, and the surviving member or members of any household 
described in the first sentence of this definition who were living, in a 
unit assisted with HOME funds, with the deceased member of the household 
at the time of his or her death.
    Program income means gross income received by the participating 
jurisdiction, State recipient, or a subrecipient directly generated from 
the use of HOME funds or matching contributions. When program income is 
generated by housing that is only partially assisted with HOME funds or 
matching funds, the income shall be prorated to reflect the percentage 
of HOME funds used. Program income includes, but is not limited to, the 
following:
    (1) Proceeds from the disposition by sale or long-term lease of real 
property acquired, rehabilitated, or constructed

[[Page 480]]

with HOME funds or matching contributions;
    (2) Gross income from the use or rental of real property, owned by 
the participating jurisdiction, State recipient, or a subrecipient, that 
was acquired, rehabilitated, or constructed, with HOME funds or matching 
contributions, less costs incidental to generation of the income;
    (3) Payments of principal and interest on loans made using HOME 
funds or matching contributions;
    (4) Proceeds from the sale of loans made with HOME funds or matching 
contributions;
    (5) Proceeds from the sale of obligations secured by loans made with 
HOME funds or matching contributions;
    (6) Interest earned on program income pending its disposition; and
    (7) Any other interest or return on the investment permitted under 
Sec. 92.205(b) of HOME funds or matching contributions.
    Project means a site or sites together with any building (including 
a manufactured housing unit) or buildings located on the site(s) that 
are under common ownership, management, and financing and are to be 
assisted with HOME funds as a single undertaking under this part. The 
project includes all the activities associated with the site and 
building. For tenant-based rental assistance, project means assistance 
to one or more families.
    Project completion means that all necessary title transfer 
requirements and construction work have been performed; the project 
complies with the requirements of this part (including the property 
standards under Sec. 92.251); the final drawdown has been disbursed for 
the project; and the project completion information has been entered in 
the disbursement and information system established by HUD. For tenant-
based rental assistance, project completion means the final drawdown has 
been disbursed for the project.
    Reconstruction means the rebuilding, on the same lot, of housing 
standing on a site at the time of project commitment. The number of 
housing units on the lot may not be decreased or increased as part of a 
reconstruction project, but the number of rooms per unit may be 
increased or decreased. Reconstruction also includes replacing an 
existing substandard unit of manufactured housing with a new or standard 
unit of manufactured housing. Reconstruction is rehabilitation for 
purposes of this part.
    Single room occupancy (SRO) housing means housing (consisting of 
single room dwelling units) that is the primary residence of its 
occupant or occupants. The unit must contain either food preparation or 
sanitary facilities (and may contain both) if the project consists of 
new construction, conversion of non-residential space, or 
reconstruction. For acquisition or rehabilitation of an existing 
residential structure or hotel, neither food preparation nor sanitary 
facilities are required to be in the unit. If the units do not contain 
sanitary facilities, the building must contain sanitary facilities that 
are shared by tenants.
    State means any State of the United States, the District of 
Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, or any agency or 
instrumentality thereof that is established pursuant to legislation and 
designated by the chief executive officer to act on behalf of the State 
with regard to the provisions of this part.
    State recipient. See Sec. 92.201(b)(2).
    Subrecipient means a public agency or nonprofit organization 
selected by the participating jurisdiction to administer all or a 
portion of the participating jurisdiction's HOME program. A public 
agency or nonprofit organization that receives HOME funds solely as a 
developer or owner of housing is not a subrecipient. The participating 
jurisdiction's selection of a subrecipient is not subject to the 
procurement procedures and requirements.
    Tenant-based rental assistance is a form of rental assistance in 
which the assisted tenant may move from a dwelling unit with a right to 
continued assistance. Tenant-based rental assistance under this part 
also includes security deposits for rental of dwelling units.
    Transitional housing means housing that:

[[Page 481]]

    (1) Is designed to provide housing and appropriate supportive 
services to persons, including (but not limited to) deinstitutionalized 
individuals with disabilities, homeless individuals with disabilities, 
and homeless families with children; and
    (2) Has as its purpose facilitating the movement of individuals and 
families to independent living within a time period that is set by the 
participating jurisdiction or project owner before occupancy.
    Unit of general local government means a city, town, township, 
county, parish, village, or other general purpose political subdivision 
of a State; a consortium of such political subdivisions recognized by 
HUD in accordance with Sec. 92.101; and any agency or instrumentality 
thereof that is established pursuant to legislation and designated by 
the chief executive to act on behalf of the jurisdiction with regard to 
provisions of this part. When a county is an urban county, the urban 
county is the unit of general local government for purposes of the HOME 
Investment Partnerships Program.
    Urban county has the meaning given the term in 24 CFR 570.3.
    Very low-income families means low-income families whose annual 
incomes do not exceed 50 percent of the median family income for the 
area, as determined by HUD with adjustments for smaller and larger 
families, except that HUD may establish income ceilings higher or lower 
than 50 percent of the median for the area on the basis of HUD findings 
that such variations are necessary because of prevailing levels of 
construction costs or fair market rents, or unusually high or low family 
incomes.


<R05>
Sec. 92.4  Waivers and suspension of requirements for disaster areas.

    HUD's authority for waiver of regulations and for the suspension of 
requirements to address damage in a Presidentially declared disaster 
area is described in 24 CFR 5.110 and in section 290 of the Act, 
respectively.


<R04>
                      Subpart B--Allocation Formula


<R05>
Sec. 92.50  Formula allocation.

    (a) Jurisdictions eligible for a formula allocation. HUD will 
provide allocations of funds in amounts determined by the formula 
described in this section to units of general local governments that, as 
of the end of the previous fiscal year, are metropolitan cities, urban 
counties, or consortia approved under Sec. 92.101; and States.
    (b) Amounts available for allocation; State and local share. The 
amount of funds that are available for allocation by the formula under 
this section is equal to the balance of funds remaining after reserving 
amounts for Indian tribes, insular areas, housing education and 
organizational support, other support for State and local housing 
strategies, and other purposes authorized by Congress, in accordance 
with the Act and appropriations.
    (c) Formula factors. The formula for determining allocations uses 
the following factors. The first and sixth factors are weighted 0.1; the 
other four factors are weighted 0.2.
    (1) Vacancy-adjusted rental units where the household head is at or 
below the poverty level. These rental units are multiplied by the ratio 
of the national rental vacancy rate over a jurisdiction's rental vacancy 
rate.
    (2) Occupied rental units with at least one of four problems 
(overcrowding, incomplete kitchen facilities, incomplete plumbing, or 
high rent costs). Overcrowding is a condition that exists if there is 
more than one person per room occupying the unit. Incomplete kitchen 
facilities means the unit lacks a sink with running water, a range, or a 
refrigerator. Incomplete plumbing means the unit lacks hot and cold 
piped water, a flush toilet, or a bathtub or shower inside the unit for 
the exclusive use of the occupants of the unit. High rent costs occur 
when more than 30 percent of household income is used for rent.
    (3) Rental units built before 1950 occupied by poor families.
    (4) Rental units described in paragraph (c)(2) of this section 
multiplied

[[Page 482]]

by the ratio of the cost of producing housing for a jurisdiction divided 
by the national cost.
    (5) Number of families at or below the poverty level.
    (6) Population of a jurisdiction multiplied by a net per capita 
income (pci). To compute net pci for a jurisdiction or for the nation, 
the pci of a three person family at the poverty threshold is subtracted 
from the pci of the jurisdiction or of the nation. The index is 
constructed by dividing the national net pci by the net pci of a 
jurisdiction.
    (d) Calculating formula allocations for units of general local 
government. (1) Initial allocation amounts for units of general local 
government described in paragraph (a) of this section are determined by 
multiplying the sum of the shares of the six factors in paragraph (c) of 
this section by 60 percent of the amount available under paragraph (b) 
of this section for formula allocation. The shares are the ratio of the 
weighted factor for each jurisdiction over the corresponding factor for 
the total for all of these units of general local government.
    (2) If any of the initial amounts for such units of general local 
government in Puerto Rico exceeds twice the national average, on a per 
rental unit basis, that amount is capped at twice the national average.
    (3) To determine the maximum number of units of general local 
government that receive a formula allocation, only one jurisdiction (the 
unit of general local government with the smallest allocation of HOME 
funds) is dropped from the pool of eligible jurisdictions on each 
successive recalculation. Then the amount of funds available for units 
of general local government is redistributed to all others. This 
recalculation/redistribution continues until all remaining units of 
general local government receive an allocation of $500,000 or more. Only 
units of general local government which receive an allocation of 
$500,000 or more under the formula will be awarded an allocation. In 
fiscal years in which Congress appropriates less than $1.5 billion of 
HOME funds, $335,000 is substituted for $500,000.
    (4) The allocation amounts determined under paragraph (d)(3) of this 
section are reduced by any amounts that are necessary to provide 
increased allocations to States that have no unit of general local 
government receiving a formula allocation (see paragraph (e)(4) of this 
section). These reductions are made on a prorata basis, except that no 
unit of general local government allocation is reduced below $500,000 
(or $335,000 in fiscal years in which Congress appropriates less than 
$1.5 billion of HOME funds).
    (e) Calculating formula allocations for States. (1) Forty percent of 
the funds available for allocation under paragraph (b) of this section 
are allocated to States. The allocation amounts for States are 
calculated by determining initial amounts for each State, based on the 
sum of the shares of the six factors. For 20 percent of the funds to be 
allocated to States, the shares are the ratio of the weighted factor for 
the entire State over the corresponding factor for the total for all 
States. For 80 percent of the funds to be allocated to States, the 
shares are the ratio of the weighted factor for all units of general 
local government within the State that do not receive a formula 
allocation over the corresponding factor for the total for all States.
    (2) If the initial amounts for Puerto Rico (based on either or both 
the 80 percent of funds or 20 percent of funds calculation) exceed twice 
the national average, on a per rental unit basis, each amount that 
exceeds the national average is capped at twice the national average, 
and the resultant funds are reallocated to other States on a prorata 
basis.
    (3) If the initial amounts when combined for any State are less than 
the $3,000,000, the allocation to that State is increased to the 
$3,000,000 and all other State allocations are reduced by an equal 
amount on a prorata basis, except that no State allocation is reduced 
below $3,000,000.
    (4) The allocation amount for each State that has no unit of general 
local government within the State receiving an allocation under 
paragraph (d) of this section is increased by $500,000. Funds for this 
increase are derived from the funds available for units of

[[Page 483]]

general local government, in accordance with paragraph (d)(4) of this 
section.

[61 FR 48750, Sept. 16, 1996, as amended at 62 FR 28928, May 28, 1997]

                          Insular Areas Program


<R05>
Sec. 92.60  Allocation amounts for insular areas.

    (a) Initial allocation amount for each insular area. The initial 
allocation amount for each insular area is determined based upon the 
insular area's population and occupied rental units compared to all 
insular areas.
    (b) Threshold requirements. The HUD Field Office shall review each 
insular area's progress on outstanding allocations made under this 
section, based on the insular area's performance report, the timeliness 
of close-outs, and compliance with fund management requirements and 
regulations, taking into consideration the size of the allocation and 
the degree and complexity of the program. If HUD determines from this 
review that the insular area does not have the capacity to administer 
effectively a new allocation, or a portion of a new allocation, in 
addition to allocations currently under administration, HUD may reduce 
the insular area's initial allocation amount.
    (c) Previous audit findings and outstanding monetary obligations. 
HUD shall not make an allocation to an insular area that has either an 
outstanding audit finding for any HUD program, or an outstanding 
monetary obligation to HUD that is in arrears, or for which a repayment 
schedule has not been established. This restriction does not apply if 
the HUD Field Office finds that the insular area has made a good faith 
effort to clear the audit and, when there is an outstanding monetary 
obligation to HUD, the insular area has made a satisfactory arrangement 
for repayment of the funds due HUD and payments are current.
    (d) Increases to the initial allocation amount. If funds reserved 
for the insular areas are available because HUD has decreased the amount 
for one or more insular areas in accordance with paragraphs (b) or (c) 
of this section, or for any other reason, HUD may increase the 
allocation amount for one or more of the remaining insular areas based 
upon the insular area's performance in committing HOME funds within the 
24 month deadline, producing housing units described in its program 
description, and meeting HOME program requirements. Funds that become 
available but which are not used to increase the allocation amount for 
one or more of the remaining insular areas will be reallocated in 
accordance with Sec. 92.66.
    (e) Notice of allocation amounts. HUD will notify each insular area, 
in writing, as to the amount of its HOME allocation.


<R05>
Sec. 92.61  Program description.

    (a) Submission requirement. Not later than 90 days after HUD 
notifies the insular area of the amount of its allocation, the insular 
area must submit a program description and certifications to HUD.
    (b) Content of program description. The program description must 
contain the following:
    (1) An executed Standard Form 424;
    (2) The estimated use of HOME funds and a description of projects 
and eligible activities, including number of units to be assisted, 
estimated costs, and tenure type (rental or owner occupied) and, for 
tenant assistance, number of households to be assisted;
    (3) A timetable for the implementation of the projects or eligible 
activities;
    (4) If the insular area intends to use HOME funds for homebuyers, 
the guidelines for resale or recapture as required in Sec. 92.254(a)(5);
    (5) If the insular area intends to use HOME funds for tenant-based 
rental assistance, a description of how the program will be administered 
consistent with the minimum guidelines described in Sec. 92.209;
    (6) If an insular area intends to use other forms of investment not 
described in Sec. 92.205(b), a description of the other forms of 
investment;
    (7) A statement of the policy and procedures to be followed by the 
insular area to meet the requirements for affirmative marketing, and 
establishing and overseeing a minority and women business outreach 
program under Sec. 92.351;

[[Page 484]]

    (8) If the insular intends to use HOME funds for refinancing along 
with rehabilitation, the insular area's guidelines described in 
Sec. 92.206(b).
    (c) Certifications. The following certifications must accompany the 
program description:
    (1) A certification that, before committing funds to a project, the 
insular area will evaluate the project in accordance with guidelines 
that it adopts for this purpose and will not invest any more HOME funds 
in combination with other governmental assistance than is necessary to 
provide affordable housing;
    (2) If the insular area intends to provide tenant-based rental 
assistance, the certification required by Sec. 92.209;
    (3) A certification that the submission of the program description 
is authorized under applicable law and the insular area possesses the 
legal authority to carry out the HOME Investment Partnerships Program, 
in accordance with the HOME regulations;
    (4) A certification that it will comply with the acquisition and 
relocation requirements of the Uniform Relocation Assistance and Real 
Property Acquisition Policies Act of 1970, as amended, implementing 
regulations at 49 CFR part 24 and the requirements of Sec. 92.353;
    (5) A certification that the insular area will use HOME funds in 
compliance with all requirements of this part;
    (6) The certification with regard to the drug-free workplace 
required by 24 CFR part 24, subpart F; and
    (7) The certification required with regard to lobbying required by 
24 CFR part 87, together with disclosure forms, if required by 24 CFR 
part 87.


<R05>
Sec. 92.62  Review of program description and certifications.

    (a) Review of program description. The responsible HUD Field Office 
will review an insular area's program description and will approve the 
description unless the insular area has failed to submit information 
sufficient to allow HUD to make the necessary determinations required 
for Sec. 92.61 (b)(4), (b)(6), and (b)(7), or the guidelines under 
(b)(8) are not satisfactory to HUD, if applicable; or if the level of 
proposed projects or eligible activities is not within the management 
capability demonstrated by past performance in housing and community 
development programs. If the insular area has not submitted information 
on Sec. 92.61 (b)(4), (b)(6), and (b)(7), or the guidelines under (b)(8) 
are not satisfactory to HUD, if applicable; or if the level of proposed 
projects or eligible activities is not within the management capability 
demonstrated by past performance in housing and community development 
programs, the insular area may be required to furnish such further 
information or assurances as HUD may consider necessary to find the 
program description and certifications satisfactory. The HUD Field 
Office shall work with the insular area to achieve a complete and 
satisfactory program description.
    (b) Review period. Within thirty days of receipt of the program 
description, the HUD Field Office will notify the insular area if 
determinations cannot be made under Sec. 92.61 (b)(4), (b)(6), (b)(7), 
or (b)(8) with the supporting information submitted, or if the proposed 
projects or activities are beyond currently demonstrated capability. The 
insular area will have a reasonable period of time, agreed upon 
mutually, to submit the necessary supporting information or to revise 
the proposed projects or activities in its program description.
    (c) HOME Investment Partnership Agreement. After HUD Field Office 
approval under this section, a HOME funds allocation is made by HUD 
execution of the agreement, subject to execution by the insular area. 
The funds are obligated on the date HUD notifies the insular area of 
HUD's execution of the agreement.


<R05>
Sec. 92.63  Amendments to program description.

    An insular area must submit to HUD for approval any substantial 
change in its HUD-approved program description that it makes and must 
document any other changes in its file. A substantial change involves a 
change in the guidelines for resale or recapture (Sec. 92.61(b)(4)), 
other forms of investment (Sec. 92.61(b)(6)), minority and women 
business outreach program (Sec. 92.61(b)(7)) or refinancing 
(Sec. 92.61(b)(8)); or a change in the tenure type of the project or 
activities; or a funding increase to a project

[[Page 485]]

or activity of $100,000 or 50% (whichever is greater). The HUD Field 
Office will notify the insular area if its program description, as 
amended, does not permit determinations to be made under Sec. 92.61 
(b)(4), (b)(6), (b)(7), or (b)(8), or if the level of proposed projects 
or eligible activities is not within the management capability 
demonstrated by past performance in housing and community development 
programs, within 30 days of receipt. The insular area will have a 
reasonable period of time, agreed upon mutually, to submit the necessary 
supporting information to revise the proposed projects or activities in 
its program description.


<R05>
Sec. 92.64  Applicability of requirements to insular areas.

    (a) Insular areas are subject to the same requirements in subpart E 
(Program Requirements), subpart F (Project Requirements), subpart K 
(Program Administration), and subpart L (Performance Reviews and 
Sanctions) of this part as participating jurisdictions, except for the 
following:
    (1) Subpart E (Program Requirements): Administrative costs, as 
described in Sec. 92.207, are eligible costs for insular areas in an 
amount not to exceed 15 percent of the HOME funds provided to the 
insular area. The matching contribution requirements in this part do not 
apply.
    (2) Subpart K (Program Administration):
    (i) Section 92.500 (The HOME Investment Trust Fund) does not apply. 
HUD will establish a HOME account in the United States Treasury for each 
insular area and the HOME funds must be used for approved activities. A 
local account must be established for program income. Each insular area 
may use either a separate local HOME account or a subsidiary account 
within its general fund (or other appropriate fund) as the local HOME 
account. HUD will recapture HOME funds in the HOME Treasury account by 
the amount of:
    (A) Any funds that are not committed within 24 months after the last 
day of the month in which HUD notifies the insular area of HUD's 
execution of the HOME Investment Partnership Agreement;
    (B) Any funds that are not expended within five years after the last 
day of the month in which HUD notifies the insular area of HUD's 
execution of the HOME Investment Partnership Agreement; and
    (C) Any penalties assessed by HUD under Sec. 92.552.
    (ii) Section 92.502 (Program disbursement and information system) 
applies, except that references to the HOME Investment Trust Fund mean 
HOME account. In addition, Sec. 92.502(c) does not apply, and instead 
compliance with Treasury Circular No. 1075 (31 CFR part 205) and 24 CFR 
85.21 is required.
    (iii) Section 92.503 (Program income, repayments, and recaptured 
funds) applies, except that the funds may be retained provided the funds 
are used for eligible activities in accordance with the requirements of 
this section.
    (3) Section 92.504 (Participating jurisdiction responsibilities; 
written agreements; on-site inspections) applies, except that the 
written agreement must ensure compliance with the requirements in this 
section.
    (4) Section 92.508 (Recordkeeping) applies with respect to the 
records that relate to the requirements of this section.
    (5) Section 92.509 (Performance reports) applies, except that a 
performance report is required for the fiscal year allocation only after 
completion of the approved projects funded by the allocation.
    (6) Subpart L (Performance Reviews and Sanctions): Section 92.552 
does not apply. Instead, Sec. 92.65 applies.
    (b) The requirements of subpart H (Other Federal Requirements) of 
this part apply as follows: Sec. 92.357 Executive Order 12372 applies as 
written, and the requirements of the remaining sections which apply to 
participating jurisdictions are applicable to the insular areas.
    (c) Subpart B (Allocation Formula), subpart C (Consortia; 
Designation and Revocation as a Participating Jurisdiction), subpart D 
(Submission Requirements), and subpart G (Community Housing Development 
Organizations) of this part do not apply.
    (d) Subpart A (General) applies, except that for the definitions of 
``commitment'', ``program income'', and

[[Page 486]]

``subrecipient'', ``participating jurisdiction'' means ``insular area.''


<R05>
Sec. 92.65  Funding sanctions.

    Following notice and opportunity for informal consultation, HUD may 
withhold, reduce or terminate the assistance where any corrective or 
remedial actions taken under Sec. 92.551 fail to remedy an insular 
area's performance deficiencies, and the deficiencies are sufficiently 
substantial, in the judgment of HUD, to warrant sanctions.


<R05>
Sec. 92.66  Reallocation.

    Any HOME funds which are reduced or recaptured from an insular 
area's allocation and which are not used to increase the allocation 
amount for one or more of the remaining insular areas as provided in 
Sec. 92.60 of this part, will be reallocated by HUD to the States in 
accordance with the requirements in subpart J for reallocating funds 
initially allocated to a State.


<R04>
  Subpart C--Consortia; Designation and Revocation of Designation as a 
                       Participating Jurisdiction


<R05>
Sec. 92.100  [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 92.101  Consortia.

    (a) A consortium of geographically contiguous units of general local 
government is a unit of general local government for purposes of this 
part if the requirements of this section are met.
    (1) One or more members of a proposed consortium or an existing 
consortium whose consortium qualification terminates at the end of the 
fiscal year, must provide written notification by March 1 to the HUD 
Field Office of its intent to participate as a consortium in the HOME 
Program for the following fiscal year. Provided that subsequent 
deadlines could be met, the Field Office may accept notification at a 
later date.
    (2) The proposed consortium must provide, at such time and in a 
manner and form prescribed by HUD, the qualification documents, which 
will include submission of:
    (i) A written certification by the State that the consortium will 
direct its activities to alleviation of housing problems within the 
State; and
    (ii) Documentation which demonstrates that the consortium has 
executed one legally binding cooperation agreement among its members 
authorizing one member unit of general local government to act in a 
representative capacity for all member units of general local government 
for the purposes of this part and providing that the representative 
member assumes overall responsibility for ensuring that the consortium's 
HOME Program is carried out in compliance with the requirements of this 
part.
    (3) Before the end of the fiscal year in which the notice of intent 
and documentation are submitted, HUD must determine that the consortium 
has sufficient authority and administrative capability to carry out the 
purposes of this part on behalf of its member jurisdictions. HUD will 
endeavor to make its determination as quickly as practicable after 
receiving the consortium's documentation in order to provide the 
consortium an opportunity to correct its submission, if necessary. If 
the submission is deficient, HUD will work with the consortium to 
resolve the issue, but will not delay the formula allocations.
    (b) A metropolitan city or an urban county may be a member of a 
consortium. A unit of general local government that is included in an 
urban county may be part of a consortium, only if the urban county joins 
the consortium. The included local government cannot join the consortium 
except through participation in the urban county.
    (c) A non-urban county may be a member of a consortium. However, the 
county cannot on its own include the whole county in the consortium. A 
unit of local government located within the non-urban county that wishes 
to participate as a member of the consortium must sign the HOME 
consortium agreement.
    (d) If the representative unit of general local government 
distributes HOME funds to member units of general local government, the 
representative unit is responsible for applying to

[[Page 487]]

the member units of general local government the same requirements as 
are applicable to subrecipients.
    (e) The consortium's qualification as a unit of general local 
government continues for a period of three successive Federal fiscal 
years, or until HUD revokes its designation as a participating 
jurisdiction, or until an urban county member fails to requalify under 
the CDBG program as an urban county for a fiscal year included in the 
consortium's qualification period, or the consortium fails to receive a 
HOME allocation for the first Federal fiscal year of the consortium's 
qualification period and does not request to be considered to receive a 
HOME allocation in each of the subsequent two years. However, if a 
member urban county's three year CDBG qualification cycle is not the 
same as the consortium, the consortium may elect a shorter qualification 
period than three years to synchronize with the urban county's 
qualification period. During the period of qualification, additional 
units of general local government may join the consortium, but no 
included unit of general local government may withdraw from the 
consortium. See 24 CFR part 91, subpart E, for consolidated plan 
requirements for consortia, including the requirement that all members 
of the consortia must be on the same program year.


<R05>
Sec. 92.102  Participation threshold amount.

    (a) To be eligible to become a participating jurisdiction, a unit of 
general local government must have a formula allocation under Sec. 92.50 
that is equal to or greater than $750,000; or
    (b) If a unit of general local government's formula allocation is 
less than $750,000, HUD must find:
    (1) The unit of general local government has a local PHA and has 
demonstrated a capacity to carry out the provisions of this part, as 
evidenced by satisfactory performance under one or more HUD-administered 
programs that provide assistance for activities comparable to the 
eligible activities under this part; and
    (2) The State has authorized HUD to transfer to the unit of general 
local government a portion of the State's allocation or the State, the 
unit of general local government, or both, has made available its own 
resources such that the sum of the amounts transferred or made available 
are equal to or greater than the difference between the unit of general 
local government's formula allocation and $750,000.
    (c) In fiscal years in which Congress appropriates less than $1.5 
billion for this part, $500,000 is substituted for $750,000 each time it 
appears in this section.


<R05>
Sec. 92.103  Notification of intent to participate.

    (a) Not later than 30 days after receiving notice of its formula 
allocation amount, a jurisdiction must notify HUD in writing of its 
intention to become a participating jurisdiction.
    (b) A unit of general local government that has a formula allocation 
of less than $750,000, or less than $500,000 in fiscal years in which 
Congress appropriates less than $1.5 billion for this part, must submit, 
with its notice, one or more of the following, as appropriate, as 
evidence that it has met the threshold allocation requirements in 
Sec. 92.102(b):
    (1) Authorization from the State to transfer a portion of its 
allocation to the unit of general local government;
    (2) A letter from the governor or designee indicating that the 
required funds have been approved and budgeted for the unit of general 
local government;
    (3) A letter from the chief executive officer of the unit of general 
local government indicating that the required funds have been approved 
and budgeted.


<R05>
Sec. 92.104  Submission of a consolidated plan.

    A jurisdiction that has not submitted a consolidated plan to HUD 
must submit to HUD, not later than 90 days after providing notification 
under Sec. 92.103, a consolidated plan in accordance with 24 CFR part 
91.


<R05>
Sec. 92.105  Designation as a participating jurisdiction.

    When a jurisdiction has complied with the requirements of 
Secs. 92.102 through 92.104 and HUD has approved

[[Page 488]]

the jurisdiction's consolidated plan in accordance with 24 CFR part 91, 
HUD will designate the jurisdiction as a participating jurisdiction.


<R05>
Sec. 92.106  Continuous designation as a participating jurisdiction.

    Once a State or unit of general local government is designated a 
participating jurisdiction, it remains a participating jurisdiction for 
subsequent fiscal years and the requirements of Secs. 92.102 through 
92.105 do not apply, unless HUD revokes the designation in accordance 
with Sec. 92.107.


<R05>
Sec. 92.107  Revocation of designation as a participating jurisdiction.

    HUD may revoke a jurisdiction's designation as a participating 
jurisdiction if:
    (a) HUD finds, after reasonable notice and opportunity for hearing 
as provided in Sec. 92.552(b) that the jurisdiction is unwilling or 
unable to carry out the provisions of this part, including failure to 
meet matching contribution requirements; or
    (b) The jurisdiction's formula allocation falls below $750,000 (or 
below $500,000 in fiscal years in which Congress appropriates less than 
$1.5 billion for this part) for three consecutive years, below $625,000 
(or below $410,000 in fiscal years in which Congress appropriates less 
than $1.5 billion for this part) for two consecutive years, or the 
jurisdiction does not receive a formula allocation in any one year.
    (c) When HUD revokes a participating jurisdiction's designation as a 
participating jurisdiction, HUD will reallocate any remaining funds in 
the jurisdiction's HOME Investment Trust Fund established under 
Sec. 92.500 in accordance with Sec. 92.451.


<R04>
                   Subpart D--Submission Requirements


<R05>
Sec. 92.150  Submission requirements.

    In order to receive its HOME allocation, a participating 
jurisdiction must submit a consolidated plan in accordance with 24 CFR 
part 91. That part includes requirements for the content of the 
consolidated plan, the process of developing the consolidated plan, 
including citizen participation, the submission date, HUD approval, and 
amendments.


<R04>
                     Subpart E--Program Requirements


<R05>
Sec. 92.200  Private-public partnership.

    Each participating jurisdiction must make all reasonable efforts to 
maximize participation by the private sector in accordance with section 
221 of the Act.


<R05>
Sec. 92.201  Distribution of assistance.

    (a) Local. (1) Each local participating jurisdiction must, insofar 
as is feasible, distribute HOME funds geographically within its 
boundaries and among different categories of housing need, according to 
the priorities of housing need identified in its approved consolidated 
plan.
    (2) The participating jurisdiction may only invest its HOME funds in 
eligible projects within its boundaries, or in joint projects within the 
boundaries of contiguous local jurisdictions which serve residents from 
both jurisdictions.
    (b) State. (1) Each State participating jurisdiction is responsible 
for distributing HOME funds throughout the State according to the 
State's assessment of the geographical distribution of the housing needs 
within the State, as identified in the State's approved consolidated 
plan. The State must distribute HOME funds to rural areas in amounts 
that take into account the non-metropolitan share of the State's total 
population and objective measures of rural housing need, such as poverty 
and substandard housing, as set forth in the State's approved 
consolidated plan. To the extent the need is within the boundaries of a 
participating unit of general local government, the State and the unit 
of general local government shall coordinate activities to address that 
need.
    (2) A State may carry out its own HOME program without active 
participation of units of general local government or may distribute 
HOME funds to units of general local government to carry out HOME 
programs in which both the State and all or some of the units of general 
local government perform specified program functions. A

[[Page 489]]

unit of general local government designated by a State to receive HOME 
funds from a State is a State recipient.
    (3)(i) A State that uses State recipients to perform program 
functions shall ensure that the State recipients use HOME funds in 
accordance with the requirements of this part and other applicable laws. 
The State may require the State recipient to comply with requirements 
established by the State or may permit the State recipient to establish 
its own requirements to comply with this part.
    (ii) The State shall conduct such reviews and audit of its State 
recipients as may be necessary or appropriate to determine whether the 
State recipient has committed and expended the HOME funds in the United 
States Treasury account as required by Sec. 92.500, and has met the 
requirements of this part, particularly eligible activities, income 
targeting, affordability, and matching contribution requirements.
    (4) A State and local participating jurisdiction may jointly fund a 
project within the boundaries of the local participating jurisdiction. 
The State may provide the HOME funds to the project or it may provide 
the HOME funds to the local participating jurisdiction to fund the 
project.
    (5) A State may fund projects on Indian reservations located within 
the State provided that the State includes Indian reservations in its 
consolidated plan.


<R05>
Sec. 92.202  Site and neighborhood standards.

    (a) General. A participating jurisdiction must administer its HOME 
program in a manner that provides housing that is suitable from the 
standpoint of facilitating and furthering full compliance with the 
applicable provisions of title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 
U.S.C. 2000d--2000d-4), the Fair Housing Act (42 U.S.C. 3601 et seq., 
E.O. 11063 (3 CFR, 1959-1963 Comp., p. 652), and HUD regulations issued 
pursuant thereto; and promotes greater choice of housing opportunities.
    (b) New rental housing. In carrying out the site and neighborhood 
requirements with respect to new construction of rental housing, a 
participating jurisdiction is responsible for making the determination 
that proposed sites for new construction meet the requirements in 24 CFR 
983.6(b).

[61 FR 48750, Sept. 16, 1996, as amended at 62 FR 28928, May 28, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 92.203  Income determinations.

    (a) The HOME program has income targeting requirements for the HOME 
program and for HOME projects. Therefore, the participating jurisdiction 
must determine each family is income eligible by determining the 
family's annual income.
    (1) For families who are tenants in HOME-assisted housing and not 
receiving HOME tenant-based rental assistance, the participating 
jurisdiction must initially determine annual income using the method in 
paragraph (a)(1)(i) of this section. For subsequent income 
determinations during the period of affordability, the participating 
jurisdiction may use any one of the following methods in accordance with 
Sec. 92.252(h):
    (i) Examine the source documents evidencing annual income (e.g., 
wage statement, interest statement, unemployment compensation statement) 
for the family.
    (ii) Obtain from the family a written statement of the amount of the 
family's annual income and family size, along with a certification that 
the information is complete and accurate. The certification must state 
that the family will provide source documents upon request.
    (iii) Obtain a written statement from the administrator of a 
government program under which the family receives benefits and which 
examines each year the annual income of the family. The statement must 
indicate the tenant's family size and state the amount of the family's 
annual income; or alternatively, the statement must indicate the current 
dollar limit for very low- or low-income families for the family size of 
the tenant and state that the tenant's annual income does not exceed 
this limit.
    (2) For all other families, the participating jurisdiction must 
determine annual income by examining the source documents evidencing 
annual income

[[Page 490]]

(e.g., wage statement, interest statement, unemployment compensation 
statement) for the family.
    (b) When determining whether a family is income eligible, the 
participating jurisdiction must use one of the following three 
definitions of ``annual income'':
    (1) ``Annual income'' as defined at 24 CFR 5.609 (except when 
determining the income of a homeowner for an owner-occupied 
rehabilitation project, the value of the homeowner's principal residence 
may be excluded from the calculation of Net Family Assets); or
    (2) Annual Income as reported under the Census long-form for the 
most recent available decennial Census. This definition includes:
    (i) Wages, salaries, tips, commissions, etc.;
    (ii) Self-employment income from owned non-farm business, including 
proprietorships and partnerships;
    (iii) Farm self-employment income;
    (iv) Interest, dividends, net rental income, or income from estates 
or trusts;
    (v) Social Security or railroad retirement;
    (vi) Supplemental Security Income, Aid to Families with Dependent 
Children, or other public assistance or public welfare programs;
    (vii) Retirement, survivor, or disability pensions; and
    (viii) Any other sources of income received regularly, including 
Veterans' (VA) payments, unemployment compensation, and alimony; or
    (3) Adjusted gross income as defined for purposes of reporting under 
Internal Revenue Service (IRS) Form 1040 series for individual Federal 
annual income tax purposes.
    (c) Although the participating jurisdiction may use any of the three 
definitions of ``annual income'' permitted in paragraph (b) of this 
section, to calculate adjusted income it must apply exclusions from 
income established at 24 CFR 5.611. The HOME rents for very low-income 
families established under Sec. 92.252(b)(2) are based on adjusted 
income. In addition, the participating jurisdiction may base the amount 
of tenant-based rental assistance on the adjusted income of the family.
    (d) (1) The participating jurisdiction must calculate the annual 
income of the family by projecting the prevailing rate of income of the 
family at the time the participating jurisdiction determines that the 
family is income eligible. Annual income shall include income from all 
family members. Income or asset enhancement derived from the HOME-
assisted project shall not be considered in calculating annual income.
    (2) The participating jurisdiction is not required to re-examine the 
family's income at the time the HOME assistance is provided, unless more 
than six months has elapsed since the participating jurisdiction 
determined that the family qualified as income eligible.

[61 FR 48750, Sept. 16, 1996, as amended at 62 FR 28928, May 28, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 92.204  Applicability of requirements to entities that receive a reallocation of HOME funds, other than participating jurisdictions.

    (a) Jurisdictions other than participating jurisdictions and 
community housing development organizations receiving competitive 
reallocations from HUD are subject to the same requirements in subpart E 
(Program Requirements), subpart F (Project Requirements), subpart K 
(Program Administration), and subpart L (Performance Reviews and 
Sanctions) of this part as participating jurisdictions, except for the 
following:
    (1) Subpart E (Program Requirements): the matching contribution 
requirements in Sec. 92.218 through Sec. 92.221 do not apply.
    (2) Subpart K (Program Administration):
    (i) Section 92.500 (The HOME Investment Trust Fund) does not apply. 
HUD will establish a HOME account in the United States Treasury and the 
HOME funds must be used for approved activities. A local account must be 
established for program income. HUD will recapture HOME funds in the 
HOME Treasury account by the amount of:
    (A) Any funds that are not committed within 24 months after the last 
day of the month in which HUD notifies the entity of HUD's execution of 
the HOME Investment Partnership Agreement;
    (B) Any funds that are not expended within five years after the last 
day of

[[Page 491]]

the month in which HUD notifies the entity of HUD's execution of the 
HOME Investment Partnership Agreement; and
    (C) Any penalties assessed by HUD under Sec. 92.552.
    (ii) Section 92.502 (Program disbursement and information system) 
applies, except that references to the HOME Investment Trust Fund mean 
HOME account and the reference to 24 CFR part 58 does not apply. In 
addition, Sec. 92.502(c) does not apply, and instead, compliance with 
Treasury Circular No. 1075 (31 CFR part 205) and 24 CFR 85.21 is 
required.
    (iii) Section 92.503 (Program income, repayments, and recaptured 
funds) applies, except that program income may be retained provided the 
funds are used for eligible activities in accordance with the 
requirements of this section.
    (3) Section 92.504 (Participating jurisdiction responsibilities; 
written agreements; on-site inspections) applies, except that the 
written agreement must ensure compliance with the requirements in this 
section.
    (4) Section 92.508 (Recordkeeping) applies with respect to the 
records that relate to the requirements of this section.
    (5) Section 92.509 (Performance reports) applies, except that a 
performance report is required only after completion of the approved 
projects.
    (b) The requirements in subpart H (Other Federal Requirements) of 
this part apply as written, except that jurisdictions and community 
housing development organizations receiving reallocations from HUD must 
comply with affirmative marketing requirements, labor requirements, and 
lead-based paint requirements, applicable to participating 
jurisdictions.
    (c) Subpart B (Allocation Formula), subpart C (Consortia; 
Designation and Revocation of Designation as a Participating 
Jurisdiction), and subpart G (Community Housing Development 
Organizations) of this part do not apply.
    (d) Subpart A (General) applies, except that for the definitions of 
commitment, program income, and subrecipient, ``participating 
jurisdiction'' means jurisdiction or community housing development 
organization receiving the competitive reallocation.

                   Eligible and Prohibited Activities


<R05>
Sec. 92.205  Eligible activities: general.

    (a) Eligible activities. (1) HOME funds may be used by a 
participating jurisdiction to provide incentives to develop and support 
affordable rental housing and homeownership affordability through the 
acquisition (including assistance to homebuyers), new construction, 
reconstruction, or rehabilitation of non-luxury housing with suitable 
amenities, including real property acquisition, site improvements, 
conversion, demolition, and other expenses, including financing costs, 
relocation expenses of any displaced persons, families, businesses, or 
organizations; to provide tenant-based rental assistance, including 
security deposits; to provide payment of reasonable administrative and 
planning costs; and to provide for the payment of operating expenses of 
community housing development organizations. The housing must be 
permanent or transitional housing. The specific eligible costs for these 
activities are set forth in Secs. 92.206 through 92.209.
    (2) Acquisition of vacant land or demolition must be undertaken only 
with respect to a particular housing project intended to provide 
affordable housing.
    (3) Conversion of an existing structure to affordable housing is 
rehabilitation, unless the conversion entails adding one or more units 
beyond the existing walls, in which case, the project is new 
construction for purposes of this part.
    (4) Manufactured housing. HOME funds may be used to purchase and/or 
rehabilitate a manufactured housing unit, or purchase the land upon 
which a manufactured housing unit is located. Except for existing, 
owner-occupied manufactured housing that is rehabilitated with HOME 
funds, the manufactured housing unit must, at the time of project 
completion, be connected to permanent utility hook-ups and be located on 
land that is owned by the manufactured housing unit owner or land for 
which the manufactured housing owner has a lease for a period at least 
equal to the applicable period of affordability.
    (b) Forms of assistance. (1) A participating jurisdiction may invest 
HOME funds as equity investments, interest-

[[Page 492]]

bearing loans or advances, non-interest-bearing loans or advances, 
interest subsidies consistent with the purposes of this part, deferred 
payment loans, grants, or other forms of assistance that HUD determines 
to be consistent with the purposes of this part. Each participating 
jurisdiction has the right to establish the terms of assistance, subject 
to the requirements of this part.
    (2) A participating jurisdiction may invest HOME funds to guarantee 
loans made by lenders and, if required, the participating jurisdiction 
may establish a loan guarantee account with HOME funds. The HOME funds 
may be used to guarantee the timely payment of principal and interest or 
payment of the outstanding principal and interest upon foreclosure of 
the loan. The amount of the loan guarantee account must be based on a 
reasonable estimate of the default rate on the guaranteed loans, but 
under no circumstances may the amount on deposit exceed 20 percent of 
the total outstanding principal amount guaranteed; except that the 
account may include a reasonable minimum balance. While loan funds 
guaranteed with HOME funds are subject to all HOME requirements, funds 
which are used to repay the guaranteed loans are not.
    (c) Minimum amount of assistance. The minimum amount of HOME funds 
that must be invested in a project involving rental housing or 
homeownership is $1,000 times the number of HOME-assisted units in the 
project.
    (d) Multi-unit projects. HOME funds may be used to assist one or 
more housing units in a multi-unit project. Only the actual HOME 
eligible development costs of the assisted units may be charged to the 
HOME program. If the assisted and non-assisted units are not comparable, 
the actual costs may be determined based on a method of cost allocation. 
If the assisted and non-assisted units are comparable in terms of size, 
features and number of bedrooms, the actual cost of the HOME-assisted 
units can be determined by pro-rating the total HOME eligible 
development costs of the project so that the proportion of the total 
development costs charged to the HOME program does not exceed the 
proportion of the HOME-assisted units in the project.
    (e) Terminated projects. A HOME assisted project that is terminated 
before completion, either voluntarily or otherwise, constitutes an 
ineligible activity and any HOME funds invested in the project must be 
repaid to the participating jurisdiction's HOME Investment Trust Fund in 
accordance with Sec. 92.503(b) (except for project-specific assistance 
to community housing development organizations as provided in 
Sec. 92.301(a)(3) and Sec. 92.301(b)(3)).

[61 FR 48750, Sept. 16, 1996, as amended at 62 FR 28928, May 28, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 92.206  Eligible project costs.

    HOME funds may be used to pay the following eligible costs:
    (a) Development hard costs. The actual cost of constructing or 
rehabilitating housing. These costs include the following:
    (1) For new construction, costs to meet the applicable new 
construction standards of the participating jurisdiction and the Model 
Energy Code referred to in Sec. 92.251;
    (2) For rehabilitation, costs:
    (i) To meet the property standards in Sec. 92.251;
    (ii) To make essential improvements, including energy-related 
repairs or improvements, improvements necessary to permit use by persons 
with disabilities, and the abatement of lead-based paint hazards, as 
required by Sec. 92.355, and to repair or replace major housing systems 
in danger of failure; and
    (3) For both new construction and rehabilitation, costs:
    (i) To demolish existing structures;
    (ii) To make utility connections including off-site connections from 
the property line to the adjacent street; and
    (iii) To make improvements to the project site that are in keeping 
with improvements of surrounding, standard projects. Site improvements 
may include on-site roads and sewer and water lines necessary to the 
development of the project. The project site is the property, owned by 
the project owner, upon which the project is located.
    (4) For both new construction and rehabilitation of multifamily 
rental

[[Page 493]]

housing, costs to construct or rehabilitate laundry and community 
facilities which are located within the same building as the housing and 
which are for the use of the project residents and their guests.
    (5) Costs to make utility connections or to make improvements to the 
project site, in accordance with the provisions of Sec. 92.206(a)(3) 
(ii) and (iii) are also eligible in connection with acquisition of 
standard housing.
    (b) Refinancing costs. The cost to refinance existing debt secured 
by housing that is being rehabilitated with HOME funds:
    (1) For single-family (1- to 4-family) owner-occupied housing when 
loaning HOME funds to rehabilitate the housing, if the refinancing is 
necessary to reduce the overall housing costs to the borrower and make 
the housing more affordable.
    (2) For multifamily projects, when loaning HOME funds to 
rehabilitate the units if refinancing is necessary to permit or continue 
affordability under Sec. 92.252. The participating jurisdiction must 
establish refinancing guidelines and state them in its consolidated plan 
described in 24 CFR part 91. Regardless of the amount of HOME funds 
invested, the minimum affordability period shall be 15 years. The 
guidelines shall describe the conditions under which the participating 
jurisdictions will refinance existing debt. At minimum, the guidelines 
must:
    (i) Demonstrate that rehabilitation is the primary eligible activity 
and ensure that this requirement is met by establishing a minimum level 
of rehabilitation per unit or a required ratio between rehabilitation 
and refinancing;
    (ii) Require a review of management practices to demonstrate that 
disinvestment in the property has not occurred, that the long term needs 
of the project can be met and that the feasibility of serving the 
targeted population over an extended affordability period can be 
demonstrated;
    (iii) State whether the new investment is being made to maintain 
current affordable units, create additional affordable units, or both;
    (iv) Specify the required period of affordability, whether it is the 
minimum 15 years or longer;
    (v) Specify whether the investment of HOME funds may be 
jurisdiction-wide or limited to a specific geographic area, such as a 
neighborhood identified in a neighborhood revitalization strategy under 
24 CFR 91.215(e)(2) or a Federally designated Empowerment Zone or 
Enterprise Community; and
    (vi) State that HOME funds cannot be used to refinance multifamily 
loans made or insured by any Federal program, including CDBG.
    (c) Acquisition costs. Costs of acquiring improved or unimproved 
real property, including acquisition by homebuyers.
    (d) Related soft costs. Other reasonable and necessary costs 
incurred by the owner or participating jurisdiction and associated with 
the financing, or development (or both) of new construction, 
rehabilitation or acquisition of housing assisted with HOME funds. These 
costs include, but are not limited to:
    (1) Architectural, engineering or related professional services 
required to prepare plans, drawings, specifications, or work write-ups.
    (2) Costs to process and settle the financing for a project, such as 
private lender origination fees, credit reports, fees for title 
evidence, fees for recordation and filing of legal documents, building 
permits, attorneys fees, private appraisal fees and fees for an 
independent cost estimate, builders or developers fees.
    (3) Costs of a project audit that the participating jurisdiction may 
require with respect to the development of the project.
    (4) Costs to provide information services such as affirmative 
marketing and fair housing information to prospective homeowners and 
tenants as required by Sec. 92.351.
    (5) For new construction or rehabilitation, the cost of funding an 
initial operating deficit reserve, which is a reserve to meet any 
shortfall in project income during the period of project rent-up (not to 
exceed 18 months) and which may only be used to pay project operating 
expenses, scheduled payments to a replacement reserve, and debt service. 
Any HOME funds placed

[[Page 494]]

in an operating deficit reserve that remain unexpended after the period 
of project rent-up may be retained for project reserves if permitted by 
the participating jurisdiction.
    (6) Staff and overhead costs directly related to carrying out the 
project, such as work specifications preparation, loan processing 
inspections, and other services related to assisting potential owners, 
tenants, and homebuyers, e.g., housing counseling, may be charged to 
project costs only if the project is funded and the individual becomes 
the owner or tenant of the HOME-assisted project. For multi-unit 
projects, such costs must be allocated among HOME-assisted units in a 
reasonable manner and documented.
    (7) For both new construction and rehabilitation, costs for the 
payment of impact fees that are charged for all projects within a 
jurisdiction.
    (8) Costs of environmental review and release of funds in accordance 
with 24 CFR part 58 which are directly related to the project.
    (e) Community housing development organization costs. Eligible costs 
of project-specific assistance are set forth in Sec. 92.301.
    (f) Relocation costs. The cost of relocation payments and other 
relocation assistance to persons displaced by the project are eligible 
costs.
    (1) Relocation payments include replacement housing payments, 
payments for moving expenses, and payments for reasonable out-of-pocket 
costs incurred in the temporary relocation of persons.
    (2) Other relocation assistance means staff and overhead costs 
directly related to providing advisory and other relocation services to 
persons displaced by the project, including timely written notices to 
occupants, referrals to comparable and suitable replacement property, 
property inspections, counseling, and other assistance necessary to 
minimize hardship.
    (g) Costs relating to payment of loans. If the HOME funds are not 
used to directly pay a cost specified in this section, but are used to 
pay off a construction loan, bridge financing loan, or guaranteed loan, 
the payment of principal and interest for such loan is an eligible cost 
only if:
    (1) The loan was used for eligible costs specified in this section, 
and
    (2) The HOME assistance is part of the original financing for the 
project and the project meets the requirements of this part.

[61 FR 48750, Sept. 16, 1996, as amended at 62 FR 28928, May 28, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 92.207  Eligible administrative and planning costs.

    A participating jurisdiction may expend, for payment of reasonable 
administrative and planning costs of the HOME program, an amount of HOME 
funds that is not more than ten percent of the fiscal year HOME basic 
formula allocation plus any funds received in accordance with 
Sec. 92.102(b) to meet or exceed participation threshold requirements 
that fiscal year. A State that transfers any HOME funds in accordance 
with Sec. 92.102(b) must exclude these funds in calculating the amount 
it may expend for administrative and planning costs. A participating 
jurisdiction may also use up to ten percent of the program income 
deposited in its local HOME account during the program year, for 
administrative and planning costs. Reasonable administrative and 
planning costs include:
    (a) General management, oversight and coordination. Reasonable costs 
of overall program management, coordination, monitoring, and evaluation. 
Such costs include, but are not limited to, necessary expenditures for 
the following:
    (1) Salaries, wages, and related costs of the participating 
jurisdiction's staff. In charging costs to this category the 
participating jurisdiction may either include the entire salary, wages, 
and related costs allocable to the program of each person whose primary 
responsibilities with regard to the program involves program 
administration assignments, or the prorated share of the salary, wages, 
and related costs of each person whose job includes any program 
administration assignments. The participating jurisdiction may use only 
one of these methods. Program administration includes the following 
types of assignments:
    (i) Developing systems and schedules for ensuring compliance with 
program requirements;

[[Page 495]]

    (ii) Developing interagency agreements and agreements with entities 
receiving HOME funds;
    (iii) Monitoring HOME-assisted housing for progress and compliance 
with program requirements;
    (iv) Developing agreements and monitoring housing not assisted with 
HOME funds that the participating jurisdiction designates as a matching 
contribution in accordance with Sec. 92.219(b) for compliance with 
applicable program requirements;
    (v) Preparing reports and other documents related to the program for 
submission to HUD;
    (vi) Coordinating the resolution of audit and monitoring findings;
    (vii) Evaluating program results against stated objectives; and
    (viii) Managing or supervising persons whose primary 
responsibilities with regard to the program include such assignments as 
those described in paragraphs (a)(1)(i) through (vii) of this section;
    (2) Travel costs incurred for official business in carrying out the 
program;
    (3) Administrative services performed under third party contracts or 
agreements, including such services as general legal services, 
accounting services, and audit services;
    (4) Other costs for goods and services required for administration 
of the program, including such goods and services as rental or purchase 
of equipment, insurance, utilities, office supplies, and rental and 
maintenance (but not purchase) of office space; and
    (5) Costs of administering tenant-based rental assistance programs.
    (b) Staff and overhead. Staff and overhead costs directly related to 
carrying out the project, such as work specifications preparation, loan 
processing, inspections, and other services related to assisting 
potential owners, tenants, and homebuyers (e.g., housing counseling); 
and staff and overhead costs directly related to providing advisory and 
other relocation services to persons displaced by the project, including 
timely written notices to occupants, referrals to comparable and 
suitable replacement property, property inspections, counseling, and 
other assistance necessary to minimize hardship. These costs may be 
charged as administrative costs or as project costs under Sec. 92.206 
(d)(6) and (f)(2), at the discretion of the participating jurisdiction.
    (c) Public information. The provision of information and other 
resources to residents and citizen organizations participating in the 
planning, implementation, or assessment of projects being assisted with 
HOME funds.
    (d) Fair housing. Activities to affirmatively further fair housing 
in accordance with the participating jurisdiction's certification under 
24 CFR part 91.
    (e) Indirect Costs. Indirect costs may be charged to the HOME 
program under a cost allocation plan prepared in accordance with OMB 
Circulars A-87 or A-122 as applicable.
    (f) Preparation of the consolidated plan. Preparation of the 
consolidated plan required under 24 CFR part 91. Preparation includes 
the costs of public hearings, consultations, and publication.
    (g) Other Federal requirements. Costs of complying with the Federal 
requirements in subpart H of this part. Project-specific environmental 
review costs may be charged as administrative costs or as project costs 
in accordance with Sec. 92.206(d)(8), at the discretion of the 
participating jurisdiction.


<R05>
Sec. 92.208  Eligible community housing development organization (CHDO) operating expense and capacity building costs.

    (a) Up to 5 percent of a participating jurisdiction's fiscal year 
HOME allocation may be used for the operating expenses of community 
housing development organizations (CHDOs). These funds may not be used 
to pay operating expenses incurred by a CHDO acting as a subrecipient or 
contractor under the HOME Program. Operating expenses means reasonable 
and necessary costs for the operation of the community housing 
development organization. Such costs include salaries, wages, and other 
employee compensation and benefits; employee education, training, and 
travel; rent; utilities; communication costs; taxes; insurance; 
equipment; materials and supplies. The requirements and limitations on 
the receipt of these funds by CHDOs are set forth in Sec. 92.300 (e) and 
(f).

[[Page 496]]

    (b) HOME funds may be used for capacity building costs under 
Sec. 92.300(b).


<R05>
Sec. 92.209  Tenant-based rental assistance: Eligible costs and requirements.

    (a) Eligible costs. Eligible costs are the rental assistance and 
security deposit payments made to provide tenant-based rental assistance 
for a family pursuant to this section. Administration of tenant-based 
rental assistance is eligible only under general management oversight 
and coordination at Sec. 92.207(a).
    (b) General requirement. A participating jurisdiction may use HOME 
funds for tenant-based rental assistance only if the participating 
jurisdiction makes the certification about inclusion of this type of 
assistance in its consolidated plan in accordance with 24 CFR 
91.225(d)(1), 91.325(d)(1), or 91.425(a)(2)(i), and specifies local 
market conditions that lead to the choice of this option.
    (c) Tenant selection. The participating jurisdiction must select 
families in accordance with written tenant selection policies and 
criteria that are consistent with the following:
    (1) Low-income families. Tenant-based rental assistance may only be 
provided to very low- and low-income families. The participating 
jurisdiction must determine that the family is very low- or low-income 
before the assistance is provided. During the period of assistance, the 
participating jurisdiction must annually determine that the family 
continues to be low-income.
    (2) Federal preferences. At least 50 percent of the families 
assisted must qualify, or would qualify in the near future without 
tenant-based rental assistance, for one of the three Federal preferences 
under section 6(c)(4)(A) of the 1937 Act. These are families that occupy 
substandard housing (including families that are homeless or living in a 
shelter for homeless families); families that are paying more than 50 
percent of their annual income for rent; or families that are 
involuntarily displaced. [During FY 1996 and FY 1997, the Federal 
preferences do not apply.]
    (3) Preferences for Individuals with Special Needs. (i) The 
participating jurisdiction may establish a preference for individuals 
with special needs. The participating jurisdiction may offer, in 
conjunction with a tenant-based rental assistance program, particular 
types of non-mandatory services that may be most appropriate for persons 
with a special need or a particular disability. Generally, tenant-based 
rental assistance and the related services should be made available to 
all persons with special needs or disabilities who can benefit from such 
services.
    (ii) The participating jurisdiction may also provide a preference 
for a specific category of individuals with disabilities (e.g., persons 
with HIV/AIDS or chronic mental illness) if the specific category is 
identified in the participating jurisdiction's consolidated plan as 
having unmet need and the preference is needed to narrow the gap in 
benefits and services received by such persons.
    (iii) Preferences cannot be administered in a manner that limits the 
opportunities of persons on any basis prohibited by the laws listed 
under 24 CFR 5.105(a). For example, a participating jurisdiction may not 
determine that persons given a preference under the program are 
therefore prohibited from applying for or participating in other 
programs or forms of assistance.
    (iv) To the extent that a participating jurisdiction is operating a 
tenant-based rental assistance program targeted exclusively to 
individuals with special needs or disabilities or to a specific category 
of individuals with special needs or disabilities, at least 50% of the 
individuals must qualify or would qualify in the near future for one of 
the three Federal preferences as described in paragraph (c)(2) of this 
section.
    (4) Existing tenants in the HOME-assisted projects. A participating 
jurisdiction may select low-income families currently residing in 
housing units that are designated for rehabilitation or acquisition 
under the participating jurisdiction's HOME program without requiring 
that the family meet the requirements of paragraph (c)(2) of this 
section. Families so selected may use the tenant-based assistance in the 
rehabilitated or acquired housing unit or in other qualified housing.

[[Page 497]]

    (d) Portability of assistance. A participating jurisdiction may 
require the family to use the tenant-based assistance within the 
participating jurisdiction's boundaries or may permit the family to use 
the assistance outside its boundaries.
    (e) Term of rental assistance contract. The term of the rental 
assistance contract providing assistance with HOME funds may not exceed 
24 months, but may be renewed, subject to the availability of HOME 
funds. The term of the rental assistance contract must begin on the 
first day of the term of the lease. For a rental assistance contract 
between a participating jurisdiction and an owner, the term of the 
contract must terminate on termination of the lease. For a rental 
assistance contract between a participating jurisdiction and a family, 
the term of the contract need not end on termination of the lease, but 
no payments may be made after termination of the lease until a family 
enters into a new lease.
    (f) Rent reasonableness. The participating jurisdiction must 
disapprove a lease if the rent is not reasonable, based on rents that 
are charged for comparable unassisted rental units.
    (g) Tenant protections. The lease must comply with the requirements 
in Sec. 92.253 (a) and (b).
    (h) Maximum subsidy. (1) The amount of the monthly assistance that a 
participating jurisdiction may pay to, or on behalf of, a family may not 
exceed the difference between a rent standard for the unit size 
established by the participating jurisdiction and 30 percent of the 
family's monthly adjusted income.
    (2) The participating jurisdiction must establish a minimum tenant 
contribution to rent.
    (3) The participating jurisdiction's rent standard for a unit size 
must be based on:
    (i) Local market conditions; or
    (ii) For each unit size, may not be less than 80 percent of the 
published Section 8 Existing Housing fair market rent (in effect when 
the payment standard amount is adopted) nor more than the fair market 
rent or HUD-approved community-wide exception rent (in effect when the 
participating jurisdiction adopts its rent standard amount). (Community-
wide exception rents are maximum gross rents approved by HUD for the 
Rental Certificate Program under 24 CFR 882.106(a)(3) for a designated 
municipality, county, or similar locality, which apply to the whole PHA 
jurisdiction.) A participating jurisdiction may approve on a unit-by-
unit basis a subsidy based on a rent standard that exceeds the 
applicable fair market rent by up to 10 percent for 20 percent of units 
assisted.
    (i) Housing quality standards. Housing occupied by a family 
receiving tenant-based assistance under this section must meet the 
requirements set forth in 24 CFR 982.401. The participating jurisdiction 
must inspect the housing initially and re-inspect it annually.
    (j) Security deposits. (1) A participating jurisdiction may use HOME 
funds provided for tenant-based rental assistance to provide loans or 
grants to very low- and low-income families for security deposits for 
rental of dwelling units whether or not the participating jurisdiction 
provides any other tenant-based rental assistance under this section.
    (2) The relevant State or local definition of ``security deposit'' 
in the jurisdiction where the unit is located is applicable for the 
purposes of this part, except that the amount of HOME funds that may be 
provided for a security deposit may not exceed the equivalent of two 
month's rent for the unit.
    (3) Only the prospective tenant may apply for HOME security deposit 
assistance, although the participating jurisdiction may pay the funds 
directly to the tenant or to the landlord.
    (4) HOME funds for security deposits may be provided as a grant or 
as a loan. If they are provided as a loan, the loan repayments are 
program income to be used in accordance with Sec. 92.503.
    (5) Paragraphs (b), (c), (d), (f), (g), and (i) of this section are 
applicable to HOME security deposit assistance, except that income 
determinations pursuant to paragraph (c)(1) of this section and Housing 
Quality Standard inspections pursuant to paragraph (i) of this section 
are required only at the time the security deposit assistance is 
provided.

[[Page 498]]

    (k) Program operation. A tenant-based rental assistance program must 
be operated consistent with the requirements of this section. The 
participating jurisdiction may operate the program itself, or may 
contract with a PHA or other entity with the capacity to operate a 
rental assistance program. The tenant-based rental assistance may be 
provided through an assistance contract to an owner that leases a unit 
to an assisted family or directly to the family. In either case, the 
participating jurisdiction (or entity operating the program) must 
approve the lease.
    (l) Use of Section 8 assistance. In any case where assistance under 
section 8 of the 1937 Act becomes available to a participating 
jurisdiction, recipients of tenant-based rental assistance under this 
part will qualify for tenant selection preferences to the same extent as 
when they received the tenant-based rental assistance under this part.

[61 FR 48750, Sept. 16, 1996, as amended at 62 FR 28928, May 28, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 92.212  Pre-award costs.

    (a) General. Before the effective date of the HOME Investment 
Partnership Agreement, the participating jurisdiction may incur costs 
which may be charged to the HOME allocation after the award of the HOME 
allocation, provided the costs are in compliance with the requirements 
of this part (including environmental review requirements) and with the 
statutory and regulatory requirements in effect at the time the costs 
are charged to the HOME allocation.
    (b) Administrative and planning costs. Eligible administrative and 
planning costs may be incurred as of the beginning of the participating 
jurisdiction's consolidated program year (see 24 CFR 91.10) or the date 
the consolidated plan describing the HOME allocation to which the costs 
will be charged is received by HUD, whichever is later.
    (c) Project costs. Eligible project costs may be incurred during the 
current program year in an amount not to exceed 25% of the current HOME 
allocation amount, to be charged to the following year's HOME 
allocation. Before incurring the pre-award costs, the participating 
jurisdiction must comply with its citizen participation plan 
requirements addressing 24 CFR 91.105(b)(2), (4), (5) and (g) (local 
governments) or 24 CFR 91.115(b)(2), (4), (5) and (f) (States). In lieu 
of a full action plan, the participating jurisdiction may develop a 
mini-action plan which describes the proposed pre-award projects and 
costs in accordance with 24 CFR 91.220(c) and includes, if applicable, 
24 CFR 91.220(g)(2) (local governments) or 24 CFR 91.320(c) and, if 
applicable, 24 CFR 91.320(g)(2) (States). The mini-action plan must 
state that HOME funding for the project(s) is subject to the future 
availability of HOME funds. The subsequent action plan (i.e., action 
plan for the HOME allocation to which the costs will be charged) must 
also include the use of HOME funds contained in the mini-action plan.
    (d) Subrecipient or State recipient costs. The participating 
jurisdiction may authorize its subrecipient or State recipient to incur 
pre-award costs in accordance with the requirements of this section. The 
authorization must be in writing.
    (e) Other pre-agreement costs. Pre-agreement costs in excess of the 
amount set forth in paragraph (c) of this section must be approved, in 
writing, by the HUD Field Office before the costs are incurred.


<R05>
Sec. 92.213  [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 92.214  Prohibited activities.

    (a) HOME funds may not be used to:
    (1) Provide project reserve accounts, except as provided in 
Sec. 92.206(d)(5), or operating subsidies;
    (2) Provide tenant-based rental assistance for the special purposes 
of the existing section 8 program, in accordance with section 212(d) of 
the Act;
    (3) Provide non-federal matching contributions required under any 
other Federal program;
    (4) Provide assistance authorized under section 9 of the 1937 Act 
(annual contributions for operation of public housing);
    (5) Carry out activities authorized under 24 CFR part 968 (Public 
Housing Modernization);
    (6) Provide assistance to eligible low-income housing under 24 CFR 
part 248 (Prepayment of Low Income Housing Mortgages), except that 
assistance may

[[Page 499]]

be provided to priority purchasers as defined in 24 CFR 248.101;
    (7) Provide assistance (other than tenant-based rental assistance or 
assistance to a homebuyer to acquire housing previously assisted with 
HOME funds) to a project previously assisted with HOME funds during the 
period of affordability established by the participating jurisdiction in 
the written agreement under Sec. 92.504. However, additional HOME funds 
may be committed to a project up to one year after project completion 
(see Sec. 92.502), but the amount of HOME funds in the project may not 
exceed the maximum per-unit subsidy amount established under 
Sec. 92.250.
    (8) Pay for the acquisition of property owned by the participating 
jurisdiction, except for property acquired by the participating 
jurisdiction with HOME funds, or property acquired in anticipation of 
carrying out a HOME project; or
    (9) Pay for any cost that is not eligible under Secs. 92.206 through 
92.209.
    (b) Participating jurisdictions may not charge monitoring, servicing 
and origination fees in HOME-assisted projects. However, participating 
jurisdictions may charge nominal application fees (although these fees 
are not an eligible HOME cost) to project owners to discourage frivolous 
applications. Such fees are applicable credits under OMB Circular A-87.

[61 FR 48750, Sept. 16, 1996, as amended at 62 FR 28929, May 28, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 92.215  Limitation on jurisdictions under court order.

    Limitations on the use of HOME funds in connection with litigation 
involving discrimination or fair housing are set forth in section 224 of 
the Act.

                            Income Targeting


<R05>
Sec. 92.216  Income targeting: Tenant-based rental assistance and rental units.

    Each participating jurisdiction must invest HOME funds made 
available during a fiscal year so that, with respect to tenant-based 
rental assistance and rental units:
    (a) Not less than 90 percent of:
    (1) The families receiving such rental assistance are families whose 
annual incomes do not exceed 60 percent of the median family income for 
the area, as determined and made available by HUD with adjustments for 
smaller and larger families (except that HUD may establish income 
ceilings higher or lower than 60 percent of the median for the area on 
the basis of HUD's findings that such variations are necessary because 
of prevailing levels of construction cost or fair market rent, or 
unusually high or low family income) at the time of occupancy or at the 
time funds are invested, whichever is later; or
    (2) The dwelling units assisted with such funds are occupied by 
families having such incomes; and
    (b) The remainder of:
    (1) The families receiving such rental assistance are households 
that qualify as low-income families (other than families described in 
paragraph (a)(1) of this section) at the time of occupancy or at the 
time funds are invested, whichever is later; or
    (2) The dwelling units assisted with such funds are occupied by such 
households.


<R05>
Sec. 92.217  Income targeting: Homeownership.

    Each participating jurisdiction must invest HOME funds made 
available during a fiscal year so that with respect to homeownership 
assistance, 100 percent of these funds are invested in dwelling units 
that are occupied by households that qualify as low-income families at 
the time of occupancy or at the time funds are invested, whichever is 
later.

                    Matching Contribution Requirement


<R05>
Sec. 92.218  Amount of matching contribution.

    (a) General. Each participating jurisdiction must make contributions 
to housing that qualifies as affordable housing under the HOME program, 
throughout a fiscal year. The contributions must total not less than 25 
percent of the funds drawn from the jurisdiction's HOME Investment Trust 
Fund Treasury account in that fiscal year, excluding funds drawn for 
purposes identified in paragraph (c) of this section.

[[Page 500]]

    (b) Shortfall amount from State or local resources. Amounts made 
available under Sec. 92.102(b)(2) from the resources of a State (other 
than a transfer of the State's formula allocation), the local 
participating jurisdiction, or both, to enable the local participating 
jurisdiction to meet the participation threshold amount are not required 
to be matched and do not constitute matching contributions.
    (c) HOME funds not required to be matched. HOME funds used for 
administrative and planning costs (pursuant to Sec. 92.207); community 
housing development organization operating expenses (pursuant to 
Sec. 92.208); capacity building (pursuant to Sec. 92.300(b)) of 
community housing development organizations; and project specific 
assistance to community housing development organizations (pursuant to 
Sec. 92.301) when the participating jurisdiction waives repayment under 
the provisions of Sec. 92.301(a)(3) or Sec. 92.301(b)(3) are not 
required to be matched.
    (d) Match contribution for other programs. Contributions that have 
been or will be counted as satisfying a matching requirement of another 
Federal grant or award may not count as satisfying the matching 
contribution requirement for the HOME program.


<R05>
Sec. 92.219  Recognition of matching contribution.

    (a) Match contribution to HOME-assisted housing. A contribution is 
recognized as a matching contribution if it is made with respect to:
    (1) A tenant who is assisted with HOME funds;
    (2) A HOME-assisted unit;
    (3) The portion of a project that is not HOME-assisted provided that 
at least 50 percent of the housing units in the project are HOME-
assisted. If the match contribution to the portion of the project that 
is not HOME-assisted meets the affordable housing requirements of 
Sec. 92.219(b)(2), the percentage requirement for HOME-assisted units 
does not apply; or
    (4) The commercial space in a mixed-use project in which at least 51 
percent of the floor space is residential provided that at least 50 
percent of the dwelling units are HOME-assisted.
    (b) Match contribution to affordable housing that is not HOME-
assisted. The following requirements apply for recognition of matching 
contributions made to affordable housing that is not HOME-assisted:
    (1) For tenant-based rental assistance that is not HOME-assisted:
    (i) The contribution must be made with respect to a tenant who is 
assisted with tenant-based rental assistance that meets the requirements 
of Sec. 92.203 (Income determinations) and paragraphs (a), (c), (f), and 
(i) of Sec. 92.209 (Tenant-based rental assistance); and
    (ii) The participating jurisdiction must demonstrate in writing that 
such assistance meets the provisions of Secs. 92.203 and 92.209 (except 
Sec. 92.209(e)).
    (2) For affordable housing that is not HOME-assisted:
    (i) The contribution must be made with respect to housing that 
qualifies as affordable housing under Sec. 92.252 or Sec. 92.254.
    (ii) The participating jurisdiction or its instrumentality must 
execute, with the owner of the housing (or, if the participating 
jurisdiction is the owner, with the manager or developer), a written 
agreement that imposes and enumerates all of the affordability 
requirements from Sec. 92.252 and Sec. 92.253(a) and (b) (Tenant 
protections), or Sec. 92.254, whichever are applicable; the property 
standards requirements of Sec. 92.251; and income determinations made in 
accordance with Sec. 92.203. This written agreement must be executed 
before any match contributions may be made.
    (iii) A participating jurisdiction must establish a procedure to 
monitor HOME match-eligible housing to ensure continued compliance with 
the requirements of Secs. 92.203 (Income determinations), 92.252 
(Qualification as affordable housing: Rental housing), 92.253(a) and (b) 
(Tenant protections) and 92.254 (Qualification as affordable housing: 
Homeownership). No other HOME requirements apply.
    (iv) The match may be in any eligible form of match except those in 
Sec. 92.220(a)(2) (forbearance of fees), (a)(4) (on-site and off-site 
infrastructure), (a)(10) (direct cost of supportive services) and 
(a)(11) (direct costs of homebuyer counseling services).

[[Page 501]]

    (v) Match contributions to mixed-use or mixed-income projects that 
contain affordable housing units will be recognized only if the 
contribution is made to the project's affordable housing units.

[61 FR 48750, Sept. 16, 1996, as amended at 62 FR 28929, May 28, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 92.220  Form of matching contribution.

    (a) Eligible forms. Matching contributions must be made from 
nonfederal resources and may be in the form of one or more of the 
following:
    (1) Cash contributions from nonfederal sources. To be recognized as 
a cash contribution, funds must be contributed permanently to the HOME 
program (or to affordable housing not assisted with HOME funds), 
regardless of the form of investment provided to the project. Therefore, 
to receive match credit for the full amount of a loan to a HOME project, 
all repayment, interest, or other return on investment of the 
contribution must be deposited in the local account of the participating 
jurisdiction's HOME Investment Trust Fund to be used for eligible HOME 
activities in accordance with the requirements of this part. A cash 
contribution to affordable housing that is not assisted with HOME funds 
must be contributed permanently to the project. Repayments of matching 
contributions in affordable housing projects, as defined in 
Sec. 92.219(b), that are not HOME-assisted, must be made to the local 
account of the participating jurisdiction's HOME Investment Trust Fund 
to get match credit for the full loan amount.
    (i) A cash contribution may be made by the participating 
jurisdiction, non-Federal public entities, private entities, or 
individuals, except as prohibited under paragraph (b)(4) of this 
section. A cash contribution made to a nonprofit organization for use in 
a HOME project may be counted as a matching contribution.
    (ii) A cash contribution may be made from program income (as defined 
by 24 CFR 85.25(b)) from a Federal grant earned after the end of the 
award period if no Federal requirements govern the disposition of the 
program income. Included in this category are repayments from closed out 
grants under the Urban Development Action Grant Program (24 CFR part 
570, subpart G) and the Housing Development Grant Program (24 CFR part 
850), and from the Rental Rehabilitation Grant Program (24 CFR part 511) 
after all fiscal year Rental Rehabilitation grants have been closed out.
    (iii) The grant equivalent of a below-market interest rate loan to 
the project that is not repayable to the participating jurisdiction's 
HOME Investment Trust Fund may be counted as a cash contribution, as 
follows:
    (A) If the loan is made from funds borrowed by a jurisdiction or 
public agency or corporation the contribution is the present discounted 
cash value of the difference between the payments to be made on the 
borrowed funds and payments to be received from the loan to the project 
based on a discount rate equal to the interest rate on the borrowed 
funds.
    (B) If the loan is made from funds other than funds borrowed by a 
jurisdiction or public agency or corporation, the contribution is the 
present discounted cash value of the yield foregone. In determining the 
yield foregone, the participating jurisdiction must use as a measure of 
a market rate yield one of the following, as appropriate:
    (1) With respect to one- to four-unit housing financed with a fixed 
interest rate mortgage, a rate equal to the 10-year Treasury note rate 
plus 200 basis points;
    (2) With respect to one- to four-unit housing financed with an 
adjustable interest rate mortgage, a rate equal to the one-year Treasury 
bill rate plus 250 basis points;
    (3) With respect to a multifamily project, a rate equal to the 10-
year Treasury note rate plus 300 basis points; or
    (4) With respect to housing receiving financing for rehabilitation, 
a rate equal to the 10-year Treasury note rate plus 400 basis points.
    (iv) Proceeds of bonds that are not repaid with revenue from an 
affordable housing project (e.g., general obligation bonds) and that are 
loaned to a HOME-assisted or other qualified affordable housing project 
constitute a

[[Page 502]]

cash contribution under this paragraph.
    (v) A cash contribution may be counted as a matching contribution 
only if it is used for costs eligible under Secs. 92.206 or 92.209, or 
for the following (which are not HOME eligible costs): the cost of 
removing and relocating an ECHO housing unit during the period of 
affordability in accordance with Sec. 92.258(d)(3)(ii), payments to a 
project reserve account beyond payments permitted by Sec. 92.206(d)(5), 
operating subsidies, or costs relating to the portion of a mixed-income 
or mixed-use HOME-assisted project not related to the affordable housing 
units.
    (2) Forbearance of fees--(i) State and local taxes, charges or fees. 
The value (based on customary and reasonable means for establishing 
value) of State or local taxes, fees, or other charges that are normally 
and customarily imposed or charged by a State or local government on all 
transactions or projects in the conduct of its operations, which are 
waived, foregone, or deferred (including State low-income housing tax 
credits) in a manner that achieves affordability of HOME-assisted 
projects, may be counted as match. The amount of any real estate taxes 
may be based on post-improvement property value. For taxes, fees, or 
charges that are forgiven for future years, the value is the present 
discounted cash value, based on a rate equal to the rate for the 
Treasury security with a maturity closest to the number of years for 
which the taxes, fees, or charges are waived, foregone, or deferred.
    (ii) Other charges or fees. The value of fees or charges associated 
with the transfer or development of real estate that are normally and 
customarily imposed or charged by public or private entities, which are 
waived or foregone, in whole or in part, in a manner that achieves 
affordability of HOME-assisted projects, may be counted as match. Fees 
and charges under this paragraph do not include fees or charges for 
legal or other professional services; professional services which are 
donated, in whole or in part, are an eligible matching contribution in 
accordance with paragraph (a)(7) of this section.
    (iii) Fees or charges that are associated with the HOME Program only 
(rather than normally and customarily imposed or charged on all 
transactions or projects) are not eligible forms of matching 
contributions.
    (3) Donated Real Property. The value, before the HOME assistance is 
provided and minus any debt burden, lien, or other encumbrance, of 
donated land or other real property may be counted as match. The 
donation may be made by the participating jurisdiction, non-Federal 
public entities, private entities, or individuals, except as prohibited 
under paragraph (b)(4) of this section.
    (i) Donated property not acquired with Federal resources is a 
contribution in the amount of 100% of the value.
    (ii) Donated property acquired with Federal assistance may provide a 
partial contribution as follows. The property must be acquired with 
Federal assistance specifically for a HOME project (or for affordable 
housing that will be counted as match pursuant to Sec. 92.219(b)(2)). 
The property must be acquired with the Federal assistance at 
demonstrably below the appraised value and must be acknowledged by the 
seller as a donation to affordable housing at the time of the 
acquisition with the Federal assistance. The amount of the contribution 
is the difference between the acquisition price and the appraised value 
at the time of acquisition with the Federal assistance. If the property 
is acquired with the Federal assistance by someone other than the HOME 
project (or affordable housing) owner, to continue to qualify as a 
contribution, the property must be given to the HOME project (or 
affordable housing) owner at a price that does not exceed the amount of 
the Federal assistance used to acquire the property.
    (iii) Property must be appraised in conformance with established and 
generally recognized appraisal practice and procedures in common use by 
professional appraisers. Opinions of value must be based on the best 
available data properly analyzed and interpreted. The appraisal of land 
and structures must be performed by an independent, certified appraiser.

[[Page 503]]

    (4) The cost, not paid with Federal resources, of on-site and off-
site infrastructure that the participating jurisdiction documents are 
directly required for HOME-assisted projects. The infrastructure must 
have been completed no earlier than 12 months before HOME funds are 
committed to the project.
    (5) Proceeds from multifamily and single family affordable housing 
project bond financing validly issued by a State or local government, or 
an agency or instrumentality of a State or local government or a 
political subdivision of a State and repayable with revenues from the 
affordable housing project financed as follows:
    (i) Fifty percent of the loan amount made from bond proceeds to a 
multifamily affordable housing project owner may qualify as match.
    (ii) Twenty-five percent of the loan amount from bond proceeds made 
to a single-family affordable housing project owner may qualify as 
match.
    (iii) Loans made from bond proceeds may not constitute more than 25 
percent of a participating jurisdiction's total annual match 
contribution.
    (6) The reasonable value of donated site-preparation and 
construction materials, not acquired with Federal resources. The value 
of site-preparation and construction materials is to be determined in 
accordance with the participating jurisdiction's cost estimate 
procedures.
    (7) The reasonable rental value of the donated use of site 
preparation or construction equipment.
    (8) The value of donated or voluntary labor or professional services 
(see Sec. 92.354(b)) in connection with the provision of affordable 
housing. A single rate established by HUD shall be applicable for 
determining the value of unskilled labor. The value of skilled labor or 
professional services shall be determined by the rate that the 
individual or entity performing the labor or service normally charges.
    (9) The value of sweat equity (see Sec. 92.354(c)) provided to a 
homeownership project, under an established component of a participating 
jurisdiction's program, up until the time of project completion (i.e., 
submission of a project completion form). Such labor shall be valued at 
the rate established for unskilled labor at paragraph (a)(8) of this 
section.
    (10) The direct cost of supportive services provided to families 
residing in HOME-assisted units during the period of affordability or 
receiving HOME tenant-based rental assistance during the term of the 
tenant-based rental assistance contract. The supportive services must be 
necessary to facilitate independent living or be required as part of a 
self-sufficiency program. Examples of supportive services include: case 
management, mental health services, assistance with the tasks of daily 
living, substance abuse treatment and counseling, day care, and job 
training and counseling.
    (11) The direct cost of homebuyer counseling services provided to 
families that acquire properties with HOME funds under the provisions of 
Sec. 92.254(a), including ongoing counseling services provided during 
the period of affordability. These services may be provided as part of a 
homebuyer counseling program that is not specific to the HOME Program, 
but only the cost of services to families that complete purchases with 
HOME assistance may be counted as match.
    (b) Ineligible forms. The following are examples that do not meet 
the requirements of paragraph (a) of this section and do not count 
toward meeting a participating jurisdiction's matching contribution 
requirement:
    (1) Contributions made with or derived from Federal resources or 
funds, regardless of when the Federal resources or funds were received 
or expended. CDBG funds (defined in 24 CFR 570.3) are Federal funds for 
this purpose;
    (2) The interest rate subsidy attributable to the Federal tax-
exemption on financing or the value attributable to Federal tax credits;
    (3) Owner equity or investment in a project; and
    (4) Cash or other forms of contributions from applicants for or 
recipients of HOME assistance or contracts, or investors who own, are 
working on, or are proposing to apply for assistance for a HOME-assisted 
project. The prohibition in this paragraph (b)(4) does not apply to 
contractors (who do not

[[Page 504]]

own any HOME project) contributing professional services in accordance 
with paragraph (a)(8) of this section or to persons contributing sweat 
equity in accordance with paragraph (a)(9) of this section.

[61 FR 48750, Sept. 16, 1996, as amended at 62 FR 28929, May 28, 1997; 
62 FR 44840, Aug. 22, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 92.221  Match credit.

    (a) When credit is given. Contributions are credited on a fiscal 
year basis at the time the contribution is made, as follows:
    (1) A cash contribution is credited when the funds are expended.
    (2) The grant equivalent of a below-market interest rate loan is 
credited at the time of the loan closing.
    (3) The value of state or local taxes, fees, or other charges that 
are normally and customarily imposed but are waived, foregone, or 
deferred is credited at the time the state or local government or other 
public or private entity officially waives, forgoes, or defers the 
taxes, fees, or other charges and notifies the project owner.
    (4) The value of donated land or other real property is credited at 
the time ownership of the property is transferred to the HOME project 
(or affordable housing) owner.
    (5) The cost of investment in infrastructure directly required for 
HOME-assisted projects is credited at the time funds are expended for 
the infrastructure or at the time the HOME funds are committed to the 
project if the infrastructure was completed before the commitment of 
HOME funds.
    (6) The value of donated material is credited as match at the time 
it is used for affordable housing.
    (7) The value of the donate use of site preparation or construction 
equipment is credited as match at the time the equipment is used for 
affordable housing.
    (8) The value of donated or voluntary labor or professional services 
is credited at the time the work is performed.
    (9) A loan made from bond proceeds under Sec. 92.220(a)(5) is 
credited at the time of the loan closing.
    (10) The direct cost of social services provided to residents of 
HOME-assisted units is credited at the time that the social services are 
provided during the period of affordability.
    (11) The direct cost of homebuyer counseling services provided to 
families that purchase HOME-assisted units is credited at the time that 
the homebuyer purchases the unit or for post-purchase counseling 
services, at the time the counseling services are provided.
    (b) Excess match. Contributions made in a fiscal year that exceed 
the participating jurisdiction's match liability for the fiscal year in 
which they were made may be carried over and applied to future fiscal 
years' match liability. Loans made from bond proceeds in excess of 25 
percent of a participating jurisdiction's total annual match 
contribution may be carried over to subsequent fiscal years as excess 
match, subject to the annual 25 percent limitation.
    (c) Credit for match contributions shall be assigned as follows:
    (1) For HOME-assisted projects involving more than one participating 
jurisdiction, the participating jurisdiction that makes the match 
contribution may decide to retain the match credit or permit the other 
participating jurisdiction to claim the credit.
    (2) For HOME match contributions to affordable housing that is not 
HOME-assisted (match pursuant to Sec. 92.219(b)) involving more than one 
participating jurisdiction, the participating jurisdiction that makes 
the match contribution receives the match credit.
    (3) A State that provides non-Federal funds to a local participating 
jurisdiction to be used for a contribution to affordable housing, 
whether or not HOME-assisted, may take the match credit for itself or 
may permit the local participating jurisdiction to receive the match 
credit.


<R05>
Sec. 92.222  Reduction of matching contribution requirement.

    (a) Reduction for fiscal distress. HUD will determine match 
reductions annually.
    (1) Distress criteria for local government participating 
jurisdictions. If a local government participating jurisdiction 
satisfies both of the distress factors in paragraphs (a)(1)(i) and (ii) 
of this section, it is in severe fiscal distress and

[[Page 505]]

its match requirement will be reduced by 100% for the period specified 
in paragraph (a)(3) of this section. If a local government participating 
jurisdiction satisfies either distress factor in paragraphs (a)(1)(i) or 
(ii) of this section, it is in fiscal distress and its match requirement 
will be reduced by 50 percent, for the period specified in paragraph 
(a)(4) of this section.
    (i) Poverty rate. The average poverty rate in the participating 
jurisdiction was equal to or greater than 125 percent of the average 
national poverty rate during the calendar year for which the most recent 
data are available, as determined according to information of the Bureau 
of the Census.
    (ii) Per capita income. The average per capita income in the 
participating jurisdiction was less than 75 percent of the average 
national per capita income, during the calendar year for which the most 
recent data are available, as determined according to information from 
the Bureau of the Census.
    (2) Distress criteria for participating jurisdictions that are 
States. If a State satisfies at least 2 of the 3 distress factors in 
paragraphs (a)(2)(i) through (iii) of this section, it is in severe 
fiscal distress and its match requirement will be reduced by 100% for 
the period specified in paragraph (a)(3) of this section. If a State 
satisfies any 1 of the 3 distress factors in paragraphs (a)(2)(i) 
through (iii) of this section, it is in fiscal distress and its match 
requirement will be reduced by 50 percent, for the period specified in 
paragraph (a)(4) of this section.
    (i) Poverty rate. The average poverty rate in the State was equal to 
or greater than 125 percent of the average national poverty rate during 
the calendar year for which the most recent data are available, as 
determined according to information from the Bureau of the Census.
    (ii) Per capita income. The average per capita income in the State 
was less than 75 percent of the average national per capita income, 
during the calendar year for which the most recent data are available, 
as determined according to information from the Bureau of the Census.
    (iii) Personal income growth. The average personal income growth 
rate in the State over the most recent four quarters for which the data 
are available was less than 75 percent of the average national personal 
income growth rate during that period, as determined according to 
information from the Bureau of Economic Analysis.
    (3) Period of match reduction for severe fiscal distress. A 100% 
match reduction is effective for the fiscal year in which the severe 
fiscal distress determination is made and for the following fiscal year.
    (4) Period of match reduction for fiscal distress. A 50% match 
reduction is effective for the fiscal year in which the fiscal distress 
determination is made and for the following fiscal year, except that if 
a severe fiscal distress determination is published in that following 
fiscal year, the participating jurisdiction starts a new two-year match 
reduction period in accordance with the provisions of paragraph (a)(3) 
of this section.
    (b) Reduction of match for participating jurisdictions in disaster 
areas. If a participating jurisdiction is located in an area in which a 
declaration of major disaster pursuant to the Robert T. Stafford 
Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act is made, it may request a 
reduction of its matching requirement. For a local participating 
jurisdiction, the HUD Field office may reduce the matching requirement 
specified in Sec. 92.218 by up to 100 percent for the fiscal year in 
which the declaration of major disaster is made and the following fiscal 
year. For a State participating jurisdiction, the HUD Field office may 
reduce the matching requirement specified in Sec. 92.218, by up to 100 
percent for the fiscal year in which the declaration of major disaster 
is made and the following fiscal year with respect to any HOME funds 
expended in an area to which the declaration of a major disaster 
applies. At its discretion and upon request of the participating 
jurisdiction, the HUD Field Office may extend the reduction for an 
additional year.

[[Page 506]]


<R04>
                     Subpart F--Project Requirements


<R05>
Sec. 92.250  Maximum per-unit subsidy amount and subsidy layering.

    (a) Maximum per-unit subsidy amount. The amount of HOME funds that a 
participating jurisdiction may invest on a per-unit basis in affordable 
housing may not exceed the per-unit dollar limits established under 
section 221(d)(3)(ii) of the National Housing Act (12 U.S.C. 
17151(d)(3)(ii)) for elevator-type projects that apply to the area in 
which the housing is located. These limits are available from the 
Multifamily Division in the HUD Field Office. If the participating 
jurisdiction's per-unit subsidy amount has already been increased to 
210% as permitted under section 221(d)(3)(ii) of the National Housing 
Act, upon request of the Field Office, HUD will allow the per-unit 
subsidy amount to be increased on a program-wide basis to an amount, up 
to 240% of the original per unit limits.
    (b) Subsidy layering. Before committing funds to a project, the 
participating jurisdiction must evaluate the project in accordance with 
guidelines that it has adopted for this purpose and will not invest any 
more HOME funds, in combination with other governmental assistance, than 
is necessary to provide affordable housing.

[61 FR 48750, Sept. 16, 1997, as amended at 62 FR 28929, May 28, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 92.251  Property standards.

    (a) (1) Housing that is constructed or rehabilitated with HOME funds 
must meet all applicable local codes, rehabilitation standards, 
ordinances, and zoning ordinances at the time of project completion, 
except as provided in paragraph (b) of this section. The participating 
jurisdiction must have written standards for rehabilitation that ensure 
that HOME-assisted housing is decent, safe, and sanitary. In the absence 
of a local code for new construction or rehabilitation, HOME-assisted 
new construction or rehabilitation must meet, as applicable, one of 
three model codes: Uniform Building Code (ICBO), National Building Code 
(BOCA), Standard (Southern) Building Code (SBCCI); or the Council of 
American Building Officials (CABO) one or two family code; or the 
Minimum Property Standards (MPS) in 24 CFR 200.925 or 200.926. To avoid 
duplicative inspections when FHA financing is involved in a HOME-
assisted property, a participating jurisdiction may rely on a Minimum 
Property Standards (MPS) inspection performed by a qualified person. 
Newly constructed housing must meet the current edition of the Model 
Energy Code published by the Council of American Building Officials.
    (2) All other HOME-assisted housing (e.g., acquisition) must meet 
all applicable State and local housing quality standards and code 
requirements and if there are no such standards or code requirements, 
the housing must meet the housing quality standards in 24 CFR 982.401.
    (3) The housing must meet the accessibility requirements at 24 CFR 
part 8, which implements Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 
(29 U.S.C. 794) and covered multifamily dwellings, as defined at 24 CFR 
100.201, must also meet the design and construction requirements at 24 
CFR 100.205, which implement the Fair Housing Act (42 U.S.C. 3601-3619).
    (4) Construction of all manufactured housing must meet the 
Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards established in 24 
CFR part 3280. These standards pre-empt State and local codes covering 
the same aspects of performance for such housing. Participating 
jurisdictions providing HOME assistance to install manufactured housing 
units must comply with applicable State and local laws or codes. In the 
absence of such laws or codes, the participating jurisdiction must 
comply with the manufacturer's written instructions for installation of 
manufactured housing units. Manufactured housing that is rehabilitated 
using HOME funds must meet the requirements set out in paragraph (a)(1) 
of this section.
    (b) The following requirements apply to housing for homeownership 
that is to be rehabilitated after transfer of the ownership interest:
    (1) Before the transfer of the homeownership interest, the 
participating jurisdiction must:
    (i) Inspect the housing for any defects that pose a danger to 
health; and

[[Page 507]]

    (ii) Notify the prospective purchaser of the work needed to cure the 
defects and the time by which defects must be cured and applicable 
property standards met.
    (2) The housing must be free from all noted health and safety 
defects before occupancy and not later than 6 months after the transfer.
    (3) The housing must meet the property standards in paragraph (a)(1) 
of this section not later than 2 years after transfer of the ownership 
interest.
    (c) An owner of rental housing assisted with HOME funds must 
maintain the housing in compliance with all applicable State and local 
housing quality standards and code requirements and if there are no such 
standards or code requirements, the housing must meet the housing 
quality standards in 24 CFR 982.401.
    (d) All housing occupied by tenants receiving HOME tenant-based 
rental assistance must meet the housing quality standards in 24 CFR 
982.401.

[61 FR 48750, Sept. 16, 1996, as amended at 62 FR 28929, May 28, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 92.252  Qualification as affordable housing: Rental housing.

    The HOME-assisted units in a rental housing project must be occupied 
only by households that are eligible as low-income families and must 
meet the following requirements to qualify as affordable housing. The 
affordability requirements also apply to the HOME-assisted non-owner-
occupied units in single-family housing purchased with HOME funds in 
accordance with Sec. 92.254.
    (a) Rent limitation. HUD provides the following maximum HOME rent 
limits. The maximum HOME rents are the lesser of:
    (1) The fair market rent for existing housing for comparable units 
in the area as established by HUD under 24 CFR 888.111; or
    (2) A rent that does not exceed 30 percent of the adjusted income of 
a family whose annual income equals 65 percent of the median income for 
the area, as determined by HUD, with adjustments for number of bedrooms 
in the unit. The HOME rent limits provided by HUD will include average 
occupancy per unit and adjusted income assumptions.
    (b) Additional Rent limitations. In rental projects with five or 
more HOME-assisted rental units, twenty (20) percent of the HOME-
assisted units must be occupied by very low-income families and meet one 
of following rent requirements:
    (1) The rent does not exceed 30 percent of the annual income of a 
family whose income equals 50 percent of the median income for the area, 
as determined by HUD, with adjustments for smaller and larger families. 
HUD provides the HOME rent limits which include average occupancy per 
unit and adjusted income assumptions. However, if the rent determined 
under this paragraph is higher than the applicable rent under paragraph 
(a) of this section, then the maximum rent for units under this 
paragraph is that calculated under paragraph (a) of this section.
    (2) The rent does not exceed 30 percent of the family's adjusted 
income. If the unit receives Federal or State project-based rental 
subsidy and the very low-income family pays as a contribution toward 
rent not more than 30 percent of the family's adjusted income, then the 
maximum rent (i.e., tenant contribution plus project-based rental 
subsidy) is the rent allowable under the Federal or State project-based 
rental subsidy program.
    (c) Initial rent schedule and utility allowances. The participating 
jurisdiction must establish maximum monthly allowances for utilities and 
services (excluding telephone). The participating jurisdiction must 
review and approve rents proposed by the owner for units subject to the 
maximum rent limitations in paragraphs (a) or (b) of this section. For 
all units subject to the maximum rent limitations in paragraphs (a) or 
(b) of this section for which the tenant is paying utilities and 
services, the participating jurisdiction must ensure that the rents do 
not exceed the maximum rent minus the monthly allowances for utilities 
and services.
    (d) Nondiscrimination against rental assistance subsidy holders. The 
owner cannot refuse to lease HOME-assisted units to a certificate or 
voucher holder

[[Page 508]]

under 24 CFR part 982--Section 8 Tenant-Based Assistance: Unified Rule 
for Tenant-Based Assistance under the Section 8 Rental Certificate 
Program and the Section 8 Rental Voucher Program or to the holder of a 
comparable document evidencing participation in a HOME tenant-based 
rental assistance program because of the status of the prospective 
tenant as a holder of such certificate, voucher, or comparable HOME 
tenant-based assistance document.
    (e) Periods of Affordability. The HOME-assisted units must meet the 
affordability requirements for not less than the applicable period 
specified in the following table, beginning after project completion. 
The affordability requirements apply without regard to the term of any 
loan or mortgage or the transfer of ownership. They must be imposed by 
deed restrictions, covenants running with the land, or other mechanisms 
approved by HUD, except that the affordability restrictions may 
terminate upon foreclosure or transfer in lieu of foreclosure. The 
participating jurisdiction may use purchase options, rights of first 
refusal or other preemptive rights to purchase the housing before 
foreclosure or deed in lieu of foreclosure to preserve affordability. 
The affordability restrictions shall be revived according to the 
original terms if, during the original affordability period, the owner 
of record before the foreclosure, or deed in lieu of foreclosure, or any 
entity that includes the former owner or those with whom the former 
owner has or had family or business ties, obtains an ownership interest 
in the project or property.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                              Minimum
                                                             period of
                 Rental housing activity                   affordability
                                                              in years
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Rehabilitation or acquisition of existing housing per               5
 unit amount of HOME funds: Under $15,000................
$15,000 to $40,000.......................................          10
Over $40,000 or rehabilitation involving refinancing.....          15
New construction or acquisition of newly constructed               20
 housing.................................................
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (f) Subsequent rents during the affordability period. (1) The 
maximum HOME rent limits are recalculated on a periodic basis after HUD 
determines fair market rents and median incomes. HUD then provides the 
new maximum HOME rent limits to participating jurisdictions. Regardless 
of changes in fair market rents and in median income over time, the HOME 
rents for a project are not required to be lower than the HOME rent 
limits for the project in effect at the time of project commitment.
    (2) The participating jurisdiction must provide project owners with 
information on updated HOME rent limits so that rents may be adjusted 
(not to exceed the maximum HOME rent limits in paragraph (f)(1) of this 
section) in accordance with the written agreement between the 
participating jurisdiction and the owner. Owners must annually provide 
the participating jurisdiction with information on rents and occupancy 
of HOME-assisted units to demonstrate compliance with this section.
    (3) Any increase in rents for HOME-assisted units is subject to the 
provisions of outstanding leases, and in any event, the owner must 
provide tenants of those units not less than 30 days prior written 
notice before implementing any increase in rents.
    (g) Adjustment of HOME rent limits for a particular project. (1) 
Changes in fair market rents and in median income over time should be 
sufficient to maintain the financial viability of a project within the 
HOME rent limits in this section.
    (2) HUD may adjust the HOME rent limits for a project, only if HUD 
finds that an adjustment is necessary to support the continued financial 
viability of the project and only by an amount that HUD determines is 
necessary to maintain continued financial viability of the project. HUD 
expects that this authority will be used sparingly.
    (h) Tenant income. The income of each tenant must be determined 
initially in accordance with Sec. 92.203(a)(1)(i). In addition, each 
year during the period of affordability the project owner must re-
examine each tenant's annual income in accordance with one of the 
options in Sec. 92.203 selected by the participating jurisdiction. An 
owner of a multifamily project with an affordability period of 10 years 
or more who re-examines tenant's annual income

[[Page 509]]

through a statement and certification in accordance with 
Sec. 92.203(a)(1)(ii), must examine the income of each tenant, in 
accordance with Sec. 92.203(a)(1)(i), every sixth year of the 
affordability period. Otherwise, an owner who accepts the tenant's 
statement and certification in accordance with Sec. 92.203(a)(1)(ii) is 
not required to examine the income of tenants in multifamily or single-
family projects unless there is evidence that the tenant's written 
statement failed to completely and accurately state information about 
the family's size or income.
    (i) Over-income tenants. (1) HOME-assisted units continue to qualify 
as affordable housing despite a temporary noncompliance caused by 
increases in the incomes of existing tenants if actions satisfactory to 
HUD are being taken to ensure that all vacancies are filled in 
accordance with this section until the noncompliance is corrected.
    (2) Tenants who no longer qualify as low-income families must pay as 
rent the lesser of the amount payable by the tenant under State or local 
law or 30 percent of the family's adjusted income, except that tenants 
of HOME-assisted units that have been allocated low-income housing tax 
credits by a housing credit agency pursuant to section 42 of the 
Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (26 U.S.C. 42) must pay rent governed by 
section 42. In addition, in projects in which the Home units are 
designated as floating pursuant to paragraph (j) of this section, 
tenants who no longer qualify as low-income are not required to pay as 
rent an amount that exceeds the market rent for comparable, unassisted 
units in the neighborhood.
    (j) Fixed and floating HOME units. In a project containing HOME-
assisted and other units, the participating jurisdiction may designate 
fixed or floating HOME units. This designation must be made at the time 
of project commitment. Fixed units remain the same throughout the period 
of affordability. Floating units are changed to maintain conformity with 
the requirements of this section during the period of affordability so 
that the total number of housing units meeting the requirements of this 
section remains the same, and each substituted unit is comparable in 
terms of size, features, and number of bedrooms to the originally 
designated HOME-assisted unit.

[61 FR 48750, Sept. 16, 1996, as amended at 62 FR 28929, May 28, 1997; 
62 FR 44840, Aug. 22, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 92.253  Tenant and participant protections.

    (a) Lease. The lease between a tenant and an owner of rental housing 
assisted with HOME funds must be for not less than one year, unless by 
mutual agreement between the tenant and the owner.
    (b) Prohibited lease terms. The lease may not contain any of the 
following provisions:
    (1) Agreement to be sued. Agreement by the tenant to be sued, to 
admit guilt, or to a judgment in favor of the owner in a lawsuit brought 
in connection with the lease;
    (2) Treatment of property. Agreement by the tenant that the owner 
may take, hold, or sell personal property of household members without 
notice to the tenant and a court decision on the rights of the parties. 
This prohibition, however, does not apply to an agreement by the tenant 
concerning disposition of personal property remaining in the housing 
unit after the tenant has moved out of the unit. The owner may dispose 
of this personal property in accordance with State law;
    (3) Excusing owner from responsibility. Agreement by the tenant not 
to hold the owner or the owner's agents legally responsible for any 
action or failure to act, whether intentional or negligent;
    (4) Waiver of notice. Agreement of the tenant that the owner may 
institute a lawsuit without notice to the tenant;
    (5) Waiver of legal proceedings. Agreement by the tenant that the 
owner may evict the tenant or household members without instituting a 
civil court proceeding in which the tenant has the opportunity to 
present a defense, or before a court decision on the rights of the 
parties;
    (6) Waiver of a jury trial. Agreement by the tenant to waive any 
right to a trial by jury;
    (7) Waiver of right to appeal court decision. Agreement by the 
tenant to waive

[[Page 510]]

the tenant's right to appeal, or to otherwise challenge in court, a 
court decision in connection with the lease; and
    (8) Tenant chargeable with cost of legal actions regardless of 
outcome. Agreement by the tenant to pay attorney's fees or other legal 
costs even if the tenant wins in a court proceeding by the owner against 
the tenant. The tenant, however, may be obligated to pay costs if the 
tenant loses.
    (c) Termination of tenancy. An owner may not terminate the tenancy 
or refuse to renew the lease of a tenant of rental housing assisted with 
HOME funds except for serious or repeated violation of the terms and 
conditions of the lease; for violation of applicable Federal, State, or 
local law; for completion of the tenancy period for transitional 
housing; or for other good cause. To terminate or refuse to renew 
tenancy, the owner must serve written notice upon the tenant specifying 
the grounds for the action at least 30 days before the termination of 
tenancy.
    (d) Tenant selection. An owner of rental housing assisted with HOME 
funds must adopt written tenant selection policies and criteria that:
    (1) Are consistent with the purpose of providing housing for very 
low-income and low-income families;
    (2) Are reasonably related to program eligibility and the 
applicants' ability to perform the obligations of the lease;
    (3) Give reasonable consideration to the housing needs of families 
that would have a Federal preference under section 6(c)(4)(A) of the 
1937 Act (see Sec. 92.209(c)(2)) ;
    (4) Provide for the selection of tenants from a written waiting list 
in the chronological order of their application, insofar as is 
practicable; and
    (5) Give prompt written notification to any rejected applicant of 
the grounds for any rejection.


<R05>
Sec. 92.254  Qualification as affordable housing: Homeownership.

    (a) Acquisition with or without rehabilitation. Housing that is for 
acquisition by a family must meet the affordability requirements of this 
paragraph (a).
    (1) The housing must be single-family housing (1- to 4-family 
residence, condominium unit, cooperative unit, combination manufactured 
home and lot, or manufactured home lot) .
    (2) The housing must be modest housing as follows:
    (i) In the case of acquisition of newly constructed housing or 
standard housing, the housing has a purchase price for the type of 
single family housing that does not exceed 95 percent of the median 
purchase price for the area, as described in paragraph (a)(2)(iii) of 
this section.
    (ii) In the case of acquisition with rehabilitation, the housing has 
an estimated value after rehabilitation that does not exceed 95 percent 
of the median purchase price for the area, described in paragraph 
(a)(2)(iii) of this section.
    (iii) If a participating jurisdiction intends to use HOME funds for 
homebuyer assistance or for rehabilitation of owner-occupied single-
family properties, the participating jurisdiction may use the Single 
Family Mortgage Limits under Section 203(b) of the National Housing Act 
(12 U.S.C. 1709(b)) (which may be obtained from the HUD Field Office) or 
it may determine 95 percent of the median area purchase price for single 
family housing in the jurisdiction, as follows. The participating 
jurisdiction must set forth the price for different types of single 
family housing (1- to 4-unit family residence, condominium unit, 
cooperative unit, combination of manufactured housing and lot or 
manufactured housing lot) for the jurisdiction. The 95 percent of median 
area purchase price must be established in accordance with a market 
analysis which ensured that a sufficient number of recent housing sales 
are included in the survey. Sales must cover the requisite number of 
months based on volume: For 500 or more sales per month, a one-month 
reporting period; for 250 through 499 sales per month, a two-month 
reporting period; for less than 250 sales per month, at least a three-
month reporting period. The data must be listed in ascending order of 
sales price. The address of the listed properties must include the 
location within the participating jurisdiction. Lot, square and 
subdivision data may be substituted for the street address. The housing 
sales data must reflect all, or nearly all, of the one-

[[Page 511]]

family house sales in the entire participating jurisdiction. To 
determine the median, take the middle sale on the list if an odd number 
of sales and if an even number, take the higher of the middle numbers 
and consider it the median. After identifying the median sales price, 
the amount should be multiplied by .95 to determine the 95 percent of 
the median area purchase price. This information must be submitted to 
the HUD Field Office for review.
    (3) The housing must be acquired by a homebuyer whose family 
qualifies as a low-income family and the housing must be the principal 
residence of the family throughout the period described in paragraph 
(a)(4) of this section.
    (4) Periods of affordability. The HOME-assisted housing must meet 
the affordability requirements for not less than the applicable period 
specified in the following table, beginning after project completion. 
The per unit amount of HOME funds and the affordability period that they 
trigger are described more fully in paragraphs (a)(5)(i) (resale) and 
(ii) (recapture) of this section.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                              Minimum
                                                             period of
      Homeownership assistance HOME amount per-unit        affordability
                                                              in years
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Under $15,000............................................           5
$15,000 to $40,000.......................................          10
Over $40,000.............................................          15
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (5) Resale and recapture. To ensure affordability, the participating 
jurisdiction must impose either resale or recapture requirements, at its 
option. The participating jurisdiction must establish the resale or 
recapture requirements that comply with the standards of this section 
and set forth the requirements in its consolidated plan. HUD must 
determine that they are appropriate.
    (i) Resale. Resale requirements must ensure, if the housing does not 
continue to be the principal residence of the family for the duration of 
the period of affordability, that the housing is made available for 
subsequent purchase only to a buyer whose family qualifies as a low-
income family and will use the property as its principal residence. The 
resale requirement must also ensure that the price at resale provides 
the original HOME-assisted owner a fair return on investment (including 
the homeowner's investment and any capital improvement) and ensure that 
the housing will remain affordable to a reasonable range of low-income 
homebuyers. The period of affordability is based on the total amount of 
HOME funds invested in the housing.
    (A) Except as provided in paragraph (a)(5)(i)(B) of this section, 
deed restrictions, covenants running with the land, or other similar 
mechanisms must be used as the mechanism to impose the resale 
requirements. The affordability restrictions may terminate upon 
occurrence of any of the following termination events: foreclosure, 
transfer in lieu of foreclosure or assignment of an FHA insured mortgage 
to HUD. The participating jurisdiction may use purchase options, rights 
of first refusal or other preemptive rights to purchase the housing 
before foreclosure to preserve affordability. The affordability 
restrictions shall be revived according to the original terms if, during 
the original affordability period, the owner of record before the 
termination event, obtains an ownership interest in the housing.
    (B) Certain housing may be presumed to meet the resale restrictions 
(i.e., the housing will be available and affordable to a reasonable 
range of low-income homebuyers; a low-income homebuyer will occupy the 
housing as the family's principal residence; and the original owner will 
be afforded a fair return on investment) during the period of 
affordability without the imposition of enforcement mechanisms by the 
participating jurisdiction. The presumption must be based upon a market 
analysis of the neighborhood in which the housing is located. The market 
analysis must include an evaluation of the location and characteristics 
of the housing and residents in the neighborhood (e.g., sale prices, age 
and amenities of the housing stock, incomes of residents, percentage of 
owner-occupants) in relation to housing and incomes in the housing 
market area. An analysis of the current and projected incomes of 
neighborhood residents for

[[Page 512]]

an average period of affordability for homebuyers in the neighborhood 
must support the conclusion that a reasonable range of low-income 
families will continue to qualify for mortgage financing. For example, 
an analysis shows that the housing is modestly priced within the housing 
market area and that families with incomes of 65% to 80% of area median 
can afford monthly payments under average FHA terms without other 
government assistance and housing will remain affordable at least during 
the next five to seven years compared to other housing in the market 
area; the size and amenities of the housing are modest and substantial 
rehabilitation will not significantly increase the market value; the 
neighborhood has housing that is not currently owned by the occupants, 
but the participating jurisdiction is encouraging homeownership in the 
neighborhood by providing homeownership assistance and by making 
improvements to the streets, sidewalks, and other public facilities and 
services. If a participating jurisdiction in preparing a neighborhood 
revitalization strategy under Sec. 91.215(e)(2) of its consolidated plan 
or Empowerment Zone or Enterprise Community application under 24 CFR 
part 597 has incorporated the type of market data described above, that 
submission may serve as the required analysis under this section. If the 
participating jurisdiction continues to provide homeownership assistance 
for housing in the neighborhood, it must periodically update the market 
analysis to verify the original presumption of continued affordability.
    (ii) Recapture. Recapture provisions must ensure that the 
participating jurisdiction recoups all or a portion of the HOME 
assistance to the homebuyers, if the housing does not continue to be the 
principal residence of the family for the duration of the period of 
affordability. The participating jurisdiction may structure its 
recapture provisions based on its program design and market conditions. 
The period of affordability is based upon the total amount of HOME funds 
subject to recapture described in paragraph (a)(5)(ii)(A)(5) of this 
section.
    (A) The following options for recapture requirements are acceptable 
to HUD. The participating jurisdiction may adopt, modify or develop its 
own recapture requirements for HUD approval.
    (1) Recapture entire amount. The participating jurisdiction may 
recapture the entire amount of the HOME investment from the homeowner.
    (2) Reduction during affordability period. The participating 
jurisdiction may reduce the HOME investment amount to be recaptured on a 
prorata basis for the time the homeowner has owned and occupied the 
housing measured against the required affordability period.
    (3) Shared net proceeds. If the net proceeds are not sufficient to 
recapture the full HOME investment (or a reduced amount as provided for 
in paragraph (a)(5)(ii)(A)(2) of this section) plus enable the homeowner 
to recover the amount of the homeowner's downpayment and any capital 
improvement investment made by the owner since purchase, the 
participating jurisdiction may share the net proceeds. The net proceeds 
are the sales price minus loan repayment (other than HOME funds) and 
closing costs. The net proceeds may be divided proportionally as set 
forth in the following mathematical formulas:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC12OC91.007

    (4) Owner investment returned first. The participating jurisdiction 
may permit the homebuyer to recover the homebuyer's entire investment 
(downpayment and capital improvements

[[Page 513]]

made by the owner since purchase) before recapturing the HOME 
investment.
    (5) Amount subject to recapture. The HOME investment that is subject 
to recapture is based on the amount of HOME assistance that enabled the 
homebuyer to buy the dwelling unit. This includes any HOME assistance 
that reduced the purchase price from fair market value to an affordable 
price, but excludes the amount between the cost of producing the unit 
and the market value of the property (i.e., the development subsidy). 
The recaptured funds must be used to carry out HOME-eligible activities 
in accordance with the requirements of this part. If the HOME assistance 
is only used for the development subsidy and therefore not subject to 
recapture, the resale option must be used.
    (6) Special considerations for single-family properties with more 
than one unit. If the HOME funds are only used to assist a low-income 
homebuyer to acquire one unit in single-family housing containing more 
than one unit and the assisted unit will be the principal residence of 
the homebuyer, the affordability requirements of this section apply only 
to the assisted unit. If HOME funds are also used to assist the low-
income homebuyer to acquire one or more of the rental units in the 
single-family housing, the affordability requirements of Sec. 92.252 
apply to assisted rental units, except that the participating 
jurisdiction may impose resale or recapture restrictions on all assisted 
units (owner-occupied and rental units) in the single family housing. If 
resale restrictions are used, the affordability requirements on all 
assisted units continue for the period of affordability. If recapture 
restrictions are used, the affordability requirements on the assisted 
rental units may be terminated, at the discretion of the participating 
jurisdiction, upon recapture of the HOME investment. (If HOME funds are 
used to assist only the rental units in such a property then the 
requirements of Sec. 92.252 would apply and the owner-occupied unit 
would not be subject to the income targeting or affordability provisions 
of Sec. 92.254.)
    (7) Lease-purchase. HOME funds may be used to assist homebuyers 
through lease-purchase programs. The housing must be purchased by a 
homebuyer within 36 months of signing the lease-purchase agreement. The 
homebuyer must qualify as a low-income family at the time the lease-
purchase agreement is signed and at the time the housing is transferred 
if more than six months have elapsed since the participating 
jurisdiction determined that the family was income eligible. If HOME 
funds are used to acquire housing that will be resold to a homebuyer 
through a lease-purchase program, the HOME affordability requirements 
for rental housing in Sec. 92.252 shall apply if the housing is not 
transferred to a homebuyer within forty-two months after project 
completion.
    (b) Rehabilitation not involving acquisition. Housing that is 
currently owned by a family qualifies as affordable housing only if:
    (1) The estimated value of the property, after rehabilitation, does 
not exceed 95 percent of the median purchase price for the area, 
described in paragraph (a)(2)(iii) of this section; and
    (2) The housing is the principal residence of an owner whose family 
qualifies as a low-income family at the time HOME funds are committed to 
the housing.
    (c) Ownership interest. The ownership in the housing assisted under 
this section must meet the definition of ``homeownership'' in Sec. 92.2.
    (d) New construction without acquisition. Newly constructed housing 
that is built on property currently owned by a family which will occupy 
the housing upon completion, qualifies as affordable housing if it meets 
the requirements under paragraph (a) of this section.


<R05>
Sec. 92.255  Converting rental units to homeownership units for existing tenants.

    The participating jurisdiction may permit the owner of HOME-assisted 
rental units to convert the rental units to homeownership units by 
selling, donating, or otherwise conveying the units to the existing 
tenants to enable the tenants to become homeowners in accordance with 
the requirements of Sec. 92.254. If no additional HOME funds

[[Page 514]]

are used to enable the tenants to become homeowners, the homeownership 
units are subject to a minimum period of affordability equal to the 
remaining affordable period if the units continued as rental units. If 
additional HOME funds are used to directly assist the tenants to become 
homeowners, the minimum period of affordability is the affordability 
period under Sec. 92.254(a)(4), based on the amount of direct 
homeownership assistance provided.


<R05>
Sec. 92.256  [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 92.257  Religious organizations.

    HOME funds may not be provided to primarily religious organizations, 
such as churches, for any activity including secular activities. In 
addition, HOME funds may not be used to rehabilitate or construct 
housing owned by primarily religious organizations or to assist 
primarily religious organizations in acquiring housing. However, HOME 
funds may be used by a secular entity to acquire housing from a 
primarily religious organization, and a primarily religious entity may 
transfer title to its property to a wholly secular entity and the entity 
may participate in the HOME program in accordance with the requirements 
of this part. The entity may be an existing or newly established entity, 
which may be an entity established by the religious organization. The 
completed housing project must be used exclusively by the owner entity 
for secular purposes, available to all persons regardless of religion. 
In particular, there must be no religious or membership criteria for 
tenants of the property.


<R05>
Sec. 92.258  Elder cottage housing opportunity (ECHO) units.

    (a) General. HOME funds may be used for the initial purchase and 
initial placement costs of elder cottage housing opportunity (ECHO) 
units that meet the requirements of this section, and that are small, 
free-standing, barrier-free, energy-efficient, removable, and designed 
to be installed adjacent to existing single-family dwellings.
    (b) Eligible owners. The owner of a HOME-assisted ECHO unit may be:
    (1) The owner-occupant of the single-family host property on which 
the ECHO unit will be located;
    (2) A participating jurisdiction; or
    (3) A non-profit organization.
    (c) Eligible tenants. During the affordability period, the tenant of 
a HOME-assisted ECHO unit must be an elderly or disabled family as 
defined in 24 CFR 5.403 and must also be a low-income family.
    (d) Applicable requirements. The requirements of Sec. 92.252 apply 
to HOME-assisted ECHO units, with the following modifications:
    (1) Only one ECHO unit may be provided per host property.
    (2) The ECHO unit owner may choose whether or not to charge the 
tenant of the ECHO unit rent, but if a rent is charged, it must meet the 
requirements of Sec. 92.252.
    (3) The ECHO housing must remain affordable for the period specified 
in Sec. 92.252(e). If within the affordability period the original 
occupant no longer occupies the unit, the ECHO unit owner must:
    (i) Rent the unit to another eligible occupant on site;
    (ii) Move the ECHO unit to another site for occupancy by an eligible 
occupant; or
    (iii) If the owner of the ECHO unit is the host property owner-
occupant, the owner may repay the HOME funds in accordance with the 
recapture provisions imposed by the participating jurisdiction 
consistent with Sec. 92.254(a)(5)(ii). The participating jurisdiction 
must use the recaptured HOME funds for additional HOME activities.
    (4) The participating jurisdiction has the responsibility to enforce 
the project requirements applicable to ECHO units.


<R04>
         Subpart G--Community Housing Development Organizations


<R05>
Sec. 92.300  Set-aside for community housing development organizations (CHDOs).

    (a)(1) Within 24 months after HUD notifies the participating 
jurisdiction of HUD's execution of the HOME Investment Partnerships 
Agreement, the participating jurisdiction must reserve not less than 15 
percent of the HOME

[[Page 515]]

allocation for investment only in housing to be developed, sponsored, or 
owned by community housing development organizations. For a State, the 
HOME allocation includes funds reallocated under Sec. 92.451(c)(2)(i) 
and, for a unit of general local government, funds transferred from a 
State under Sec. 92.102(b). The funds are reserved when a participating 
jurisdiction enters into a written agreement with the community housing 
development organization. The funds must be provided to a community 
housing development organization, its subsidiary, or a partnership of 
which it or its subsidiary is the managing general partner. If a CHDO 
owns the project in partnership, it or its wholly owned for-profit or 
non-profit subsidiary must be the managing general partner. In acting in 
any of the capacities specified, the community housing development 
organization must have effective project control. In addition, a 
community housing development organization, in connection with housing 
it develops, sponsors or owns with HOME funds provided under this 
section, may provide direct homeownership assistance (e.g. downpayment 
assistance) and not be considered a subrecipient.
    (2) The participating jurisdiction determines the form of 
assistance, e.g., grant or loan, that the community housing development 
organization receives and whether any proceeds must be returned to the 
participating jurisdiction or may be retained by the community housing 
development organization. While the proceeds the participating 
jurisdiction permits the community housing development organization to 
retain are not subject to the requirements of this part, the 
participating jurisdiction must specify in the written agreement with 
the community housing development organization whether they are to be 
used for HOME-eligible or other housing activities to benefit low-income 
families. However, funds recaptured because housing no longer meets the 
affordability requirements under Sec. 92.254(a)(5)(ii) are subject to 
the requirements of this part in accordance with Sec. 92.503.
    (b) Each participating jurisdiction must make reasonable efforts to 
identify community housing development organizations that are capable, 
or can reasonably be expected to become capable, of carrying out 
elements of the jurisdiction's approved consolidated plan and to 
encourage such community housing development organizations to do so. If 
during the first 24 months of its participation in the HOME Program a 
participating jurisdiction cannot identify a sufficient number of 
capable community housing development organizations, up to 20 percent of 
the minimum community housing development organization setaside of 15 
percent specified in paragraph (a) of this section, above, (but not more 
than $150,000 during the 24 month period) may be committed to develop 
the capacity of community housing development organizations in the 
jurisdiction.
    (c) Up to 10 percent of the HOME funds reserved under this section 
may be used for activities specified under Sec. 92.301.
    (d) HOME funds required to be reserved under this section are 
subject to reduction, as provided in Sec. 92.500(d).
    (e) If funds for operating expenses are provided under Sec. 92.208 
to a community housing development organization that is not also 
receiving funds under paragraph (a) of this section for housing to be 
developed, sponsored or owned by the community housing development 
organization, the participating jurisdiction must enter into a written 
agreement with the community housing development organization that 
provides that the community housing development organization is expected 
to receive funds under paragraph (a) of this section within 24 months of 
receiving the funds for operating expenses, and specifies the terms and 
conditions upon which this expectation is based.
    (f) Limitation on community housing development organization 
operating funds. A community housing development organization may not 
receive HOME funding for any fiscal year in an amount that provides more 
than 50 percent or $50,000, whichever is greater, of the community 
housing development organization's total operating expenses in that 
fiscal year. This also includes organizational support and housing 
education provided under section 233(b)(1), (2), and (6) of the Act, as 
well

[[Page 516]]

as funds for operating expenses provided under Sec. 92.208.

[61 FR 48750, Sept. 16, 1996, as amended at 62 FR 28930, May 28, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 92.301  Project-specific assistance to community housing development organizations.

    (a) Project-specific technical assistance and site control loans--
(1) General. Within the percentage specified in Sec. 92.300(c), HOME 
funds may be used by a participating jurisdiction to provide technical 
assistance and site control loans to community housing development 
organizations in the early stages of site development for an eligible 
project. These loans may not exceed amounts that the participating 
jurisdiction determines to be customary and reasonable project 
preparation costs allowable under paragraph (a)(2) of this section. All 
costs must be related to a specific eligible project or projects.
    (2) Allowable costs. A loan may be provided to cover project costs 
necessary to determine project feasibility (including costs of an 
initial feasibility study), consulting fees, costs of preliminary 
financial applications, legal fees, architectural fees, engineering 
fees, engagement of a development team, option to acquire property, site 
control and title clearance. General operational expenses of the 
community housing development organization are not allowable costs.
    (3) Repayment. The community housing development organization must 
repay the loan to the participating jurisdiction from construction loan 
proceeds or other project income. The participating jurisdiction may 
waive repayment of the loan, in part or in whole, if there are 
impediments to project development that the participating jurisdiction 
determines are reasonably beyond the control of the borrower.
    (b) Project-specific seed money loans--(1) General. Within the 
percentage specified in Sec. 92.300(c), HOME funds may be used to 
provide loans to community housing development organizations to cover 
preconstruction project costs that the participating jurisdiction 
determines to be customary and reasonable, including, but not limited to 
the costs of obtaining firm construction loan commitments, architectural 
plans and specifications, zoning approvals, engineering studies, and 
legal fees.
    (2) Eligible sponsors. A loan may be provided only to a community 
housing development organization that has, with respect to the project 
concerned, site control (evidenced by a deed, a sales contract, or an 
option contract to acquire the property), a preliminary financial 
commitment, and a capable development team.
    (3) Repayment. The community housing development organization must 
repay the loan to the participating jurisdiction from construction loan 
proceeds or other project income. The participating jurisdiction may 
waive repayment of the loan, in whole or in part, if there are 
impediments to project development that the participating jurisdiction 
determines are reasonably beyond the control of the community housing 
development organization.


<R05>
Sec. 92.302  Housing education and organizational support.

    HUD is authorized to provide education and organizational support 
assistance, in conjunction with HOME funds made available to community 
housing development organizations in accordance with section 233 of the 
Act. HUD will publish a notice in the Federal Register announcing the 
availability of funding under this section, as appropriate. The notice 
need not include funding for each of the eligible activities, but may 
target funding from among the eligible activities.


<R05>
Sec. 92.303  Tenant participation plan.

    A community housing development organization that receives 
assistance under this part must adhere to a fair lease and grievance 
procedure approved by the participating jurisdiction and provide a plan 
for and follow a program of tenant participation in management 
decisions.

[[Page 517]]


<R04>
                  Subpart H--Other Federal Requirements


<R05>
Sec. 92.350  Other Federal requirements and nondiscrimination.

    (a) The Federal requirements set forth in 24 CFR part 5, subpart A, 
are applicable to participants in the HOME program. The requirements of 
this subpart include: nondiscrimination and equal opportunity; 
disclosure requirements; debarred, suspended or ineligible contractors; 
and drug-free workplace.
    (b) The nondiscrimination requirements at section 282 of the Act are 
applicable. These requirements are waived in connection with the use of 
HOME funds on lands set aside under the Hawaiian Homes Commission Act, 
1920 (42 Stat. 108).

[62 FR 28930, May 28, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 92.351  Affirmative marketing; minority outreach program.

    (a) Affirmative marketing. (1) Each participating jurisdiction must 
adopt affirmative marketing procedures and requirements for rental and 
homebuyer projects containing 5 or more HOME-assisted housing units. 
Affirmative marketing steps consist of actions to provide information 
and otherwise attract eligible persons in the housing market area to the 
available housing without regard to race, color, national origin, sex, 
religion, familial status or disability. (The affirmative marketing 
procedures do not apply to families with Section 8 tenant-based rental 
housing assistance or families with tenant-based rental assistance 
provided with HOME funds.)
    (2) The affirmative marketing requirements and procedures adopted 
must include:
    (i) Methods for informing the public, owners, and potential tenants 
about Federal fair housing laws and the participating jurisdiction's 
affirmative marketing policy (e.g., the use of the Equal Housing 
Opportunity logotype or slogan in press releases and solicitations for 
owners, and written communication to fair housing and other groups);
    (ii) Requirements and practices each owner must adhere to in order 
to carry out the participating jurisdiction's affirmative marketing 
procedures and requirements (e.g., use of commercial media, use of 
community contacts, use of the Equal Housing Opportunity logotype or 
slogan, and display of fair housing poster);
    (iii) Procedures to be used by owners to inform and solicit 
applications from persons in the housing market area who are not likely 
to apply for the housing without special outreach (e.g., use of 
community organizations, places of worship, employment centers, fair 
housing groups, or housing counseling agencies);
    (iv) Records that will be kept describing actions taken by the 
participating jurisdiction and by owners to affirmatively market units 
and records to assess the results of these actions; and
    (v) A description of how the participating jurisdiction will 
annually assess the success of affirmative marketing actions and what 
corrective actions will be taken where affirmative marketing 
requirements are not met.
    (3) A State that distributes HOME funds to units of general local 
government must require each unit of general local government to adopt 
affirmative marketing procedures and requirements that meet the 
requirement in paragraphs (a) and (b) of this section.
    (b) Minority outreach. A participating jurisdiction must prescribe 
procedures acceptable to HUD to establish and oversee a minority 
outreach program within its jurisdiction to ensure the inclusion, to the 
maximum extent possible, of minorities and women, and entities owned by 
minorities and women, including, without limitation, real estate firms, 
construction firms, appraisal firms, management firms, financial 
institutions, investment banking firms, underwriters, accountants, and 
providers of legal services, in all contracts entered into by the 
participating jurisdiction with such persons or entities, public and 
private, in order to facilitate the activities of the participating 
jurisdiction to provide affordable housing authorized under this Act or 
any other Federal housing law applicable to such jurisdiction. Section 
85.36(e) of this title describes actions to be taken by a participating 
jurisdiction

[[Page 518]]

to assure that minority business enterprises and women business 
enterprises are used when possible in the procurement of property and 
services.


<R05>
Sec. 92.352  Environmental review.

    (a) General. The environmental effects of each activity carried out 
with HOME funds must be assessed in accordance with the provisions of 
the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (NEPA) (42 U.S.C. 4321) 
and the related authorities listed in HUD's implementing regulations at 
24 CFR parts 50 and 58.
    (b) Responsibility for review. (1) The jurisdiction (e.g., the 
participating jurisdiction or State recipient) or insular area must 
assume responsibility for environmental review, decisionmaking, and 
action for each activity that it carries out with HOME funds, in 
accordance with the requirements imposed on a recipient under 24 CFR 
part 58. No funds may be committed to a HOME activity or project before 
the completion of the environmental review and approval of the request 
for release of funds and related certification, except as authorized by 
24 CFR part 58.
    (2) A State participating jurisdiction must also assume 
responsibility for approval of requests for release of HOME funds 
submitted by State recipients.
    (3) HUD will perform the environmental review, in accordance with 24 
CFR part 50, for a competitively awarded application for HOME funds 
submitted to HUD by an entity that is not a jurisdiction.


<R05>
Sec. 92.353  Displacement, relocation, and acquisition.

    (a) Minimizing displacement. Consistent with the other goals and 
objectives of this part, the participating jurisdiction must ensure that 
it has taken all reasonable steps to minimize the displacement of 
persons (families, individuals, businesses, nonprofit organizations, and 
farms) as a result of a project assisted with HOME funds. To the extent 
feasible, residential tenants must be provided a reasonable opportunity 
to lease and occupy a suitable, decent, safe, sanitary, and affordable 
dwelling unit in the building/complex upon completion of the project.
    (b) Temporary relocation. The following policies cover residential 
tenants who will not be required to move permanently but who must 
relocate temporarily for the project. Such tenants must be provided:
    (1) Reimbursement for all reasonable out-of-pocket expenses incurred 
in connection with the temporary relocation, including the cost of 
moving to and from the temporarily occupied housing and any increase in 
monthly rent/utility costs.
    (2) Appropriate advisory services, including reasonable advance 
written notice of:
    (i) The date and approximate duration of the temporary relocation;
    (ii) The location of the suitable, decent, safe, and sanitary 
dwelling to be made available for the temporary period;
    (iii) The terms and conditions under which the tenant may lease and 
occupy a suitable, decent, safe, and sanitary dwelling in the building/
complex upon completion of the project; and
    (iv) The provisions of paragraph (b)(1) of this section.
    (c) Relocation assistance for displaced persons--(1) General. A 
displaced person (defined in paragraph (c)(2) of this section) must be 
provided relocation assistance at the levels described in, and in 
accordance with the requirements of the Uniform Relocation Assistance 
and Real Property Acquisition Policies Act of 1970 (URA) (42 U.S.C. 
4201-4655) and 49 CFR part 24. A ``displaced person'' must be advised of 
his or her rights under the Fair Housing Act and, if the comparable 
replacement dwelling used to establish the amount of the replacement 
housing payment to be provided to a minority person is located in an 
area of minority concentration, the minority person also must be given, 
if possible, referrals to comparable and suitable, decent, safe, and 
sanitary replacement dwellings not located in such areas.
    (2) Displaced Person. (i) For purposes of paragraph (c) of this 
section, the term displaced person means a person (family individual, 
business, nonprofit organization, or farm, including any corporation, 
partnership or association) that moves from real property or moves 
personal property from real

[[Page 519]]

property, permanently, as a direct result of acquisition, 
rehabilitation, or demolition for a project assisted with HOME funds. 
This includes any permanent, involuntary move for an assisted project, 
including any permanent move from the real property that is made:
    (A) After notice by the owner to move permanently from the property, 
if the move occurs on or after:
    (1) The date of the submission of an application to the 
participating jurisdiction or HUD, if the applicant has site control and 
the application is later approved; or
    (2) The date the jurisdiction approves the applicable site, if the 
applicant does not have site control at the time of the application; or
    (B) Before the date described in paragraph (c)(2)(i)(A) of this 
section, if the jurisdiction or HUD determines that the displacement 
resulted directly from acquisition, rehabilitation, or demolition for 
the project; or
    (C) By a tenant-occupant of a dwelling unit, if any one of the 
following three situations occurs:
    (1) The tenant moves after execution of the agreement covering the 
acquisition, rehabilitation, or demolition and the move occurs before 
the tenant is provided written notice offering the tenant the 
opportunity to lease and occupy a suitable, decent, safe, and sanitary 
dwelling in the same building/complex upon completion of the project 
under reasonable terms and conditions. Such reasonable terms and 
conditions must include a term of at least one year at a monthly rent 
and estimated average monthly utility costs that do not exceed the 
greater of:
    (i) The tenant's monthly rent before such agreement and estimated 
average monthly utility costs; or
    (ii) The total tenant payment, as determined under 24 CFR 5.613, if 
the tenant is low-income, or 30 percent of gross household income, if 
the tenant is not low-income; or
    (2) The tenant is required to relocate temporarily, does not return 
to the building/complex, and either
    (i) The tenant is not offered payment for all reasonable out-of-
pocket expenses incurred in connection with the temporary relocation; or
    (ii) Other conditions of the temporary relocation are not 
reasonable; or
    (3) The tenant is required to move to another dwelling unit in the 
same building/complex but is not offered reimbursement for all 
reasonable out-of-pocket expenses incurred in connection with the move, 
or other conditions of the move are not reasonable.
    (ii) Notwithstanding paragraph (c)(2)(i) of this section, a person 
does not qualify as a displaced person if:
    (A) The person has been evicted for cause based upon a serious or 
repeated violation of the terms and conditions of the lease or occupancy 
agreement, violation of applicable federal, State or local law, or other 
good cause, and the participating jurisdiction determines that the 
eviction was not undertaken for the purpose of evading the obligation to 
provide relocation assistance. The effective date of any termination or 
refusal to renew must be preceded by at least 30 days advance written 
notice to the tenant specifying the grounds for the action.
    (B) The person moved into the property after the submission of the 
application but, before signing a lease and commencing occupancy, was 
provided written notice of the project, its possible impact on the 
person (e.g., the person may be displaced, temporarily relocated, incur 
a rent increase), and the fact that the person would not qualify as a 
``displaced person'' (or for any assistance under this section) as a 
result of the project;
    (C) The person is ineligible under 49 CFR 24.2(g)(2); or
    (D) HUD determines that the person was not displaced as a direct 
result of acquisition, rehabilitation, or demolition for the project.
    (iii) The jurisdiction may, at any time, ask HUD to determine 
whether a displacement is or would be covered by this rule.
    (3) Initiation of negotiations. For purposes of determining the 
formula for computing replacement housing assistance to be provided 
under paragraph (c) of this section to a tenant displaced from a 
dwelling as a direct result of private-owner rehabilitation, demolition 
or acquisition of the real property, the term initiation of negotiations 
means

[[Page 520]]

the execution of the agreement covering the acquisition, rehabilitation, 
or demolition.
    (d) Optional relocation assistance. The participating jurisdiction 
may provide relocation payments and other relocation assistance to 
families, individuals, businesses, nonprofit organizations, and farms 
displaced by a project assisted with HOME funds where the displacement 
is not subject to paragraph (c) of this section. The jurisdiction may 
also provide relocation assistance to persons covered under paragraph 
(c) of this section beyond that required. For any such assistance that 
is not required by State or local law, the jurisdiction must adopt a 
written policy available to the public that describes the optional 
relocation assistance that it has elected to furnish and provides for 
equal relocation assistance within each class of displaced persons.
    (e) Residential antidisplacement and relocation assistance plan. The 
participating jurisdiction shall comply with the requirements of 24 CFR 
part 42, subpart B.
    (f) Real property acquisition requirements. The acquisition of real 
property for a project is subject to the URA and the requirements of 49 
CFR part 24, subpart B.
    (g) Appeals. A person who disagrees with the participating 
jurisdiction's determination concerning whether the person qualifies as 
a displaced person, or the amount of relocation assistance for which the 
person may be eligible, may file a written appeal of that determination 
with the jurisdiction. A low-income person who is dissatisfied with the 
jurisdiction's determination on his or her appeal may submit a written 
request for review of that determination to the HUD Field Office.

[61 FR 48750, Sept. 16, 1996, as amended at 61 FR 51760, Oct. 3, 1996; 
62 FR 28930, May 28, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 92.354  Labor.

    (a) General. (1) Every contract for the construction (rehabilitation 
or new construction) of housing that includes 12 or more units assisted 
with HOME funds must contain a provision requiring the payment of not 
less than the wages prevailing in the locality, as predetermined by the 
Secretary of Labor pursuant to the Davis-Bacon Act (40 U.S.C. 276a-276a-
5), to all laborers and mechanics employed in the development of any 
part of the housing. Such contracts must also be subject to the overtime 
provisions, as applicable, of the Contract Work Hours and Safety 
Standards Act (40 U.S.C. 327-332).
    (2) The contract for construction must contain these wage provisions 
if HOME funds are used for any project costs in Sec. 92.206, including 
construction or nonconstruction costs, of housing with 12 or more HOME-
assisted units. When HOME funds are only used to assist homebuyers to 
acquire single-family housing, and not for any other project costs, the 
wage provisions apply to the construction of the housing if there is a 
written agreement with the owner or developer of the housing that HOME 
funds will be used to assist homebuyers to buy the housing and the 
construction contract covers 12 or more housing units to be purchased 
with HOME assistance. The wage provisions apply to any construction 
contract that includes a total of 12 or more HOME-assisted units, 
whether one or more than one project is covered by the construction 
contract. Once they are determined to be applicable, the wage provisions 
must be contained in the construction contract so as to cover all 
laborers and mechanics employed in the development of the entire 
project, including portions other than the assisted units. Arranging 
multiple construction contracts within a single project for the purpose 
of avoiding the wage provisions is not permitted.
    (3) Participating jurisdictions, contractors, subcontractors, and 
other participants must comply with regulations issued under these acts 
and with other Federal laws and regulations pertaining to labor 
standards and HUD Handbook 1344.1 (Federal Labor Standards Compliance in 
Housing and Community Development Programs), as applicable. 
Participating jurisdictions must require certification as to compliance 
with the provisions of this section before making any payment under such 
contract.
    (b) Volunteers. The prevailing wage provisions of paragraph (a) of 
this section do not apply to an individual who

[[Page 521]]

receives no compensation or is paid expenses, reasonable benefits, or a 
nominal fee to perform the services for which the individual volunteered 
and who is not otherwise employed at any time in the construction work. 
See 24 CFR part 70.
    (c) Sweat equity. The prevailing wage provisions of paragraph (a) of 
this section do not apply to members of an eligible family who provide 
labor in exchange for acquisition of a property for homeownership or 
provide labor in lieu of, or as a supplement to, rent payments.


<R05>
Sec. 92.355  Lead-based paint.

    Housing assisted with HOME funds is subject to the Lead-Based Paint 
Poisoning Prevention Act (42 U.S.C. 4821 et seq.) and 24 CFR part 35. 
The lead-based paint provisions of 24 CFR 982.401(j), except 24 CFR 
982.401(j)(1)(i), also apply, irrespective of the applicable property 
standard under Sec. 92.251. In a project in which not all units are 
assisted with HOME funds, the lead-based paint requirements apply to all 
units and common areas in the project. Unless otherwise provided, the 
participating jurisdiction is responsible for testing and abatement 
activities.

[62 FR 28930, May 28, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 92.356  Conflict of interest.

    (a) Applicability. In the procurement of property and services by 
participating jurisdictions, State recipients, and subrecipients, the 
conflict of interest provisions in 24 CFR 85.36 and 24 CFR 84.42, 
respectively, apply. In all cases not governed by 24 CFR 85.36 and 24 
CFR 84.42, the provisions of this section apply.
    (b) Conflicts prohibited. No persons described in paragraph (c) of 
this section who exercise or have exercised any functions or 
responsibilities with respect to activities assisted with HOME funds or 
who are in a position to participate in a decisionmaking process or gain 
inside information with regard to these activities, may obtain a 
financial interest or benefit from a HOME-assisted activity, or have an 
interest in any contract, subcontract or agreement with respect thereto, 
or the proceeds thereunder, either for themselves or those with whom 
they have family or business ties, during their tenure or for one year 
thereafter.
    (c) Persons covered. The conflict of interest provisions of 
paragraph (b) of this section apply to any person who is an employee, 
agent, consultant, officer, or elected official or appointed official of 
the participating jurisdiction, State recipient, or subrecipient which 
are receiving HOME funds.
    (d) Exceptions: Threshold requirements. Upon the written request of 
the participating jurisdiction, HUD may grant an exception to the 
provisions of paragraph (b) of this section on a case-by-case basis when 
it determines that the exception will serve to further the purposes of 
the HOME Investment Partnerships Program and the effective and efficient 
administration of the participating jurisdiction's program or project. 
An exception may be considered only after the participating jurisdiction 
has provided the following:
    (1) A disclosure of the nature of the conflict, accompanied by an 
assurance that there has been public disclosure of the conflict and a 
description of how the public disclosure was made; and
    (2) An opinion of the participating jurisdiction's or State 
recipient's attorney that the interest for which the exception is sought 
would not violate State or local law.
    (e) Factors to be considered for exceptions. In determining whether 
to grant a requested exception after the participating jurisdiction has 
satisfactorily met the requirements of paragraph (d) of this section, 
HUD will consider the cumulative effect of the following factors, where 
applicable:
    (1) Whether the exception would provide a significant cost benefit 
or an essential degree of expertise to the program or project which 
would otherwise not be available;
    (2) Whether the person affected is a member of a group or class of 
low-income persons intended to be the beneficiaries of the assisted 
activity, and the exception will permit such person to receive generally 
the same interests or benefits as are being made available or provided 
to the group or class;
    (3) Whether the affected person has withdrawn from his or her 
functions or responsibilities, or the decisionmaking

[[Page 522]]

process with respect to the specific assisted activity in question;
    (4) Whether the interest or benefit was present before the affected 
person was in a position as described in paragraph (c) of this section;
    (5) Whether undue hardship will result either to the participating 
jurisdiction or the person affected when weighed against the public 
interest served by avoiding the prohibited conflict; and
    (6) Any other relevant considerations.
    (f) Owners and Developers. (1) No owner, developer or sponsor of a 
project assisted with HOME funds (or officer, employee, agent, elected 
or appointed official or consultant of the owner, developer or sponsor) 
whether private, for-profit or non-profit (including a community housing 
development organization (CHDO) when acting as an owner, developer or 
sponsor) may occupy a HOME-assisted affordable housing unit in a 
project. This provision does not apply to an individual who receives 
HOME funds to acquire or rehabilitate his or her principal residence or 
to an employee or agent of the owner or developer of a rental housing 
project who occupies a housing unit as the project manager or 
maintenance worker.
    (2) Exceptions. Upon written request of a housing owner or 
developer, the participating jurisdiction (or State recipient, if 
authorized by the State participating jurisdiction) may grant an 
exception to the provisions of paragraph (f)(1) of this section on a 
case-by-case basis when it determines that the exception will serve to 
further the purposes of the HOME program and the effective and efficient 
administration of the owner's or developer's HOME-assisted project. In 
determining whether to grant a requested exception, the participating 
jurisdiction shall consider the following factors:
    (i) Whether the person receiving the benefit is a member of a group 
or class of low-income persons intended to be the beneficiaries of the 
assisted housing, and the exception will permit such person to receive 
generally the same interests or benefits as are being made available or 
provided to the group or class;
    (ii) Whether the person has withdrawn from his or her functions or 
responsibilities, or the decisionmaking process with respect to the 
specific assisted housing in question;
    (iii) Whether the tenant protection requirements of Sec. 92.253 are 
being observed;
    (iv) Whether the affirmative marketing requirements of Sec. 92.351 
are being observed and followed; and
    (v) Any other factor relevant to the participating jurisdiction's 
determination, including the timing of the requested exception.

[61 FR 48750, Sept. 16, 1996, as amended at 62 FR 28930, May 28, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 92.357  Executive Order 12372.

    (a) General. Executive Order 12372, as amended by Executive Order 
12416 (3 CFR, 1982 Comp., p. 197 and 3 CFR, 1983 Comp., p. 186) 
(Intergovernmental Review of Federal Programs) and HUD's implementing 
regulations at 24 CFR part 52, allow each State to establish its own 
process for review and comment on proposed Federal financial assistance 
programs.
    (b) Applicability. Executive Order 12372 applies to applications 
submitted with respect to HOME funds being competitively reallocated 
under subpart J of this part to units of general local government.


<R05>
Sec. 92.358  Consultant activities.

    No person providing consultant services in an employer-employee type 
relationship shall receive more than a reasonable rate of compensation 
for personal services paid with HOME funds. In no event, however, shall 
such compensation exceed the limits in effect under the provisions of 
any applicable statute (e.g., annual HUD appropriations acts which have 
set the limit at the equivalent of the daily rate paid for Level IV of 
the Executive Schedule, see the Departments of Veterans Affairs and 
Housing and Urban Development, and Independent Agencies Appropriations 
Act, 1997, Pub. L. 104-204 (September 26, 1996)). Such services shall be 
evidenced by written agreements between the parties which detail the 
responsibilities, standards, and compensation. Consultant services 
provided under an independent contractor

[[Page 523]]

relationship are not subject to the compensation limitation of Level IV 
of the Executive Schedule.

[62 FR 28930, May 28, 1997]


<R04>
                     Subpart I--Technical Assistance


<R05>
Sec. 92.400  Coordinated Federal support for housing strategies.

    (a) General. HUD will provide assistance in accordance with Subtitle 
C of the Act.
    (b) Notice of funding. HUD will publish a notice in the Federal 
Register announcing the availability of funding under this section as 
appropriate.


<R04>
                        Subpart J--Reallocations


<R05>
Sec. 92.450  General.

    (a) This subpart J sets out the conditions under which HUD 
reallocates HOME funds that have been allocated, reserved, or placed in 
a HOME Investment Trust Fund.
    (b) A jurisdiction that is not a participating jurisdiction but is 
meeting the requirements of Secs. 92.102, 92.103, and 92.104, 
(participation threshold, notice of intent, and submission of 
consolidated plan) is treated as a participating jurisdiction for 
purposes of receiving a reallocation under subpart J of this part.


<R05>
Sec. 92.451  Reallocation of HOME funds from a jurisdiction that is not designated a participating jurisdiction or has its designation revoked.

    (a) Failure to be designated a participating jurisdiction. HUD will 
reallocate, under this section, any HOME funds allocated to or reserved 
for a jurisdiction that is not a participating jurisdiction if:
    (1) HUD determines that the jurisdiction has failed to:
    (i) Meet the participation threshold amount in Sec. 92.102;
    (ii) Provide notice of its intent to become a participating 
jurisdiction in accordance with Sec. 92.103; or
    (iii) Submit its consolidated plan, in accordance with 24 CFR part 
91; or
    (2) HUD after providing for amendments and resubmissions in 
accordance with 24 CFR part 91 disapproves the jurisdiction's 
consolidated plan.
    (b) Designation revoked. HUD will reallocate, under this section, 
any funds remaining in a jurisdiction's HOME Investment Trust Fund after 
HUD has revoked the jurisdiction's designation as a participating 
jurisdiction under Sec. 92.107.
    (c) Manner of reallocation. HUD will reallocate funds that are 
subject to reallocation under this section in the following manner:
    (1) If the funds to be reallocated under this section are from a 
State, HUD will:
    (i) Make the funds available by competition in accordance with 
criteria in Sec. 92.453 among applications submitted by units of general 
local government within the State and with preference being given to 
applications from units of general local government that are not 
participating jurisdictions, and
    (ii) Reallocate the remainder by formula in accordance with 
Sec. 92.454.
    (2) If the funds to be reallocated are from a unit of general local 
government:
    (i) Located in a State that is participating jurisdiction, HUD will 
reallocate the funds to that State. The State, in distributing these 
funds, must give preference to the provision of affordable housing 
within the unit of general local government; or
    (ii) Located in a State that is not a participating jurisdiction, 
HUD will reallocate the funds by competition among units of general 
local government and community housing development organizations within 
the State, with priority going to applications for affordable housing 
within the unit of general local government; and reallocate the 
remainder by formula in accordance with Sec. 92.454.


<R05>
Sec. 92.452  Reallocation of community housing development organization set-aside.

    HUD will reallocate, under this section, any HOME funds reduced or 
recaptured by HUD from a participating jurisdiction's HOME Investment 
Trust Fund under Sec. 92.300(d). HUD will reallocate these funds by 
competition in accordance with criteria in Sec. 92.453 to other 
participating jurisdictions for affordable housing developed, sponsored,

[[Page 524]]

or owned by community housing development organizations.


<R05>
Sec. 92.453  Competitive reallocations.

    (a) HUD will invite applications through Federal Register 
publication of a Notice of Funding Availability (NOFA), in accordance 
with section 102 of the Department of Housing and Urban Development 
Reform Act of 1989 (42 U.S.C. 3545) and the requirements of sec. 217(c) 
of the Cranston-Gonzalez National Affordable Housing Act (42 U.S.C. 
12747(c)), for HOME funds that become available for competitive 
reallocation under Sec. 92.451 or Sec. 92.452, or both. The NOFA will 
describe the application requirements and procedures, including the 
total funding available for the competition and any maximum amount of 
individual awards. The NOFA will also describe the selection criteria 
and any special factors to be evaluated in awarding points under the 
selection criteria.
    (b) The NOFA will include the selection criteria at sec. 217(c) of 
the Cranston-Gonzalez National Affordable Housing Act (42 U.S.C. 
12747(c)), with the following maximum number of points awarded for each 
category of criteria:
    (1) Commitment. Up to 25 points for the criteria at sec. 217(c)(1) 
of the Cranston-Gonzalez National Affordable Housing Act (42 U.S.C. 
12747(c)(1));
    (2) Actions. Up to 50 points for the criteria at sec. 217(c)(2) of 
the Cranston-Gonzalez National Affordable Housing Act (42 U.S.C. 
12747(c)(2)); and
    (3) Policies. Up to 25 points for the criteria at sec. 217(c)(3) of 
the Cranston-Gonzalez National Affordable Housing Act (42 U.S.C. 
12747(c)(3)).

[62 FR 44840, Aug. 22, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 92.454  Reallocations by formula.

    (a) HUD will reallocate under this section:
    (1) Any HOME funds remaining available for reallocation after HUD 
has made competitive reallocations under Sec. 92.451 and Sec. 92.452;
    (2) Any HOME funds available for reallocation because HUD reduced or 
recaptured funds from participating jurisdiction under Sec. 92.500(d) 
for failure to commit the funds within the time specified;
    (3) Any HOME funds withdrawn by HUD from a participating 
jurisdiction under 24 CFR 91.520(f) for failure to submit in a timely 
manner a performance report required by 24 CFR 91.520 that is 
satisfactory to HUD; and
    (4) Any HOME funds remitted to HUD under Sec. 92.503(b) when a 
jurisdiction ceases to be a participating jurisdiction.
    (b) Any reallocation of funds from a State must be made only among 
all participating States, and any reallocation of funds from units of 
general local government must be made only among all participating units 
of general local government, except those participating jurisdictions 
that HUD has removed from participating in reallocations under 
Sec. 92.552.
    (c) A local participating jurisdiction's share of a reallocation is 
calculated by multiplying the amount available for reallocation to units 
of general local government by a factor that is that ratio of the 
participating jurisdiction's formula allocation provided under 
Sec. 92.50 to the total of the formula allocations provided for all 
local participating jurisdictions sharing in the reallocation. A State 
participating jurisdiction's share is comparably determined using the 
amount available for reallocation to States.
    (d) HUD will make reallocations under this section quarterly, unless 
the amount available for such reallocation is insufficient to warrant 
making a reallocation. In any event, HUD will make a reallocation under 
this section at least once a year. The minimum amount of a reallocation 
is $1000.


<R04>
                    Subpart K--Program Administration


<R05>
Sec. 92.500  The HOME Investment Trust Fund.

    (a) General. A HOME Investment Trust Fund consists of the accounts 
described in this section solely for investment in accordance with the 
provisions of this part. HUD will establish a HOME Investment Trust Fund 
United States Treasury account for each participating jurisdiction. Each 
participating jurisdiction may use either a separate local HOME 
Investment Trust Fund account or, a subsidiary account

[[Page 525]]

within its general fund (or other appropriate fund) as the local HOME 
Investment Trust Fund account.
    (b) Treasury Account. The United States Treasury account of the HOME 
Investment Trust Fund includes funds allocated to the participating 
jurisdiction under Sec. 92.50 (including for a local participating 
jurisdiction, any transfer of the State's allocation pursuant to 
Sec. 92.102(b)(2)) and funds reallocated to the participating 
jurisdiction, either by formula or by competition, under subpart J of 
this part; and
    (c) Local Account. (1) The local account of the HOME Investment 
Trust Fund includes deposits of HOME funds disbursed from the Treasury 
account; the deposit of any State funds (other than HOME funds 
transferred pursuant to Sec. 92.102(b)(2)) or local funds that enable 
the jurisdiction to meet the participating threshold amount in 
Sec. 92.102; any program income (from both the allocated funds and 
matching contributions in accordance with the definition of program 
income); and any repayments or recaptured funds as required by 
Sec. 92.503.
    (2) The participating jurisdiction may establish a second local 
account of the HOME Investment Trust Funds if:
    (i) The participating jurisdiction has its own affordable housing 
trust fund that the participating jurisdiction will use for matching 
contributions to the HOME program;
    (ii) The statute or local ordinance requires repayments from its own 
trust fund to be made to the trust fund;
    (iii) The participating jurisdiction establishes a separate account 
within its own trust fund for repayments of the matching contributions; 
and
    (iv) The funds in the account are used solely for investment in 
eligible activities within the participating jurisdiction's boundaries 
in accordance with the provisions of this part, except as provided under 
Sec. 92.201(a)(2).
    (3) The funds in the local account cannot be used for the matching 
contribution and do not need to be matched.
    (d)(1) Reductions. HUD will reduce or recapture HOME funds in the 
HOME Investment Trust Fund by the amount of:
    (A) Any funds in the United States Treasury account that are 
required to be reserved (i.e., 15 percent of the funds) by a 
participating jurisdiction under Sec. 92.300 that are not reserved for a 
community housing development organization pursuant to a written 
agreement within 24 months after the last day of the month in which HUD 
notifies the participating jurisdiction of HUD's execution of the HOME 
Investment Partnership Agreement;
    (B) Any funds in the United States Treasury account that are not 
committed within 24 months after the last day of the month in which HUD 
notifies the participating jurisdiction of HUD's execution of the HOME 
Investment Partnership Agreement;
    (C) Any funds in the United States Treasury account that are not 
expended within five years after the last day of the month in which HUD 
notifies the participating jurisdiction of HUD's execution of the HOME 
Investment Partnership Agreement; and
    (D) Any penalties assessed by HUD under Sec. 92.552.
    (2) For purposes of determining the amount by which the HOME 
Investment Trust Fund will be reduced or recaptured under paragraphs 
(d)(1)(A), (B) and (C) of this section, HUD will consider the sum of 
commitments to CHDOs, commitments, or expenditures, as applicable, from 
the fiscal year allocation being examined and from subsequent 
allocations. This sum must be equal to or greater than the amount of the 
fiscal year allocation being examined, or in the case of commitments to 
CHDOs, 15 percent of that fiscal year allocation.

[61 FR 48750, Sept. 16, 1996, as amended at 62 FR 28930, May 28, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 92.501  HOME Investment Partnership Agreement.

    Allocated and reallocated funds will be made available pursuant to a 
HOME Investment Partnership Agreement. The agreement ensures that HOME 
funds invested in affordable housing are repayable if the housing ceases 
to qualify as affordable housing before the period of affordability 
expires.

[[Page 526]]


<R05>
Sec. 92.502  Program disbursement and information system.

    (a) General. The Home Investment Trust Fund account established in 
the United States Treasury is managed through a computerized 
disbursement and information system established by HUD. The system 
disburses HOME funds that are allocated or reallocated, and collects and 
reports information on the use of HOME funds in the United States 
Treasury account. [For purposes of reporting in the Integrated 
Disbursement and Information System, a HOME project is an activity.]
    (b) Project set-up. (1) After the participating jurisdiction 
executes the HOME Investment Partnership Agreement, submits the 
applicable banking and security documents, complies with the 
environmental requirements under 24 CFR part 58 for release of funds and 
commits funds to a specific local project, the participating 
jurisdiction may identify (set up) specific investments in the 
disbursement and information system. Investments that require the set-up 
of projects in the system are the acquisition, new construction, or 
rehabilitation of housing, and the provision of tenant-based rental 
assistance. The participating jurisdiction is required to enter complete 
project set-up information at the time of project set-up.
    (2) If the project set-up information is not completed within 20 
days of the project set-up call, the project may be cancelled by the 
system. In addition, a project which has been committed in the system 
for 12 months without an initial disbursement of funds may be cancelled 
by the system.
    (c) Disbursement of HOME funds. (1) After complete project set-up 
information is entered into the disbursement and information system, 
HOME funds for the project may be drawn down from the United States 
Treasury account by the participating jurisdiction by electronic funds 
transfer. The funds will be deposited in the local account of the HOME 
Investment Trust Fund of the participating jurisdiction within 48 to 72 
hours of the disbursement request. Any drawdown of HOME funds from the 
United States Treasury account is conditioned upon the provision of 
satisfactory information by the participating jurisdiction about the 
project or tenant-based rental assistance and compliance with other 
procedures, as specified by HUD.
    (2) HOME funds drawn from the United States Treasury account must be 
expended for eligible costs within 15 days. Any interest earned within 
the 15 day period may be retained by the participating jurisdiction as 
HOME funds. Any funds that are drawn down and not expended for eligible 
costs within 15 days of the disbursement must be returned to HUD for 
deposit in the participating jurisdiction's United States Treasury 
account of the HOME Investment Trust Fund. Interest earned after 15 days 
belongs to the United States and must be remitted promptly, but at least 
quarterly, to HUD, except that a local participating jurisdiction may 
retain interest amounts up to $100 per year for administrative expenses 
and States are subject to the Intergovernmental Cooperation Act (31 
U.S.C. 6501 et seq.).
    (3) HOME funds in the local account of the HOME Investment Trust 
Fund must be disbursed before requests are made for HOME funds in the 
United States Treasury account.
    (4) A participating jurisdiction will be paid on an advance basis 
provided it complies with the requirements of this part.
    (d) Project completion. (1) Complete project completion information 
must be entered into the disbursement and information system, or 
otherwise provided, within 120 days of the final project drawdown. If 
satisfactory project completion information is not provided, HUD may 
suspend further project set-ups or take other corrective actions.
    (2) Additional HOME funds may be committed to a project up to one 
year after project completion, but the amount of HOME funds in the 
project may not exceed the maximum per-unit subsidy amount established 
under Sec. 92.250.
    (e) Access by other participants. Access to the disbursement and 
information system by other entities participating in the HOME program 
(e.g., State recipients) will be governed by procedures established by 
HUD.

[[Page 527]]


<R05>
Sec. 92.503  Program income, repayments, and recaptured funds.

    (a) Program income. (1) Program income must be used in accordance 
with the requirements of this part. Program income must be deposited in 
the participating jurisdiction's HOME Investment Trust Fund local 
account unless the participating jurisdiction permits the State 
recipient or subrecipient to retain the program income for additional 
HOME projects pursuant to the written agreement required by Sec. 92.504.
    (2) If the jurisdiction is not a participating jurisdiction when the 
program income is received, the funds are not subject to the 
requirements of this part.
    (3) Program income derived from consortium activities undertaken by 
or within a member unit of general local government which thereafter 
terminates its participation in the consortium continues to be program 
income of the consortium.
    (b) Repayments. (1) Any HOME funds invested in housing that does not 
meet the affordability requirements for the period specified in 
Sec. 92.252 or Sec. 92.254, as applicable, must be repaid by the 
participating jurisdiction in accordance with paragraph (b)(3) of this 
section.
    (2) Any HOME funds invested in a project that is terminated before 
completion, either voluntarily or otherwise, must be repaid by the 
participating jurisdiction in accordance with paragraph (b)(3) of this 
section except for repayments of project specific community housing 
development organization loans which are waived in accordance with 
Secs. 92.301(a)(3) and 92.301(b)(3).
    (3) If the HOME funds were disbursed from the participating 
jurisdiction's HOME Investment Trust Fund Treasury account, they must be 
repaid to the Treasury account. If the HOME funds were disbursed from 
the participating jurisdiction's HOME Investment Trust Fund local 
account, they must be repaid to the local account. If the jurisdiction 
is not a participating jurisdiction when the repayment is made, the 
funds must be remitted to HUD and reallocated in accordance with 
Sec. 92.454.
    (c) Recaptures. HOME funds recaptured in accordance with 
Sec. 92.254(a)(5)(ii) must be used in accordance with the requirements 
of this part. Recaptured funds must be deposited in the participating 
jurisdiction's HOME Investment Trust Fund local account unless the 
participating jurisdiction permits the State recipient, subrecipient, or 
community housing development organization to retain the recaptured 
funds for additional HOME projects pursuant to the written agreement 
required by Sec. 92.504. If the jurisdiction is not a participating 
jurisdiction when the recaptured funds are received, the funds must be 
remitted to HUD and reallocated in accordance with Sec. 92.454.


<R05>
Sec. 92.504  Participating jurisdiction responsibilities; written agreements; on-site inspection.

    (a) Responsibilities. The participating jurisdiction is responsible 
for managing the day to day operations of its HOME program, ensuring 
that HOME funds are used in accordance with all program requirements and 
written agreements, and taking appropriate action when performance 
problems arise. The use of State recipients, subrecipients, or 
contractors does not relieve the participating jurisdiction of this 
responsibility. The performance of each contractor and subrecipient must 
be reviewed at least annually.
    (b) Executing a written agreement. Before disbursing any HOME funds 
to any entity, the participating jurisdiction must enter into a written 
agreement with that entity. Before disbursing any HOME funds to any 
entity, a State recipient, subrecipient, or contractor which is 
administering all or a part of the HOME program on behalf of the 
participating jurisdiction, must also enter into a written agreement 
with that entity. The written agreement must ensure compliance with the 
requirements of this part.
    (c) Provisions in written agreements. The contents of the agreement 
may vary depending upon the role the entity is asked to assume or the 
type of project undertaken. This section details basic requirements by 
role and the minimum provisions that must be included in a written 
agreement.
    (1) State recipient. The provisions in the written agreement between 
the State and a State recipient will depend on the program functions 
that the

[[Page 528]]

State specifies the State recipient will carry out in accordance with 
Sec. 92.201(b).
    (i) Use of the HOME funds. The agreement must describe the use of 
the HOME funds, including the tasks to be performed, a schedule for 
completing the tasks, and a budget. These items must be in sufficient 
detail to provide a sound basis for the State to effectively monitor 
performance under the agreement.
    (ii) Affordability. The agreement must require housing assisted with 
HOME funds to meet the affordability requirements of Sec. 92.252 or 
Sec. 92.254, as applicable, and must require repayment of the funds if 
the housing does not meet the affordability requirements for the 
specified time period.
    (iii) Program income. The agreement must state if program income is 
to be remitted to the State or to be retained by the State recipient for 
additional eligible activities.
    (iv) Uniform administrative requirements. The agreement must require 
the State recipient to comply with applicable uniform administrative 
requirements, as described in Sec. 92.505.
    (v) Project requirement. The agreement must require compliance with 
project requirements in subpart F of this part, as applicable in 
accordance with the type of project assisted.
    (vi) Other program requirements. The agreement must require the 
State recipient to carry out each activity in compliance with all 
Federal laws and regulations described in subpart H of this part, except 
that the State recipient does not assume the State's responsibilities 
for release of funds under Sec. 92.352 and the intergovernmental review 
process in Sec. 92.357 does not apply to the State recipient.
    (vii) Affirmative marketing. The agreement must specify the State 
recipient's affirmative marketing responsibilities in accordance with 
Sec. 92.351, if the HOME funds received by the State recipient will be 
used for housing containing five or more assisted units.
    (viii) Requests for disbursement of funds. The agreement must 
specify that the State recipient may not request disbursement of HOME 
funds under this agreement until the funds are needed for payment of 
eligible costs. The amount of each request must be limited to the amount 
needed. Program income must be disbursed before the State recipient 
requests funds from the State.
    (ix) Records and reports. The agreement must specify the particular 
records that must be maintained and the information or reports that must 
be submitted in order to assist the State in meeting its recordkeeping 
and reporting requirements.
    (x) Enforcement of the agreement. The agreement must provide for a 
means of enforcement of affordable housing requirements by the State or 
the intended beneficiaries, if the State recipient will be the owner at 
project completion of the affordable housing. The means of enforcement 
may include liens on real property, deed restrictions, or covenants 
running with the land. The affordability requirements in Sec. 92.252 
must be enforced by deed restriction. In addition, the agreement must 
specify remedies for breach of the HOME requirements. The agreement must 
specify that, in accordance with 24 CFR 85.43, suspension or termination 
may occur if the State recipient materially fails to comply with any 
term of the agreement. The State may permit the agreement to be 
terminated for convenience in accordance with 24 CFR 85.44.
    (xi) If the State recipient provides funds to for-profit owners or 
developers, nonprofit owners or developers, subrecipients, homeowners, 
homebuyers, tenants receiving tenant-based rental assistance, or 
contractors who are providing services to the State recipient, the State 
recipient must have a written agreement with such entities which meets 
the requirements of this section.
    (xii) Duration of the agreement. The duration of the agreement will 
depend on which functions the State recipient performs (e.g., whether 
the State recipient or the State has responsibility for monitoring 
rental projects for the period of affordability) and which activities 
are funded under the agreement.
    (2) Subrecipient. A subrecipient is a public agency or nonprofit 
selected by the participating jurisdiction to administer all or a 
portion of the participating jurisdiction's HOME Program.

[[Page 529]]

The agreement between the participating jurisdiction and the 
subrecipient must include:
    (i) Use of the HOME funds. The agreement must describe the use of 
the HOME funds, including the tasks to be performed, a schedule for 
completing the tasks, a budget, and the period of the agreement. These 
items must be in sufficient detail to provide a sound basis for the 
participating jurisdiction effectively to monitor performance under the 
agreement.
    (ii) Program income. The agreement must state if program income is 
to be remitted to the participating jurisdiction or to be retained by 
the subrecipient for additional eligible activities.
    (iii) Uniform administrative requirements. The agreement must 
require the subrecipient to comply with applicable uniform 
administrative requirements, as described in Sec. 92.505.
    (iv) Other program requirements. The agreement must require the 
subrecipient to carry out each activity in compliance with all Federal 
laws and regulations described in subpart H of this part, except that 
the subrecipient does not assume the participating jurisdiction's 
responsibilities for environmental review under Sec. 92.352 and the 
intergovernmental review process in Sec. 92.357 does not apply.
    (v) Affirmative marketing. The agreement must specify the 
subrecipient's affirmative marketing responsibilities in accordance with 
Sec. 92.351, if the HOME funds administered by the subrecipient will be 
used for housing containing five or more assisted units.
    (vi) Requests for disbursement of funds. The agreement must specify 
that the subrecipient may not request disbursement of funds under the 
agreement until the funds are needed for payment of eligible costs. The 
amount of each request must be limited to the amount needed. Program 
income must be disbursed before the subrecipient requests funds from the 
participating jurisdiction.
    (vii) Reversion of assets. The agreement must specify that upon 
expiration of the agreement, the subrecipient must transfer to the 
participating jurisdiction any HOME funds on hand at the time of 
expiration and any accounts receivable attributable to the use of HOME 
funds.
    (viii) Records and reports. The agreement must specify the 
particular records that must be maintained and the information or 
reports that must be submitted in order to assist the participating 
jurisdiction in meeting its recordkeeping and reporting requirements.
    (ix) Enforcement of the agreement. The agreement must specify 
remedies for breach of the provisions of the agreement. The agreement 
must specify that, in accordance with 24 CFR 85.43, suspension or 
termination may occur if the subrecipient materially fails to comply 
with any term of the agreement. The participating jurisdiction may 
permit the agreement to be terminated for convenience in accordance with 
24 CFR 85.44.
    (x) If the subrecipient provides HOME funds to for-profit owners or 
developers, nonprofit owners or developers, subrecipients, homeowners, 
homebuyers, tenants receiving tenant-based rental assistance, or 
contractors, the subrecipient must have a written agreement which meets 
the requirements of this section.
    (3) For-profit or nonprofit housing owner, sponsor or developer 
(other than single-family owner-occupant)--(i) Use of the HOME funds. 
The agreement between the participating jurisdiction and a for-profit or 
non-profit housing owner, sponsor or developer must describe the use of 
the HOME funds, including the tasks to be performed, a schedule for 
completing the tasks, and a budget. These items must be in sufficient 
detail to provide a sound basis for the participating jurisdiction to 
effectively monitor performance under the agreement.
    (ii) Affordability. The agreement must require housing assisted with 
HOME funds to meet the affordability requirements of Sec. 92.252 or 
Sec. 92.254, as applicable, and must require repayment of the funds if 
the housing does not meet the affordability requirements for the 
specified time period. If the owner or developer is undertaking rental 
projects, the agreement must establish the initial rents and the 
procedures for rent increases. If the owner or developer is undertaking 
homeownership projects for

[[Page 530]]

sale to homebuyers in accordance with Sec. 92.254(a), the agreement must 
set forth the resale or recapture requirements which must be imposed on 
the housing.
    (iii) Project requirements. The agreement must require compliance 
with project requirements in subpart F of this part, as applicable in 
accordance with the type of project assisted.
    (iv) Property standards. The agreement must require the housing to 
meet the property standards in Sec. 92.251 and the lead-based paint 
requirements in Sec. 92.355 upon project completion. The agreement must 
also require owners of rental housing assisted with HOME funds to 
maintain the housing in compliance with Sec. 92.251 for the duration of 
the affordability period.
    (v) Affirmative marketing. If the project contains 5 or more HOME-
assisted units, the agreement must specify the owner or developer's 
affirmative marketing responsibilities as enumerated by the 
participating jurisdiction in accordance with Sec. 92.351.
    (vi) Records and reports. The agreement must specify the particular 
records that must be maintained and the information or reports that must 
be submitted in order to assist the participating jurisdiction in 
meeting its recordkeeping and reporting requirements.
    (vii) Enforcement of the agreement. The agreement must provide for a 
means of enforcement of the affordable housing requirements by the 
participating jurisdiction or the intended beneficiaries. This means of 
enforcement may include liens on real property, deed restrictions or 
covenants running with the land. The affordability requirements in 
Sec. 92.252 must be enforced by deed restriction. In addition, the 
agreement must specify remedies for breach of the provisions of the 
agreement.
    (viii) Requests for disbursement of funds. The agreement must 
specify that the developer may not request disbursement of funds under 
the agreement until the funds are needed for payment of eligible costs. 
The amount of each request must be limited to the amount needed.
    (ix) Duration of the agreement. The agreement must specify the 
duration of the agreement. If the housing assisted under this agreement 
is rental housing, the agreement must be in effect through the 
affordability period required by the participating jurisdiction under 
Sec. 92.252. If the housing assisted under this agreement is 
homeownership housing, the agreement must be in effect at least until 
completion of the project and ownership by the low-income family.
    (x) Conditions for religious organizations. Where applicable, the 
agreement must include the conditions prescribed in Sec. 92.257 for the 
use of HOME funds by religious organizations.
    (xi) Community housing development organization provisions. If the 
nonprofit owner or developer is a community housing development 
organization and is using set-aside funds under Sec. 92.300, the 
agreement must include the appropriate provisions under Secs. 92.300 and 
92.301.
    (4) Contractor. The participating jurisdiction selects a contractor 
through applicable procurement procedures and requirements. The 
contractor provides goods or services in accordance with a written 
agreement (the contract). For contractors who are administering all or a 
portion of the HOME program, the contract must include at a minimum the 
following provisions:
    (i) Use of the HOME funds. The agreement must describe the use of 
the HOME funds, including the tasks to be performed, a schedule for 
completing the tasks, a budget, and the length of the agreement.
    (ii) Program requirements. The agreement must provide that the 
contractor is subject to the requirements in part 92 that are applicable 
to the participating jurisdiction, except Secs. 92.505 and 92.506 do not 
apply, and the contractor cannot assume the participating jurisdiction 
responsibilities for environmental review, decisionmaking, and action 
under Sec. 92.352. Where the contractor is administering only a portion 
of the program, the agreement must list the requirements applicable to 
the activities the contractor is administering.
    (iii) Duration of agreement. The agreement must specify the duration 
of the contract. Generally, the duration of a contract should not exceed 
two years.

[[Page 531]]

    (5) Homebuyer, homeowner or tenant receiving tenant-based rental or 
security deposit assistance. When a participating jurisdiction provides 
assistance to a homebuyer, homeowner or tenant the written agreement may 
take many forms depending upon the nature of assistance. As appropriate, 
it must include as a minimum:
    (i) For homebuyers, the agreement must conform to the requirements 
in Sec. 92.254(a), the value of the property, principal residence, 
lease-purchase, if applicable, and the resale or recapture provisions. 
The agreement must specify the amount of HOME funds, the form of 
assistance, e.g., grant, amortizing loan, deferred payment loan, the use 
of the funds (e.g., down-payment, closing costs, rehabilitation) and the 
time by which the housing must be acquired.
    (ii) For homeowners, the agreement must conform to the requirements 
in Sec. 92.254(b) and specify the amount and form of HOME assistance, 
rehabilitation work to be undertaken, date for completion, and property 
standards to be met.
    (iii) For tenants, the rental assistance contract or the security 
deposit contract must conform to Secs. 92.209 and 92.253.
    (d) On site inspections--(1) HOME assisted rental housing. During 
the period of affordability, the participating jurisdiction must perform 
on-site inspections of HOME-assisted rental housing to determine 
compliance with the property standards of Sec. 92.251 and to verify the 
information submitted by the owners in accordance with the requirements 
of Sec. 92.252 no less than: every three years for projects containing 1 
to 4 units; every two years for projects containing 5 to 25 units; and 
every year for projects containing 26 or more units. Inspections must be 
based on a sufficient sample of units.
    (2) Tenant-based rental assistance. The participating jurisdiction 
must perform annual on-site inspections of rental housing occupied by 
tenants receiving HOME-assisted TBRA to determine compliance with the 
property standards of Sec. 92.251.


<R05>
Sec. 92.505  Applicability of uniform administrative requirements.

    (a) Governmental entities. The requirements of OMB Circular No. A-87 
and the following requirements of 24 CFR part 85 apply to the 
participating jurisdiction, State recipients, and any governmental 
subrecipient receiving HOME funds: Secs. 85.6, 85.12, 85.20, 85.22, 
85.26, 85.32 through 85.34, 85.36, 85.44, 85.51, and 85.52.
    (b) Non-profit organizations. The requirements of OMB Circular No. 
A-122 and the following requirements of 24 CFR part 84 apply to 
subrecipients receiving HOME funds that are nonprofit organizations that 
are not governmental subrecipients: Secs. 84.2, 84.5, 84.13 through 
84.16, 84.21, 84.22, 84.26 through 84.28, 84.30, 84.31, 84.34 through 
84.37, 84.40 through 84.48, 84.51, 84.60 through 84.62, 84.72, and 
84.73.
    (c) OMB Circulars referenced in this part may be obtained from: 
Executive Office of the President, Publication Service, 725 17th Street, 
N.W., Suite G-2200, Washington, DC 20503; telephone: (202) 395-7332.

[61 FR 84750, Sept. 16, 1996, as amended at 62 FR 28930, May 28, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 92.506  Audit.

    Audits of the participating jurisdiction, State recipients, and 
subrecipients must be conducted in accordance with 24 CFR parts 44 and 
45, as applicable.


<R05>
Sec. 92.507  Closeout.

    Home funds will be closed out in accordance with procedures 
established by HUD.

[62 FR 44840, Aug. 22, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 92.508  Recordkeeping.

    (a) General. Each participating jurisdiction must establish and 
maintain sufficient records to enable HUD to determine whether the 
participating jurisdiction has met the requirements of this part. At a 
minimum, the following records are needed:
    (1) Records concerning designation as a participating jurisdiction. 
(i) For a consortium, the consortium agreement among the participating 
member units of general local government as required by Sec. 92.101.

[[Page 532]]

    (ii) For a unit of general local government receiving a formula 
allocation of less than $750,000 (or less than $500,000 in fiscal years 
in which Congress appropriates less than $1.5 billion for this part), 
records demonstrating that funds have been made available (either by the 
State or the unit of general local government, or both) equal to or 
greater than the difference between its formula allocation and $750,000 
(or $500,000 in fiscal years in which Congress appropriates less than 
$1.5 billion) as required by Sec. 92.102(b).
    (2) Program records. (i) Records of the efforts to maximize 
participation by the private sector as required by Sec. 92.200.
    (ii) The forms of HOME assistance used in the program, including any 
forms of investment described in the Consolidated Plan under 24 CFR part 
91 which are not identified in Sec. 92.205(b).
    (iii) The subsidy layering guidelines adopted in accordance with 
Sec. 92.250 which support the participating jurisdiction's Consolidated 
Plan certification.
    (iv) If existing debt is refinanced for multi-family rehabilitation 
projects, the refinancing guidelines established in accordance with 
Sec. 92.206(b), described in the Consolidated Plan.
    (v) If HOME funds are used for tenant-based rental assistance, 
records supporting the participating jurisdiction's Consolidated Plan 
certification in accordance with Sec. 92.209(b), including documentation 
of the local market conditions that led to the choice of this option; 
written selection policies and criteria; supporting documentation for 
preferences for specific categories of individuals with disabilities; 
and records supporting the rent standard and minimum tenant contribution 
established in accordance with Sec. 92.209(h).
    (vi) If HOME funds are used for tenant-based rental assistance or 
rental housing, records evidencing that not less than 90 percent of the 
families receiving such rental assistance meet the income requirements 
of Sec. 92.216.
    (vii) If HOME funds are used for homeownership housing, the 
procedures used for establishing 95 percent of the median purchase price 
for the area in accordance with Sec. 92.254(a)(2), in the Consolidated 
Plan.
    (viii) If HOME funds are used for acquisition of housing for 
homeownership, the resale or recapture guidelines established in 
accordance with Sec. 92.254(a)(5), in the Consolidated Plan.
    (ix) Records demonstrating compliance with the matching requirements 
of Sec. 92.218 through Sec. 92.222 including a running log and project 
records documenting the type and amount of match contributions by 
project.
    (x) Records documenting compliance with the 24 month commitment 
deadline of Sec. 92.500(d).
    (xi) Records demonstrating compliance with the fifteen percent CHDO 
set-aside requirement of Sec. 92.300(a).
    (xii) Records documenting compliance with the ten percent limitation 
on administrative and planning costs in accordance with Sec. 92.207.
    (3) Project records. (i) A full description of each project assisted 
with HOME funds, including the location, form of HOME assistance, and 
the units or tenants assisted with HOME funds.
    (ii) The source and application of funds for each project, including 
supporting documentation in accordance with 24 CFR 85.20.
    (iii) Records demonstrating that each rental housing or 
homeownership project meets the minimum per-unit subsidy amount of 
Sec. 92.205(c), the maximum per-unit subsidy amount of Sec. 92.250(a) 
and the subsidy layering guidelines adopted in accordance with 
Sec. 92.250(b).
    (iv) Records demonstrating that each project meets the property 
standards of Sec. 92.251 and the lead based paint requirements of 
Sec. 92.355.
    (v) Records demonstrating that each family is income eligible in 
accordance with Sec. 92.203.
    (vi) Records demonstrating that each tenant-based rental assistance 
project meets the written tenant selection policies and criteria of 
Sec. 92.209(c), including the tenant preference requirements, the rent 
reasonableness requirements of Sec. 92.209(f), the maximum subsidy 
provisions of Sec. 92.209(h), HQS inspection reports, and calculation of 
the HOME subsidy.
    (vii) Records demonstrating that each rental housing project meets 
the

[[Page 533]]

affordability and income targeting requirements of Sec. 92.252 for the 
required period. Records must be kept for each family assisted.
    (viii) Records demonstrating that each multifamily rental housing 
project involving rehabilitation with refinancing complies with the 
refinancing guidelines established in accordance with Sec. 92.206(b).
    (ix) Records demonstrating that each lease for a tenant receiving 
tenant-based rental assistance and for an assisted rental housing unit 
complies with the tenant and participant protections of Sec. 92.253. 
Records must be kept for each family.
    (x) Records demonstrating that the purchase price or estimated value 
after rehabilitation for each homeownership housing project does not 
exceed 95 percent of the median purchase price for the area in 
accordance with Sec. 92.254(a)(2). The records must demonstrate how the 
estimated value was determined.
    (xi) Records demonstrating that each homeownership project meets the 
affordability requirements of Sec. 92.254 for the required period.
    (xii) Records demonstrating that any pre-award costs charged to the 
HOME allocation meet the requirements of Sec. 92.212.
    (4) Community Housing Development Organizations (CHDOs) Records. (i) 
Written agreements reserving HOME funds to CHDOs in accordance with 
Sec. 92.300(a).
    (ii) Records setting forth the efforts made to identify and 
encourage CHDOs, as required by Sec. 92.300(b).
    (iii) The name and qualifications of each CHDO and amount of HOME 
CHDO set-aside funds reserved and committed.
    (iv) Records demonstrating that each CHDO complies with the written 
agreements required by Sec. 92.504.
    (v) Records concerning the use of CHDO setaside funds, including 
funds used to develop CHDO capacity pursuant to Sec. 92.300(b).
    (vi) Records concerning the use of funds for CHDO operating expenses 
and demonstrating compliance with the requirements of Sec. 92.208, 
Sec. 92.300(e) and Sec. 92.300(f).
    (vii) Records concerning the tenant participation plan required by 
Sec. 92.303.
    (viii) Records concerning project-specific assistance to CHDOs 
pursuant to Sec. 92.301, including the impediments to repayment, if 
repayment is waived.
    (5) Financial records. (i) Records identifying the source and 
application of funds for each fiscal year, including the formula 
allocation, any reallocation (identified by federal fiscal year 
appropriation), and any State or local funds provided under 
Sec. 92.102(b).
    (ii) Records concerning the HOME Investment Trust Fund Treasury 
account and local account required to be established and maintained by 
Sec. 92.500, including deposits, disbursements, balances, supporting 
documentation and any other information required by the program 
disbursement and information system established by HUD.
    (iii) Records identifying the source and application of program 
income, repayments and recaptured funds.
    (iv) Records demonstrating adequate budget control, in accordance 
with 24 CFR 85.20, including evidence of periodic account 
reconciliations.
    (6) Program administration records. (i) Records demonstrating 
compliance with the written agreements required by Sec. 92.504.
    (ii) Records demonstrating compliance with the applicable uniform 
administrative requirements required by Sec. 92.505.
    (iii) Records documenting required inspections, monitoring reviews 
and audits, and the resolution of any findings or concerns.
    (7) Records concerning other Federal requirements--(i) Equal 
opportunity and fair housing records. (A) Data on the extent to which 
each racial and ethnic group and single-headed households (by gender of 
household head) have applied for, participated in, or benefited from, 
any program or activity funded in whole or in part with HOME funds.
    (B) Documentation of actions undertaken to meet the requirements of 
24 CFR part 135 which implements section 3 of the Housing Development 
Act of 1968, as amended (12 U.S.C. 1701u).
    (C) Documentation of the actions the participating jurisdiction has 
taken to affirmatively further fair housing.
    (ii) Affirmative marketing and MBE/WBE records.

[[Page 534]]

    (A) Records demonstrating compliance with the affirmative marketing 
procedures and requirements of Sec. 92.351.
    (B) Documentation and data on the steps taken to implement the 
jurisdiction's outreach programs to minority-owned (MBE) and female-
owned (WBE) businesses including data indicating the racial/ethnic or 
gender character of each business entity receiving a contract or 
subcontract of $25,000 or more paid, or to be paid, with HOME funds; the 
amount of the contract or subcontract, and documentation of 
participating jurisdiction's affirmative steps to assure that minority 
business and women's business enterprises have an equal opportunity to 
obtain or compete for contracts and subcontracts as sources of supplies, 
equipment, construction, and services.
    (iii) Records demonstrating compliance with the environmental review 
requirements of Sec. 92.352 and 24 CFR part 58, including flood 
insurance requirements.
    (iv) Records demonstrating compliance with the requirements of 
Sec. 92.353 regarding displacement, relocation, and real property 
acquisition, including project occupancy lists identifying the name and 
address of all persons occupying the real property on the date described 
in Sec. 92.353(c)(2)(i)(A), moving into the property on or after the 
date described in Sec. 92.353(c)(2)(i)(A), and occupying the property 
upon completion of the project.
    (v) Records demonstrating compliance with the labor requirements of 
Sec. 92.354, including contract provisions and payroll records.
    (vi) Records demonstrating compliance with the lead-based paint 
requirements of Sec. 92.355.
    (vii) Records supporting exceptions to the conflict of interest 
prohibition pursuant to Sec. 92.356.
    (viii) Debarment and suspension certifications required by 24 CFR 
parts 24 and 91.
    (ix) Records concerning intergovernmental review, as required by 
Sec. 92.357.
    (b) States with State Recipients. A State that distributes HOME 
funds to State recipients must require State recipients to keep the 
records required by paragraphs (a)(2), (a)(3), (a)(5), (a)(6) and (a)(7) 
of this section, and such other records as the State determines to be 
necessary to enable the State to carry out its responsibilities under 
this part. The State need not duplicate the records kept by the State 
recipients. The State must keep records concerning its review of State 
recipients required under Sec. 92.201(b)(3).
    (c) Period of record retention. All records pertaining to each 
fiscal year of HOME funds must be retained for the most recent five year 
period, except as provided below.
    (1) For rental housing projects, records may be retained for five 
years after the project completion date; except that records of 
individual tenant income verifications, project rents and project 
inspections must be retained for the most recent five year period, until 
five years after the affordability period terminates.
    (2) For homeownership housing projects, records may be retained for 
five years after the project completion date, except for documents 
imposing recapture/resale restrictions which must be retained for five 
years after the affordability period terminates.
    (3) For tenant-based rental assistance projects, records must be 
retained for five years after the period of rental assistance 
terminates.
    (4) Written agreements must be retained for five years after the 
agreement terminates.
    (5) Records covering displacements and acquisition must be retained 
for five years after the date by which all persons displaced from the 
property and all persons whose property is acquired for the project have 
received the final payment to which they are entitled in accordance with 
Sec. 92.353.
    (6) If any litigation, claim, negotiation, audit, monitoring, 
inspection or other action has been started before the expiration of the 
required record retention period records must be retained until 
completion of the action and resolution of all issues which arise from 
it, or until the end of the required period, whichever is later.
    (d) Access to records. (1) The participating jurisdiction must 
provide citizens, public agencies, and other interested parties with 
reasonable access to records, consistent with applicable

[[Page 535]]

state and local laws regarding privacy and obligations of 
confidentiality.
    (2) HUD and the Comptroller General of the United States, any of 
their representatives, have the right of access to any pertinent books, 
documents, papers or other records of the participating jurisdiction, 
state recipients, and subrecipients, in order to make audits, 
examinations, excerpts, and transcripts.


<R05>
Sec. 92.509  Performance reports.

    (a) Management reports. Each participating jurisdiction must submit 
management reports on its HOME Investment Partnerships Program in such 
format and at such time as HUD may prescribe.
    (b) Annual performance report. For annual performance report 
requirements, see 24 CFR part 91.


<R04>
              Subpart L--Performance Reviews and Sanctions


<R05>
Sec. 92.550  Performance reviews.

    (a) General. HUD will review the performance of each participating 
jurisdiction in carrying out its responsibilities under this part 
whenever determined necessary by HUD, but at least annually. In 
conducting performance reviews, HUD will rely primarily on information 
obtained from the participating jurisdiction's and, as appropriate, the 
State recipient's records and reports, findings from on-site monitoring, 
audit reports, and information generated from the disbursement and 
information system established by HUD. Where applicable, HUD may also 
consider relevant information pertaining to a participating 
jurisdiction's or State recipient's performance gained from other 
sources, including citizen comments, complaint determinations, and 
litigation. Reviews to determine compliance with specific requirements 
of this part will be conducted as necessary, with or without prior 
notice to the participating jurisdiction or State recipient. 
Comprehensive performance reviews under the standards in paragraph (b) 
of this section will be conducted after prior notice to the 
participating jurisdiction.
    (b) Standards for comprehensive performance review. A participating 
jurisdiction's performance will be comprehensively reviewed 
periodically, as prescribed by HUD, to determine:
    (1) For local participating jurisdictions and State participating 
jurisdictions administering their own HOME programs, whether the 
participating jurisdiction has committed the HOME funds in the United 
States Treasury account as required by Sec. 92.500 and expended the 
funds in the United States Treasury account as required by Sec. 92.500, 
and has met the requirements of this part, particularly eligible 
activities, income targeting, affordability, and matching requirements; 
or
    (2) For State participating jurisdictions distributing HOME funds to 
State recipients, whether the State has met the matching contribution 
and other requirements of this part; has distributed the funds in 
accordance with the requirements of this part; and has made such reviews 
and audits of its State recipients as may be appropriate to determine 
whether they have satisfied the requirements of paragraph (b)(1) of this 
section.


<R05>
Sec. 92.551  Corrective and remedial actions.

    (a) General. HUD will use the procedures in this section in 
conducting the performance review as provided in Sec. 92.550 and in 
taking corrective and remedial actions.
    (b) Performance review. (1) If HUD determines preliminarily that the 
participating jurisdiction has not met a requirement of this part, the 
participating jurisdiction will be given notice of this determination 
and an opportunity to demonstrate, within the time prescribed by HUD 
(not to exceed 30 days) and on the basis of substantial facts and data, 
that it has done so.
    (2) If the participating jurisdiction fails to demonstrate to HUD's 
satisfaction that it has met the requirement, HUD will take corrective 
or remedial action in accordance with this section or Sec. 92.552.
    (c) Corrective and remedial actions. Corrective or remedial actions 
for a performance deficiency (failure to meet a provision of this part) 
will be designed to prevent a continuation of the

[[Page 536]]

deficiency; mitigate, to the extent possible, its adverse effects or 
consequences; and prevent its recurrence.
    (1) HUD may instruct the participating jurisdiction to submit and 
comply with proposals for action to correct, mitigate and prevent a 
performance deficiency, including:
    (i) Preparing and following a schedule of actions for carrying out 
the affected activities, consisting of schedules, timetables, and 
milestones necessary to implement the affected activities;
    (ii) Establishing and following a management plan that assigns 
responsibilities for carrying out the remedial actions;
    (iii) Canceling or revising activities likely to be affected by the 
performance deficiency, before expending HOME funds for the activities;
    (iv) Reprogramming HOME funds that have not yet been expended from 
affected activities to other eligible activities;
    (v) Reimbursing its HOME Investment Trust Fund in any amount not 
used in accordance with the requirements of this part;
    (vi) Suspending disbursement of HOME funds for affected activities; 
and
    (vii) Making matching contributions as draws are made from the 
participating jurisdiction's HOME Investment Trust Fund United States 
Treasury Account.
    (2) HUD may also change the method of payment from an advance to 
reimbursement basis; and take other remedies that may be legally 
available.


<R05>
Sec. 92.552  Notice and opportunity for hearing; sanctions.

    (a) If HUD finds after reasonable notice and opportunity for hearing 
that a participating jurisdiction has failed to comply with any 
provision of this part and until HUD is satisfied that there is no 
longer any such failure to comply:
    (1) HUD shall reduce the funds in the participating jurisdiction's 
HOME Investment Trust Fund by the amount of any expenditures that were 
not in accordance with the requirements of this part; and
    (2) HUD may do one or more of the following:
    (i) Prevent withdrawals from the participating jurisdiction's HOME 
Investment Trust Fund for activities affected by the failure to comply;
    (ii) Restrict the participating jurisdiction's activities under this 
part to activities that conform to one or more model programs which HUD 
has developed in accordance with section 213 of the Act;
    (iii) Remove the participating jurisdiction from participation in 
allocations or reallocations of funds made available under subpart B or 
J of this part;
    (iv) Require the participating jurisdiction to make matching 
contributions in amounts required by Sec. 92.218(a) as HOME funds are 
drawn from the participating jurisdiction's HOME Investment Trust Fund 
United States Treasury Account. Provided, however, that HUD may on due 
notice suspend payments at any time after the issuance of a notice of 
opportunity for hearing pursuant to paragraph (b)(1) of this section, 
pending such hearing and a final decision, to the extent HUD determines 
such action necessary to preclude the further expenditure of funds for 
activities affected by the failure to comply.
    (b) Proceedings. When HUD proposes to take action pursuant to this 
section, the respondent in the proceedings will be the participating 
jurisdiction or, at HUD's option, the State recipient. Proceedings will 
be conducted in accordance with 24 CFR part 26, subpart B.

[61 FR 48750, Sept. 16, 1996, as amended at 62 FR 44840, Aug. 22, 1997]

                Appendixes A--C to Subtitle A [Reserved]

[[Page 537]]

    Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Housing and Urban Development

[[Page 539]]


<R02>
    CHAPTER I--OFFICE OF ASSISTANT SECRETARY FOR EQUAL OPPORTUNITY, 
               DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT


<R03>

  --------------------------------------------------------------------

                       SUBCHAPTER A--FAIR HOUSING
Part                                                                Page
100             Discriminatory conduct under the Fair 
                    Housing Act.............................         541
103             Fair housing--complaint processing..........         557
105             [Reserved]
107             Nondiscrimination and equal opportunity in 
                    housing under Executive Order 11063.....         569
108             Compliance procedures for affirmative fair 
                    housing marketing.......................         576
110             Fair housing poster.........................         580
115             Certification and funding of State and local 
                    fair housing enforcement agencies.......         582
121             Collection of data..........................         595
125             Fair housing initiatives program............         595
            SUBCHAPTER B--EMPLOYMENT AND BUSINESS OPPORTUNITY
135             Economic opportunities for low- and very 
                    low-income persons......................         600
146             Nondiscrimination on the basis of age in HUD 
                    programs or activities receiving Federal 
                    financial assistance....................         618
180             Consolidated HUD hearing procedures for 
                    civil rights matters....................         625

[[Page 541]]


<R03>
                       SUBCHAPTER A--FAIR HOUSING

<R05>


<R03>
PART 100--DISCRIMINATORY CONDUCT UNDER THE FAIR HOUSING ACT--Table of Contents

<R05>


                           Subpart A--General

Sec.
100.1  Authority.
100.5  Scope.
100.10  Exemptions.
100.20  Definitions.

               Subpart B--Discriminatory Housing Practices

100.50  Real estate practices prohibited.
100.60  Unlawful refusal to sell or rent or to negotiate for the sale or 
          rental.
100.65  Discrimination in terms, conditions and privileges and in 
          services and facilities.
100.70  Other prohibited sale and rental conduct.
100.75  Discriminatory advertisements, statements and notices.
100.80  Discriminatory representations on the availability of dwellings.
100.85  Blockbusting.
100.90  Discrimination in the provision of brokerage services.

      Subpart C--Discrimination in Residential Real Estate-Related 
                              Transactions

100.110  Discriminatory practices in residential real estate-related 
          transactions.
100.115  Residential real estate-related transactions.
100.120  Discrimination in the making of loans and in the provision of 
          other financial assistance.
100.125  Discrimination in the purchasing of loans.
100.130  Discrimination in the terms and conditions for making available 
          loans or other financial assistance.
100.135  Unlawful practices in the selling, brokering, or appraising of 
          residential real property.
100.140  General rules.
100.141  Definitions.
100.142  Types of information.
100.143  Appropriate corrective action.
100.144  Scope of privilege.
100.145  Loss of privilege.
100.146  Limited use of privileged information.
100.147  Adjudication.
100.148  Effective date.

    Subpart D--Prohibition Against Discrimination Because of Handicap

100.200  Purpose.
100.201  Definitions.
100.202  General prohibitions against discrimination because of 
          handicap.
100.203  Reasonable modifications of existing premises.
100.204  Reasonable accommodations.
100.205  Design and construction requirements.

                  Subpart E--Housing for Older Persons

100.300  Purpose.
100.301  Exemption.
100.302  State and Federal elderly housing programs.
100.303  62 or over housing.
100.304  55 or over housing.

            Subpart F--Interference, Coercion or Intimidation

100.400  Prohibited interference, coercion or intimidation.

    Authority: 42 U.S.C. 3535(d), 3600-3620.

    Source: 54 FR 3283, Jan. 23, 1989, unless otherwise noted.


<R04>
                           Subpart A--General


<R05>
Sec. 100.1  Authority.

    This regulation is issued under the authority of the Secretary of 
Housing and Urban Development to administer and enforce title VIII of 
the Civil Rights Act of 1968, as amended by the Fair Housing Amendments 
Act of 1988 (the Fair Housing Act).


<R05>
Sec. 100.5  Scope.

    (a) It is the policy of the United States to provide, within 
constitutional limitations, for fair housing throughout the United 
States. No person shall be subjected to discrimination because of race, 
color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin in 
the sale, rental, or advertising of dwellings, in the provision of 
brokerage services, or in the availability of residential real estate-
related transactions.
    (b) This part provides the Department's interpretation of the 
coverage

[[Page 542]]

of the Fair Housing Act regarding discrimination related to the sale or 
rental of dwellings, the provision of services in connection therewith, 
and the availability of residential real estate-related transactions.
    (c) Nothing in this part relieves persons participating in a Federal 
or Federally-assisted program or activity from other requirements 
applicable to buildings and dwellings.


<R05>
Sec. 100.10  Exemptions.

    (a) This part does not:
    (1) Prohibit a religious organization, association, or society, or 
any nonprofit institution or organization operated, supervised or 
controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization, 
association, or society, from limiting the sale, rental or occupancy of 
dwellings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose 
to persons of the same religion, or from giving preference to such 
persons, unless membership in such religion is restricted because of 
race, color, or national origin;
    (2) Prohibit a private club, not in fact open to the public, which, 
incident to its primary purpose or purposes, provides lodgings which it 
owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose, from limiting the 
rental or occupancy of such lodgings to its members or from giving 
preference to its members;
    (3) Limit the applicability of any reasonable local, State or 
Federal restrictions regarding the maximum number of occupants permitted 
to occupy a dwelling; or
    (4) Prohibit conduct against a person because such person has been 
convicted by any court of competent jurisdiction of the illegal 
manufacture or distribution of a controlled substance as defined in 
section 102 of the Controlled Substances Act (21 U.S.C. 802).
    (b) Nothing in this part regarding discrimination based on familial 
status applies with respect to housing for older persons as defined in 
subpart E of this part.
    (c) Nothing in this part, other than the prohibitions against 
discriminatory advertising, applies to:
    (1) The sale or rental of any single family house by an owner, 
provided the following conditions are met:
    (i) The owner does not own or have any interest in more than three 
single family houses at any one time.
    (ii) The house is sold or rented without the use of a real estate 
broker, agent or salesperson or the facilities of any person in the 
business of selling or renting dwellings. If the owner selling the house 
does not reside in it at the time of the sale or was not the most recent 
resident of the house prior to such sale, the exemption in this 
paragraph (c)(1) of this section applies to only one such sale in any 
24-month period.
    (2) Rooms or units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied 
or intended to be occupied by no more than four families living 
independently of each other, if the owner actually maintains and 
occupies one of such living quarters as his or her residence.


<R05>
Sec. 100.20  Definitions.

    The terms Department, Fair Housing Act, and Secretary are defined in 
24 CFR part 5.
    Aggrieved person includes any person who--
    (a) Claims to have been injured by a discriminatory housing 
practice; or
    (b) Believes that such person will be injured by a discriminatory 
housing practice that is about to occur.
    Broker or Agent includes any person authorized to perform an action 
on behalf of another person regarding any matter related to the sale or 
rental of dwellings, including offers, solicitations or contracts and 
the administration of matters regarding such offers, solicitations or 
contracts or any residential real estate-related transactions.
    Discriminatory housing practice means an act that is unlawful under 
section 804, 805, 806, or 818 of the Fair Housing Act.
    Dwelling means any building, structure or portion thereof which is 
occupied as, or designed or intended for occupancy as, a residence by 
one or more families, and any vacant land which is offered for sale or 
lease for the construction or location thereon of any such building, 
structure or portion thereof.

[[Page 543]]

    Familial status means one or more individuals (who have not attained 
the age of 18 years) being domiciled with--
    (a) A parent or another person having legal custody of such 
individual or individuals; or
    (b) The designee of such parent or other person having such custody, 
with the written permission of such parent or other person.

The protections afforded against discrimination on the basis of familial 
status shall apply to any person who is pregnant or is in the process of 
securing legal custody of any individual who has not attained the age of 
18 years.
    Handicap is defined in Sec. 100.201.
    Person includes one or more individuals, corporations, partnerships, 
associations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual 
companies, joint-stock companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, 
trustees, trustees in cases under title 11 U.S.C., receivers, and 
fiduciaries.
    Person in the business of selling or renting dwellings means any 
person who:
    (a) Within the preceding twelve months, has participated as 
principal in three or more transactions involving the sale or rental of 
any dwelling or any interest therein;
    (b) Within the preceding twelve months, has participated as agent, 
other than in the sale of his or her own personal residence, in 
providing sales or rental facilities or sales or rental services in two 
or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any 
interest therein; or
    (c) Is the owner of any dwelling designed or intended for occupancy 
by, or occupied by, five or more families.
    State means any of the several states, the District of Columbia, the 
Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, or any of the territories and possessions 
of the United States.

[54 FR 3283, Jan. 23, 1989, as amended at 61 FR 5205, Feb. 9, 1996]


<R04>
               Subpart B--Discriminatory Housing Practices


<R05>
Sec. 100.50  Real estate practices prohibited.

    (a) This subpart provides the Department's interpretation of conduct 
that is unlawful housing discrimination under section 804 and section 
806 of the Fair Housing Act. In general the prohibited actions are set 
forth under sections of this subpart which are most applicable to the 
discriminatory conduct described. However, an action illustrated in one 
section can constitute a violation under sections in the subpart. For 
example, the conduct described in Sec. 100.60(b)(3) and (4) would 
constitute a violation of Sec. 100.65(a) as well as Sec. 100.60(a).
    (b) It shall be unlawful to:
    (1) Refuse to sell or rent a dwelling after a bona fide offer has 
been made, or to refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of a 
dwelling because of race, color, religion, sex, familial status, or 
national origin, or to discriminate in the sale or rental of a dwelling 
because of handicap.
    (2) Discriminate in the terms, conditions or privileges of sale or 
rental of a dwelling, or in the provision of services or facilities in 
connection with sales or rentals, because of race, color, religion, sex, 
handicap, familial status, or national origin.
    (3) Engage in any conduct relating to the provision of housing which 
otherwise makes unavailable or denies dwellings to persons because of 
race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national 
origin.
    (4) Make, print or publish, or cause to be made, printed or 
published, any notice, statement or advertisement with respect to the 
sale or rental of a dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation 
or discrimination because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, 
familial status, or national origin, or an intention to make any such 
preference, limitation or discrimination.
    (5) Represent to any person because of race, color, religion, sex, 
handicap, familial status, or national origin that a dwelling is not 
available for sale or rental when such dwelling is in fact available.
    (6) Engage in blockbusting practices in connection with the sale or 
rental of dwellings because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, 
familial status, or national origin.
    (7) Deny access to or membership or participation in, or to 
discriminate against any person in his or her access

[[Page 544]]

to or membership or participation in, any multiple-listing service, real 
estate brokers' assocation, or other service organization or facility 
relating to the business of selling or renting a dwelling or in the 
terms or conditions or membership or participation, because of race, 
color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin.
    (c) The application of the Fair Housing Act with respect to persons 
with handicaps is discussed in subpart D of this part.


<R05>
Sec. 100.60  Unlawful refusal to sell or rent or to negotiate for the sale or rental.

    (a) It shall be unlawful for a person to refuse to sell or rent a 
dwelling to a person who has made a bona fide offer, because of race, 
color, religion, sex, familial status, or national origin or to refuse 
to negotiate with a person for the sale or rental of a dwelling because 
of race, color, religion, sex, familial status, or national origin, or 
to discriminate against any person in the sale or rental of a dwelling 
because of handicap.
    (b) Prohibited actions under this section include, but are not 
limited to:
    (1) Failing to accept or consider a bona fide offer because of race, 
color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin.
    (2) Refusing to sell or rent a dwelling to, or to negotiate for the 
sale or rental of a dwelling with, any person because of race, color, 
religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin.
    (3) Imposing different sales prices or rental charges for the sale 
or rental of a dwelling upon any person because of race, color, 
religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin.
    (4) Using different qualification criteria or applications, or sale 
or rental standards or procedures, such as income standards, application 
requirements, application fees, credit analysis or sale or rental 
approval procedures or other requirements, because of race, color, 
religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin.
    (5) Evicting tenants because of their race, color, religion, sex, 
handicap, familial status, or national origin or because of the race, 
color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin of a 
tenant's guest.


<R05>
Sec. 100.65  Discrimination in terms, conditions and privileges and in services and facilities.

    (a) It shall be unlawful, because of race, color, religion, sex, 
handicap, familial status, or national origin, to impose different 
terms, conditions or privileges relating to the sale or rental of a 
dwelling or to deny or limit services or facilities in connection with 
the sale or rental of a dwelling.
    (b) Prohibited actions under this section include, but are not 
limited to:
    (1) Using different provisions in leases or contracts of sale, such 
as those relating to rental charges, security deposits and the terms of 
a lease and those relating to down payment and closing requirements, 
because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or 
national origin.
    (2) Failing or delaying maintenance or repairs of sale or rental 
dwellings because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial 
status, or national origin.
    (3) Failing to process an offer for the sale or rental of a dwelling 
or to communicate an offer accurately because of race, color, religion, 
sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin.
    (4) Limiting the use of privileges, services or facilities 
associated with a dwelling because of race, color, religion, sex, 
handicap, familial status, or national origin of an an owner, tenant or 
a person associated with him or her.
    (5) Denying or limiting services or facilities in connection with 
the sale or rental of a dwelling, because a person failed or refused to 
provide sexual favors.


<R05>
Sec. 100.70  Other prohibited sale and rental conduct.

    (a) It shall be unlawful, because of race, color, religion, sex, 
handicap, familial status, or national origin, to restrict or attempt to 
restrict the choices of a person by word or conduct in connection with 
seeking, negotiating for, buying or renting a dwelling so as to 
perpetuate, or tend to perpetuate, segregated housing patterns, or to 
discourage or obstruct choices in a

[[Page 545]]

community, neighborhood or development.
    (b) It shall be unlawful, because of race, color, religion, sex, 
handicap, familial status, or national origin, to engage in any conduct 
relating to the provision of housing or of services and facilities in 
connection therewith that otherwise makes unavailable or denies 
dwellings to persons.
    (c) Prohibited actions under paragraph (a) of this section, which 
are generally referred to as unlawful steering practices, include, but 
are not limited to:
    (1) Discouraging any person from inspecting, purchasing or renting a 
dwelling because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial 
status, or national origin, or because of the race, color, religion, 
sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin of persons in a 
community, neighborhood or development.
    (2) Discouraging the purchase or rental of a dwelling because of 
race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national 
origin, by exaggerating drawbacks or failing to inform any person of 
desirable features of a dwelling or of a community, neighborhood, or 
development.
    (3) Communicating to any prospective purchaser that he or she would 
not be comfortable or compatible with existing residents of a community, 
neighborhood or development because of race, color, religion, sex, 
handicap, familial status, or national origin.
    (4) Assigning any person to a particular section of a community, 
neighborhood or development, or to a particular floor of a building, 
because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or 
national origin.
    (d) Prohibited activities relating to dwellings under paragraph (b) 
of this section include, but are not limited to:
    (1) Discharging or taking other adverse action against an employee, 
broker or agent because he or she refused to participate in a 
discriminatory housing practice.
    (2) Employing codes or other devices to segregate or reject 
applicants, purchasers or renters, refusing to take or to show listings 
of dwellings in certain areas because of race, color, religion, sex, 
handicap, familial status, or national origin, or refusing to deal with 
certain brokers or agents because they or one or more of their clients 
are of a particular race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial 
status, or national origin.
    (3) Denying or delaying the processing of an application made by a 
purchaser or renter or refusing to approve such a person for occupancy 
in a cooperative or condominium dwelling because of race, color, 
religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin.
    (4) Refusing to provide municipal services or property or hazard 
insurance for dwellings or providing such services or insurance 
differently because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial 
status, or national origin.


<R05>
Sec. 100.75  Discriminatory advertisements, statements and notices.

    (a) It shall be unlawful to make, print or publish, or cause to be 
made, printed or published, any notice, statement or advertisement with 
respect to the sale or rental of a dwelling which indicates any 
preference, limitation or discrimination because of race, color, 
religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin, or an 
intention to make any such preference, limitation or discrimination.
    (b) The prohibitions in this section shall apply to all written or 
oral notices or statements by a person engaged in the sale or rental of 
a dwelling. Written notices and statements include any applications, 
flyers, brochures, deeds, signs, banners, posters, billboards or any 
documents used with respect to the sale or rental of a dwelling.
    (c) Discriminatory notices, statements and advertisements include, 
but are not limited to:
    (1) Using words, phrases, photographs, illustrations, symbols or 
forms which convey that dwellings are available or not available to a 
particular group of persons because of race, color, religion, sex, 
handicap, familial status, or national origin.
    (2) Expressing to agents, brokers, employees, prospective sellers or 
renters or any other persons a preference for or limitation on any 
purchaser or renter

[[Page 546]]

because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or 
national origin of such persons.
    (3) Selecting media or locations for advertising the sale or rental 
of dwellings which deny particular segments of the housing market 
information about housing opportunities because of race, color, 
religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin.
    (4) Refusing to publish advertising for the sale or rental of 
dwellings or requiring different charges or terms for such advertising 
because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or 
national origin.
    (d) 24 CFR part 109 provides information to assist persons to 
advertise dwellings in a nondiscriminatory manner and describes the 
matters the Department will review in evaluating compliance with the 
Fair Housing Act and in investigating complaints alleging discriminatory 
housing practices involving advertising.


<R05>
Sec. 100.80  Discriminatory representations on the availability of dwellings.

    (a) It shall be unlawful, because of race, color, religion, sex, 
handicap, familial status, or national origin, to provide inaccurate or 
untrue information about the availability of dwellings for sale or 
rental.
    (b) Prohibited actions under this section include, but are not 
limited to:
    (1) Indicating through words or conduct that a dwelling which is 
available for inspection, sale, or rental has been sold or rented, 
because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or 
national origin.
    (2) Representing that covenants or other deed, trust or lease 
provisions which purport to restrict the sale or rental of dwellings 
because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or 
national origin preclude the sale of rental of a dwelling to a person.
    (3) Enforcing covenants or other deed, trust, or lease provisions 
which preclude the sale or rental of a dwelling to any person because of 
race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national 
origin.
    (4) Limiting information, by word or conduct, regarding suitably 
priced dwellings available for inspection, sale or rental, because of 
race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national 
origin.
    (5) Providing false or inaccurate information regarding the 
availability of a dwelling for sale or rental to any person, including 
testers, regardless of whether such person is actually seeking housing, 
because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or 
national origin.


<R05>
Sec. 100.85  Blockbusting.

    (a) It shall be unlawful, for profit, to induce or attempt to induce 
a person to sell or rent a dwelling by representations regarding the 
entry or prospective entry into the neighborhood of a person or persons 
of a particular race, color, religion, sex, familial status, or national 
origin or with a handicap.
    (b) In establishing a discriminatory housing practice under this 
section it is not necessary that there was in fact profit as long as 
profit was a factor for engaging in the blockbusting activity.
    (c) Prohibited actions under this section include, but are not 
limited to:
    (1) Engaging, for profit, in conduct (including uninvited 
solicitations for listings) which conveys to a person that a 
neighborhood is undergoing or is about to undergo a change in the race, 
color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin of 
persons residing in it, in order to encourage the person to offer a 
dwelling for sale or rental.
    (2) Encouraging, for profit, any person to sell or rent a dwelling 
through assertions that the entry or prospective entry of persons of a 
particular race, color, religion, sex, familial status, or national 
origin, or with handicaps, can or will result in undesirable 
consequences for the project, neighborhood or community, such as a 
lowering of property values, an increase in criminal or antisocial 
behavior, or a decline in the quality of schools or other services or 
facilities.


<R05>
Sec. 100.90  Discrimination in the provision of brokerage services.

    (a) It shall be unlawful to deny any person access to or membership 
or participation in any multiple listing service, real estate brokers' 
organization or other service, organization, or facility

[[Page 547]]

relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings, or to 
discriminate against any person in the terms or conditions of such 
access, membership or participation, because of race, color, religion, 
sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin.
    (b) Prohibited actions under this section include, but are not 
limited to:
    (1) Setting different fees for access to or membership in a multiple 
listing service because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, 
familial status, or national origin.
    (2) Denying or limiting benefits accruing to members in a real 
estate brokers' organization because of race, color, religion, sex, 
handicap, familial status, or national origin.
    (3) Imposing different standards or criteria for membership in a 
real estate sales or rental organization because of race, color, 
religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin.
    (4) Establishing geographic boundaries or office location or 
residence requirements for access to or membership or participation in 
any multiple listing service, real estate brokers' organization or other 
service, organization or facility relating to the business of selling or 
renting dwellings, because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, 
familial status, or national origin.


<R04>
      Subpart C--Discrimination in Residential Real Estate-Related 
                              Transactions


<R05>
Sec. 100.110  Discriminatory practices in residential real estate-related transactions.

    (a) This subpart provides the Department's interpretation of the 
conduct that is unlawful housing discrimination under section 805 of the 
Fair Housing Act.
    (b) It shall be unlawful for any person or other entity whose 
business includes engaging in residential real estate-related 
transactions to discriminate against any person in making available such 
a transaction, or in the terms or conditions of such a transaction, 
because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or 
national origin.


<R05>
Sec. 100.115  Residential real estate-related transactions.

    The term residential real estate-related transactions means:
    (a) The making or purchasing of loans or providing other financial 
assistance--
    (1) For purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing or 
maintaining a dwelling; or
    (2) Secured by residential real estate; or
    (b) The selling, brokering or appraising of residential real 
property.


<R05>
Sec. 100.120  Discrimination in the making of loans and in the provision of other financial assistance.

    (a) It shall be unlawful for any person or entity whose business 
includes engaging in residential real estate-related transactions to 
discriminate against any person in making available loans or other 
financial assistance for a dwelling, or which is or is to be secured by 
a dwelling, because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial 
status, or national origin.
    (b) Prohibited practices under this section include, but are not 
limited to, failing or refusing to provide to any person, in connection 
with a residential real estate-related transaction, information 
regarding the availability of loans or other financial assistance, 
application requirements, procedures or standards for the review and 
approval of loans or financial assistance, or providing information 
which is inaccurate or different from that provided others, because of 
race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national 
origin.


<R05>
Sec. 100.125  Discrimination in the purchasing of loans.

    (a) It shall be unlawful for any person or entity engaged in the 
purchasing of loans or other debts or securities which support the 
purchase, construction, improvement, repair or maintenance of a 
dwelling, or which are secured by residential real estate, to refuse to 
purchase such loans, debts, or securities, or to impose different terms 
or conditions for such purchases, because of race, color, religion, sex, 
handicap, familial status, or national origin.

[[Page 548]]

    (b) Unlawful conduct under this section includes, but is not limited 
to:
    (1) Purchasing loans or other debts or securities which relate to, 
or which are secured by dwellings in certain communities or 
neighborhoods but not in others because of the race, color, religion, 
sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin of persons in such 
neighborhoods or communities.
    (2) Pooling or packaging loans or other debts or securities which 
relate to, or which are secured by, dwellings differently because of 
race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national 
origin.
    (3) Imposing or using different terms or conditions on the marketing 
or sale of securities issued on the basis of loans or other debts or 
securities which relate to, or which are secured by, dwellings because 
of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national 
origin.
    (c) This section does not prevent consideration, in the purchasing 
of loans, of factors justified by business necessity, including 
requirements of Federal law, relating to a transaction's financial 
security or to protection against default or reduction of the value of 
the security. Thus, this provision would not preclude considerations 
employed in normal and prudent transactions, provided that no such 
factor may in any way relate to race, color, religion, sex, handicap, 
familial status or national origin.


<R05>
Sec. 100.130  Discrimination in the terms and conditions for making available loans or other financial assistance.

    (a) It shall be unlawful for any person or entity engaged in the 
making of loans or in the provision of other financial assistance 
relating to the purchase, construction, improvement, repair or 
maintenance of dwellings or which are secured by residential real estate 
to impose different terms or conditions for the availability of such 
loans or other financial assistance because of race, color, religion, 
sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin.
    (b) Unlawful conduct under this section includes, but is not limited 
to:
    (1) Using different policies, practices or procedures in evaluating 
or in determining creditworthiness of any person in connection with the 
provision of any loan or other financial assistance for a dwelling or 
for any loan or other financial assistance which is secured by 
residential real estate because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, 
familial status, or national origin.
    (2) Determining the type of loan or other financial assistance to be 
provided with respect to a dwelling, or fixing the amount, interest 
rate, duration or other terms for a loan or other financial assistance 
for a dwelling or which is secured by residential real estate, because 
of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national 
origin.


<R05>
Sec. 100.135  Unlawful practices in the selling, brokering, or appraising of residential real property.

    (a) It shall be unlawful for any person or other entity whose 
business includes engaging in the selling, brokering or appraising of 
residential real property to discriminate against any person in making 
available such services, or in the performance of such services, because 
of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national 
origin.
    (b) For the purposes of this section, the term appraisal means an 
estimate or opinion of the value of a specified residential real 
property made in a business context in connection with the sale, rental, 
financing or refinancing of a dwelling or in connection with any 
activity that otherwise affects the availability of a residential real 
estate-related transaction, whether the appraisal is oral or written, or 
transmitted formally or informally. The appraisal includes all written 
comments and other documents submitted as support for the estimate or 
opinion of value.
    (c) Nothing in this section prohibits a person engaged in the 
business of making or furnishing appraisals of residential real property 
from taking into consideration factors other than race, color, religion, 
sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin.
    (d) Practices which are unlawful under this section include, but are 
not limited to, using an appraisal of residential real property in 
connection

[[Page 549]]

with the sale, rental, or financing of any dwelling where the person 
knows or reasonably should know that the appraisal improperly takes into 
consideration race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status or 
national origin.


<R05>
Sec. 100.140  General rules.

    (a) Voluntary self-testing and correction. The report or results of 
a self-test a lender voluntarily conducts or authorizes are privileged 
as provided in this subpart if the lender has taken or is taking 
appropriate corrective action to address likely violations identified by 
the self-test. Data collection required by law or any governmental 
authority (federal, state, or local) is not voluntary.
    (b) Other privileges. This subpart does not abrogate any evidentiary 
privilege otherwise provided by law.

[62 FR 66432, Dec. 18, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 100.141  Definitions.

    As used in this subpart:
    Lender means a person who engages in a residential real estate-
related lending transaction.
    Residential real estate-related lending transaction means the making 
of a loan:
    (1) For purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing, or 
maintaining a dwelling; or
    (2) Secured by residential real estate.
    Self-test means any program, practice or study a lender voluntarily 
conducts or authorizes which is designed and used specifically to 
determine the extent or effectiveness of compliance with the Fair 
Housing Act. The self-test must create data or factual information that 
is not available and cannot be derived from loan files, application 
files, or other residential real estate-related lending transaction 
records. Self-testing includes, but is not limited to, using fictitious 
credit applicants (testers) or conducting surveys of applicants or 
customers, nor is it limited to the pre-application stage of loan 
processing.

[62 FR 66432, Dec. 18, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 100.142  Types of information.

    (a) The privilege under this subpart covers:
    (1) The report or results of the self-test;
    (2) Data or factual information created by the self-test;
    (3) Workpapers, draft documents and final documents;
    (4) Analyses, opinions, and conclusions if they directly result from 
the self-test report or results.
    (b) The privilege does not cover:
    (1) Information about whether a lender conducted a self-test, the 
methodology used or scope of the self-test, the time period covered by 
the self-test or the dates it was conducted;
    (2) Loan files and application files, or other residential real 
estate-related lending transaction records (e.g., property appraisal 
reports, loan committee meeting minutes or other documents reflecting 
the basis for a decision to approve or deny a loan application, loan 
policies or procedures, underwriting standards, compensation records) 
and information or data derived from such files and records, even if 
such data has been aggregated, summarized or reorganized to facilitate 
analysis.

[62 FR 66432, Dec. 18, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 100.143  Appropriate corrective action.

    (a) The report or results of a self-test are privileged as provided 
in this subpart if the lender has taken or is taking appropriate 
corrective action to address likely violations identified by the self-
test. Appropriate corrective action is required when a self-test shows 
it is more likely than not that a violation occurred even though no 
violation was adjudicated formally.
    (b) A lender must take action reasonably likely to remedy the cause 
and effect of the likely violation and must:
    (1) Identify the policies or practices that are the likely cause of 
the violation, such as inadequate or improper lending policies, failure 
to implement established policies, employee conduct, or other causes; 
and
    (2) Assess the extent and scope of any likely violation, by 
determining which areas of operation are likely to be affected by those 
policies and practices, such as stages of the loan application

[[Page 550]]

process, types of loans, or the particular branch where the likely 
violation has occurred. Generally, the scope of the self-test governs 
the scope of the appropriate corrective action.
    (c) Appropriate corrective action may include both prospective and 
remedial relief, except that to establish a privilege under this 
subpart:
    (1) A lender is not required to provide remedial relief to a tester 
in a self-test;
    (2) A lender is only required to provide remedial relief to an 
applicant identified by the self-test as one whose rights were more 
likely than not violated;
    (3) A lender is not required to provide remedial relief to a 
particular applicant if the statute of limitations applicable to the 
violation expired before the lender obtained the results of the self-
test or the applicant is otherwise ineligible for such relief.
    (d) Depending on the facts involved, appropriate corrective action 
may include, but is not limited to, one or more of the following:
    (1) If the self-test identifies individuals whose applications were 
inappropriately processed, offering to extend credit if the applications 
were improperly denied; compensating such persons for any damages, both 
out-of-pocket and compensatory;
    (2) Correcting any institutional policies or procedures that may 
have contributed to the likely violation, and adopting new policies as 
appropriate;
    (3) Identifying, and then training and/or disciplining the employees 
involved;
    (4) Developing outreach programs, marketing strategies, or loan 
products to serve more effectively the segments of the lender's market 
that may have been affected by the likely violation; and
    (5) Improving audit and oversight systems to avoid a recurrence of 
the likely violations.
    (e) Determination of appropriate corrective action is fact-based. 
Not every corrective measure listed in paragraph (d) of this section 
need be taken for each likely violation.
    (f) Taking appropriate corrective action is not an admission by a 
lender that a violation occurred.

[62 FR 66432, Dec. 18, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 100.144  Scope of privilege.

    The report or results of a self-test may not be obtained or used by 
an aggrieved person, complainant, department or agency in any:
    (a) Proceeding or civil action in which a violation of the Fair 
Housing Act is alleged; or
    (b) Examination or investigation relating to compliance with the 
Fair Housing Act.

[62 FR 66432, Dec. 18, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 100.145  Loss of privilege.

    (a) The self-test report or results are not privileged under this 
subpart if the lender or person with lawful access to the report or 
results:
    (1) Voluntarily discloses any part of the report or results or any 
other information privileged under this subpart to any aggrieved person, 
complainant, department, agency, or to the public; or
    (2) Discloses the report or results or any other information 
privileged under this subpart as a defense to charges a lender violated 
the Fair Housing Act; or
    (3) Fails or is unable to produce self-test records or information 
needed to determine whether the privilege applies.
    (b) Disclosures or other actions undertaken to carry out appropriate 
corrective action do not cause the lender to lose the privilege.

[62 FR 66432, Dec. 18, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 100.146  Limited use of privileged information.

    Notwithstanding Sec. 100.145, the self-test report or results may be 
obtained and used by an aggrieved person, applicant, department or 
agency solely to determine a penalty or remedy after the violation of 
the Fair Housing Act has been adjudicated or admitted. Disclosures for 
this limited purpose may be used only for the particular proceeding in 
which the adjudication or admission is made. Information disclosed under 
this section remains otherwise privileged under this subpart.

[62 FR 66433, Dec. 18, 1997]

[[Page 551]]


<R05>
Sec. 100.147  Adjudication.

    An aggrieved person, complainant, department or agency that 
challenges a privilege asserted under Sec. 100.144 may seek a 
determination of the existence and application of that privilege in:
    (a) A court of competent jurisdiction; or
    (b) An administrative law proceeding with appropriate jurisdiction.

[62 FR 66433, Dec. 18, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 100.148  Effective date.

    The privilege under this subpart applies to self-tests conducted 
both before and after January 30, 1998, except that a self-test 
conducted before January 30, 1998 is not privileged:
    (a) If there was a court action or administrative proceeding before 
January 30, 1998, including the filing of a complaint alleging a 
violation of the Fair Housing Act with the Department or a substantially 
equivalent state or local agency; or
    (b) If any part of the report or results were disclosed before 
January 30, 1998 to any aggrieved person, complainant, department or 
agency, or to the general public.

[62 FR 66433, Dec. 18, 1997]


<R04>
    Subpart D--Prohibition Against Discrimination Because of Handicap


<R05>
Sec. 100.200  Purpose.

    The purpose of this subpart is to effectuate sections 6 (a) and (b) 
and 15 of the Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988.


<R05>
Sec. 100.201  Definitions.

    As used in this subpart:
    Accessible, when used with respect to the public and common use 
areas of a building containing covered multifamily dwellings, means that 
the public or common use areas of the building can be approached, 
entered, and used by individuals with physical handicaps. The phrase 
readily accessible to and usable by is synonymous with accessible. A 
public or common use area that complies with the appropriate 
requirements of ANSI A117.1-1986 or a comparable standard is accessible 
within the meaning of this paragraph.
    Accessible route means a continuous unobstructed path connecting 
accessible elements and spaces in a building or within a site that can 
be negotiated by a person with a severe disability using a wheelchair 
and that is also safe for and usable by people with other disabilities. 
Interior accessible routes may include corridors, floors, ramps, 
elevators and lifts. Exterior accessible routes may include parking 
access aisles, curb ramps, walks, ramps and lifts. A route that complies 
with the appropriate requirements of ANSI A117.1-1986 or a comparable 
standard is an accessible route.
    ANSI A117.1-1986 means the 1986 edition of the American National 
Standard for buildings and facilities providing accessibility and 
usability for physically handicapped people. This incorporation by 
reference was approved by the Director of the Federal Register in 
accordance with 5 U.S.C. 552(a) and 1 CFR part 51. Copies may be 
obtained from American National Standards Institute, Inc., 1430 
Broadway, New York, NY 10018. Copies may be inspected at the Department 
of Housing and Urban Development, 451 Seventh Street, SW., room 10276, 
Washington, DC, or at the Office of the Federal Register, 800 North 
Capitol Street, NW., suite 700, Washington, DC.
    Building means a structure, facility or portion thereof that 
contains or serves one or more dwelling units.
    Building entrance on an accessible route means an accessible 
entrance to a building that is connected by an accessible route to 
public transportation stops, to accessible parking and passenger loading 
zones, or to public streets or sidewalks, if available. A building 
entrance that complies with ANSI A117.1-1986 or a comparable standard 
complies with the requirements of this paragraph.
    Common use areas means rooms, spaces or elements inside or outside 
of a building that are made available for the use of residents of a 
building or the guests thereof. These areas include hallways, lounges, 
lobbies, laundry rooms, refuse rooms, mail rooms, recreational areas and 
passageways among and between buildings.

[[Page 552]]

    Controlled substance means any drug or other substance, or immediate 
precursor included in the definition in section 102 of the Controlled 
Substances Act (21 U.S.C. 802).
    Covered multifamily dwellings means buildings consisting of 4 or 
more dwelling units if such buildings have one or more elevators; and 
ground floor dwelling units in other buildings consisting of 4 or more 
dwelling units.
    Dwelling unit means a single unit of residence for a family or one 
or more persons. Examples of dwelling units include: a single family 
home; an apartment unit within an apartment building; and in other types 
of dwellings in which sleeping accommodations are provided but toileting 
or cooking facilities are shared by occupants of more than one room or 
portion of the dwelling, rooms in which people sleep. Examples of the 
latter include dormitory rooms and sleeping accommodations in shelters 
intended for occupancy as a residence for homeless persons.
    Entrance means any access point to a building or portion of a 
building used by residents for the purpose of entering.
    Exterior means all areas of the premises outside of an individual 
dwelling unit.
    First occupancy means a building that has never before been used for 
any purpose.
    Ground floor means a floor of a building with a building entrance on 
an accessible route. A building may have more than one ground floor.
    Handicap means, with respect to a person, a physical or mental 
impairment which substantially limits one or more major life activities; 
a record of such an impairment; or being regarded as having such an 
impairment. This term does not include current, illegal use of or 
addiction to a controlled substance. For purposes of this part, an 
individual shall not be considered to have a handicap solely because 
that individual is a transvestite. As used in this definition:
    (a) Physical or mental impairment includes:
    (1) Any physiological disorder or condition, cosmetic disfigurement, 
or anatomical loss affecting one or more of the following body systems: 
Neurological; musculoskeletal; special sense organs; respiratory, 
including speech organs; cardiovascular; reproductive; disgestive; 
genito-urinary; hemic and lymphatic; skin; and endocrine; or
    (2) Any mental or psychological disorder, such as mental 
retardation, organic brain syndrome, emotional or mental illness, and 
specific learning disabilities. The term physical or mental impairment 
includes, but is not limited to, such diseases and conditions as 
orthopedic, visual, speech and hearing impairments, cerebral palsy, 
autism, epilepsy, muscular dystrophy, multiple sclerosis, cancer, heart 
disease, diabetes, Human Immunodeficiency Virus infection, mental 
retardation, emotional illness, drug addiction (other than addiction 
caused by current, illegal use of a controlled substance) and 
alcoholism.
    (b) Major life activities means functions such as caring for one's 
self, performing manual tasks, walking, seeing, hearing, speaking, 
breathing, learning and working.
    (c) Has a record of such an impairment means has a history of, or 
has been misclassified as having, a mental or physical impairment that 
substantially limits one or more major life activities.
    (d) Is regarded as having an impairment means:
    (1) Has a physical or mental impairment that does not substantially 
limit one or more major life activities but that is treated by another 
person as constituting such a limitation;
    (2) Has a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits 
one or more major life activities only as a result of the attitudes of 
other toward such impairment; or
    (3) Has none of the impairments defined in paragraph (a) of this 
definition but is treated by another person as having such an 
impairment.
    Interior means the spaces, parts, components or elements of an 
individual dwelling unit.
    Modification means any change to the public or common use areas of a 
building or any change to a dwelling unit.

[[Page 553]]

    Premises means the interior or exterior spaces, parts, components or 
elements of a building, including individual dwelling units and the 
public and common use areas of a building.
    Public use areas means interior or exterior rooms or spaces of a 
building that are made available to the general public. Public use may 
be provided at a building that is privately or publicly owned.
    Site means a parcel of land bounded by a property line or a 
designated portion of a public right or way.


<R05>
Sec. 100.202  General prohibitions against discrimination because of handicap.

    (a) It shall be unlawful to discriminate in the sale or rental, or 
to otherwise make unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any buyer or renter 
because of a handicap of--
    (1) That buyer or renter;
    (2) A person residing in or intending to reside in that dwelling 
after it is so sold, rented, or made available; or
    (3) Any person associated with that person.
    (b) It shall be unlawful to discriminate against any person in the 
terms, conditions, or privileges of the sale or rental of a dwelling, or 
in the provision of services or facilities in connection with such 
dwelling, because of a handicap of--
    (1) That buyer or renter;
    (2) A person residing in or intending to reside in that dwelling 
after it is so sold, rented, or made available; or
    (3) Any person associated with that person.
    (c) It shall be unlawful to make an inquiry to determine whether an 
applicant for a dwelling, a person intending to reside in that dwelling 
after it is so sold, rented or made available, or any person associated 
with that person, has a handicap or to make inquiry as to the nature or 
severity of a handicap of such a person. However, this paragraph does 
not prohibit the following inquiries, provided these inquiries are made 
of all applicants, whether or not they have handicaps:
    (1) Inquiry into an applicant's ability to meet the requirements of 
ownership or tenancy;
    (2) Inquiry to determine whether an applicant is qualified for a 
dwelling available only to persons with handicaps or to persons with a 
particular type of handicap;
    (3) Inquiry to determine whether an applicant for a dwelling is 
qualified for a priority available to persons with handicaps or to 
persons with a particular type of handicap;
    (4) Inquiring whether an applicant for a dwelling is a current 
illegal abuser or addict of a controlled substance;
    (5) Inquiring whether an applicant has been convicted of the illegal 
manufacture or distribution of a controlled substance.
    (d) Nothing in this subpart requires that a dwelling be made 
available to an individual whose tenancy would constitute a direct 
threat to the health or safety of other individuals or whose tenancy 
would result in substantial physical damage to the property of others.


<R05>
Sec. 100.203  Reasonable modifications of existing premises.

    (a) It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to permit, at the 
expense of a handicapped person, reasonable modifications of existing 
premises, occupied or to be occupied by a handicapped person, if the 
proposed modifications may be necessary to afford the handicapped person 
full enjoyment of the premises of a dwelling. In the case of a rental, 
the landlord may, where it is reasonable to do so, condition permission 
for a modification on the renter agreeing to restore the interior of the 
premises to the condition that existed before the modification, 
reasonable wear and tear excepted. The landlord may not increase for 
handicapped persons any customarily required security deposit. However, 
where it is necessary in order to ensure with reasonable certainty that 
funds will be available to pay for the restorations at the end of the 
tenancy, the landlord may negotiate as part of such a restoration 
agreement a provision requiring that the tenant pay into an interest 
bearing escrow account, over a reasonable period, a reasonable amount of 
money not to exceed the cost of the restorations. The interest in any 
such account shall accrue to the benefit of the tenant.
    (b) A landlord may condition permission for a modification on the 
renter

[[Page 554]]

providing a reasonable description of the proposed modifications as well 
as reasonable assurances that the work will be done in a workmanlike 
manner and that any required building permits will be obtained.
    (c) The application of paragraph (a) of this section may be 
illustrated by the following examples:

    Example (1): A tenant with a handicap asks his or her landlord for 
permission to install grab bars in the bathroom at his or her own 
expense. It is necessary to reinforce the walls with blocking between 
studs in order to affix the grab bars. It is unlawful for the landlord 
to refuse to permit the tenant, at the tenant's own expense, from making 
the modifications necessary to add the grab bars. However, the landlord 
may condition permission for the modification on the tenant agreeing to 
restore the bathroom to the condition that existed before the 
modification, reasonable wear and tear excepted. It would be reasonable 
for the landlord to require the tenant to remove the grab bars at the 
end of the tenancy. The landlord may also reasonably require that the 
wall to which the grab bars are to be attached be repaired and restored 
to its original condition, reasonable wear and tear excepted. However, 
it would be unreasonable for the landlord to require the tenant to 
remove the blocking, since the reinforced walls will not interfere in 
any way with the landlord's or the next tenant's use and enjoyment of 
the premises and may be needed by some future tenant.
    Example (2): An applicant for rental housing has a child who uses a 
wheelchair. The bathroom door in the dwelling unit is too narrow to 
permit the wheelchair to pass. The applicant asks the landlord for 
permission to widen the doorway at the applicant's own expense. It is 
unlawful for the landlord to refuse to permit the applicant to make the 
modification. Further, the landlord may not, in usual circumstances, 
condition permission for the modification on the applicant paying for 
the doorway to be narrowed at the end of the lease because a wider 
doorway will not interfere with the landlord's or the next tenant's use 
and enjoyment of the premises.


<R05>
Sec. 100.204  Reasonable accommodations.

    (a) It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to make reasonable 
accommodations in rules, policies, practices, or services, when such 
accommodations may be necessary to afford a handicapped person equal 
opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling unit, including public and 
common use areas.
    (b) The application of this section may be illustrated by the 
following examples:

    Example (1): A blind applicant for rental housing wants live in a 
dwelling unit with a seeing eye dog. The building has a no pets policy. 
It is a violation of Sec. 100.204 for the owner or manager of the 
apartment complex to refuse to permit the applicant to live in the 
apartment with a seeing eye dog because, without the seeing eye dog, the 
blind person will not have an equal opportunity to use and enjoy a 
dwelling.
    Example (2): Progress Gardens is a 300 unit apartment complex with 
450 parking spaces which are available to tenants and guests of Progress 
Gardens on a first come first served basis. John applies for housing in 
Progress Gardens. John is mobility impaired and is unable to walk more 
than a short distance and therefore requests that a parking space near 
his unit be reserved for him so he will not have to walk very far to get 
to his apartment. It is a violation of Sec. 100.204 for the owner or 
manager of Progress Gardens to refuse to make this accommodation. 
Without a reserved space, John might be unable to live in Progress 
Gardens at all or, when he has to park in a space far from his unit, 
might have great difficulty getting from his car to his apartment unit. 
The accommodation therefore is necessary to afford John an equal 
opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling. The accommodation is reasonable 
because it is feasible and practical under the circumstances.


<R05>
Sec. 100.205  Design and construction requirements.

    (a) Covered multifamily dwellings for first occupancy after March 
13, 1991 shall be designed and constructed to have at least one building 
entrance on an accessible route unless it is impractical to do so 
because of the terrain or unusual characteristics of the site. For 
purposes of this section, a covered multifamily dwelling shall be deemed 
to be designed and constructed for first occupancy on or before March 
13, 1991, if the dwelling is occupied by that date, or if the last 
building permit or renewal thereof for the dwelling is issued by a 
State, County or local government on or before June 15, 1990. The burden 
of establishing impracticality because of terrain or unusual site 
characteristics is on the person or persons who designed or constructed 
the housing facility.

[[Page 555]]

    (b) The application of paragraph (a) of this section may be 
illustrated by the following examples:

    Example (1): A real estate developer plans to construct six covered 
multifamily dwelling units on a site with a hilly terrain. Because of 
the terrain, it will be necessary to climb a long and steep stairway in 
order to enter the dwellings. Since there is no practical way to provide 
an accessible route to any of the dwellings, one need not be provided.
    Example (2): A real estate developer plans to construct a building 
consisting of 10 units of multifamily housing on a waterfront site that 
floods frequently. Because of this unusual characteristic of the site, 
the builder plans to construct the building on stilts. It is customary 
for housing in the geographic area where the site is located to be built 
on stilts. The housing may lawfully be constructed on the proposed site 
on stilts even though this means that there will be no practical way to 
provide an accessible route to the building entrance.
    Example (3): A real estate developer plans to construct a 
multifamily housing facility on a particular site. The developer would 
like the facility to be built on the site to contain as many units as 
possible. Because of the configuration and terrain of the site, it is 
possible to construct a building with 105 units on the site provided the 
site does not have an accessible route leading to the building entrance. 
It is also possible to construct a building on the site with an 
accessible route leading to the building entrance. However, such a 
building would have no more than 100 dwelling units. The building to be 
constructed on the site must have a building entrance on an accessible 
route because it is not impractical to provide such an entrance because 
of the terrain or unusual characteristics of the site.

    (c) All covered multifamily dwellings for first occupancy after 
March 13, 1991 with a building entrance on an accessible route shall be 
designed and constructed in such a manner that--
    (1) The public and common use areas are readily accessible to and 
usable by handicapped persons;
    (2) All the doors designed to allow passage into and within all 
premises are sufficiently wide to allow passage by handicapped persons 
in wheelchairs; and
    (3) All premises within covered multifamily dwelling units contain 
the following features of adaptable design:
    (i) An accessible route into and through the covered dwelling unit;
    (ii) Light switches, electrical outlets, thermostats, and other 
environmental controls in accessible locations;
    (iii) Reinforcements in bathroom walls to allow later installation 
of grab bars around the toilet, tub, shower, stall and shower seat, 
where such facilities are provided; and
    (iv) Usable kitchens and bathrooms such that an individual in a 
wheelchair can maneuver about the space.
    (d) The application of paragraph (c) of this section may be 
illustrated by the following examples:

    Example (1): A developer plans to construct a 100 unit condominium 
apartment building with one elevator. In accordance with paragraph (a), 
the building has at least one accessible route leading to an accessible 
entrance. All 100 units are covered multifamily dwelling units and they 
all must be designed and constructed so that they comply with the 
accessibility requirements of paragraph (c) of this section.
    Example (2): A developer plans to construct 30 garden apartments in 
a three story building. The building will not have an elevator. The 
building will have one accessible entrance which will be on the first 
floor. Since the building does not have an elevator, only the ground 
floor units are covered multifamily units. The ground floor is the first 
floor because that is the floor that has an accessible entrance. All of 
the dwelling units on the first floor must meet the accessibility 
requirements of paragraph (c) of this section and must have access to at 
least one of each type of public or common use area available for 
residents in the building.

    (e) Compliance with the appropriate requirements of ANSI A117.1-1986 
suffices to satisfy the requirements of paragraph (c)(3) of this 
section.
    (f) Compliance with a duly enacted law of a State or unit of general 
local government that includes the requirements of paragraphs (a) and 
(c) of this section satisfies the requirements of paragraphs (a) and (c) 
of this section.
    (g)(1) It is the policy of HUD to encourage States and units of 
general local government to include, in their existing procedures for 
the review and approval of newly constructed covered multifamily 
dwellings, determinations as to whether the design and construction of 
such dwellings are consistent with paragraphs (a) and (c) of this 
section.
    (2) A State or unit of general local government may review and 
approve

[[Page 556]]

newly constructed multifamily dwellings for the purpose of making 
determinations as to whether the requirements of paragraphs (a) and (c) 
of this section are met.
    (h) Determinations of compliance or noncompliance by a State or a 
unit of general local government under paragraph (f) or (g) of this 
section are not conclusive in enforcement proceedings under the Fair 
Housing Amendments Act.
    (i) This subpart does not invalidate or limit any law of a State or 
political subdivision of a State that requires dwellings to be designed 
and constructed in a manner that affords handicapped persons greater 
access than is required by this subpart.

[54 FR 3283, Jan. 23, 1989, as amended at 56 FR 11665, Mar. 20, 1991]


<R04>
                  Subpart E--Housing for Older Persons


<R05>
Sec. 100.300  Purpose.

    The purpose of this subpart is to effectuate the exemption in the 
Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988 that relates to housing for older 
persons.


<R05>
Sec. 100.301  Exemption.

    (a) The provisions regarding familial status in this part do not 
apply to housing which satisfies the requirements of Secs. 100.302, 
100.303 or Sec. 100.304.
    (b) Nothing in this part limits the applicability of any reasonable 
local, State, or Federal restrictions regarding the maximum number of 
occupants permitted to occupy a dwelling.


<R05>
Sec. 100.302  State and Federal elderly housing programs.

    The provisions regarding familial status in this part shall not 
apply to housing provided under any Federal or State program that the 
Secretary determines is specifically designed and operated to assist 
elderly persons, as defined in the State or Federal program.


<R05>
Sec. 100.303  62 or over housing.

    (a) The provisions regarding familial status in this part shall not 
apply to housing intended for, and solely occupied by, persons 62 years 
of age or older. Housing satisfies the requirements of this section even 
though:
    (1) There are persons residing in such housing on September 13, 1988 
who are under 62 years of age, provided that all new occupants are 
persons 62 years of age or older;
    (2) There are unoccupied units, provided that such units are 
reserved for occupancy by persons 62 years of age or over;
    (3) There are units occupied by employees of the housing (and family 
members residing in the same unit) who are under 62 years of age 
provided they perform substantial duties directly related to the 
management or maintenance of the housing.
    (b) The following examples illustrate the application of paragraph 
(a) of this section:

    Example (1): John and Mary apply for housing at the Vista Heights 
apartment complex which is an elderly housing complex operated for 
persons 62 years of age or older. John is 62 years of age. Mary is 59 
years of age. If Vista Heights wishes to retain its ``62 or over'' 
exemption it must refuse to rent to John and Mary because Mary is under 
62 years of age. However, if Vista Heights does rent to John and Mary, 
it might qualify for the ``55 or over'' exemption in Sec. 100.304.
    Example (2): The Blueberry Hill retirement community has 100 
dwelling units. On September 13, 1988, 15 units were vacant and 35 units 
were occupied with at least one person who is under 62 years of age. The 
remaining 50 units were occupied by persons who were all 62 years of age 
or older. Blueberry Hill can qualify for the ``62 or over'' exemption as 
long as all units that were occupied after September 13, 1988 are 
occupied by persons who were 62 years of age or older. The people under 
62 in the 35 units previously described need not be required to leave 
for Blueberry Hill to qualify for the ``62 or over'' exemption.


<R05>
Sec. 100.304  55 or over housing.

    (a) The provisions regarding familial status shall not apply to 
housing intended and operated for occupancy by at least one person 55 
years of age or older per unit pursuant to this section.
    (b) In order to qualify as housing for older persons under this 
section, at least 80 percent of the units in the housing facility must 
be occupied by at least one person 55 years of age or older, except that 
a newly constructed housing facility for first occupancy

[[Page 557]]

after March 12, 1989, need not comply with this section until 25 percent 
of the units in the facility are occupied.
    (c) Housing satisfies the requirements of this section even though:
    (1) On September 13, 1988, under 80 percent of the occupied units in 
the housing facility are occupied by at least one person 55 years of age 
or older per unit, provided that at least 80 percent of the units that 
are occupied after September 13, 1988, are occupied by at least one 
person 55 years of age or older.
    (2) There are unoccupied units, provided that at least 80 percent of 
the occupied units are occupied by at least one person 55 years of age 
or older.
    (3) There are units occupied by employees of the housing provider 
(and family members residing in the same unit) who are under 55 years of 
age, provided the employees perform substantial duties directly related 
to the management or maintenance of the housing.

[61 FR 18249, Apr. 25, 1996]


<R04>
            Subpart F--Interference, Coercion or Intimidation


<R05>
Sec. 100.400  Prohibited interference, coercion or intimidation.

    (a) This subpart provides the Department's interpretation of the 
conduct that is unlawful under section 818 of the Fair Housing Act.
    (b) It shall be unlawful to coerce, intimidate, threaten, or 
interfere with any person in the exercise or enjoyment of, or on account 
of that person having exercised or enjoyed, or on account of that person 
having aided or encouraged any other person in the exercise or enjoyment 
of, any right granted or protected by this part.
    (c) Conduct made unlawful under this section includes, but is not 
limited to, the following:
    (1) Coercing a person, either orally, in writing, or by other means, 
to deny or limit the benefits provided that person in connection with 
the sale or rental of a dwelling or in connection with a residential 
real estate-related transaction because of race, color, religion, sex, 
handicap, familial status, or national origin.
    (2) Threatening, intimidating or interfering with persons in their 
enjoyment of a dwelling because of the race, color, religion, sex, 
handicap, familial status, or national origin of such persons, or of 
visitors or associates of such persons.
    (3) Threatening an employee or agent with dismissal or an adverse 
employment action, or taking such adverse employment action, for any 
effort to assist a person seeking access to the sale or rental of a 
dwelling or seeking access to any residential real estate-related 
transaction, because of the race, color, religion, sex, handicap, 
familial status, or national origin of that person or of any person 
associated with that person.
    (4) Intimidating or threatening any person because that person is 
engaging in activities designed to make other persons aware of, or 
encouraging such other persons to exercise, rights granted or protected 
by this part.
    (5) Retaliating against any person because that person has made a 
complaint, testified, assisted, or participated in any manner in a 
proceeding under the Fair Housing Act.


<R03>
PART 103--FAIR HOUSING--COMPLAINT PROCESSING--Table of Contents

<R05>


                   Subpart A--Purpose and Definitions

Sec.
103.1  Purpose and applicability.
103.5  Other civil rights authorities.
103.9  Definitions.

                          Subpart B--Complaints

103.10  Submission of information.
103.15  Who may file complaints.
103.20  Persons against whom complaints may be filed.
103.25  Where to file complaints.
103.30  Form and content of complaint.
103.40  Date of filing of complaint.
103.42  Amendment of complaint.
103.45  Service of notice on aggrieved person.
103.50  Notification of respondent; joinder of additional or substitute 
          respondents.
103.55  Answer to complaint.

      Subpart C--Referral of Complaints to State and Local Agencies

103.100  Notification and referral to substantially equivalent State or 
          local agencies.
103.105  Cessation of action on referred complaints.

[[Page 558]]

103.110  Reactivation of referred complaints.
103.115  Notification upon reactivation.

                   Subpart D--Investigation Procedures

103.200  Investigations.
103.205  Systemic processing.
103.215  Conduct of investigation.
103.220  Cooperation of Federal, State and local agencies.
103.225  Completion of investigation.
103.230  Final investigative report.

                   Subpart E--Conciliation Procedures

103.300  Conciliation.
103.310  Conciliation agreement.
103.315  Relief sought for aggrieved persons.
103.320  Provisions sought for the public interest.
103.325  Termination of conciliation efforts.
103.330  Prohibitions and requirements with respect to disclosure of 
          information obtained during conciliation.
103.335  Review of compliance with conciliation agreements.

                      Subpart F--Issuance of Charge

103.400  Reasonable cause determination.
103.405  Issuance of charge.
103.410  Election of civil action or provision of administrative 
          proceeding.

                    Subpart G--Prompt Judicial Action

103.500  Prompt judicial action.

                         Subpart H--Other Action

103.510  Other action by HUD.
103.515  Action by other agencies.

    Authority: 42 U.S.C. 3535(d), 3600-3619.

    Source: 54 FR 3292, Jan. 23, 1989, unless otherwise noted.


<R04>
                   Subpart A--Purpose and Definitions


<R05>
Sec. 103.1  Purpose and applicability.

    (a) This part contains the procedures established by the Department 
of Housing and Urban Development for the investigation and conciliation 
of complaints under section 810 of the Fair Housing Act, 42 U.S.C. 3610.
    (b) This part applies to:
    (1) Complaints alleging discriminatory housing practices because of 
race, color, religion, sex or national origin; and
    (2) Complaints alleging discriminatory housing practices on account 
of handicap or familial status occurring on or after March 12, 1989.
    (c) Part 180 of this chapter governs the administrative proceedings 
before an administrative law judge adjudicating charges issued under 
Sec. 103.405.
    (d) The Department will reasonably accommodate persons with 
disabilities who are participants in complaint processing.

[54 FR 3292, Jan. 23, 1989, as amended at 62 FR 66433, Dec. 18, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 103.5  Other civil rights authorities.

    In addition to the Fair Housing Act, other civil rights authorities 
may be applicable in a particular case. Thus, where a person charged 
with a discriminatory housing practice in a complaint filed under 
section 810 of the Fair Housing Act is also prohibited from engaging in 
similar practices under title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 
U.S.C. 2000d-2000d-5), section 109 of the Housing and Community 
Development Act of 1974 (42 U.S.C. 5309), Executive Order 11063 of 
November 20, 1962, on Equal Opportunity in Housing (27 FR 11527-11530, 
November 24, 1962), section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (29 
U.S.C. 794), the Age Discrimination Act (42 U.S.C. 6101) or other 
applicable law, the person may also be subject to action by HUD or other 
Federal agencies under the rules, regulations, and procedures prescribed 
under title VI (24 CFR parts 1 and 2), section 109 (24 CFR 570.602)), 
Executive Order 11063 (24 CFR part 107), section 504 (24 CFR part 8), or 
other applicable law.


<R05>
Sec. 103.9  Definitions.

    The terms Fair Housing Act, General Counsel, and HUD are defined in 
24 CFR part 5.
    Aggrieved person includes any person who:
    (a) Claims to have been injured by a discriminatory housing 
practice; or
    (b) Believes that such person will be injured by a discriminatory 
housing practice that is about to occur.
    Assistant Secretary means the Assistant Secretary for Fair Housing 
and Equal Opportunity in HUD.
    Attorney General means the Attorney General of the United States.

[[Page 559]]

    Complainant means the person (including the Assistant Secretary) who 
files a complaint under this part.
    Conciliation means the attempted resolution of issues raised by a 
complaint, or by the investigation of a complaint, through informal 
negotiations involving the aggrieved person, the respondent, and the 
Assistant Secretary.
    Conciliation agreement means a written agreement setting forth the 
resolution of the issues in conciliation.
    Discriminatory housing practice means an act that is unlawful under 
section 804, 805, 806 or 818 of the Fair Housing Act, as described in 
part 100.
    Dwelling means any building, structure, or portion thereof which is 
occupied as, or designed or intended for occupancy as, a residence by 
one or more families, or any vacant land which is offered for sale or 
lease for the construction or location thereon of any such building, 
structure, or portion thereof.
    Person includes one or more individuals, corporations, partnerships, 
associations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual 
companies, joint-stock companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, 
trustees, trustee in cases under title 11 U.S.C., receivers and 
fiduciaries.
    Personal service means handing a copy of the document to the person 
to be served or leaving a copy of the document with a person of suitable 
age and discretion at the place of business, residence or usual place of 
abode of the person to be served.
    Receipt of notice means the day that personal service is completed 
by handing or delivering a copy of the document to an appropriate person 
or the date that a document is delivered by certified mail.
    Respondent means:
    (a) The person or other entity accused in a complaint of a 
discriminatory housing practice; and
    (b) Any other person or entity identified in the course of 
investigation and notified as required under Sec. 103.50.
    State means any of the several States, the District of Columbia, the 
Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, or any of the territories and possessions 
of the United States.
    Substantially equivalent State or local agency means a State or 
local agency certified by HUD under 24 CFR part 115 (including agencies 
certified for interim referrals).
    To rent includes to lease, to sublease, to let, and otherwise to 
grant for consideration the right to occupy premises not owned by the 
occupant.

[54 FR 3292, Jan. 23, 1989, as amended at 61 FR 5205, Feb. 9, 1996]


<R04>
                          Subpart B--Complaints


<R05>
Sec. 103.10  Submission of information.

    (a) The Assistant Secretary will receive information concerning 
alleged discriminatory housing practices from any person. Where the 
information constitutes a complaint within the meaning of the Fair 
Housing Act and this part and is furnished by an aggrieved person, it 
will be considered to be filed under Sec. 103.40. Where additional 
information is required for purposes of perfecting a complaint under the 
Fair Housing Act, HUD will advise what additional information is needed 
and will provide appropriate assistance in the filing of the complaint.
    (b) HUD may also concurrently initiate compliance reviews under 
other appropriate civil rights authorities, such as E.O. 11063 on Equal 
Opportunity in Housing, title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, 
section 109 of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974, 
section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 or the Age Discrimination 
Act (42 U.S.C. 6101). The information may also be made available to any 
other Federal, State or local agency having an interest in the matter. 
In making available such information, steps will be taken to protect the 
confidentiality of any informant or complainant where desired by the 
informant or complainant.


<R05>
Sec. 103.15  Who may file complaints.

    Any aggrieved person or the Assistant Secretary may file a complaint 
no later than one year after an alleged discriminatory housing practice 
has occurred or terminated. The complaint may be filed with the 
assistance of an

[[Page 560]]

authorized representative of an aggrieved person, including any 
organization acting on behalf of an aggrieved person.


<R05>
Sec. 103.20  Persons against whom complaints may be filed.

    (a) A complaint may be filed against any person alleged to be 
engaged, to have engaged, or to be about to engage, in a discriminatory 
housing practice.
    (b) A complaint may also be filed against any person who directs or 
controls, or has the right to direct or control, the conduct of another 
person with respect to any aspect of the sale, rental, advertising or 
financing of dwellings or the provision of brokerage services relating 
to the sale or rental of dwellings if that other person, acting within 
the scope of his or her authority as employee or agent of the directing 
or controlling person, is engaged, has engaged, or is about to engage, 
in a discriminatory housing practice.


<R05>
Sec. 103.25  Where to file complaints.

    (a)(1) Aggrieved persons may file complaints in person with, or by 
mail to: Fair Housing, Department of Housing and Urban Development, 
Washington DC 20410, or any HUD Office. A list of Regional Offices (with 
addresses and areas of jurisdiction) and Field Offices (with addresses) 
is contained in an appendix to this part.
    (2) Aggrieved persons may provide information to be contained in a 
complaint by telephone to any Regional or Field Office of HUD. HUD will 
reduce information provided by telephone to writing on the prescribed 
complaint form and send the form to the aggrieved person to be signed 
and affirmed as provided in Sec. 103.30(a).
    (3) Complaints may be filed in person or by mail with any 
substantially equivalent State or local agency. Complaints filed with a 
substantially equivalent State or local agency will be considered to be 
complaints dual filed with the agency under its own law, and with HUD 
under the Fair Housing Act.
    (b) Generally, complaints will be processed through HUD's Regional 
Administrator having jurisdiction in the State in which the alleged 
discriminatory housing practice occurred. However, where a complaint has 
been identified for systemic processing under Sec. 103.205, that 
complaint may be processed in the Office of the Assistant Secretary in 
Washington, DC.


<R05>
Sec. 103.30  Form and content of complaint.

    (a) Each complaint must be in writing and must be signed and 
affirmed by the aggrieved person filing the complaint or, if the 
complaint is filed by HUD, by the Assistant Secretary. The signature and 
affirmation may be made at any time during the investigation. The 
affirmation shall state: ``I declare under penalty of perjury that the 
foregoing is true and correct.''
    (b) The Assistant Secretary may require complaints to be made on 
prescribed forms.
    (c) Each complaint must contain substantially the following 
information:
    (1) The name and address of the aggrieved person.
    (2) The name and address of the respondent.
    (3) A description and the address of the dwelling which is involved, 
if appropriate.
    (4) A concise statement of the facts, including pertinent dates, 
constituting the alleged discriminatory housing practice.

[54 FR 3292, Jan. 23, 1989, as amended at 61 FR 14379, Apr. 1, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 103.40  Date of filing of complaint.

    (a) Except as provided in paragraph (b) of this section, a complaint 
is filed when it is received by HUD, or dual filed with HUD through a 
substantially equivalent State or local agency, in a form that 
reasonably meets the standards of Sec. 103.30.
    (b) The Assistant Secretary may determine that a complaint is filed 
for the purposes of the one-year period for the filing of complaints, 
upon the submission of written information (including information 
provided by telephone and reduced to writing by an employee of HUD) 
identifying the parties and describing generally the alleged 
discriminatory housing practice.
    (c) Where a complaint alleges a discriminatory housing practice that 
is continuing, as manifested in a number

[[Page 561]]

of incidents of such conduct, the complaint will be timely if filed 
within one year of the last alleged occurrence of that practice.


<R05>
Sec. 103.42  Amendment of complaint.

    Complaints may be reasonably and fairly amended at any time. Such 
amendments may include, but are not limited to: amendments to cure 
technical defects or omissions, including failure to sign or affirm a 
complaint, to clarify or amplify the allegations in a complaint, or to 
join additional or substitute respondents. Except for the purposes of 
notifying respondents under Sec. 103.50, amended complaints will be 
considered as having been made as of the original filing date.


<R05>
Sec. 103.45  Service of notice on aggrieved person.

    Upon the filing of a complaint, the Assistant Secretary will notify, 
by certified mail or personal service, each aggrieved person on whose 
behalf the complaint was filed. The notice will:
    (a) Acknowledge the filing of the complaint and state the date that 
the complaint was accepted for filing.
    (b) Include a copy of the complaint.
    (c) Advise the aggrieved person of the time limits applicable to 
complaint processing and of the procedural rights and obligations of the 
aggrieved person under this part and part 180.
    (d) Advise the aggrieved person of his or her right to commence a 
civil action under section 813 of the Fair Housing Act in an appropriate 
United States District Court, not later than two years after the 
occurrence or termination of the alleged discriminatory housing 
practice. The notice will state that the computation of this two-year 
period excludes any time during which a proceeding is pending under this 
part or part 180 with respect to a complaint or charge based on the 
alleged discriminatory housing practice. The notice will also state that 
the time period includes the time during which an action arising from a 
breach of a conciliation agreement under section 814(b)(2) of the Fair 
Housing Act is pending.
    (e) Advise the aggrieved person that retaliation against any person 
because he or she made a complaint or testified, assisted, or 
participated in an investigation or conciliation under this part or an 
administrative proceeding under part 180, is a discriminatory housing 
practice that is prohibited under section 818 of the Fair Housing Act.

[54 FR 3292, Jan. 23, 1989, as amended at 61 FR 52218, Oct. 4, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 103.50  Notification of respondent; joinder of additional or substitute respondents.

    (a) Within ten days of the filing of a complaint under Sec. 103.40 
or the filing of an amended complaint under Sec. 103.42, the Assistant 
Secretary will serve a notice on each respondent by certified mail or by 
personal service. A person who is not named as a respondent in a 
complaint, but who is identified in the course of the investigation 
under subpart D of this part as a person who is alleged to be engaged, 
to have engaged, or to be about to engage in the discriminatory housing 
practice upon which the complaint is based may be joined as an 
additional or substitute respondent by service of a notice on the person 
under this section within ten days of the identification.
    (b)(1) The notice will identify the alleged discriminatory housing 
practice upon which the complaint is based, and include a copy of the 
complaint.
    (2) The notice will state the date that the complaint was accepted 
for filing.
    (3) The notice will advise the respondent of the time limits 
applicable to complaint processing under this part and of the procedural 
rights and obligations of the respondent under this part and part 180, 
including the opportunity to submit an answer to the complaint within 10 
days of the receipt of the notice.
    (4) The notice will advise the respondent of the aggrieved person's 
right to commence a civil action under section 813 of the Fair Housing 
Act in an appropriate United States District Court, not later than two 
years after the occurrence or termination of the alleged discriminatory 
housing practice. The notice will state that the computation of this 
two-year period excludes any time during which a proceeding is pending 
under this part or part 180 with respect to a complaint or

[[Page 562]]

charge based on the alleged discriminatory housing practice. The notice 
will also state that the time period includes the time during which an 
action arising from a breach of a conciliation agreement under section 
814(b)(2) of the Fair Housing Act is pending.
    (5) If the person is not named in the complaint, but is being joined 
as an additional or substitute respondent, the notice will explain the 
basis for the Assistant Secretary's belief that the joined person is 
properly joined as a respondent.
    (6) The notice will advise the respondent that retaliation against 
any person because he or she made a complaint or testified, assisted or 
participated in an investigation or conciliation under this part or an 
administrative proceeding under part 180, is a discriminatory housing 
practice that is prohibited under section 818 of the Fair Housing Act.

[54 FR 3292, Jan. 23, 1989, as amended at 61 FR 52218, Oct. 4, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 103.55  Answer to complaint.

    (a) The respondent may file an answer not later than ten days after 
receipt of the notice described in Sec. 103.50. The respondent may 
assert any defense that might be available to a defendent in a court of 
law. The answer must be signed and affirmed by the respondent. The 
affirmation must state: ``I declare under penalty of perjury that the 
foregoing is true and correct.''
    (b) An answer may be reasonably and fairly amended at any time with 
the consent of the Assistant Secretary.


<R04>
      Subpart C--Referral of Complaints to State and Local Agencies


<R05>
Sec. 103.100  Notification and referral to substantially equivalent State or local agencies.

    (a) Whenever a complaint alleges a discriminatory housing practice 
that is within the jurisdiction of a substantially equivalent State or 
local agency and the agency is certified or may accept interim referrals 
under 24 CFR part 115 with regard to the alleged discriminatory housing 
practice, the Assistant Secretary will notify the agency of the filing 
of the complaint and refer the complaint to the agency for further 
processing before HUD takes any action with respect to the complaint. 
The Assistant Secretary will notify the State or local agency of the 
referral by certified mail.
    (b) The Assistant Secretary will notify the aggrieved person and the 
respondent, by certified mail or personal service, of the notification 
and referral under paragraph (a) of this section. The notice will advise 
the aggrieved person and the respondent of the aggrieved person's right 
to commence a civil action under section 813 of the Fair Housing Act in 
an appropriate United States District Court, not later than two years 
after the occurrence or termination of the alleged discriminatory 
housing practice. The notice will state that the computation of this 
two-year period excludes any time during which a proceeding is pending 
under this part or part 180 with respect to complaint or charge based on 
the alleged discriminatory housing practice. The notice will also state 
that the time period includes the time during which an action arising 
from a breach of a conciliation agreement under section 814(b)(2) of the 
Fair Housing Act is pending.

[54 FR 3292, Jan. 23, 1989, as amended at 61 FR 52218, Oct. 4, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 103.105  Cessation of action on referred complaints.

    A referral under Sec. 103.100 does not prohibit the Assistant 
Secretary from taking appropriate action to review or investigate 
matters in the complaint that raise issues cognizable under other civil 
rights authorities applicable to departmental programs (see Sec. 103.5).

[54 FR 3292, Jan. 23, 1989, as amended at 61 FR 14379, Apr. 1, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 103.110  Reactivation of referred complaints.

    The Assistant Secretary may reactivate a complaint referred under 
Sec. 103.100 for processing by HUD if:
    (a) The substantially equivalent State or local agency consents or 
requests the reactivation;
    (b) The Assistant Secretary determines that, with respect to the 
alleged discriminatory housing practice, the agency no longer qualifies 
for certification as a substantially equivalent

[[Page 563]]

State or local agency and may not accept interim referrals; or
    (c) The substantially equivalent State or local agency has failed to 
commence proceedings with respect to the complaint within 30 days of the 
date that it received the notification and referral of the complaint; or 
the agency commenced proceedings within this 30-day period, but the 
Assistant Secretary determines that the agency has failed to carry the 
proceedings forward with reasonable promptness.

[54 FR 3292, Jan. 23, 1989, as amended at 61 FR 14379, Apr. 1, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 103.115  Notification upon reactivation.

    (a) Whenever a complaint referred to a State or local fair housing 
agency under Sec. 103.100 is reactivated under Sec. 103.110, the 
Assistant Secretary will notify the substantially equivalent State or 
local agency, the aggrieved person and the respondent of HUD's 
reactivation. The notification will be made by certified mail or 
personal service.
    (b) The notification to the respondent and the aggrieved person 
will:
    (1) Advise the aggrieved person and the respondent of the time 
limits applicable to complaint processing and the procedural rights and 
obligations of the aggrieved person and the respondent under this part 
and part 180.
    (2) State that HUD will process the complaint under the Fair Housing 
Act and that the State or local agency to which the complaint was 
referred may continue to process the complaint under State or local law.
    (3) Advise the aggrieved person and the respondent of the aggrieved 
person's right to commence a civil action under section 813 of the Fair 
Housing Act in an appropriate United States District Court, not later 
than two years after the occurrence or termination of the alleged 
discriminatory housing practice. The notice will state that the 
computation of this two-year period excludes any time during which a 
proceeding is pending under this part or part 180 with respect to a 
complaint or charge based on the alleged discriminatory housing practice 
under part 180. The notices will also state that the time period 
includes the time during which an action arising from a breach of 
conciliation agreement under section 814(b)(2) of the Fair Housing Act 
is pending.

[54 FR 3292, Jan. 23, 1989, as amended at 61 FR 52218, Oct. 4, 1996]


<R04>
                   Subpart D--Investigation Procedures


<R05>
Sec. 103.200  Investigations.

    (a) Upon the filing of a complaint under Sec. 103.40, the Assistant 
Secretary will initiate an investigation. The purposes of an 
investigation are:
    (1) To obtain information concerning the events or transactions that 
relate to the alleged discriminatory housing practice identified in the 
complaint.
    (2) To document policies or practices of the respondent involved in 
the alleged discriminatory housing practice raised in the complaint.
    (3) To develop factual data necessary for the General Counsel to 
make a determination under Sec. 103.400 whether reasonable cause exists 
to believe that a discriminatory housing practice has occurred or is 
about to occur, and for the Assistant Secretary to make a determination 
under Sec. 103.400 that no reasonable cause exists to believe that a 
discriminatory housing practice has occurred or is about to occur, and 
to take other actions provided under this part.
    (b) Upon the written direction of the Assistant Secretary, HUD may 
initate an investigation of housing practices to determine whether a 
complaint should be filed under subpart B of this part. Such 
investigations will be conducted in accordance with the procedures 
described under this subpart.

[54 FR 3292, Jan. 23, 1989, as amended at 55 FR 53293, Dec. 28, 1990, 57 
FR 39116, Aug. 28, 1992]


<R05>
Sec. 103.205  Systemic processing.

    Where the Assistant Secretary determines that the alleged 
discriminatory practices contained in a complaint are pervasive or 
institutional in nature, or that the processing of the complaint will 
involve complex issues, novel questions of fact or law, or will affect a 
large number of persons, the Assistant Secretary may identify the 
complaint

[[Page 564]]

for systemic processing. This determination can be based on the face of 
the complaint or on information gathered in connection with an 
investigation. Systemic investigations may focus not only on documenting 
facts involved in the alleged discriminatory housing practice that is 
the subject of the complaint but also on review of other policies and 
procedures related to matters under investigation, to make sure that 
they also comply with the nondiscrimination requirements of the Fair 
Housing Act.


<R05>
Sec. 103.215  Conduct of investigation.

    (a) In conducting investigations under this part, the Assistant 
Secretary will seek the voluntary cooperation of all persons to obtain 
access to premises, records, documents, individuals, and other possible 
sources of information; to examine, record, and copy necessary 
materials; and to take and record testimony or statements of persons 
reasonably necessary for the furtherance of the investigation.
    (b) The Assistant Secretary may conduct and order discovery in aid 
of the investigation by the same methods and to the same extent that 
discovery may be ordered in an administrative proceeding under 24 CFR 
part 180, except that the Assistant Secretary shall have the power to 
issue subpoenas described in 24 CFR 180.545 in support of the 
investigation. Subpoenas issued by the Assistant Secretary must be 
approved by the General Counsel as to their legality before issuance.

[54 FR 3292, Jan. 23, 1989, as amended at 61 FR 41482, Aug. 8, 1996; 61 
FR 52218, Oct. 4, 1996; 62 FR 66433, Dec. 18, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 103.220  Cooperation of Federal, State and local agencies.

    The Assistant Secretary, in processing Fair Housing Act complaints, 
may seek the cooperation and utilize the services of Federal, State or 
local agencies, including any agency having regulatory or supervisory 
authority over financial institutions.


<R05>
Sec. 103.225  Completion of investigation.

    The investigation will remain open until a determination is made 
under Sec. 103.400, or a conciliation agreement is executed and approved 
under Sec. 103.310. Unless it is impracticable to do so, the Assistant 
Secretary will complete the investigation of the alleged discriminatory 
housing practice within 100 days of the filing of the complaint (or 
where the Assistant Secretary reactivates the complaint, within 100 days 
after service of the notice of reactivation under Sec. 103.115). If the 
Assistant Secretary is unable to complete the investigation within the 
100-day period, HUD will notify the aggrieved person and the respondent, 
by mail, of the reasons for the delay.

[61 FR 14380, Apr. 1, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 103.230  Final investigative report.

    (a) At the end of each investigation under this part, the Assistant 
Secretary will prepare a final investigative report. The investigative 
report will contain:
    (1) The names and dates of contacts with witnesses, except that the 
report will not disclose the names of witnesses that request anonymity. 
HUD, however, may be required to disclose the names of such witnesses in 
the course of an administrative hearing under part 180 of this chapter 
or a civil action under title VIII of the Fair Housing Act;
    (2) A summary and the dates of correspondence and other contacts 
with the aggrieved person and the respondent;
    (3) A summary description of other pertinent records;
    (4) A summary of witness statements; and
    (5) Answers to interrogatories.
    (b) A final investigative report may be amended at any time, if 
additional evidence is discovered.
    (c) Notwithstanding the prohibitions and requirements with respect 
to disclosure of information contained in Sec. 103.330, the Assistant 
Secretary will make information derived from an investigation, including 
the final investigative report, available to the aggrieved person and 
the respondent. Following the completion of investigation, the Assistant 
Secretary shall notify the aggrieved person and the respondent that the 
final investigation report

[[Page 565]]

is complete and will be provided upon request.

[54 FR 3292, Jan. 23, 1989, as amended at 62 FR 66433, Dec. 18, 1997]


<R04>
                   Subpart E--Conciliation Procedures


<R05>
Sec. 103.300  Conciliation.

    (a) During the period beginning with the filing of the complaint and 
ending with the filing of a charge or the dismissal of the complaint by 
the General Counsel or the Assistant Secretary, the Assistant Secretary 
will, to the extent feasible, attempt to conciliate the complaint.
    (b) In conciliating a complaint, HUD will attempt to achieve a just 
resolution of the complaint and to obtain assurances that the respondent 
will satisfactorily remedy any violations of the rights of the aggrieved 
person, and take such action as will assure the elimination of 
discriminatory housing practices, or the prevention of their occurrence, 
in the future.
    (c) Generally, officers, employees, and agents of HUD engaged in the 
investigation of a complaint under this part will not participate or 
advise in the conciliation of the same complaint or in any factually 
related complaint. Where the rights of the aggrieved party and the 
respondent can be protected and the prohibitions with respect to the 
disclosure of information can be observed, the investigator may suspend 
fact finding and engage in efforts to resolve the complaint by 
conciliation.

[54 FR 3292, Jan. 23, 1989, as amended at 55 FR 53294, Dec. 28, 1990]


<R05>
Sec. 103.310  Conciliation agreement.

    (a) The terms of a settlement of a complaint will be reduced to a 
written conciliation agreement. The conciliation agreement shall seek to 
protect the interests of the aggrieved person, other persons similarly 
situated, and the public interest. The types of relief that may be 
sought for the aggrieved person are described in Sec. 103.315. The 
provisions that may be sought for the vindication of the public interest 
are described in Sec. 103.320.
    (b)(1) The agreement must be executed by the respondent and the 
complainant. The agreement is subject to the approval of the Assistant 
Secretary, who will indicate approval by signing the agreement. The 
Assistant Secretary will approve an agreement and, if the Assistant 
Secretary is the complainant, will execute the agreement, only if:
    (i) The complainant and the respondent agree to the relief accorded 
the aggrieved person;
    (ii) The provisions of the agreement will adequately vindicate the 
public interest; and
    (iii) If the Assistant Secretary is the complainant, all aggrieved 
persons named in the complaint are satisfied with the relief provided to 
protect their interests.
    (2) The General Counsel may issue a charge under Sec. 103.405 if the 
aggrieved person and the respondent have executed a conciliation 
agreement that has not been approved by the Assistant Secretary.


<R05>
Sec. 103.315  Relief sought for aggrieved persons.

    (a) The following types of relief may be sought for aggrieved 
persons in conciliation:
    (1) Monetary relief in the form of damages, including damages caused 
by humiliation or embarrassment, and attorney fees;
    (2) Other equitable relief including, but not limited to, access to 
the dwelling at issue, or to a comparable dwelling, the provision of 
services or facilities in connection with a dwelling, or other specific 
relief; or
    (3) Injunctive relief appropriate to the elimination of 
discriminatory housing practices affecting the aggrieved person or other 
persons.
    (b) The conciliation agreement may provide for binding arbitration 
of the dispute arising from the complaint. Arbitration may award 
appropriate relief as described in paragraph (a) of this section. The 
aggrieved person and the respondent may, in the conciliation agreement, 
limit the types of relief that may be awarded under binding arbitration.

[[Page 566]]


<R05>
Sec. 103.320  Provisions sought for the public interest.

    The following are types of provisions may be sought for the 
vindication of the public interest:
    (a) Elimination of discriminatory housing practices.
    (b) Prevention of future discriminatory housing practices.
    (c) Remedial affirmative activities to overcome discriminatory 
housing practices.
    (d) Reporting requirements.
    (e) Monitoring and enforcement activities.


<R05>
Sec. 103.325  Termination of conciliation efforts.

    (a) HUD may terminate its efforts to conciliate the complaint if the 
respondent fails or refuses to confer with HUD; the aggrieved person or 
the respondent fail to make a good faith effort to resolve any dispute; 
or HUD finds, for any reason, that voluntary agreement is not likely to 
result.
    (b) Where the aggrieved person has commenced a civil action under an 
Act of Congress or a State law seeking relief with respect to the 
alleged discriminatory housing practice, and the trial in the action has 
commenced, HUD will terminate conciliation unless the court specifically 
requests assistance from the Assistant Secretary.


<R05>
Sec. 103.330  Prohibitions and requirements with respect to disclosure of information obtained during conciliation.

    (a) Except as provided in paragraph (b) of this section and 
Sec. 103.230(c), nothing that is said or done in the course of 
conciliation under this part may be made public or used as evidence in a 
subsequent administrative hearing under part 180 or in civil actions 
under title VIII of the Fair Housing Act, without the written consent of 
the persons concerned.
    (b) Conciliation agreements shall be made public, unless the 
aggrieved person and respondent request nondisclosure and the Assistant 
Secretary determines that disclosure is not required to further the 
purposes of the Fair Housing Act. Notwithstanding a determination that 
disclosure of a conciliation agreement is not required, the Assistant 
Secretary may publish tabulated descriptions of the results of all 
conciliation efforts.

[54 FR 3292, Jan. 23, 1989, as amended at 61 FR 52218, Oct. 4, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 103.335  Review of compliance with conciliation agreements.

    HUD may, from time to time, review compliance with the terms of any 
conciliation agreement. Whenever HUD has reasonable cause to believe 
that a respondent has breached a conciliation agreement, the Assistant 
Secretary shall refer the matter to the Attorney General with a 
recommendation for the filing of a civil action under section 814(b)(2) 
of the Fair Housing Act for the enforcement of the terms of the 
conciliation agreement.

[54 FR 3292, Jan. 23, 1989, as amended at 59 FR 39956, Aug. 5, 1994]


<R04>
                      Subpart F--Issuance of Charge


<R05>
Sec. 103.400  Reasonable cause determination.

    (a) If a conciliation agreement under Sec. 103.310 has not been 
executed by the complainant and the respondent and approved by the 
Assistant Secretary, the Assistant Secretary shall conduct a review of 
the factual circumstances revealed as part of HUD's investigation.
    (1) If the Assistant Secretary for Fair Housing and Equal 
Opportunity determines that, based on the totality of factual 
circumstances known at the time of the Assistant Secretary's review, no 
reasonable cause exists to believe that a discriminatory housing 
practice has occurred or is about to occur, the Assistant Secretary 
shall: Issue a short and plain written statement of the facts upon which 
the Assistant Secretary has based the no reasonable cause determination; 
dismiss the complaint; notify the aggrieved person and the respondent of 
the dismissal (including the written statement of facts) by mail; and 
make public disclosure of the dismissal. The respondent may request that 
no public disclosure be made. Notwithstanding such a request, the fact 
of dismissal, including the names of the parties, shall be public 
information available on request. The Assistant Secretary's

[[Page 567]]

determination shall be based solely upon the facts concerning the 
alleged discriminatory housing practice provided by complainant and 
respondent and otherwise disclosed during the investigation. In making 
this determination, the Assistant Secretary shall consider whether the 
facts concerning the alleged discriminatory housing practice are 
sufficient to warrant the initiation of a civil action in federal court.
    (2) If, based on the totality of the factual circumstances known at 
the time of the decision, the Assistant Secretary believes that 
reasonable cause may exist to believe that a discriminatory housing 
practice has occurred or is about to occur, the Assistant Secretary 
shall determine that reasonable cause exists to believe that a 
discriminatory housing practice has occurred or is about to occur, in 
all cases not involving the legality of local land use laws or 
ordinances (except as provided in paragraph (b) of this section). The 
Assistant Secretary's determination shall be based solely on the facts 
concerning the alleged discriminatory housing practices provided by 
complainants and respondents and otherwise identified during the 
investigation in making this determination. In making this 
determination, the Assistant Secretary shall consider whether the facts 
concerning the alleged discriminatory housing practice are sufficient to 
warrant the initiation of a civil action in federal court.
    (i) If the Assistant Secretary determines that reasonable cause 
exists, the Assistant Secretary, upon receipt of concurrence of the 
General Counsel, will issue such determination and direct the issuance 
of a charge under Sec. 103.405 on behalf of the aggrieved person, and 
shall notify the complainant and the respondent of this determination by 
certified mail or personal service.
    (ii) If the Assistant Secretary determines that no reasonable cause 
exists, the Assistant Secretary shall: Issue a short and plain written 
statement of the facts upon which the Assistant Secretary has based the 
no reasonable cause determination; dismiss the complaint; notify the 
complainant and the respondent of the dismissal (including the written 
statement of facts) by mail; and make public disclosure of the 
dismissal. The complainant or respondent may request that no public 
disclosure be made. Notwithstanding such a request, the fact of 
dismissal, including the names of the parties, shall be public 
information available on request.
    (3) If the Assistant Secretary determines that the matter involves 
the legality of local zoning or land use laws or ordinances, the 
Assistant Secretary, in lieu of making a determination regarding 
reasonable cause, shall refer the investigative material to the Attorney 
General for appropriate action under section 814(b)(1) of the Fair 
Housing Act, and shall notify the complainant and the respondent of this 
action by mail or personal service.
    (b) The Assistant Secretary may not issue a charge under paragraph 
(a) of this section regarding an alleged discriminatory housing 
practice, if an aggrieved person has commenced a civil action under an 
Act of Congress or a state law seeking relief with respect to the 
alleged housing practice and the trial in the action has commenced. If a 
charge may not be issued because of the commencement of such a trial, 
the Assistant Secretary shall so notify the complainant and the 
respondent by certified mail or personal service.
    (c)(1) A determination of reasonable cause or no reasonable cause by 
the Assistant Secretary shall be made within 100 days after filing of 
the complaint (or where the Assistant Secretary has reactivated a 
complaint, within 100 days after service of the notice of reactivation 
under Sec. 103.115), unless it is impracticable to do so.
    (2) If the Assistant Secretary is unable to make the determination 
within the 100-day period specified in paragraph (c)(1) of this section, 
the Assistant Secretary will notify the complainant and the respondent 
by mail of the reasons for the delay.

[55 FR 53294, Dec. 28, 1990, as amended at 57 FR 18398, Apr. 30, 1992; 
59 FR 39956, Aug. 5, 1994; 59 FR 46759, Sept. 12, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 103.405  Issuance of charge.

    (a) A charge:
    (1) Shall consist of a short and plain written statement of the 
facts upon which the Assistant Secretary has found reasonable cause to 
believe that

[[Page 568]]

a discriminatory housing practice has occurred or is about to occur;
    (2) Shall be based on the final investigative report; and
    (3) Need not be limited to facts or grounds that are alleged in the 
complaint filed under subpart B of this part. If the charge is based on 
grounds that are not alleged in the complaint, HUD will not issue a 
charge with regard to the grounds unless the record of investigation 
demonstrates that the respondent has been given notice and an 
opportunity to respond to the allegation.
    (b) Within three business days after the issuance of the charge, the 
General Counsel shall:
    (1) Obtain a time and place for hearing from the Chief Docket Clerk 
of the Office of Administrative Law Judges;
    (2) File the charge along with the notifications described in 24 CFR 
180.410(b) with the Office of Administrative Law Judges;
    (3) Serve the charge and notifications in accordance with 24 CFR 
180.410(a); and
    (4) Notify the Assistant Secretary of the filing of the charge.

[54 FR 3292, Jan. 23, 1989, as amended at 56 FR 55078, Oct. 24, 1991; 59 
FR 39956, Aug. 5, 1994; 59 FR 46759, Sept. 12, 1994; 60 FR 58452, Nov. 
27, 1995; 62 FR 66433, Dec. 18, 1997]

    Editorial Note: At 61 FR 52218, Oct. 4, 1996, Sec. 103.405 was 
amended by replacing all references to ``Part 104'' with ``Part 180'', 
however, no references to ``Part 104'' exist in the 1996 edition.


<R05>
Sec. 103.410  Election of civil action or provision of administrative proceeding.

    (a) If a charge is issued under Sec. 103.405, a complainant 
(including the Assistant Secretary, if HUD filed the complaint), a 
respondent, or an aggrieved person on whose behalf the complaint is 
filed may elect, in lieu of an administrative proceeding under 24 CFR 
part 180, to have the claims asserted in the charge decided in a civil 
action under section 812(o) of the Fair Housing Act.
    (b) The election must be made not later than 20 says after the 
receipt of service of the charge, or in the case of the Assistant 
Secretary, not later than 20 days after service. The notice of the 
election must be filed with the Chief Docket Clerk in the Office of 
Administrative Law Judges and served on the General Counsel, the 
Assistant Secretary, the respondent, and the aggrieved persons on whose 
behalf the complaint was filed. The notification will be filed and 
served in accordance with the procedures established under 24 CFR part 
180.
    (c) If an election is not made under this section, the General 
Counsel will maintain an administrative proceeding based on the charge 
in accordance with the procedures under 24 CFR part 180.
    (d) If an election is made under this section, the General Counsel 
shall immediately notify and authorize the Attorney General to commence 
and maintain a civil action seeking relief under section 812(o) of the 
Fair Housing Act on behalf of the aggrieved person in an appropriate 
United States District Court. Such notification and authorization shall 
include transmission of the file in the case, including a copy of the 
final investigative report and the charge, to the Attorney General.
    (e) The General Counsel shall be available for consultation 
concerning any legal issues raised by the Attorney General as to how 
best to proceed in the event that a new court decision or newly 
discovered evidence is regarded as relevant to the reasonable cause 
determination.

[54 FR 3292, Jan. 23, 1989, as amended at 61 FR 52218, Oct. 4, 1996]


<R04>
                    Subpart G--Prompt Judicial Action


<R05>
Sec. 103.500  Prompt judicial action.

    (a) If at any time following the filing of a complaint, the General 
Counsel concludes that prompt judicial action is necessary to carry out 
the purposes of this part or 24 CFR part 180, the General Counsel may 
authorize the Attorney General to commence a civil action for 
appropriate temporary or preliminary relief pending final disposition of 
the complaint. To ensure the prompt initiation of the civil action, the 
General Counsel will consult with the Assistant Attorney General for the 
Civil Rights Division before making the determination that prompt 
judicial

[[Page 569]]

action is necessary. The commencement of a civil action by the Attorney 
General under this section will not affect the initiation or 
continuation of proceedings under this part or administrative 
proceedings under part 180.
    (b) If the General Counsel has reason to believe that a basis exists 
for the commencement of proceedings against the respondent under section 
814(a) of the Fair Housing Act (Pattern or Practice Cases), proceedings 
under section 814(c) of the Fair Housing Act (Enforcement of Subpoenas), 
or proceedings by any governmental licensing or supervisory authorities, 
the General Counsel shall transmit the information upon which that 
belief is based to the Attorney General and to other appropriate 
authorities.

[54 FR 3292, Jan. 23, 1989, as amended at 61 FR 52218, Oct. 4, 1996]


<R04>
                         Subpart H--Other Action


<R05>
Sec. 103.510  Other action by HUD.

    In addition to the actions described in Sec. 103.500, HUD may pursue 
one or more of the following courses of action:
    (a) Refer the matter to the Attorney General for appropriate action 
(e.g., enforcement of criminal penalties under section 811(c) of the 
Act).
    (b) Take appropriate steps to initiate proceedings leading to the 
debarment of the respondent under 24 CFR part 24, or initiate other 
actions leading to the imposition of administrative sanctions where HUD 
determines that such actions are necessary to the effective operation 
and administration of Federal programs or activities.
    (c) Take appropriate steps to initiate proceedings under:
    (1) 24 CFR part 1, implementing title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 
1964;
    (2) 24 CFR 570.912, implementing section 109 of the Housing and 
Community Development Act of 1974;
    (3) 24 CFR part 8, implementing section 504 of the Rehabilitation 
Act of 1973;
    (4) 24 CFR part 107, implementing Executive Order 11063; or
    (5) The Age Discrimination Act, 42 U.S.C. 6101.
    (d) Inform any other Federal, State or local agency with an interest 
in the enforcement of respondent's obligations with respect to 
nondiscrimination in housing.


<R05>
Sec. 103.515  Action by other agencies.

    In accordance with section 808 (d) and (e) of the Fair Housing Act 
and Executive Order No. 12259, other Federal agencies, including any 
agency having regulatory or supervisory authority over financial 
institutions, are responsible for ensuring that their programs and 
activities relating to housing and urban development are administered in 
a manner affirmatively to further the goal of fair housing, and for 
cooperating with the Assistant Secretary in furthering the purposes of 
the Fair Housing Act.

                           PART 105 [RESERVED]


<R03>
PART 107--NONDISCRIMINATION AND EQUAL OPPORTUNITY IN HOUSING UNDER EXECUTIVE ORDER 11063--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
107.10  Purpose.
107.11  Relation to other authorities.
107.15  Definitions.
107.20  Prohibition against discriminatory practices.
107.21  Prevention of discriminatory practices.
107.25  Provisions in legal instruments.
107.30  Recordkeeping requirements.
107.35  Complaints.
107.40  Compliance meeting.
107.45  Resolution of matters.
107.50  Compliance reviews.
107.51  Findings of noncompliance.
107.55  Compliance report.
107.60  Sanctions and penalties.
107.65  Referral to the Attorney General.

    Authority: 42 U.S.C. 3535(d); E.O. 11063, 27 FR 11527, 3 CFR, 1958-
1963 Comp., p. 652; E.O. 12892, 59 FR 2939, 3 CFR, 1994 Comp., p. 849.

    Source: 45 FR 59514, Sept. 9, 1980, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 107.10  Purpose.

    These regulations are to carry out the requirements of E.O. 11063 
that all action necessary and appropriate be taken to prevent 
discrimination because of race, color, religion (creed), sex or national 
origin in the sale, rental, leasing or other disposition of residential 
property and related facilities or in the use or occupancy thereof

[[Page 570]]

where such property or facilities are owned or operated by the Federal 
Government, or provided with Federal assistance by the Department of 
Housing and Urban Development and in the lending practices with respect 
to residential property and related facilities of lending institutions 
insofar as such practices relate to loans insured, guaranteed or 
purchased by the Department. These regulations are intended to assure 
compliance with the established policy of the United States that the 
benefits under programs and activities of the Department which provide 
financial assistance, directly or indirectly, for the provision, 
rehabilitation, or operation of housing and related facilities are made 
available without discrimination based on race, color, religion (creed), 
sex or national origin. These regulations are also intended to assure 
compliance with the policy of this Department to administer its housing 
programs affirmatively, so as to achieve a condition in which 
individuals of similar income levels in the same housing market area 
have a like range of housing choices available to them regardless of 
their race, color, religion (creed), sex or national origin.

[45 FR 59514, Sept. 9, 1980, as amended at 50 FR 31360, Aug. 2, 1985]


<R05>
Sec. 107.11  Relation to other authorities.

    (a) Where allegations of discrimination on the grounds of race, 
color, or national origin are made in a program or activity of Federal 
financial assistance of the Department which does not involve a contract 
of insurance or guaranty, the provisions of title VI of the Civil Rights 
Act of 1964 and regulations implementing title VI, Nondiscrimination in 
Federally Assisted Programs, under part 1 of this title shall apply. Any 
complaint alleging discrimination on the basis of race, color, religion 
(creed), sex or national origin in a program or activity of the 
Department involving a contract of insurance or guaranty will be 
received and processed according to this part.
    (b) Where a complaint filed pursuant to this part alleges a 
discriminatory housing practice which is also covered by title VIII of 
the Civil Rights Act of 1968, the complainant shall be advised of the 
right to file a complaint pursuant to section 810 of that title and of 
the availability of Department procedures regarding fair housing 
complaints under part 105 of this title. The complainant shall also be 
advised of the right to initiate a civil action in court pursuant to 
section 812 of the Civil Rights Act of 1968 without first filing a 
complaint with HUD.

[45 FR 59514, Sept. 9, 1980, as amended at 50 FR 31360, Aug. 2, 1985]


<R05>
Sec. 107.15  Definitions.

    (a) Department and Secretary are defined in 24 CFR part 5.
    (b) State means each of the fifty states, the District of Columbia, 
the Commonwealths of Puerto Rico and the Northern Marianas, and the 
territories of the United States.
    (c) Assistance includes (1) grants, loans, contributions, and 
advances of Federal funds; (2) the grant or donation of Federal property 
and interests in property; (3) the sale, lease, and rental of, and the 
permission to use (on other than a casual or transient basis), Federal 
property or any interest in such property without consideration or at a 
nominal consideration or at a consideration which is reduced for the 
purpose of assisting the recipient or in recognition of the public 
interest to be served by such sale or lease to the recipient, when such 
order granting permission accompanies the sale, lease, or rental of 
Federal properties; (4) loans in whole or in part insured, guaranteed, 
or otherwise secured by the credit of the Federal Government; and (5) 
any Federal agreement, arrangement, or other contract which has as one 
of its purposes the provision of assistance.
    (d) Person includes one or more individuals, corporations, 
partnerships, associations, labor organizations, legal representatives 
or agents, mutual companies, joint-stock companies, trusts, 
unincorporated organizations, trustees, trustees in bankruptcy, 
receivers, fiduciaries and public entities.
    (e) Public entity means a government or governmental subdivision or 
agency.
    (f) Discriminatory practice means: (1) Any discrimination on the 
basis of race, color, religion (creed), sex or national origin or the 
existence or use of

[[Page 571]]

a policy or practice, or any arrangement, criterion or other method of 
administration which has the effect of denying equal housing opportunity 
or which substantially impairs the ability of persons to apply for or 
receive the benefits of assistance because of race, color, religion 
(creed), sex or national origin, in the sale, rental or other 
disposition of residential property or related facilities (including 
land to be developed for residential use), or in the use or occupancy 
thereof, where such property or related facilities are:
    (i) Owned or operated by the Secretary;
    (ii) Provided in whole or in part with the aid of loans, advances, 
grants, or contributions agreed to be made by the Department after 
November 20, 1962;
    (iii) Provided in whole or in part by loans insured, guaranteed or 
otherwise secured by the credit of the Department after November 20, 
1962; or
    (iv) Provided by the development or the redevelopment of real 
property purchased, leased, or otherwise obtained from a State or local 
public agency or unit of general purpose local government receiving 
Federal financial assistance from the Department under a loan or grant 
contract entered into after November 20, 1962.
    (2) Any discrimination on the basis of race, color, religion 
(creed), sex or national origin or the existence or use of a policy, 
practice, or any arrangement, criterion or other method of 
administration which has the effect of denying equal housing opportunity 
or which substantially impairs the ability of persons to apply for or 
receive the benefits of assistance because of race, color, religion 
(creed), sex or national origin in lending practices with respect to 
residential property and related facilities (including land to be 
developed for residential use) of lending institutions, insofar as such 
practices relate to loans, insured or guaranteed, by the Department 
after November 20, 1962. Examples of discriminatory practices under 
subsections (1) and (2) include but are not limited to the following 
when based on race, color, religion (creed), sex or national origin:
    (i) Denial to a person of any housing accommodations, facilities, 
services, financial aid, financing or other benefit provided under a 
program or activity;
    (ii) Providing any housing accommodations, facilities, services, 
financial aid, financing or other benefits to a person which are 
different, or are provided in a different manner, from those provided to 
others in a program or activity;
    (iii) Subjecting a person to segregation or separate treatment in 
any matter related to the receipt of housing, accommodations, 
facilities, services, financial aid, financing or other benefits under a 
program or activity;
    (iv) Restricting a person in any way in access to housing, 
accommodations, facilities, services, financial aid, financing or other 
benefits, or in the enjoyment of any advantage or privilege enjoyed by 
others in connection with such housing, accommodations, facilities, 
services, financial aid, or other benefits under a program or activity;
    (v) Treating persons differently in determining whether they satisfy 
any occupancy, admission, enrollment, eligibility, membership, or other 
requirement or condition which persons must meet in order to be provided 
any housing, accommodations, facilities, services, financial aid, 
financing or other benefits under a program or activity; and
    (vi) Denying a person opportunity to participate in a program or 
activity through the provision of services or otherwise, or affording 
the person an opportunity to do so which is different from that afforded 
others in a program or activity.
    (3) Noncompliance with relevant affirmative fair housing marketing 
requirements contained in Department programs and regulations.
    (4) A formal finding of a violation of title VIII of the Civil 
Rights Act of 1968 or a state or local fair housing law with respect to 
activities also covered by E.O. 11063.

[45 FR 59514, Sept. 9, 1980, as amended at 50 FR 31360, Aug. 2, 1985; 61 
FR 5205, Feb. 9, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 107.20  Prohibition against discriminatory practices.

    (a) No person receiving assistance from or participating in any 
program

[[Page 572]]

or activity of the Department involving housing and related facilities 
shall engage in a discriminatory practice.
    (b) Where such person has been found by the Department or any other 
Federal Department, agency, or court to have previously discriminated 
against persons on the ground of race, color, religion (creed), sex or 
national origin, he or she must take affirmative action to overcome the 
effects of prior discrimination.
    (c) Nothing in this part precludes such person from taking 
affirmative action to prevent discrimination in housing or related 
facilities where the purpose of such action is to overcome prior 
discriminatory practice or usage or to overcome the effects of 
conditions which resulted in limiting participation by persons of a 
particular race, color, religion (creed), sex or national origin.

[45 FR 59514, Sept. 9, 1980, as amended at 50 FR 31360, Aug. 2, 1985]


<R05>
Sec. 107.21  Prevention of discriminatory practices.

    All persons receiving assistance from, or participating in any 
program or activity of the Department involving housing and related 
facilities shall take all action necessary and proper to prevent 
discrimination on the basis of race, color, religion (creed), sex or 
national origin.

[45 FR 59514, Sept. 9, 1980, as amended at 50 FR 31360, Aug. 2, 1985]


<R05>
Sec. 107.25  Provisions in legal instruments.

    (a) The following documents shall contain provisions or statements 
requiring compliance with E.O. 11063 and this part:
    (1) Contracts, grants and agreements providing Departmental 
assistance for the provision of housing and related facilities,
    (2) Contracts, grants and agreements regarding the sale, rental or 
management of properties owned by the Secretary,
    (3) Corporate charters and regulatory agreements relating to 
multifamily and land development projects assisted by the Department,
    (4) Approvals of financial institutions and other lenders as 
approved FHA mortgagees,
    (5) Requests for subdivision reports under home mortgage procedures 
and for preapplication analysis of multifamily and land development 
projects, and
    (6) Contracts and agreements providing for Departmental insurance or 
guarantee of loans with respect to housing and related facilities.
    (b) The provision or statement required pursuant to this section 
shall indicate that the failure or refusal to comply with the 
requirments of E.O. 11063 or this part shall be a proper basis for the 
imposition of sanctions provided in Sec. 107.60.


<R05>
Sec. 107.30  Recordkeeping requirements.

    (a) All persons receiving assistance through any program or activity 
of the Department involving the provision of housing and related 
activities subject to Executive Order 11063 shall maintain racial, 
religious, national origin and sex data required by the Department in 
connection with its programs and activities.
    (b) All lenders participating in Departmental mortgage insurance 
programs, home improvement loan programs, GNMA mortgage purchase 
programs, or special mortgage assistance programs, shall maintain data 
regarding the race, religion, national origin and sex of each applicant 
and joint applicant for assistance with regard to residential property 
and related facilities. Racial data shall be noted in the following 
categories: American Indian/Alaskan Native, Asian/Pacific Islander, 
Black, White, Hispanic. If an applicant or joint applicant refuses to 
voluntarily provide the information or any part of it, that fact shall 
be noted and the information shall be obtained, to the extent possible, 
through observation. Applications shall be retained for a period of at 
least twenty-five (25) months following the date the record was made.
    (c) If an investigation or compliance review under this part reveals 
a failure to comply with any of the requirements of paragraph (a) or (b) 
of this section, the respondent shall have the burden of establishing 
its compliance

[[Page 573]]

with this part and with the equal housing opportunity requirements of 
the Executive order.

[45 FR 59514, Sept. 9, 1980, as amended at 50 FR 52442, Dec. 24, 1985]


<R05>
Sec. 107.35  Complaints.

    (a) The Assistant Secretary for FH&EO, or designee, shall conduct 
such compliance reviews, investigations, inquiries, and informal 
meetings as may be necessary to effect compliance with this part.
    (b) Complaints under this part may be filed by any person and must 
be filed within one year of date of the alleged act of discrimination 
unless the time for filing is extended by the Assistant Secretary for 
FH&EO. Complaints must be signed by the complainant and may be filed 
with the Assistant Secretary for Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity, 
Department of Housing and Urban Development, Washington, DC 20410, or 
any Regional or Area Office of the Department. All complaints shall be 
forwarded to the Director, Office of Regional Fair Housing and Equal 
Opportunity in the appropriate Regional Office which has jurisdiction in 
the area in which the property is located.
    (c) Upon receipt of a timely complaint, the Director of the Office 
of Regional FH&EO shall determine whether the complaint indicates a 
possible violation of the Executive Order or this part. The Director of 
the Office of Regional FH&EO or a designee within a reasonable period of 
time shall conduct an investigation into the facts. The complainant 
shall be notified of the determination.


<R05>
Sec. 107.40  Compliance meeting.

    (a) Where preliminary analysis of a complaint, a compliance review 
initiated by the Assistant Secretary for FH&EO, or other information 
indicates a possible violation of E.O. 11063, or this part, the person 
allegedly in violation (respondent) shall be sent a Notice of Compliance 
Meeting and requested to attend a compliance meeting. The Notice shall 
advise the respondent of the matters to be addressed in the Compliance 
Meeting and the allegations contained in a complaint received pursuant 
to Sec. 107.35. The purpose of the compliance meeting is to provide the 
respondent with the opportunity to address matters raised and to remedy 
such possible violations speedily and informally, to identify possible 
remedies; and to effect a resolution as provided in Sec. 107.45.
    (b) The Notice of Compliance Meeting shall be sent to the last known 
address of the person allegedly in violation, by certified mail, or 
through personal service. The Notice will advise such person of the 
right to respond within seven (7) days to the matters and to submit 
information and relevant data evidencing compliance with E.O. 11063, the 
Affirmative Fair Housing Marketing Regulations, 24 CFR 200.600, the Fair 
Housing Poster Regulations, 24 CFR part 110, the Advertising Guidelines 
for Fair Housing, 37 FR 6700, April 1, 1972, other affirmative marketing 
requirements applicable to the program or activity and any revisions 
thereto. Further, the person will be offered an opportunity to be 
present at the meeting in order to submit any other evidence showing 
such compliance. The date, place, and time of the scheduled meeting will 
be included in the Notice.
    (c) Whenever a compliance meeting is scheduled as a result of a 
complaint, the complainant shall be sent a copy of the Notice of 
Compliance Meeting and shall be provided an opportunity to attend the 
meeting.
    (d) The Area Office having jurisdiction over the program will 
prepare a report concerning the status of the respondent's participation 
in Department programs to be presented to the respondent at the meeting. 
The Area Manager shall be notified of the meeting and may attend the 
meeting.
    (e) At the Compliance Meeting the respondent and the complainant may 
be represented by counsel and shall have a fair opportunity to present 
any matters relevant to the complaint.
    (f) During and pursuant to the Compliance Meeting, the Director of 
the Office of Regional FH&EO shall consider all evidence relating to the 
alleged violation, including any action taken by the person allegedly in 
violation to comply with E.O. 11063.
    (g) If the evidence shows no violation of the Executive order or 
this part, the Director of the Office of Regional

[[Page 574]]

FH&EO shall so notify the person(s) involved within ten (10) days of the 
meeting. A copy of this notification shall be sent to the complainant, 
if any, and shall be submitted to the Assistant Secretary for FH&EO.
    (h) If the evidence indicates an apparent failure to comply with the 
Executive order or this part, and the matter cannot be resolved 
informally pursuant to Sec. 107.45, the Director of the Office of 
Regional FH&EO shall so notify the respondent and the complainant, if 
any, no later than ten (10) days after the date on which the compliance 
meeting is held, in writing by certified mail, return receipt requested, 
and shall advise the complainant, if any, and the respondent whether the 
Department will conduct a compliance review pursuant to Sec. 107.50 or, 
where appropriate, refer the matter to the Assistant Secretary for FH&EO 
for possible imposition of sanctions. A copy of this notification shall 
be submitted to the Assistant Secretary for FH&EO. The compliance review 
shall be conducted to determine whether the respondent has complied with 
the provisions of E.O. 11063, title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 
1968, Department regulations and the Department's Affirmative Fair 
Housing Marketing requirements.
    (i) If the respondent fails to attend a compliance meeting scheduled 
pursuant to this section, the Director of the Office of Regional FH&EO 
shall notify the respondent no later than ten (10) days after the date 
of the scheduled meeting, in writing by certified mail, return receipt 
requested, as to whether the Department will conduct a compliance review 
or, where appropriate, refer the matter to the Assistant Secretary for 
FH&EO for possible imposition of sanctions. A copy of this notification 
shall be submitted to the Assistant Secretary for FH&EO and sent to the 
complainant, if any.


<R05>
Sec. 107.45  Resolution of matters.

    (a) Attempts to resolve and remedy matters found in a complaint 
investigation or a compliance review shall be made through the methods 
of conference, conciliation, and persuasion.
    (b) Resolution of matters pursuant to this section and Sec. 107.40 
need not be attempted where similar efforts by another Federal agency 
have been unsuccessful in ending and remedying the violation found with 
respect to the same respondent.
    (c) Efforts to remedy matters shall be directed toward achieving a 
just resolution of the probable violation and obtaining assurance(s) 
that the respondent will satisfactorily remedy any violation of E.O. 
11063 and will take actions to eliminate the discriminatory practices 
and prevent reoccurrences. Compensation to individuals from the 
respondent may also be considered.
    (d) The terms of settlements shall be reduced to a written 
agreement, signed by the respondent and the Assistant Secretary for 
FH&EO or a designee. Such settlements shall seek to protect the 
interests of the complainant, if any, other persons similarly affected, 
and the public interest. A written notice of the disposition of matters 
pursuant to this section and of the terms of settlements shall be given 
to the Area Manager by the Assistant Secretary for FH&EO or a designee 
and to the complainant, if any. When the Assistant Secretary or a 
designee determines that there has been a violation of a settlement 
agreement, the Assistant Secretary immediately may take action to impose 
sanctions provided under this part, including the referral of the matter 
to the Attorney General for appropriate action.


<R05>
Sec. 107.50  Compliance reviews.

    (a) Compliance reviews shall be conducted by the Director of the 
Office of Regional FH&EO or a designee. Complaints alleging a 
violation(s) of this part or information ascertained in the absence of a 
complaint indicating apparent failure to comply with this part shall be 
referred immediately to the Director of the Office of Regional FH&EO. 
The Regional Director of the Office having jurisdiction over the 
programs involved and the Area Manager shall be notified of all alleged 
violations of the regulations. A complaint is not a prerequisite for the 
initiation of compliance review.
    (b) The purpose of a compliance review is to determine whether the 
respondent is in compliance with the Executive order and this part. 
Where allegations may also indicate a violation

[[Page 575]]

of the provisions of title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968, HUD 
regulations issued thereunder and Affirmative Fair Housing Marketing 
requirements, a review may be undertaken to determine compliance with 
those requirements. The respondent shall be given at least five (5) days 
notice of the time set for any compliance review and the place or places 
for such review. The complainant shall also be notified of the 
compliance review.


<R05>
Sec. 107.51  Findings of noncompliance.

    (a) A finding of noncompliance shall be made when the facts 
disclosed during an investigation or compliance review, or other 
information, indicate a failure to comply with the provisions of E.O. 
11063 or this part. In no event will a finding of noncompliance precede 
the completion of the compliance meeting procedures set forth in 
Sec. 107.40.
    (b) Determinations of noncompliance with E.O. 11063 shall be made in 
any case in which the facts establish the existence of a discriminatory 
practice under Sec. 107.15(g)
    (c) The existence or use of a policy or practice, or any 
arrangement, criterion or other method of administration which has the 
effect of denying equal housing opportunity or which substantially 
impairs the ability of persons, because of race, color, religion 
(creed), sex or national origin, to apply for or receive the benefits of 
assistance shall be a basis for finding a discriminatory practice unless 
the respondent can establish that:
    (1) The policy or practice is designed to serve a legitimate 
business necessity or governmental purpose of the respondent;
    (2) The policy or practice effectively carries out the interest it 
is designed to serve; and
    (3) No alternative course of action could be adopted that would 
enable respondent's interest to be served with a less discriminatory 
impact.

[45 FR 59514, Sept. 9, 1980, as amended at 50 FR 31360, Aug. 2, 1985]


<R05>
Sec. 107.55  Compliance report.

    (a) Following completion of efforts under this part, the Director of 
the Office of Regional FH&EO or a designee shall prepare a compliance 
report promptly and the Assistant Secretary for FH&EO shall make a 
finding of compliance or noncompliance. If it is found that the 
respondent is in compliance, all persons concerned shall be notified of 
the finding. Where a finding of noncompliance is made, the report shall 
specify the violations found. The Director of the Office of Regional 
FH&EO shall send a copy of the report to the respondent by certified 
mail, return receipt requested, together with a Notice that the matter 
will be forwarded to the Assistant Secretary for FH&EO for a 
determination as to whether actions will be initiated for the imposition 
of sanctions. The Regional Director of the Office having jurisdiction 
over the programs involved and the Area Manager shall also receive a 
copy of the report and the notice of intention to refer the matter to 
the Assistant Secretary for FH&EO.
    (b) The Notice will provide that the respondent shall have seven (7) 
days to respond to the violations found and resolve and remedy matters 
in the compliance report. At the expiration of the seven (7) day period 
the matter shall be referred to the Assistant Secretary for FH&EO.
    (c) The complainant shall be sent a copy of the findings and 
compliance report and shall have seven (7) days to comment thereon.


<R05>
Sec. 107.60  Sanctions and penalties.

    (a) Failure or refusal to comply with E.O. 11063 or the requirements 
of this part shall be proper basis for applying sanctions. Violations of 
title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968 or a state or local fair 
housing law, with respect to activities covered by the Executive order, 
or of the regulations and requirements under E.O. 11063 of other Federal 
Departments and agencies may also result in the imposition of sanctions 
by this Department.
    (b) Such sanctions as are specified by E.O. 11063, the contract 
through which Federal assistance is provided, and such sanctions as are 
specified by the rules or regulations of the Department governing the 
program under which Federal assistance to the project is

[[Page 576]]

provided, shall be applied in accordance with the relevant regulations. 
Actions which may be taken include: cancellation or termination, in 
whole or in part of the contract or agreement; refusal to approve a 
lender or withdrawal of approval; a determination of ineligibility, 
suspension or debarment from any further assistance or contracts 
provided, however, that sanctions of debarment, suspension and 
ineligibility are subject to the Department's regulations under part 24 
of this title; and provided further, that no sanction under section 302 
(a), (b) and (c) of E.O. 11063 shall be applied by the Assistant 
Secretary for FH&EO without the concurrence of the Secretary.
    (c) The Department shall use its good offices in order to promote 
the abandonment of discriminatory practices with regard to residential 
property and related facilities provided with assistance prior to the 
effective date of E.O. 11063 and take appropriate actions permitted by 
law including the institution of appropriate litigation to provide such 
equal housing opportunities.
    (d) In any case involving the failure of a lender to comply with the 
requirements of the Executive order or this part, the Assistant 
Secretary for FH&EO shall notify the Federal financial regulatory agency 
having jurisdiction over the lender of the findings in the case.


<R05>
Sec. 107.65  Referral to the Attorney General.

    If the results of a complaint investigation or a compliance review 
demonstrate that any person, or specified class of persons, has violated 
E.O. 11063 or this part, and efforts to resolve the matter(s) by 
informal means have failed, the Assistant Secretary for FH&EO in 
appropriate cases shall recommend that the General Counsel refer the 
case to the Attorney General of the United States for appropriate civil 
or criminal action under section 303 of E.O. 11063.


<R03>
PART 108--COMPLIANCE PROCEDURES FOR AFFIRMATIVE FAIR HOUSING MARKETING--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
108.1  Purpose and application.
108.5  Authority.
108.15  Pre-occupancy conference.
108.20  Area office responsibility for monitoring plans and reports.
108.21  Regional office compliance responsibility.
108.25  Compliance meeting.
108.35  Complaints.
108.40  Compliance reviews.
108.45  Compliance report.
108.50  Sanctions.

    Authority: Sec. 7(d), Department of Housing and Urban Development 
Act of 1965, 42 U.S.C. 3535(d).

    Source: 44 FR 47013, Aug. 9, 1979, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 108.1  Purpose and application.

    (a) The primary purpose of this regulation is to establish 
procedures for determining whether or not an applicant's actions are in 
compliance with its approved Affirmative Fair Housing Marketing (AFHM) 
plan, AFHM Regulation (24 CFR 200.600), and AFHM requirements in 
Departmental programs.
    (b) These regulations apply to all applicants for participation in 
subsidized and unsubsidized housing programs administered by the 
Department of Housing and Urban Development and to all other persons 
subject to Affirmative Fair Housing Marketing requirements in Department 
programs.
    (c) The term applicant includes:
    (1) All persons whose applications are approved for development or 
rehabilitation of: Subdivisions; multifamily projects; manufactured home 
parks of five or more lots, units or spaces; or dwelling units, when the 
applicant's participation in FHA housing programs has exceeded, or would 
thereby exceed, development of five or more such dwelling units during 
the year preceding the application, except that there shall not be 
included in a determination of the number of dwelling units developed or 
rehabilitated by an applicant, those in which a single family dwelling 
is constructed or rehabilitated for occupancy by a mortgagor on property 
owned by the mortgagor and in which the applicant had no interest prior 
to entering into the contract for construction or rehabilitation. For 
the purposes of this definition, a person remains an applicant from the 
date of submission of an application through

[[Page 577]]

duration of receipt of assistance pursuant to such application.
    (2) All other persons subject to AFHM requirements in Departmental 
programs.
    (d) The term person includes one or more individuals, corporations, 
partnerships, associations, labor organizations, legal representatives 
or agents, mutual companies, joint-stock companies, trusts, 
unincorporated organizations, trustees, trustees in bankruptcy, 
receivers, fiduciaries and public entities.

[44 FR 47013, Aug. 9, 1979, as amended at 50 FR 9268, Mar. 7, 1985]


<R05>
Sec. 108.5  Authority.

    The regulations in this part are issued pursuant to the authority to 
issue regulations granted to the Secretary by section 7(d) of the 
Department of Housing and Urban Development Act of 1965, 42 U.S.C. 
3535(d). They implement the functions, powers, and duties imposed on the 
Secretary by Executive Order 11063, 27 FR 11527 and title VIII of the 
Civil Rights Act of 1968, 42 U.S.C. 3608.


<R05>
Sec. 108.15  Pre-occupancy conference.

    Applicants shall submit a Notification of Intent to Begin Marketing 
to the HUD Area Office having jurisdiction over the area in which the 
housing is located no later than 90 days prior to engaging in sales or 
rental marketing activities. Upon receipt of the Notification of Intent 
to Begin Marketing from the applicant, the FH&EO Division of the Area 
Office Division shall review any previously approved plan and may 
schedule a pre-occupancy conference. Such pre-occupancy conference shall 
be held prior to initiation of sales or rental marketing activities. At 
this conference, the previously approved AFHM plan shall be reviewed 
with the applicant to determine if the plan, and/or its proposed 
implementation, requires modification previous to initiation of 
marketing in order to achieve the objectives of the AFHM regulation and 
the plan.

(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 
2535-0027)

[44 FR 47013, Aug. 9, 1979, as amended at 48 FR 20903, May 10, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 108.20  Area office responsibility for monitoring plans and reports.

    (a) Submission of documentation. Pursuant to initiation of 
marketing, the applicant shall submit to the Area Office reports 
documenting of the implementation of the AFHM plan, including sales or 
rental reports, as required by the Department. Copies of such 
documentation shall be forwarded to the Director of the Office of 
Regional Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity by the FH&EO Division of the 
Area Office as requested.
    (b) Monitoring of AFHM plan. The FH&EO Division of the Area Office 
is responsible for monitoring AFHM plans and providing technical 
assistance to the applicant in preparation or modification of such plans 
during the period of development and initial implementation.
    (c) Review of applicant's reports. Each sales or rental report shall 
be reviewed by the FH&EO Division of the Area Office as it is received. 
When sales or rental reports show that 20% of the units covered by the 
AFHM plan have been sold or rented, or whenever it appears that the plan 
may not accomplish its intended objective, the Area Office FH&EO 
Division shall notify the Director of the Office of Regional FH&EO.
    (d) Failure of applicant to file documentation. If the applicant 
fails to file required documentation, the applicant shall be sent a 
written notice indicating that if the delinquent documentation is not 
submitted to the Area Office within 10 days from date of receipt of the 
notice, the matter will be referred to the Director of the Regional 
FH&EO for action which may lead to the imposition of sanctions.


<R05>
Sec. 108.21  Regional office compliance responsibility.

    The Director of the Office of Regional FH&EO shall be responsible 
for determining whether an applicant's actions are in apparent 
compliance with its approved AFHM plan, the AFHM regulations, and this 
part and for determining changes or modifications necessary in the plan 
after initiation of marketing.

[[Page 578]]


<R05>
Sec. 108.25  Compliance meeting.

    (a) Scheduling meeting. If an applicant fails to comply with 
requirements under Sec. 108.15 or Sec. 108.20 or it appears that the 
goals of the AFHM plan may not be achieved, or that the implementation 
of the Plan should be modified, the Director of the Office of Regional 
FH&EO shall schedule a meeting with the applicant. The meeting shall be 
held at least ten days before the next sales or rental report is due. 
The purpose of the compliance meeting is to review the applicant's 
compliance with AFHM requirements and the implementation of the AFHM 
Plan and to indicate any changes or modifications which may be required 
in its Plan.
    (b) Notice of Compliance Meeting. A Notice of Compliance Meeting 
shall be sent to the last known address of the applicant, by certified 
mail or through personal service. The Notice will advise the applicant 
of the right to respond within seven (7) days to the matters identified 
as subjects of the meeting and to submit information and relevant data 
evidencing compliance with the AFHM regulations, the AFHM Plan, 
Executive Order 11063 and title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968, 
when appropriate.
    (c) Applicant data required. The applicant will be requested in 
writing to provide, prior to or at the compliance meeting, specific 
documents, records, and other information relevant to compliance, 
including but not limited to:
    (1) Copies or scripts of all advertising in the Standard 
Metropolitan Statistical Area (SMSA) or housing market area, as 
appropriate, including newspaper, radio and television advertising, and 
a photograph of any sale or rental sign at the site of construction;
    (2) Copies of brochures and other printed material used in 
connection with sales or rentals;
    (3) Evidence of outreach to community organizations;
    (4) Any other evidence of affirmative outreach to groups which are 
not likely to apply for the subject housing;
    (5) Evidence of instructions to employees with respect to company 
policy of nondiscrimination in housing;
    (6) Description of training conducted with sales/rental staff;
    (7) Evidence of nondiscriminatory hiring and recruiting policies for 
staff engaged in the sale or rental of properties, and data by race and 
sex of the composition of the staff;
    (8) Copies of applications and waiting lists of prospective buyers 
or renters maintained by applicant;
    (9) Copies of Sign-in Lists maintained on site for prospective 
buyers and renters who are shown the facility;
    (10) Copies of the selection and screeing criteria;
    (11) Copies of relevant lease or sales agreements;
    (12) Any other information which documents efforts to comply with an 
approved plan.
    (d) Preparation for the compliance meeting. The Area Office Housing 
Division will provide information concerning the status of the project 
or housing involved to be presented to the applicant at the meeting. The 
Area Manager shall be notified of the meeting and may attend.
    (e) Resolution of matters. Where matters raised in the compliance 
meetings are resolved through revision to the plan or its 
implementation, the terms of the resolution shall be reduced to writing 
and submitted to the Regional Office within 10 days of the date of the 
compliance meeting.
    (f) Determination of compliance. If the evidence shows no violation 
of the AFHM regulations and that the applicant is complying with its 
approved AFHM plan and this part, the Director of the Office of Regional 
FH&EO shall so notify the applicant within 10 days of the meeting.
    (g) Determination of possible noncompliance. If the evidence 
indicates an apparent failure to comply with the AFHM plan or the AFHM 
regulation, or if the matters raised cannot be resolved, the Director of 
the Office of Regional FH&EO shall so notify the applicant no later than 
ten (10) days after the date of the compliance meeting is held, in 
writing by certified mail, return receipt requested, and shall advise 
the applicant that the Department will conduct a comprehensive 
compliance review or refer the matter to the Assistant Secretary for 
Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity for consideration of action including 
the imposition of

[[Page 579]]

sanctions. The purpose of a compliance review is to determine whether 
the applicant has complied with the provisions of Executive Order 11063, 
title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968, and the AFHM regulations in 
conjunction with the applicant's specific AFHM plan previously approved 
by HUD.
    (h) Failure of applicant to attend the meeting. If the applicant 
fails to attend the meeting scheduled pursuant to this section, the 
Director of the Office of Regional FH&EO shall so notify the applicant 
no later than ten (10) days after the date of the scheduled meeting, in 
writing by certified mail, return receipt requested, and shall advise 
the applicant as to whether the Director will conduct a comprehensive 
compliance review or refer the matter to the Assistant Secretary for 
Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity for consideration of action including 
the imposition of sanctions.


<R05>
Sec. 108.35  Complaints.

    Individuals and private and public entities may file complaints 
alleging violations of the AFHM regulations or an approved AFHM plan 
with any HUD Area Office, HUD Regional Office, or with the Assistant 
Secretary for FH&EO. Complaints will be referred to the Director of the 
Office of Regional FH&EO. Where there is an allegation of a violation of 
title VIII the complaint also will be processed under part 105.


<R05>
Sec. 108.40  Compliance reviews.

    (a) General. All compliance reviews shall be conducted by the 
Director of the Office of Regional FH&EO or designee. Complaints 
alleging a violation(s) of the AFHM regulations, or information 
ascertained in the absence of a complaint indicating an applicant's 
failure to comply with an AFHM plan, shall be referred immediately to 
the Director of the Office of Regional FH&EO. The Regional Director for 
Housing and the Area Manager shall be notified as appropriate of all 
alleged violations of the AFHM regulations or alleged failure to comply 
with an AFHM plan.
    (b) Initiation of compliance reviews. Even in the absence of a 
complaint or other information indicating noncompliance pursuant to 
paragraph (a), the Director of the Office of Regional FH&EO may conduct 
periodic compliance reviews throughout the life of the mortgage in the 
case of multi-family projects and throughout the duration of the Housing 
Assistance Payments Contract with the Department in the case of housing 
assisted under section 8 of the United States Housing Act of 1937, as 
amended, 42 U.S.C. 1437.
    (c) Nature of compliance reviews. The purpose of a compliance review 
is to determine whether the applicant is in compliance with the 
Department's AFHM requirements and the applicant's approved AFHM plan. 
Where allegations under this part may also constitute a violation of the 
provisions of Executive Order 11063 or title VIII, the review will also 
determine compliance with the requirements thereof. The applicant shall 
be given at least five (5) days notice of the time set for any 
compliance review and the place or places for such review. The 
compliance review will cover the following areas:
    (1) Applicant's sales and rental practices, including practices in 
soliciting buyers and tenants, determining eligibility, selecting and 
rejecting buyers and renters, and in concluding sales and rental 
transactions.
    (2) Programs to attract minority and majority buyers and renters 
regardless of sex, including:
    (i) Use of advertising media, brochures, and pamphlets;
    (ii) Conformance with both the Department's Fair Housing Poster 
Regulation (24 CFR part 110) and the Advertising Guidelines for Fair 
Housing (37 FR 6700) and any revisions thereto.
    (3) Data relating to:
    (i) The size and location of units;
    (ii) Services provided;
    (iii) Sales and/or rental price ranges;
    (iv) The race and sex of buyers and/or renters;
    (v) Race and sex of staff engaged in sale or rental of dwellings.
    (4) Other matters relating to the marketing or sales of dwellings 
under HUD affirmative marketing requirements, the AFMH Plan and this 
part.


<R05>
Sec. 108.45  Compliance report.

    Following a compliance review, a report shall be prepared promptly 
and the Assistant Secretary for FH&EO

[[Page 580]]

shall make a finding of compliance or noncompliance. If it is found that 
the applicant is in compliance, all parties concerned shall be notified 
of the findings. Whenever a finding of noncompliance is made pursuant to 
this part, the report shall list specifically the violations found. The 
applicant shall be sent a copy of the report by certified mail, return 
receipt requested, together with a notice that, if the matter cannot be 
resolved within ten days of receipt of the Notice, the matter will be 
referred to the Assistant Secretary for FH&EO to make a determination as 
to whether actions will be initiated for the imposition of sanctions. 
The Director of the Office of Regional Housing and the Area Director of 
the Housing Division shall also receive a copy of the report and the 
notice of intention to refer the matter to the Assistant Secretary for 
FH&EO for a determination as to whether actions will be initiated to 
impose sanctions.


<R05>
Sec. 108.50  Sanctions.

    Applicants failing to comply with the requirements of these 
regulations, the AFHM regulations, or an AFHM plan will make themselves 
liable to sanctions authorized by law, regulations, agreements, rules, 
or policies governing the program pursuant to which the application was 
made, including, but not limited to, denial of further participation in 
Departmental programs and referral to the Department of Justice for suit 
by the United States for injunctive or other appropriate relief.


<R03>
PART 110--FAIR HOUSING POSTER--Table of Contents

<R05>


                   Subpart A--Purpose and Definitions

Sec.
110.1  Purpose.
110.5  Definitions.

             Subpart B--Requirements for Display of Posters

110.10  Persons subject.
110.15  Location of posters.
110.20  Availability of posters.
110.25  Description of posters.

                         Subpart C--Enforcement

110.30  Effect of failure to display poster.

    Authority: 42 U.S.C. 3535(d), 3600-3620.

    Source: 37 FR 3429, Feb. 16, 1972.


<R04>
                   Subpart A--Purpose and Definitions


<R05>
Sec. 110.1  Purpose.

    The regulations set forth in this part contain the procedures 
established by the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development with 
respect to the display of a fair housing poster by persons subject to 
sections 804 through 806 of the Fair Housing Act, 42 U.S.C. 3604-3606.

[54 FR 3310, Jan. 23, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 110.5  Definitions.

    (a) The terms Department and Secretary are defined in 24 CFR part 5.
    (b) Discriminatory housing practice means an act that is unlawful 
under section 804, 805, 806, or 818 of the Act.
    (c) Dwelling means any building, structure, or portion thereof which 
is occupied as, or designed or intended for occupancy as, a residence by 
one or more families, and any vacant land which is offered for sale or 
lease for the construction or location thereon of any such building, 
structure, or portion thereof.
    (d) Family includes a single individual.
    (e) Person includes one or more individuals, corporations, 
partnerships, associations, labor organizations, legal representatives, 
mutual companies, joint-stock companies, trusts, unincorporated 
organizations, trustees, trustees in cases under title 11 U.S.C., 
receivers and fiduciaries.
    (f) Fair housing poster means the poster prescribed by the Secretary 
for display by persons subject to sections 804-806 of the Act.
    (g) The Act means the Fair Housing Act (The Civil Rights Act of 
1968, as amended by the Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988), 42 U.S.C. 
3600, et seq.
    (h) Person in the business of selling or renting dwellings means a 
person as defined in section 803(c) of the Act.

[37 FR 3429, Feb. 16, 1972, as amended at 54 FR 3311, Jan. 23, 1989; 61 
FR 5205, Feb. 9, 1996]

[[Page 581]]


<R04>
             Subpart B--Requirements for Display of Posters


<R05>
Sec. 110.10  Persons subject.

    (a) Except to the extent that paragraph (b) of this section applies, 
all persons subject to section 804 of the Act, Discrimination in the 
Sale or Rental of Housing and Other Prohibited Practices, shall post and 
maintain a fair housing poster as follows:
    (1) With respect to a single-family dwelling (not being offered for 
sale or rental in conjunction with the sale or rental of other 
dwellings) offered for sale or rental through a real estate broker, 
agent, salesman, or person in the business of selling or renting 
dwellings, such person shall post and maintain a fair housing poster at 
any place of business where the dwelling is offered for sale or rental.
    (2) With respect to all other dwellings covered by the Act:
    (i) A fair housing poster shall be posted and maintained at any 
place of business where the dwelling is offered for sale or rental, and
    (ii) A fair housing poster shall be posted and maintained at the 
dwelling, except that with respect to a single-family dwelling being 
offered for sale or rental in conjunction with the sale or rental of 
other dwellings, the fair housing poster may be posted and maintained at 
the model dwellings instead of at each of the individual dwellings.
    (3) With respect to those dwellings to which paragraph (a)(2) of 
this section applies, the fair housing poster must be posted at the 
beginning of construction and maintained throughout the period of 
construction and sale or rental.
    (b) This part shall not require posting and maintaining a fair 
housing poster:
    (1) On vacant land, or
    (2) At any single-family dwelling, unless such dwelling
    (i) Is being offered for sale or rental in conjunction with the sale 
or rental of other dwellings in which circumstances a fair housing 
poster shall be posted and maintained as specified in paragraph 
(a)(2)(ii) of this section, or
    (ii) Is being offered for sale or rental through a real estate 
broker, agent, salesman, or person in the business of selling or renting 
dwellings in which circumstances a fair housing poster shall be posted 
and maintained as specified in paragraph (a)(1) of this section,
    (c) All persons subject to section 805 of the Act, Discrimination In 
Residential Real Estate-Related Transactions shall post and maintain a 
fair housing poster at all their places of business which participate in 
the covered activities.
    (d) All persons subject to section 806 of the Act, Discrimination in 
the Provision of Brokerage Services, shall post and maintain a fair 
housing poster at all their places of business.

[37 FR 3429, Feb. 16, 1972, as amended at 54 FR 3311, Jan. 23, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 110.15  Location of posters.

    All fair housing posters shall be prominently displayed so as to be 
readily apparent to all persons seeking housing accommodations or 
seeking to engage in residential real estate-related transactions or 
brokerage services as contemplated by sections 804 through 806 of the 
Act.

[54 FR 3311, Jan. 23, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 110.20  Availability of posters.

    All persons subject to this part may obtain fair housing posters 
from the Department's regional and area offices. A facsimile may be used 
if the poster and the lettering are equivalent in size and legibility to 
the poster available from the Department.

[37 FR 3429, Feb. 16, 1972]


<R05>
Sec. 110.25  Description of posters.

    (a) The fair housing poster shall be 11 inches by 14 inches and 
shall bear the following legend:

[[Page 582]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC12OC91.008

                        EQUAL HOUSING OPPORTUNITY

         We do Business in Accordance With the Fair Housing Act

(The Civil Rights Act of 1968, as amended by the Fair Housing Amendments 
Act of 1988)

                  IT IS ILLEGAL TO DISCRIMINATE AGAINST

  ANY PERSON BECAUSE OF RACE, COLOR, RELIGION, SEX, HANDICAP, FAMILIAL 
        STATUS (HAVING ONE OR MORE CHILDREN), OR NATIONAL ORIGIN

    <bullet> In the sale or rental of housing or residential lots.
    <bullet> In advertising the sale or rental of housing.
    <bullet> In the financing of housing.
    <bullet> In the appraisal of housing.
    <bullet> In the provision of real estate brokerage services.
    <bullet> Blockbusting is also illegal.
    Anyone who feels he or she has been discriminated against should 
send a complaint to:

U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, Assistant Secretary 
for Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity, Washington, DC 20410

    or

HUD Region or [Area Office stamp]

    (b) The Assistant Secretary for Equal Opportunity may grant a waiver 
permitting the substitution of a poster prescribed by a Federal 
financial regulatory agency for the fair housing poster described in 
paragraph (a) of this section. While such waiver remains in effect, 
compliance with the posting requirements of such regulatory agency shall 
be deemed compliance with the posting requirements of this part. Such 
waiver shall not affect the applicability of all other provisions of 
this part.

[37 FR 3429, Feb. 16, 1972, as amended at 40 FR 20079, May 8, 1975; 54 
FR 3311, Jan. 23, 1989]


<R04>
                         Subpart C--Enforcement


<R05>
Sec. 110.30  Effect of failure to display poster.

    Any person who claims to have been injured by a discriminatory 
housing practice may file a complaint with the Secretary pursuant to 
part 105 of this chapter. A failure to display the fair housing poster 
as required by this part shall be deemed prima facie evidence of a 
discriminatory housing practice.

[37 FR 3429, Feb. 16, 1972]


<R03>
PART 115--CERTIFICATION AND FUNDING OF STATE AND LOCAL FAIR HOUSING ENFORCEMENT AGENCIES--Table of Contents

<R05>


                           Subpart A--General

Sec.
115.100  Definitions.
115.101  Program administration.
115.102  Public notices.

      Subpart B--Certification of Substantially Equivalent Agencies

115.200  Purpose.
115.201  Basis of determination.
115.202  Criteria for adequacy of law.
115.203  Performance standards.
115.204  Consequences of certification.
115.205  Technical assistance.
115.206  Request for certification.
115.207  Procedure for interim certification.

[[Page 583]]

115.208  Suspension of interim certification.
115.209  Denial of interim certification.
115.210  Procedure for certification.
115.211  Suspension of certification.
115.212  Withdrawal of certification.

            Subpart C--Fair Housing Assistance Program (FHAP)

115.300  Purpose.
115.301  Agency eligibility criteria.
115.302  Capacity building funds.
115.303  Eligible activities for capacity building funds.
115.304  Agencies eligible for contributions funds.
115.305  Special enforcement effort (SEE) funds.
115.306  Training funds.
115.307  Additional requirements for participation in the FHAP.
115.308  Standards for FHAP program review.
115.309  Reporting and recordkeeping requirements.
115.310  Subcontracting under the FHAP.
115.311  Corrective and remedial action.

    Authority: 42 U.S.C. 3601-19; 42 U.S.C. 3535(d)

    Source: 61 FR 41284, Aug. 7, 1996, unless otherwise noted.


<R04>
                           Subpart A--General


<R05>
Sec. 115.100  Definitions.

    (a) The terms ``Fair Housing Act'' and ``HUD'', as used in this 
part, are defined in 24 CFR 5.100.
    (b) The terms ``Aggrieved person'', ``Complainant'', 
``Conciliation'', ``Conciliation agreement'', ``Discriminatory housing 
practice'', ``Dwelling'', ``Handicap'', ``Person'', ``Respondent'', 
``Secretary'', and ``State'', as used in this part, are set forth in 
section 802 of the Fair Housing Act (42 U.S.C. 3600-3620).
    (c) Other definitions. The following definitions also apply to this 
part:
    Act means the Fair Housing Act, as defined in 24 CFR 5.100.
    Assistant Secretary means the Assistant Secretary for Fair Housing 
and Equal Opportunity.
    Certified Agency is an agency to which the Assistant Secretary for 
Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity has granted interim certification or 
certification, in accordance with the requirements of this part.
    Cooperative Agreement is the assistance instrument HUD will use to 
provide funds. The Cooperative Agreement will contain attachments and 
appendices establishing requirements relating to the operation or 
performance of the agency.
    Cooperative Agreement Officer (CAO) is the administrator of the 
funds awarded pursuant to this part and is the Director of a Fair 
Housing Enforcement Center in the Office of Fair Housing and Equal 
Opportunity.
    Director of FHEO means a Director of a Fair Housing Enforcement 
Center.
    Dual-Filed Complaint means a housing discrimination complaint which 
has been filed with both the Fair Housing Enforcement Center and the 
certified agency.
    FHAP means the Fair Housing Assistance Program.
    FHEO means the Office of Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity.


<R05>
Sec. 115.101  Program administration.

    (a) Authority and responsibility. The Secretary has delegated the 
authority and responsibility for administering this part to the 
Assistant Secretary.
    (b) Delegation of Authority. The Assistant Secretary delegates the 
authority and responsibility for administering this part to each 
Director of a Fair Housing Enforcement Center. However, with respect to 
the duties and responsibilities for administering subpart B of this 
part, the Assistant Secretary retains the right to make final decisions 
concerning the granting and maintenance of substantial equivalency 
certification and interim certification.


<R05>
Sec. 115.102  Public notices.

    (a) Periodically, the Assistant Secretary will publish the following 
public notices in the Federal Register:
    (1) A list of all agencies which have interim certification or 
certification; and
    (2) A list of agencies to which a notice of denial of interim 
certification has been issued or for which withdrawal of certification 
is being proposed.
    (b) The Assistant Secretary will publish in the Federal Register a 
notice soliciting public comment before granting certification to a 
State or local agency. The notice will invite the

[[Page 584]]

public to comment on the relevant State and local laws, as well as on 
the performance of the agency in enforcing its law. All comments will be 
considered before a final decision on certification is made.


<R04>
      Subpart B--Certification of Substantially Equivalent Agencies


<R05>
Sec. 115.200  Purpose.

    This subpart implements section 810(f) of the Fair Housing Act. The 
purpose of this subpart is to set forth:
    (a) The basis for agency interim certification and certification;
    (b) The procedure by which a determination to certify is made by the 
Assistant Secretary;
    (c) The basis and procedures for denial of interim certification;
    (d) The basis and procedures for withdrawal of certification;
    (e) The consequences of certification;
    (f) The basis and procedures for suspension of interim certification 
or certification; and
    (g) The funding criteria for interim certified and certified 
agencies.


<R05>
Sec. 115.201  Basis of determination.

    A determination to certify an agency as substantially equivalent 
involves a two-phase procedure. The determination requires examination 
and an affirmative conclusion by the Assistant Secretary on two separate 
inquiries:
    (a) Whether the law, administered by the agency, on its face, 
satisfies the criteria set forth in section 810(f)(3)(A) of the Act; and
    (b) Whether the current practices and past performance of the agency 
demonstrate that, in operation, the law in fact provides rights and 
remedies which are substantially equivalent to those provided in the 
Act.


<R05>
Sec. 115.202  Criteria for adequacy of law.

    (a) In order for a determination to be made that a State or local 
fair housing agency administers a law which, on its face, provides 
rights and remedies for alleged discriminatory housing practices that 
are substantially equivalent to those provided in the Act, the law or 
ordinance must:
    (1) Provide for an administrative enforcement body to receive and 
process complaints and provide that:
    (i) Complaints must be in writing;
    (ii) Upon the filing of a complaint the agency shall serve notice 
upon the complainant acknowledging the filing and advising the 
complainant of the time limits and choice of forums provided under the 
law;
    (iii) Upon the filing of a complaint the agency shall promptly serve 
notice on the respondent or person charged with the commission of a 
discriminatory housing practice advising of his or her procedural rights 
and obligations under the law or ordinance together with a copy of the 
complaint;
    (iv) A respondent may file an answer to a complaint.
    (2) Delegate to the administrative enforcement body comprehensive 
authority, including subpoena power, to investigate the allegations of 
complaints, and power to conciliate complaints, and require that:
    (i) The agency commence proceedings with respect to the complaint 
before the end of the 30th day after receipt of the complaint;
    (ii) The agency investigate the allegations of the complaint and 
complete the investigation within the time-frame established by section 
810(a)(1)(B)(iv) of the Act or comply with the notification requirements 
of section 810(a)(1)(C) of the Act;
    (iii) The agency make final administrative disposition of a 
complaint within one year of the date of receipt of a complaint, unless 
it is impracticable to do so. If the agency is unable to do so it shall 
notify the parties, in writing, of the reasons for not doing so;
    (iv) Any conciliation agreement arising out of conciliation efforts 
by the agency shall be an agreement between the respondent, the 
complainant, and the agency and shall require the approval of the 
agency;
    (v) Each conciliation agreement shall be made public unless the 
complainant and respondent otherwise agree and the agency determines 
that disclosure is not required to further the purposes of the law or 
ordinance.

[[Page 585]]

    (3) Not place any excessive burdens on the complainant that might 
discourage the filing of complaints, such as:
    (i) A provision that a complaint must be filed within any period of 
time less than 180 days after an alleged discriminatory housing practice 
has occurred or terminated;
    (ii) Anti-testing provisions;
    (iii) Provisions that could subject a complainant to costs, criminal 
penalties or fees in connection with filing of complaints.
    (4) Not contain exemptions that substantially reduce the coverage of 
housing accommodations as compared to section 803 of the Act.
    (5) Provide the same protections as those afforded by sections 804, 
805, 806, and 818 of the Act, consistent with HUD's implementing 
regulations found at 24 CFR part 100.
    (b) In addition to the factors described in paragraph (a) of this 
section, the provisions of the State or local law must afford 
administrative and judicial protection and enforcement of the rights 
embodied in the law.
    (1) The agency must have authority to:
    (i) Grant or seek prompt judicial action for appropriate temporary 
or preliminary relief pending final disposition of a complaint if such 
action is necessary to carry out the purposes of the law or ordinance;
    (ii) Issue and seek enforceable subpoenas;
    (iii) Grant actual damages in an administrative proceeding or 
provide adjudication in court at agency expense to allow the award of 
actual damages to an aggrieved person;
    (iv) Grant injunctive or other equitable relief, or be specifically 
authorized to seek such relief in a court of competent jurisdiction;
    (v) Provide an administrative proceeding in which a civil penalty 
may be assessed or provide an adjudication in court at agency expense, 
allowing the assessment of punitive damages against the respondent.
    (2) Agency actions must be subject to judicial review upon 
application by any party aggrieved by a final agency order.
    (3) Judicial review of a final agency order must be in a court with 
authority to:
    (i) Grant to the petitioner, or to any other party, such temporary 
relief, restraining order, or other order as the court determines is 
just and proper;
    (ii) Affirm, modify, or set aside, in whole or in part, the order, 
or remand the order for further proceedings; and
    (iii) Enforce the order to the extent that the order is affirmed or 
modified.
    (c) The requirement that the state or local law prohibit 
discrimination on the basis of familial status does not require that the 
state or local law limit the applicability of any reasonable local, 
state or Federal restrictions regarding the maximum number of occupants 
permitted to occupy a dwelling.
    (d) The state or local law may assure that no prohibition based on 
discrimination because of familial status applies to housing for older 
persons substantially as described in 24 CFR part 100, subpart E.
    (e) A determination of the adequacy of a state or local fair housing 
law ``on its face'' is intended to focus on the meaning and intent of 
the text of the law, as distinguished from the effectiveness of its 
administration. Accordingly, this determination is not limited to an 
analysis of the literal text of the law but must take into account all 
relevant matters of state or local law. Regulations, directives, rules 
of procedure, judicial decisions, or interpretations of the fair housing 
law by competent authorities will be considered in making this 
determination.
    (f) A law will be found inadequate ``on its face'' if it permits any 
of the agency's decision-making authority to be contracted out or 
delegated to a non-governmental authority. For the purposes of this 
paragraph, ``decision-making authority'' shall include:
    (1) Acceptance of the complaint;
    (2) Approval of the conciliation agreement;
    (3) Dismissal of a complaint;
    (4) Any action specified in Secs. 115.202(a)(2)(iii) or 
115.202(b)(1); and
    (5) Any decision-making regarding whether the matter will or will 
not be pursued.
    (g) The state or local law must provide for civil enforcement of the 
law or

[[Page 586]]

ordinance by an aggrieved person by the commencement of an action in an 
appropriate court at least one year after the occurrence or termination 
of an alleged discriminatory housing practice. The court must be 
empowered to:
    (1) Award the plaintiff actual and punitive damages;
    (2) Grant as relief, as it deems appropriate, any temporary or 
permanent injunction, temporary restraining order or other order; and
    (3) Allow reasonable attorney's fees and costs.


<R05>
Sec. 115.203  Performance standards.

    A state or local fair housing enforcement agency must meet all of 
the performance standards listed in this section in order to obtain or 
maintain certification.
    (a) Engage in timely, comprehensive and thorough fair housing 
complaint investigation, conciliation and enforcement activities. The 
performance assessment will consider the following to determine the 
effectiveness of an agency's fair housing complaint processing, 
consistent with such guidance as may be issued by HUD:
    (1) The agency's case processing procedures;
    (2) The thoroughness of the agency's case processing;
    (3) A review of cause and no cause determinations for quality of 
investigations and consistency with appropriate standards;
    (4) A review of conciliation agreements and other settlements;
    (5) A review of the agency's administrative closures; and
    (6) A review of the agency's enforcement procedures.
    (b)(1) Commence proceedings with respect to a complaint:
    (i) Before the end of the 30th day after receipt;
    (ii) Carry forward such proceedings with reasonable promptness;
    (iii) Make final administrative disposition within one year; and
    (iv) Within 100 days of receipt of the complaint complete the 
identified proceedings.
    (2) To meet this standard, the performance assessment will consider 
the timeliness of the agency's actions with respect to its complaint 
processing, including, but not limited to:
    (i) Whether the agency began its processing of fair housing 
complaints within 30 days of receipt;
    (ii) Whether the agency completes the investigative activities with 
respect to a complaint within 100 days from the date of receipt or, if 
it is impracticable to do so, notifies the parties in writing of the 
reason(s) for the delay;
    (iii) Whether the agency administratively disposes of a complaint 
within one year from the date of receipt or, if it is impracticable to 
do so, notifies the parties in writing of the reasons for the delay; and
    (iv) Whether the agency completed the investigation of the complaint 
and prepared a complete final investigative report.
    (3) The performance assessment will also consider documented 
conciliation attempts and activities and a review of the bases for 
administrative disposition of complaints.
    (c) Conduct compliance reviews of settlements, conciliation 
agreements and orders issued by or entered into to resolve 
discriminatory housing practices. The performance assessment will 
include, but not be limited to:
    (1) An assessment of the agency's procedures for conducting 
compliance reviews;
    (2) Terms and conditions of agreements and orders issued;
    (3) Application of its authority to seek actual damages, as 
appropriate; and
    (4) Application of its authority to seek and assess civil penalties 
or punitive damages.
    (d) Consistently and affirmatively seek and obtain the type of 
relief designed to prevent recurrences of such practices. The 
performance assessment will include, but not be limited to:
    (1) An assessment of the types of relief sought and obtained by the 
agency with consideration of the inclusion of affirmative provisions 
designed to protect the public interest;
    (2) The adequacy of the disposition of the complaint;
    (3) The relief sought and awarded;

[[Page 587]]

    (4) The number of complaints closed with relief and the number 
closed without relief; and
    (5) Whether all the issues and bases were investigated adequately 
and appropriately disposed of.
    (e) Consistently and affirmatively seek the elimination of all 
prohibited practices under its fair housing law. An assessment under 
this standard will include, but not be limited to:
    (1) A discussion and confirmation of the law or ordinance 
administered by the agency;
    (2) The identification of any amendments, court decisions or other 
rulings or documentation that may affect the agency's ability to carry 
out provisions of its fair housing law or ordinance;
    (3) Identification of the education and outreach efforts of the 
agency; and
    (4) Identification and discussion of any special requirements of the 
fair housing law or ordinance.


<R05>
Sec. 115.204  Consequences of certification.

    (a) Whenever a complaint received by the Assistant Secretary alleges 
violations of a state or local fair housing law or ordinance 
administered by an agency that has been certified as substantially 
equivalent, the complaint will be referred to the agency, and no further 
action shall be taken by the Assistant Secretary with respect to such 
complaint except as provided for by the Act, this part, 24 CFR part 103, 
subpart C, and any written agreements executed by the Agency and the 
Assistant Secretary.
    (b) If HUD determines that a complaint has not been processed in a 
timely manner in accordance with the performance standards set forth in 
Sec. 115.203, HUD may reactivate the complaint, conduct its own 
investigation and conciliation efforts, and make a determination 
consistent with 24 CFR part 103.
    (c) Notwithstanding paragraph (a) of this section, whenever the 
Assistant Secretary has reason to believe that a complaint demonstrates 
a basis for the commencement of proceedings against any respondent under 
section 814(a) of the Act or for proceedings by any governmental 
licensing or supervisory authorities, the Assistant Secretary shall 
transmit the information upon which such belief is based to the Attorney 
General, Federal financial regulatory agencies, other Federal agencies, 
or other appropriate governmental licensing or supervisory authorities.


<R05>
Sec. 115.205  Technical assistance.

    (a) The Assistant Secretary, through its FHEO Field Office, may 
provide technical assistance to the agencies. The agency may request 
such technical assistance or the FHEO Field Office may determine the 
necessity for technical assistance and require the agency's cooperation 
and participation.
    (b) The Assistant Secretary, through FHEO Headquarters or Field 
staff, will require that the agency participate in training conferences 
and seminars that will enhance the agency's ability to process 
complaints alleging discriminatory housing practices.


<R05>
Sec. 115.206  Request for certification.

    (a) A request for certification under this subpart shall be filed 
with the Assistant Secretary by the State or local official having 
principal responsibility for administration of the State or local fair 
housing law. The request shall be supported by the following materials 
and information:
    (1) The text of the jurisdiction's fair housing law, the law 
creating and empowering the agency, any regulations and directives 
issued under the law, and any formal opinions of the State Attorney 
General or the chief legal officer of the jurisdiction that pertain to 
the jurisdiction's fair housing law.
    (2) Organizational information of the agency responsible for 
administering and enforcing the law.
    (3) Funding and personnel made available to the agency for 
administration and enforcement of the fair housing law during the 
current operating year, and not less than the preceding three operating 
years (or such lesser number during which the law was in effect).
    (4) If available, data demonstrating that the agency's current 
practices and past performance comply with the performance standards 
described in Sec. 115.203.

[[Page 588]]

    (5) Any additional information which the submitting official may 
wish to be considered.
    (b) The request and supporting materials shall be filed with the 
Assistant Secretary for Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity, Department 
of Housing and Urban Development, 451 7th Street, SW., Washington, DC 
20410. A copy of the request and supporting materials will be kept 
available for public examination and copying at:
    (1) The office of the Assistant Secretary;
    (2) The HUD Field Office in whose jurisdiction the State or local 
jurisdiction seeking recognition is located; and
    (3) The office of the State or local agency charged with 
administration and enforcement of the State or local law.


<R05>
Sec. 115.207  Procedure for interim certification.

    (a) Upon receipt of a request for certification filed under 
Sec. 115.206, the Assistant Secretary may request further information 
necessary for a determination to be made under this section. The 
Assistant Secretary may consider the relative priority given to fair 
housing administration, as compared to the agency's other duties and 
responsibilities, as well as the compatibility or potential conflict of 
fair housing objectives with these other duties and responsibilities.
    (b) Interim certification. If the Assistant Secretary determines, 
after application of the criteria set forth in Sec. 115.202 that the 
State or local law or ordinance, on its face, provides substantive 
rights, procedures, remedies, and judicial review procedures for alleged 
discriminatory housing practices that are substantially equivalent to 
those provided in the Act, the Assistant Secretary may offer to enter 
into an Agreement for the Interim Referral of Complaints and Other 
Utilization of Services (Interim Agreement). The interim agreement will 
outline the procedures and authorities upon which the interim 
certification is based.
    (c) Such interim agreement, after it is signed by all appropriate 
signatories, will result in the agency receiving interim certification.
    (d)(1) Interim agreements shall be for a term of no more than three 
years. The Assistant Secretary, through the FHEO Field Office, will 
conduct one or more on-site assessments to determine whether the agency 
administers its fair housing law or ordinance in a manner that is 
substantially equivalent to the Act.
    (2) Performance Improvement Plan. If the agency is not administering 
its law or ordinance in a manner that is substantially equivalent, the 
Assistant Secretary, may, but need not, offer a Performance Improvement 
Plan (PIP) to the agency. The PIP will outline the agency's 
deficiencies, identify necessary corrective actions, and include a 
timetable for completion.
    (3) If the agency receives a PIP, funding under the FHAP may be 
suspended for the duration of the PIP. Once the agency has implemented 
corrective actions to eliminate the deficiencies, and such corrective 
actions are accepted by the Assistant Secretary, funding may be 
reinstated.


<R05>
Sec. 115.208  Suspension of interim certification.

    (a) Suspension based on changes in the law. (1) The Assistant 
Secretary may suspend the agency's interim certification if the 
Assistant Secretary has reason to believe that the State or locality may 
have limited the effectiveness of the agency's implementation of the 
fair housing law or ordinance by:
    (i) Amending the fair housing law or ordinance;
    (ii) Adopting rules or procedures concerning the fair housing law or 
ordinance; or
    (iii) Issuing judicial or other authoritative interpretations of the 
fair housing law or ordinance.
    (2) If the Assistant Secretary suspends interim certification under 
paragraph (a)(1) of this section, such suspension will remain in effect 
until the Assistant Secretary conducts a review of the changes in 
language and/or interpretation and determines whether the law or 
ordinance remains substantially equivalent to the Act on its face or in 
its operations. Such suspension shall not exceed 180 days.

[[Page 589]]

    (3) If the Assistant Secretary determines that, notwithstanding the 
actions taken by the State or locality as described in paragraph (a)(1), 
the law or ordinance remains substantially equivalent on its face and in 
operation to the Act, the Assistant Secretary will rescind the 
suspension and reinstate the agency's interim certification and/or 
recommend the agency for certification. HUD will provide full or partial 
reimbursement for cases processed during the period of the suspension.
    (4) If the Assistant Secretary determines that the actions taken by 
the State or locality do limit the agency's effectiveness interim 
certification will be denied pursuant to Sec. 115.209.
    (b) Suspension based on agency performance. (1) The Assistant 
Secretary may suspend the interim certification of an agency charged 
with the administration of a fair housing law or ordinance if the 
Assistant Secretary has reason to believe that the agency's performance 
does not comply with the criteria set forth by this part. Such 
suspension shall not exceed 180 days.
    (2) If the agency is suspended pursuant to paragraph (b) of this 
section, the FHEO Field Office may elect not to provide payment for 
complaints processed within that period of time unless and until the 
Assistant Secretary determines that the agency is fully in compliance 
with Sec. 115.203. The FHEO Field Office will provide technical 
assistance to the agency during this period of time.
    (3) During the period of a suspension the Assistant Secretary shall 
not refer complaints to the agency.
    (4) Suspension under paragraph (b) of this section renders the 
agency ineligible to receive Fair Housing Assistance Program Funds under 
subpart C of this part, pending correction of the deficiencies by the 
agency.
    (5) Before the end of the suspension, a final performance assessment 
will be provided to the Assistant Secretary upon which a determination 
will be made as to the adequacy of the agency's performance.
    (c) HUD will provide an agency with notice of the specific reasons 
for the suspension of its interim certification and an opportunity to 
respond, in accordance with the procedures set forth in HUD issued 
guidance.


<R05>
Sec. 115.209  Denial of interim certification.

    (a) If the Assistant Secretary determines, after application of the 
criteria set forth in this part that the State and local law or 
ordinance, on its face or in its operation, does not provide substantive 
rights, procedures, remedies, and availability of judicial review for 
alleged discriminatory housing practices which are substantially 
equivalent to those provided in the Fair Housing Act, the Assistant 
Secretary shall inform the State or local official in writing of the 
reasons for that determination.
    (b) The agency, within 20 days from the date of the receipt of this 
notice, may submit, in writing, any opposition to the planned denial of 
interim certification to the Assistant Secretary. The Assistant 
Secretary will evaluate all pertinent written comments, information, and 
documentation. If, after reviewing all materials submitted by the 
agency, the Assistant Secretary is still of the opinion that interim 
certification should be denied, the Assistant Secretary will inform the 
agency in writing of that determination.
    (c) If the agency does not, within 20 days of receipt of the 
Assistant Secretary's notice of denial of interim certification, make a 
request of the Assistant Secretary under paragraph (b) of this section 
to submit additional data, views, or comments, no further action shall 
be required of the Assistant Secretary and denial of interim 
certification shall occur.


<R05>
Sec. 115.210  Procedure for certification.

    (a) Certification. (1) If the Assistant Secretary determines, after 
application of the criteria set forth in Secs. 115.202, 115.203 and this 
section, that the State or local law or ordinance, both ``on its face'' 
and ``in operation,'' provides substantive rights, procedures, remedies, 
and judicial review procedures for alleged discriminatory housing 
practices that are substantially equivalent to those provided in the 
Act, the Assistant Secretary may enter into a Memorandum of 
Understanding (MOU) with the agency.

[[Page 590]]

    (2) The MOU is a written agreement providing for the referral of 
complaints to the agency and for communication procedures between the 
agency and HUD that are adequate to permit the Assistant Secretary to 
monitor the agency's continuing substantial equivalency certification.
    (3) A MOU, after it is signed by all appropriate signatories, may 
authorize an agency to be a certified agency for a period of not more 
than five years.
    (b) Performance Improvement Plan. (1) If the agency is not 
administering its law or ordinance in a manner that is substantially 
equivalent, the Assistant Secretary, may, but need not, offer a 
Performance Improvement Plan (PIP) to the agency. The PIP will outline 
the agency's deficiencies, identify necessary corrective actions, and 
include a timetable for completion.
    (2) If the agency receives a PIP, funding under the FHAP may be 
suspended for the duration of the PIP. Once the agency has implemented 
corrective actions to eliminate the deficiencies, and such corrective 
actions are accepted by the Assistant Secretary, funding may be 
reinstated.
    (c) Annual assessments. The Assistant Secretary shall annually 
assess the performance of an agency to determine whether it continues to 
qualify for certification under this part. If the Assistant Secretary 
affirmatively concludes that the agency's law and performance have 
complied with the requirements of this part in each of the five years, 
the Assistant Secretary may offer the agency an updated Memorandum of 
Understanding.
    (d) Interim certification required prior to certification. An agency 
shall receive interim certification prior to receiving certification.


<R05>
Sec. 115.211  Suspension of certification.

    (a) Suspension based on changes in the law. (1) The Assistant 
Secretary may suspend the agency's certification if the Assistant 
Secretary has reason to believe that the State or locality may have 
limited the effectiveness of the agency's implementation of the fair 
housing law or ordinance by:
    (i) Amending the fair housing law or ordinance;
    (ii) Adopting rules or procedures concerning the fair housing law or 
ordinance; or
    (iii) Issuing judicial or other authoritative interpretations of the 
fair housing law or ordinance.
    (2) If the Assistant Secretary suspends certification under 
paragraph (a)(1) of this section, such suspension will remain in effect 
until the Assistant Secretary conducts a review of the changes in 
language and/or interpretation and determines whether the law or 
ordinance remains substantially equivalent on its face and in its 
operation to the Act. Such suspension shall not exceed 180 days.
    (3) If the Assistant Secretary determines that the law or ordinance 
remains substantially equivalent on its face and in operation to the 
Act, the Assistant Secretary will rescind the suspension and reinstate 
the agency's interim certification and/or recommend the agency for 
certification. HUD will provide full or partial reimbursement for cases 
processed during the period of the suspension.
    (4) If the Assistant Secretary determines that the actions taken by 
the State or locality do limit the agency's effectiveness, certification 
will be withdrawn pursuant to Sec. 115.212.
    (b) Suspension based on agency performance. (1) The Assistant 
Secretary may suspend the certification of an agency charged with the 
administration of a fair housing law or ordinance, if the Assistant 
Secretary has reason to believe that the agency's performance does not 
comply with the criteria set forth by this part. Such suspension shall 
not exceed 180 days.
    (2) If the agency is suspended pursuant to paragraph (b) of this 
section, the FHEO Field Office may elect not to provide payment for 
complaints processed within that period of time unless and until the 
Assistant Secretary determines that the agency is fully in compliance 
with Sec. 115.203. The FHEO Field Office will provide technical 
assistance to the agency during this period of time.
    (3) During the period of a suspension the Assistant Secretary shall 
not refer complaints to the agency.
    (4) Suspension under this paragraph also renders the agency 
ineligible to

[[Page 591]]

receive Fair Housing Assistance Program Funds under subpart C of this 
part, pending correction of the deficiencies by the agency.
    (5) Before the end of the suspension, a final performance assessment 
will be provided to the Assistant Secretary upon which a determination 
will be made as to the adequacy of the agency's performance.
    (c) HUD will provide an agency with notice of the specific reasons 
for the suspension of its certification and an opportunity to respond, 
in accordance with the procedures set forth in HUD issued guidance.


<R05>
Sec. 115.212  Withdrawal of certification.

    (a) If the Assistant Secretary finds, as a result of a review 
undertaken in accordance with this part, that the agency's fair housing 
law or ordinance no longer meets the requirements of this part, the 
Assistant Secretary shall propose to withdraw the certification 
previously granted.
    (b) The Assistant Secretary will propose withdrawal of certification 
under paragraph (a) of this section unless further review and 
information or documentation establishes that the current law and/or the 
agency's administration of the law meets the criteria set out in this 
part.
    (c) If the Assistant Secretary determines, after application of the 
criteria set forth in this part, that the state or local law or 
ordinance, in operation, does not provide substantive rights, 
procedures, remedies, and availability of judicial review for alleged 
discriminatory housing practices which are substantially equivalent to 
those provided in the Fair Housing Act, the Assistant Secretary shall 
inform the State or local official in writing of the reasons for that 
determination.


<R04>
            Subpart C--Fair Housing Assistance Program (FHAP)


<R05>
Sec. 115.300  Purpose.

    The purpose of the Fair Housing Assistance Program (FHAP) is to 
provide assistance to State and local fair housing enforcement agencies. 
The intent of this funding program is to build a coordinated 
intergovernmental enforcement effort to further fair housing and to 
encourage the agencies to assume a greater share of the responsibility 
for the administration and enforcement of their fair housing laws and 
ordinances. This financial assistance is designed to provide support 
for:
    (a) The processing of dual-filed complaints;
    (b) Training under the Fair Housing Act and the agencies' fair 
housing law;
    (c) The provision of technical assistance;
    (d) The creation and maintenance of data and information systems; 
and
    (e) The development and enhancement of other fair housing 
enforcement projects.


<R05>
Sec. 115.301  Agency eligibility criteria.

    Any agency with certification or interim certification under subpart 
A of this part, and which has entered into a MOU or interim agreement, 
is eligible to participate in the FHAP.


<R05>
Sec. 115.302  Capacity building funds.

    (a) Capacity building (CB) funds are funds that HUD may provide to 
an agency with interim certification during the agency's first three 
years of participation in the FHAP. Agencies receiving CB funds are not 
eligible to receive contributions funds under Sec. 115.304.
    (b) CB funds will be provided in a fixed annual amount to be 
utilized for the eligible activities established pursuant to 
Sec. 115.303. However, in the second and third year of the agency's 
participation in the FHAP, HUD has the option to permit the agency to 
receive CB funding on a per case basis, rather than in a single annual 
amount.
    (c) In order to receive CB funding, agencies will be required to 
submit a statement of work which identifies:
    (1) The objectives and activities to be carried out with the CB 
funds received;
    (2) A plan for training all of the agency's employees involved in 
the administration of the agency's fair housing law or ordinance;
    (3) A statement of the agency's intention to participate in HUD-
sponsored training in accordance with the training requirements set out 
in the cooperative agreement;
    (4) A description of the agency's complaint processing data and 
information

[[Page 592]]

system or, alternatively, whether the agency plans to use CB funds to 
purchase and install a data system; and
    (5) A description of any other fair housing activities that the 
agency will undertake with its CB funds. All such activities must 
address matters affecting fair housing enforcement which are cognizable 
under the Fair Housing Act. Any activities which do not address the 
implementation of the agency's fair housing law or ordinance, and which 
are therefore not cognizable under the Fair Housing Act, will be 
disapproved.


<R05>
Sec. 115.303  Eligible activities for capacity building funds.

    The primary purposes of capacity building funding is to provide for 
complaint activities and to support activities that produce increased 
awareness of fair housing rights and remedies. All such activities must 
support the agency's administration of its fair housing law or ordinance 
and address matters affecting fair housing which are cognizable under 
the Fair Housing Act. HUD will periodically publish a list of eligible 
activities in the Federal Register.


<R05>
Sec. 115.304  Agencies eligible for contributions funds.

    (a) An agency that has received CB funds for three consecutive years 
is eligible for contributions funding. Contributions funding consists of 
three categories:
    (1) Complaint Processing (CP) funds;
    (2) Administrative Costs (AC) funds; and
    (3) Special Enforcement Efforts (SEE) funds (Sec. 115.305 sets forth 
the requirements for SEE funding).
    (b) CP funds. (1) Agencies receiving CP funds will receive such 
support based solely on the number of complaints processed by the agency 
and accepted for payment by the Director of FHEO during a consecutive, 
specifically identified, 12-month period. Normally this period will be 
the previous year's funding cycle.
    (2) Funding for agencies in their fourth year of participation in 
the FHAP will be based on the number of complaints acceptably processed 
by the agency during the agency's third year of participation in the 
FHAP.
    (c) Administrative Cost (AC) funds. (1) Agencies which acceptably 
process 100 or more cases will receive no less than 10 percent of the 
agency's annual FHAP payment amount for the preceding year, in addition 
to case processing funds, contingent on fiscal year appropriations. 
Agencies that acceptably process fewer than 100 cases will receive a 
flat rate contingent on fiscal year appropriations.
    (2) Agencies will be required to provide HUD with a statement of how 
they intend to use the AC funds. HUD may require that some or all AC 
funding be directed to activities designed to create, modify, or improve 
local, regional, or national information systems concerning fair housing 
matters (including the purchase of state of the art computer systems and 
getting on line or internet access, etc.).


<R05>
Sec. 115.305  Special enforcement effort (SEE) funds.

    (a) SEE funds are funds that HUD will provide to an agency to 
enhance enforcement activities of the agency's fair housing law or 
ordinance. SEE funds will be a maximum of 20% of the agency's total FHAP 
cooperative agreement for the previous contract year, based on approval 
of eligible activity or activities, and based on the appropriation of 
funds. All agencies receiving contributions funds are eligible to 
receive SEE funds if they meet three of the six criteria set out in 
paragraphs (a)(1) through (6):
    (1) The agency has taken action to enforce a subpoena or make use of 
its prompt judicial action authority within the past year.
    (2) The agency has held at least one administrative hearing or has 
had at least one case on a court's docket for civil proceedings during 
the past year.
    (3) At least ten percent of the agency's fair housing caseload 
resulted in written conciliation agreements providing monetary relief 
for the complainant as well as remedial action, monitoring, reporting 
and public interest relief provisions.
    (4) The agency has had in the most recent three years, or is 
currently handling, at least one major fair housing

[[Page 593]]

systemic investigation requiring an exceptional amount of expenditure of 
funds.
    (5) The agency's administration of its fair housing law or ordinance 
received meritorious mention for its complaint processing or other fair 
housing activities that were innovative.
    (6) The agency must have fully investigated 10 fair housing 
complaints during the previous funding year.
    (b) Notwithstanding the eligibility criteria set forth in paragraph 
(a) of this section, an agency is ineligible for SEE funds if:
    (1) Twenty percent or more of an agency's fair housing complaints 
result in administrative closures; or
    (2) The agency is currently on a PIP, or if its interim 
certification or certification has been suspended during the fiscal year 
in which SEE funds are sought.
    (c) SEE funding amounts are subject to the FHAP appropriation by 
Congress and will be described in writing in the cooperative agreements 
annually. HUD will periodically publish a list of activities eligible 
for SEE funding in the Federal Register.


<R05>
Sec. 115.306  Training funds.

    (a) All agencies are eligible to receive training funds. Training 
funds are fixed amounts based on the number of agency employees to be 
trained and shall be allocated based on the FHAP appropriation. Training 
funds may be used only for HUD-approved or HUD-sponsored training. 
Agency initiated training or other formalized training may be included 
in this category. However, such training must first be approved by the 
Cooperative Agreement Officer (CAO) and the Government Technical 
Representative (GTR). Specifics on the amount of training funds that an 
agency will receive and, if applicable, amounts that may be deducted, 
will be set out in the cooperative agreement each year.
    (b) All staff of the agency responsible for the administration of 
the fair housing law or ordinance must participate in mandatory FHAP 
training sponsored by HUD at the national and field office levels. If 
the agency does not participate in the mandatory national and field 
office HUD-sponsored training, training funds will be deducted from 
their overall training amount.


<R05>
Sec. 115.307  Additional requirements for participation in the FHAP.

    (a) Agencies which participate in the FHAP must:
    (1) Conform to reporting and record maintenance requirements 
determined by the Assistant Secretary;
    (2) Agree to on-site technical assistance and guidance and 
implementation of corrective actions set out by the Department in 
response to deficiencies found during the technical assistance or 
performance assessment evaluations of the agency's operations;
    (3) Agree to implement and adhere to policies and procedures (as 
their laws and ordinances will allow) provided to the agencies by the 
Assistant Secretary, including but not limited to guidance on 
investigative techniques, case file preparation and organization, 
implementation of data elements for complaint tracking, etc.;
    (4) Spend at least twenty (20) percent of its total annual budget on 
fair housing activities; and
    (5) Not unilaterally reduce the level of financial resources 
currently committed to fair housing complaint processing (budget and 
staff reductions or other actions outside the control of the agency will 
not, alone, result in a negative determination for the agency's 
participation in the FHAP).
    (b) The agency's refusal to provide information, assist in 
implementation, or carry out the requirements of paragraph (a) of this 
section may result in the denial or interruption of its receipt of FHAP 
funds.


<R05>
Sec. 115.308  Standards for FHAP program review.

    HUD will conduct reviews of the agency's cooperative agreement 
implementation. This review will also identify:
    (a) How the agency used the FHAP funds received;
    (b) Whether its draw-down of funds was timely;
    (c) Whether the agency has been audited and received copies of the 
audit reports in accordance with applicable rules and regulations for 
State and local governmental entities; and

[[Page 594]]

    (d) If the agency complied with all certifications and assurances 
required by HUD in the cooperative agreement.


<R05>
Sec. 115.309  Reporting and recordkeeping requirements.

    (a) The agency shall establish and maintain records demonstrating:
    (1) Its financial administration of the FHAP funds; and
    (2) Its performance under the FHAP.
    (b) In accordance with the cooperative agreement in effect between 
the agency and HUD, the agency will provide to HUD the agency reports 
maintained pursuant to paragraph (a) of this section. The agency will 
provide reports to HUD in accordance with the cooperative agreement in 
effect between the agency and HUD for frequency and content, regarding 
complaint processing, training, data and information systems, 
enforcement and other activities explaining how FHAP funds were expended 
and used.
    (c) The agency will permit reasonable public access to its records, 
consistent with the jurisdiction's requirements for release of 
information. Documents relevant to the agency's participation in FHAP 
must be made available at the agency's office during normal working 
hours (except that documents with respect to ongoing fair housing 
complaint investigations are exempt from public review consistent with 
Federal and/or State law).
    (d) The Secretary, the Inspector General of HUD, and the Comptroller 
General of the United States, or any of their duly authorized 
representatives, shall have access to all pertinent books, accounts, 
reports, files, and other payments for surveys, audits, examinations, 
excerpts, and transcripts as they relate to the agency's participation 
in FHAP.
    (e) All files will be kept in such fashion as to permit audits under 
applicable procurement regulations and guidelines and the Single Audit 
requirements for State and local agencies.
    (f) The FHAP financial records and files will be kept at least three 
years on-site after any cooperative agreement has terminated.


<R05>
Sec. 115.310  Subcontracting under the FHAP.

    If an agency subcontracts to a public or private agency any activity 
for which the subcontractor will receive FHAP funds, the agency must 
ensure and certify in writing that the subcontractor is:
    (a) Using services and facilities that are accessible in accordance 
with the Americans with Disability Act (ADA) (42 U.S.C. 12101) and 
Section 504 of the 1973 Rehabilitation Act (29 U.S.C. 701);
    (b) Complying with the standards of Section 3 of the Housing and 
Urban Development Act of 1968 (42 U.S.C. 1441); and
    (c) Furthering fair housing.


<R05>
Sec. 115.311  Corrective and remedial action.

    (a) If HUD makes a preliminary determination that an agency has not 
complied with Sec. 115.309, the agency will be given written notice of 
this determination and an opportunity to show, through demonstrable 
facts and data, that it has done so within a time prescribed by HUD.
    (b) If an agency fails to demonstrate to HUD's satisfaction that it 
has met program review standards, HUD will request the agency to submit 
and comply with proposals for action to correct, mitigate, or prevent 
performance deficiencies, including, but not limited to:
    (1) Preparing and/or following a schedule of actions for carrying 
out the affected fair housing activities;
    (2) Establishing and/or following a management plan that assigns 
responsibilities for carrying out the actions required;
    (3) Canceling or revising activities likely to be affected by a 
performance deficiency before expending FHAP funds for the activities; 
and
    (4) Redistributing or suspending disbursement of FHAP funds that 
have not yet been disbursed.
    (c) HUD may condition the use of FHAP award amounts with respect to 
an agency's succeeding fiscal year's allocation on the satisfactory 
completion by the agency of appropriate corrective actions. When the use 
of funds is so

[[Page 595]]

conditioned, HUD will specify the deficiency(ies), the required 
corrective action(s), and the time allowed for taking these actions. 
Failure of the agency to complete the actions as specified will result 
in a reduction or withdrawal of the FHAP allocation in an amount not to 
exceed the amount conditionally granted.


<R03>
PART 121--COLLECTION OF DATA--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
121.1  Purpose.
121.2  Furnishing of data by program participation.

    Authority: Title VIII, Civil Rights Act of 1968 (42 U.S.C. 3600-
3620); E.O. 11063, 27 FR 11527; sec. 602, Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 
U.S.C. 2000d-1); sec. 562, Housing and Community Development Act of 1987 
(42 U.S.C. 3608a); sec. 2, National Housing Act, 12 U.S.C. 1703; sec. 
7(d), Department of Housing and Urban Development Act, 42 U.S.C. 
3535(d).

    Source: 54 FR 3317, Jan. 23, 1989, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 121.1  Purpose.

    The purpose of this part is to enable the Secretary of Housing and 
Urban Development to carry out his or her responsibilities under the 
Fair Housing Act, Executive Order 11063, dated November 20, 1962, title 
VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, and section 562 of the Housing and 
Community Development Act of 1987. These authorities prohibit 
discrimination in housing and in programs receiving financial assistance 
from the Department of Housing and Urban Development, and they direct 
the Secretary to administer the Department's housing and urban 
development programs and activities in a manner affirmatively to further 
these policies and to collect certain data to assess the extent of 
compliance with these policies.


<R05>
Sec. 121.2  Furnishing of data by program participants.

    Participants in the programs administered by the Department shall 
furnish to the Department such data concerning the race, color, 
religion, sex, national origin, age, handicap, and family 
characteristics of persons and households who are applicants for, 
participants in, or beneficiaries or potential beneficiaries of, those 
programs as the Secretary may determine to be necessary or appropriate 
to enable him or her to carry out his or her responsibilities under the 
authorities referred to in Sec. 121.1.


<R03>
PART 125--FAIR HOUSING INITIATIVES PROGRAM--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
125.103  Definitions.
125.104  Program administration.
125.105  Application requirements.
125.106  Waivers.
125.107  Testers.
125.201  Administrative Enforcement Initiative.
125.301  Education and Outreach Initiative.
125.401  Private Enforcement Initiative.
125.501  Fair Housing Organizations Initiative.

    Authority: 42 U.S.C. 3535(d), 3616 note.

    Source: 60 FR 58452, Nov. 27, 1995, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 125.103  Definitions.

    In addition to the definitions that appear at section 802 of title 
VIII (42 U.S.C. 3602), the following definitions apply to this part:
    Assistant Secretary means the Assistant Secretary for Fair Housing 
and Equal Opportunity in the Department of Housing and Urban 
Development.
    Expert witness means a person who testifies, or who would have 
testified but for a resolution of the case before a verdict is entered, 
and who qualifies as an expert witness under the rules of the court 
where the litigation funded by this part is brought.
    Fair housing enforcement organization (FHO) means any organization, 
whether or not it is solely engaged in fair housing enforcement 
activities, that--
    (1) Is organized as a private, tax-exempt, nonprofit, charitable 
organization;
    (2) Is currently engaged in complaint intake, complaint 
investigation, testing for fair housing violations and enforcement of 
meritorious claims; and
    (3) Upon the receipt of FHIP funds will continue to be engaged in 
complaint intake, complaint investigation, testing for fair housing 
violations and enforcement of meritorious claims.
    The Department may request an organization to submit documentation 
to support its claimed status as an FHO.

[[Page 596]]

    FHIP means the Fair Housing Initiatives Program authorized by 
section 561 of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1987 (42 
U.S.C. 3616 note).
    Meritorious claims means enforcement activities by an organization 
that resulted in lawsuits, consent decrees, legal settlements, HUD and/
or substantially equivalent agency (under 24 CFR 115.6) conciliations 
and organization initiated settlements with the outcome of monetary 
awards for compensatory and/or punitive damages to plaintiffs or 
complaining parties, or other affirmative relief, including the 
provision of housing.
    Qualified fair housing enforcement organization (QFHO) means any 
organization, whether or not it is solely engaged in fair housing 
enforcement activities, that--
    (1) Is organized as a private, tax-exempt, nonprofit, charitable 
organization;
    (2) Has at least 2 years experience in complaint intake, complaint 
investigation, testing for fair housing violations and enforcement of 
meritorious claims; and
    (3) Is engaged in complaint intake, complaint investigation, testing 
for fair housing violations and enforcement of meritorious claims at the 
time of application for FHIP assistance.
    For the purpose of meeting the 2-year qualification period for the 
activities included in paragraph (2) of this definition, it is not 
necessary that the activities were conducted simultaneously, as long as 
each activity was conducted for 2 years. It is also not necessary for 
the activities to have been conducted for 2 consecutive or continuous 
years. An organization may aggregate its experience in each activity 
over the 3 year period preceding its application to meet the 2-year 
qualification period requirement.
    The Department may request an organization to submit documentation 
to support its claimed status as a QFHO.
    Title VIII means title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968, as 
amended (42 U.S.C. 3600-3620), commonly cited as the Fair Housing Act.

[60 FR 58452, Nov. 27, 1995, as amended at 61 FR 5206, Feb. 9, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 125.104  Program administration.

    (a) FHIP is administered by the Assistant Secretary.
    (b) FHIP funding is made available under the following initiatives:
    (1) The Administrative Enforcement Initiative;
    (2) The Education and Outreach Initiative;
    (3) The Private Enforcement Initiative; and
    (4) The Fair Housing Organizations Initiative.
    (c) FHIP funding is made available in accordance with the 
requirements of the authorizing statute (42 U.S.C. 3616 note), the 
regulation in this part, and Notices of Funding Availability (NOFAs), 
and is awarded through a grant or other funding instrument.
    (d) Notices of Funding Availability under this program will be 
published periodically in the Federal Register. Such notices will 
announce amounts available for award, eligible applicants, and eligible 
activities, and may limit funding to one or more of the Initiatives. 
Notices of Funding Availability will include the specific selection 
criteria for awards, and will indicate the relative weight of each 
criterion. The selection criteria announced in Notices of Funding 
Availability will be designed to permit the Department to target and 
respond to areas of concern, and to promote the purposes of the FHIP in 
an equitable and cost efficient manner.
    (e) All recipients of FHIP funds must conform to reporting and 
record maintenance requirements determined appropriate by the Assistant 
Secretary. Each funding instrument will include provisions under which 
the Department may suspend, terminate or recapture funds if the 
recipient does not conform to these requirements.
    (f) Recipients of FHIP funds may not use such funds for the payment 
of expenses in connection with litigation against the United States.
    (g) All recipients of funds under this program must conduct audits 
in accordance with part 44 or part 45, as appropriate, of this title.


<R05>
Sec. 125.105  Application requirements.

    Each application for funding under the FHIP must contain the 
following

[[Page 597]]

information, which will be assessed against the specific selection 
criteria set forth in a Notice of Funding Availability.
    (a) A description of the practice (or practices) that has affected 
adversely the achievement of the goal of fair housing, and that will be 
addressed by the applicant's proposed activities.
    (b) A description of the specific activities proposed to be 
conducted with FHIP funds including the final product(s) and/or any 
reports to be produced; the cost of each activity proposed; and a 
schedule for completion of the proposed activities.
    (c) A description of the applicant's experience in formulating or 
carrying out programs to prevent or eliminate discriminatory housing 
practices.
    (d) An estimate of public or private resources that may be available 
to assist the proposed activities.
    (e) A description of the procedures to be used for monitoring 
conduct and assessing results of the proposed activities.
    (f) A description of the benefits that successful completion of the 
project will produce to enhance fair housing, and the indicators by 
which these benefits are to be measured.
    (g) A description of the expected long term viability of project 
results.
    (h) Any additional information that may be required by a Notice of 
Funding Availability published in the Federal Register.

(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 
2529-0033. An agency may not conduct or sponsor, and a person is not 
required to respond to, a collection of information unless the 
collection displays a valid control number.)


<R05>
Sec. 125.106  Waivers.

    Upon determination of good cause, the Assistant Secretary may waive, 
in a published Notice of Funding Availability or other Federal Register 
notice, any requirement in this part that is not required by statute.


<R05>
Sec. 125.107  Testers.

    The following requirements apply to testing activities funded under 
the FHIP:
    (a) Testers must not have prior felony convictions or convictions of 
crimes involving fraud or perjury.
    (b) Testers must receive training or be experienced in testing 
procedures and techniques.
    (c) Testers and the organizations conducting tests, and the 
employees and agents of these organizations may not:
    (1) Have an economic interest in the outcome of the test, without 
prejudice to the right of any person or entity to recover damages for 
any cognizable injury;
    (2) Be a relative of any party in a case;
    (3) Have had any employment or other affiliation, within one year, 
with the person or organization to be tested; or
    (4) Be a licensed competitor of the person or organization to be 
tested in the listing, rental, sale, or financing of real estate.


<R05>
Sec. 125.201  Administrative Enforcement Initiative.

    The Administrative Enforcement Initiative provides funding to State 
and local fair housing agencies administering fair housing laws 
recognized by the Assistant Secretary under Sec. 115.6 of this 
subchapter as providing rights and remedies which are substantially 
equivalent to those provided in title VIII.


<R05>
Sec. 125.301  Education and Outreach Initiative.

    (a) The Education and Outreach Initiative provides funding for the 
purpose of developing, implementing, carrying out, or coordinating 
education and outreach programs designed to inform members of the public 
concerning their rights and obligations under the provisions of fair 
housing laws.
    (b) Notices of Funding Availability published for the FHIP may 
divide Education and Outreach Initiative funding into separate 
competitions for each of the separate types of programs (i.e., national, 
regional and/or local, community-based) eligible under this Initiative.
    (c) National program applications, including those for Fair Housing 
Month funding, may be eligible to receive, as provided for in Notices of

[[Page 598]]

Funding Availability published in the Federal Register, a preference 
consisting of additional points if they:
    (1) Demonstrate cooperation with real estate industry organizations; 
and/or
    (2) Provide for the dissemination of educational information and 
technical assistance to support compliance with the housing adaptability 
and accessibility guidelines contained in the Fair Housing Amendments 
Act of 1988.
    (d) Activities that are regional are activities that are implemented 
in adjoining States or two or more units of general local government 
within a state. Activities that are local are activities whose 
implementation is limited to a single unit of general local government, 
meaning a city, town, township, county, parish, village, or other 
general purpose political subdivision of a State. Activities that are 
community-based in scope are those which are primarily focused on a 
particular neighborhood area within a unit of general local government.
    (e) Each non-governmental recipient of regional, local, or 
community-based funding for activities located within the jurisdiction 
of a State or local enforcement agency or agencies administering a 
substantially equivalent (under part 115 of this subchapter) fair 
housing law must consult with the agency or agencies to coordinate 
activities funded under FHIP.


<R05>
Sec. 125.401  Private Enforcement Initiative.

    (a) The Private Enforcement Initiative provides funding on a single-
year or multi-year basis, to investigate violations and obtain 
enforcement of the rights granted under the Fair Housing Act or State or 
local laws that provide rights and remedies for discriminatory housing 
practices that are substantially equivalent to the rights and remedies 
provided in the Fair Housing Act. Multi-year funding may be contingent 
upon annual performance reviews and annual appropriations.
    (b) Organizations that are eligible to receive assistance under the 
Private Enforcement Initiative are:
    (1) Qualified fair housing enforcement organizations.
    (2) Fair housing enforcement organizations with at least 1 year of 
experience in complaint intake, complaint investigation, testing for 
fair housing violations and enforcement of meritorious claims. For the 
purpose of meeting this 1 year qualification period, it is not necessary 
that the activities were conducted simultaneously, as long as each 
activity was conducted for 1 year. It is also not necessary for the 
activities to have been conducted for a continuous year. An organization 
may aggregate its experience in each activity over the 2-year period 
preceding its application to meet this 1 year qualification period 
requirement.


<R05>
Sec. 125.501  Fair Housing Organizations Initiative.

    (a) The Fair Housing Organizations Initiative of the FHIP provides 
funding to develop or expand the ability of existing eligible 
organizations to provide fair housing enforcement, and to establish, on 
a single-year or multi-year basis contingent upon annual performance 
reviews and annual appropriations, new fair housing enforcement 
organizations.
    (b) Continued development of existing organizations--(1) Eligible 
applicants. Eligible for funding under this component of the Fair 
Housing Organizations Initiative are:
    (i) Qualified fair housing enforcement organizations;
    (ii) Fair housing enforcement organizations; and
    (iii) Nonprofit groups organizing to build their capacity to provide 
fair housing enforcement.
    (2) Operating budget limitation. (i) Funding under this component of 
the Fair Housing Organizations Initiative may not be used to provide 
more than 50 percent of the operating budget of a recipient organization 
for any one year.
    (ii) For purposes of the limitation in this paragraph, operating 
budget means the applicant's total planned budget expenditures from all 
sources, including the value of in-kind and monetary contributions, in 
the year for which funding is sought.
    (c) Establishing new organizations--(1) Eligible applicants. 
Eligible for funding

[[Page 599]]

under this component of the Fair Housing Organizations Initiative are:
    (i) Qualified fair housing enforcement organizations;
    (ii) Fair housing enforcement organizations; and
    (iii) Organizations with at least three years of experience in 
complaint intake, complaint investigation, and enforcement of 
meritorious claims involving the use of testing evidence.
    (2) Targeted areas. FHIP Notices of Funding Availability may 
identify target areas of the country that may receive priority for 
funding under this component of the Fair Housing Organizations 
Initiative. An applicant may also seek funding to establish a new 
organization in a locality not identified as a target area, but in such 
a case, the applicant must submit sufficient evidence to establish the 
proposed area as being currently underserved by fair housing enforcement 
organizations or as containing large concentrations of protected 
classes.

[[Page 600]]


<R03>
            SUBCHAPTER B--EMPLOYMENT AND BUSINESS OPPORTUNITY

<R05>


<R03>
PART 135--ECONOMIC OPPORTUNITIES FOR LOW- AND VERY LOW-INCOME PERSONS--Table of Contents

<R05>


                      Subpart A--General Provisions

Sec.
135.1  Purpose.
135.2  Effective date of regulation.
135.3  Applicability.
135.5  Definitions.
135.7  Delegation of authority.
135.9  Requirements applicable to HUD NOFAs for section 3 covered 
          programs.
135.11  Other laws governing training, employment, and contracting.

Subpart B--Economic Opportunities for Section 3 Residents and Section 3 
                            Business Concerns

135.30  Numerical goals for meeting the greatest extent feasible 
          requirement.
135.32  Responsibilities of the recipient.
135.34  Preference for section 3 residents in training and employment 
          opportunities.
135.36  Preference for section 3 business concerns in contracting 
          opportunities.
135.38  Section 3 clause.
135.40  Providing other economic opportunities.

                          Subpart C [Reserved]

               Subpart D--Complaint and Compliance Review

135.70  General.
135.72  Cooperation in achieving compliance.
135.74  Section 3 compliance review procedures.
135.76  Filing and processing complaints.

                 Subpart E--Reporting and Recordkeeping

135.90  Reporting.
135.92  Recordkeeping and access to records.

Appendix to Part 135

    Authority: 12 U.S.C. 1701u; 42 U.S.C. 3535(d).

    Source: 59 FR 33880, June 30, 1994, unless otherwise noted.

    Effective Date Note: At 59 FR 33880, June 30, 1994, part 135 was 
revised effective August 1, 1994 through June 30, 1995. At 60 FR 28325, 
May 31, 1995, the effective period was extended until the final rule 
implementing changes made to section 3 of the Housing and Urban 
Development Act of 1968 by the Housing and Community Development Act of 
1992 is published and becomes effective.


<R04>
                      Subpart A--General Provisions


<R05>
Sec. 135.1  Purpose.

    (a) Section 3. The purpose of section 3 of the Housing and Urban 
Development Act of 1968 (12 U.S.C. 1701u) (section 3) is to ensure that 
employment and other economic opportunities generated by certain HUD 
financial assistance shall, to the greatest extent feasible, and 
consistent with existing Federal, State and local laws and regulations, 
be directed to low- and very low-income persons, particularly those who 
are recipients of government assistance for housing, and to business 
concerns which provide economic opportunities to low- and very low-
income persons.
    (b) Part 135. The purpose of this part is to establish the standards 
and procedures to be followed to ensure that the objectives of section 3 
are met.


<R05>
Sec. 135.2  Effective date of regulation.

    The regulations of this part will remain in effect until the date 
the final rule adopting the regulations of this part with or without 
changes is published and becomes effective, at which point the final 
rule will remain in effect.

[60 FR 28326, May 31, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 135.3  Applicability.

    (a) Section 3 covered assistance. Section 3 applies to the following 
HUD assistance (section 3 covered assistance):
    (1) Public and Indian housing assistance. Section 3 applies to 
training, employment, contracting and other economic opportunities 
arising from the expenditure of the following public and Indian housing 
assistance:
    (i) Development assistance provided pursuant to section 5 of the 
U.S. Housing Act of 1937 (1937 Act);
    (ii) Operating assistance provided pursuant to section 9 of the 1937 
Act; and

[[Page 601]]

    (iii) Modernization assistance provided pursuant to section 14 of 
the 1937 Act;
    (2) Housing and community development assistance. Section 3 applies 
to training, employment, contracting and other economic opportunities 
arising in connection with the expenditure of housing assistance 
(including section 8 assistance, and including other housing assistance 
not administered by the Assistant Secretary of Housing) and community 
development assistance that is used for the following projects;
    (i) Housing rehabilitation (including reduction and abatement of 
lead-based paint hazards, but excluding routine maintenance, repair and 
replacement);
    (ii) Housing construction; and
    (iii) Other public construction.
    (3) Thresholds--(i) No thresholds for section 3 covered public and 
Indian housing assistance. The requirements of this part apply to 
section 3 covered assistance provided to recipients, notwithstanding the 
amount of the assistance provided to the recipient. The requirements of 
this part apply to all contractors and subcontractors performing work in 
connection with projects and activities funded by public and Indian 
housing assistance covered by section 3, regardless of the amount of the 
contract or subcontract.
    (ii) Thresholds for section 3 covered housing and community 
development assistance--(A) Recipient thresholds. The requirements of 
this part apply to recipients of other housing and community development 
program assistance for a section 3 covered project(s) for which the 
amount of the assistance exceeds $200,000.
    (B) Contractor and subcontractor thresholds. The requirements of 
this part apply to contractors and subcontractors performing work on 
section 3 covered project(s) for which the amount of the assistance 
exceeds $200,000; and the contract or subcontract exceeds $100,000.
    (C) Threshold met for recipients, but not contractors or 
subcontractors. If a recipient receives section 3 covered housing or 
community development assistance in excess of $200,000, but no contract 
exceeds $100,000, the section 3 preference requirements only apply to 
the recipient.
    (b) Applicability of section 3 to entire project or activity funded 
with section 3 assistance. The requirements of this part apply to the 
entire project or activity that is funded with section 3 covered 
assistance, regardless of whether the section 3 activity is fully or 
partially funded with section 3 covered assistance.
    (c) Applicability to Indian housing authorities and Indian tribes. 
Indian housing authorities and tribes that receive HUD assistance 
described in paragraph (a) of this section shall comply with the 
procedures and requirements of this part to the maximum extent 
consistent with, but not in derogation of, compliance with section 7(b) 
of the Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act (25 U.S.C. 
450e(b)). (See 24 CFR part 905.)
    (d) Other HUD assistance and other Federal assistance. Recipients, 
contractors and subcontractors that receive HUD assistance, not listed 
in paragraph (a) of this section, or other Federal assistance, are 
encouraged to provide, to the greatest extent feasible, training, 
employment, and contracting opportunities generated by the expenditure 
of this assistance to low- and very low-income persons, and business 
concerns owned by low- and very low-income persons, or which employ low- 
and very low-income persons.


<R05>
Sec. 135.5  Definitions.

    The terms Department, HUD, Indian housing authority (IHA), Public 
housing agency (PHA), and Secretary are defined in 24 CFR part 5.
    Annual Contributions Contract (ACC) means the contract under the 
U.S. Housing Act of 1937 (1937 Act) between HUD and the PHA, or between 
HUD and the IHA, that contains the terms and conditions under which HUD 
assists the PHA or the IHA in providing decent, safe, and sanitary 
housing for low income families. The ACC must be in a form prescribed by 
HUD under which HUD agrees to provide assistance in the development, 
modernization and/or operation of a low income housing project under the 
1937 Act, and the PHA or IHA agrees to develop, modernize and operate 
the project in compliance with all provisions of the

[[Page 602]]

ACC and the 1937 Act, and all HUD regulations and implementing 
requirements and procedures. (The ACC is not a form of procurement 
contract.)
    Applicant means any entity which makes an application for section 3 
covered assistance, and includes, but is not limited to, any State, unit 
of local government, public housing agency, Indian housing authority, 
Indian tribe, or other public body, public or private nonprofit 
organization, private agency or institution, mortgagor, developer, 
limited dividend sponsor, builder, property manager, community housing 
development organization (CHDO), resident management corporation, 
resident council, or cooperative association.
    Assistant Secretary means the Assistant Secretary for Fair Housing 
and Equal Opportunity.
    Business concern means a business entity formed in accordance with 
State law, and which is licensed under State, county or municipal law to 
engage in the type of business activity for which it was formed.
    Business concern that provides economic opportunities for low- and 
very low-income persons. See definition of ``section 3 business 
concern'' in this section.
    Contract. See the definition of ``section 3 covered contract'' in 
this section.
    Contractor means any entity which contracts to perform work 
generated by the expenditure of section 3 covered assistance, or for 
work in connection with a section 3 covered project.
    Employment opportunities generated by section 3 covered assistance 
means all employment opportunities generated by the expenditure of 
section 3 covered public and Indian housing assistance (i.e., operating 
assistance, development assistance and modernization assistance, as 
described in Sec. 135.3(a)(1)). With respect to section 3 covered 
housing and community development assistance, this term means all 
employment opportunities arising in connection with section 3 covered 
projects (as described in Sec. 135.3(a)(2)), including management and 
administrative jobs connected with the section 3 covered project. 
Management and administrative jobs include architectural, engineering or 
related professional services required to prepare plans, drawings, 
specifications, or work write-ups; and jobs directly related to 
administrative support of these activities, e.g., construction manager, 
relocation specialist, payroll clerk, etc.
    Housing authority (HA) means, collectively, public housing agency 
and Indian housing authority.
    Housing and community development assistance means any financial 
assistance provided or otherwise made available through a HUD housing or 
community development program through any grant, loan, loan guarantee, 
cooperative agreement, or contract, and includes community development 
funds in the form of community development block grants, and loans 
guaranteed under section 108 of the Housing and Community Development 
Act of 1974, as amended. Housing and community development assistance 
does not include financial assistance provided through a contract of 
insurance or guaranty.
    Housing development means low-income housing owned, developed, or 
operated by public housing agencies or Indian housing authorities in 
accordance with HUD's public and Indian housing program regulations 
codified in 24 CFR Chapter IX.
    HUD Youthbuild programs mean programs that receive assistance under 
subtitle D of Title IV of the National Affordable Housing Act, as 
amended by the Housing and Community Development Act of 1992 (42 U.S.C. 
12899), and provide disadvantaged youth with opportunities for 
employment, education, leadership development, and training in the 
construction or rehabilitation of housing for homeless individuals and 
members of low- and very low-income families.
    Indian tribes shall have the meaning given this term in 24 CFR part 
571.
    JTPA means the Job Training Partnership Act (29 U.S.C. 1579(a)).
    Low-income person. See the definition of ``section 3 resident'' in 
this section.
    Metropolitan area means a metropolitan statistical area (MSA), as 
established by the Office of Management and Budget.
    Neighborhood area means:

[[Page 603]]

    (1) For HUD housing programs, a geographical location within the 
jurisdiction of a unit of general local government (but not the entire 
jurisdiction) designated in ordinances, or other local documents as a 
neighborhood, village, or similar geographical designation.
    (2) For HUD community development programs, see the definition, if 
provided, in the regulations for the applicable community development 
program, or the definition for this term in 24 CFR 570.204(c)(1).
    New hires mean full-time employees for permanent, temporary or 
seasonal employment opportunities.
    Nonmetropolitan county means any county outside of a metropolitan 
area.
    Other HUD programs means HUD programs, other than HUD public and 
Indian housing programs, that provide housing and community development 
assistance for ``section 3 covered projects,'' as defined in this 
section.
    Public housing resident has the meaning given this term in 24 CFR 
part 963.
    Recipient means any entity which receives section 3 covered 
assistance, directly from HUD or from another recipient and includes, 
but is not limited to, any State, unit of local government, PHA, IHA, 
Indian tribe, or other public body, public or private nonprofit 
organization, private agency or institution, mortgagor, developer, 
limited dividend sponsor, builder, property manager, community housing 
development organization, resident management corporation, resident 
council, or cooperative association. Recipient also includes any 
successor, assignee or transferee of any such entity, but does not 
include any ultimate beneficiary under the HUD program to which section 
3 applies and does not include contractors.
    Section 3 means section 3 of the Housing and Urban Development Act 
of 1968, as amended (12 U.S.C. 1701u).
    Section 3 business concern means a business concern, as defined in 
this section--
    (1) That is 51 percent or more owned by section 3 residents; or
    (2) Whose permanent, full-time employees include persons, at least 
30 percent of whom are currently section 3 residents, or within three 
years of the date of first employment with the business concern were 
section 3 residents; or
    (3) That provides evidence of a commitment to subcontract in excess 
of 25 percent of the dollar award of all subcontracts to be awarded to 
business concerns that meet the qualifications set forth in paragraphs 
(1) or (2) in this definition of ``section 3 business concern.''
    Section 3 clause means the contract provisions set forth in 
Sec. 135.38.
    Section 3 covered activity means any activity which is funded by 
section 3 covered assistance public and Indian housing assistance.
    Section 3 covered assistance means: (1) Public and Indian housing 
development assistance provided pursuant to section 5 of the 1937 Act;
    (2) Public and Indian housing operating assistance provided pursuant 
to section 9 of the 1937 Act;
    (3) Public and Indian housing modernization assistance provided 
pursuant to section 14 of the 1937 Act;
    (4) Assistance provided under any HUD housing or community 
development program that is expended for work arising in connection 
with:
    (i) Housing rehabilitation (including reduction and abatement of 
lead-based paint hazards, but excluding routine maintenance, repair and 
replacement);
    (ii) Housing construction; or
    (iii) Other public construction project (which includes other 
buildings or improvements, regardless of ownership).
    Section 3 covered contract means a contract or subcontract 
(including a professional service contract) awarded by a recipient or 
contractor for work generated by the expenditure of section 3 covered 
assistance, or for work arising in connection with a section 3 covered 
project. ``Section 3 covered contracts'' do not include contracts 
awarded under HUD's procurement program, which are governed by the 
Federal Acquisition Regulation System (see 48 CFR, Chapter 1). ``Section 
3 covered contracts'' also do not include contracts for the purchase of 
supplies and materials. However, whenever a contract for materials 
includes the installation of the materials, the contract constitutes a 
section 3 covered contract. For example, a contract for the

[[Page 604]]

purchase and installation of a furnace would be a section 3 covered 
contract because the contract is for work (i.e., the installation of the 
furnace) and thus is covered by section 3.
    Section 3 covered project means the construction, reconstruction, 
conversion or rehabilitation of housing (including reduction and 
abatement of lead-based paint hazards), other public construction which 
includes buildings or improvements (regardless of ownership) assisted 
with housing or community development assistance.
    Section 3 joint venture. See Sec. 135.40. Section 3 resident means: 
(1) A public housing resident; or
    (2) An individual who resides in the metropolitan area or 
nonmetropolitan county in which the section 3 covered assistance is 
expended, and who is:
    (i) A low-income person, as this term is defined in section 3(b)(2) 
of the 1937 Act (42 U.S.C. 1437a(b)(2)). Section 3(b)(2) of the 1937 Act 
defines this term to mean families (including single persons) whose 
incomes do not exceed 80 per centum of the median income for the area, 
as determined by the Secretary, with adjustments for smaller and larger 
families, except that the Secretary may establish income ceilings higher 
or lower than 80 per centum of the median for the area on the basis of 
the Secretary's findings that such variations are necessary because of 
prevailing levels of construction costs or unusually high or low-income 
families; or
    (ii) A very low-income person, as this term is defined in section 
3(b)(2) of the 1937 Act (42 U.S.C. 1437a(b)(2)). Section 3(b)(2) of the 
1937 Act (42 U.S.C. 1437a(b)(2)) defines this term to mean families 
(including single persons) whose incomes do not exceed 50 per centum of 
the median family income for the area, as determined by the Secretary 
with adjustments for smaller and larger families, except that the 
Secretary may establish income ceilings higher or lower than 50 per 
centum of the median for the area on the basis of the Secretary's 
findings that such variations are necessary because of unusually high or 
low family incomes.
    (3) A person seeking the training and employment preference provided 
by section 3 bears the responsibility of providing evidence (if 
requested) that the person is eligible for the preference.
    Section 8 assistance means assistance provided under section 8 of 
the 1937 Act (42 U.S.C. 1437f) pursuant to 24 CFR part 882, subpart G.
    Service area means the geographical area in which the persons 
benefitting from the section 3 covered project reside. The service area 
shall not extend beyond the unit of general local government in which 
the section 3 covered assistance is expended. In HUD's Indian housing 
programs, the service area, for IHAs established by an Indian tribe as a 
result of the exercise of the tribe's sovereign power, is limited to the 
area of tribal jurisdiction.
    Subcontractor means any entity (other than a person who is an 
employee of the contractor) which has a contract with a contractor to 
undertake a portion of the contractor's obligation for the performance 
of work generated by the expenditure of section 3 covered assistance, or 
arising in connection with a section 3 covered project.
    Very low-income person. See the definition of ``section 3 resident'' 
in this section.
    Youthbuild programs. See the definition of ``HUD Youthbuild 
programs'' in this section.

[59 FR 33880, June 30, 1994, as amended at 61 FR 5206, Feb. 9, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 135.7  Delegation of authority.

    Except as may be otherwise provided in this part, the functions and 
responsibilities of the Secretary under section 3, and described in this 
part, are delegated to the Assistant Secretary for Fair Housing and 
Equal Opportunity. The Assistant Secretary is further authorized to 
redelegate functions and responsibilities to other employees of HUD; 
provided however, that the authority to issue rules and regulations 
under this part, which authority is delegated to the Assistant 
Secretary, may not be redelegated by the Assistant Secretary.

[[Page 605]]


<R05>
Sec. 135.9  Requirements applicable to HUD NOFAs for section 3 covered programs.

    (a) Certification of compliance with part 135. All notices of 
funding availability (NOFAs) issued by HUD that announce the 
availability of funding covered by section 3 shall include a provision 
in the NOFA that notifies applicants that section 3 and the regulations 
in part 135 are applicable to funding awards made under the NOFA. 
Additionally the NOFA shall require as an application submission 
requirement (which may be specified in the NOFA or application kit) a 
certification by the applicant that the applicant will comply with the 
regulations in part 135. (For PHAs, this requirement will be met where a 
PHA Resolution in Support of the Application is submitted.) With respect 
to application evaluation, HUD will accept an applicant's certification 
unless there is evidence substantially challenging the certification.
    (b) Statement of purpose in NOFAs. (1) For competitively awarded 
assistance in which the grants are for activities administered by an HA, 
and those activities are anticipated to generate significant training, 
employment or contracting opportunities, the NOFA must include a 
statement that one of the purposes of the assistance is to give to the 
greatest extent feasible, and consistent with existing Federal, State 
and local laws and regulations, job training, employment, contracting 
and other economic opportunities to section 3 residents and section 3 
business concerns.
    (2) For competitively awarded assistance involving housing 
rehabilitation, construction or other public construction, where the 
amount awarded to the applicant may exceed $200,000, the NOFA must 
include a statement that one of the purposes of the assistance is to 
give, to the greatest extent feasible, and consistent with existing 
Federal, State and local laws and regulations, job training, employment, 
contracting and other economic opportunities to section 3 residents and 
section 3 business concerns.
    (c) Section 3 as NOFA evaluation criteria. Where not otherwise 
precluded by statute, in the evaluation of applications for the award of 
assistance, consideration shall be given to the extent to which an 
applicant has demonstrated that it will train and employ section 3 
residents and contract with section 3 business concerns for economic 
opportunities generated in connection with the assisted project or 
activity. The evaluation criteria to be utilized, and the rating points 
to be assigned, will be specified in the NOFA.


<R05>
Sec. 135.11  Other laws governing training, employment, and contracting.

    Other laws and requirements that are applicable or may be applicable 
to the economic opportunities generated from the expenditure of section 
3 covered assistance include, but are not necessarily limited to those 
listed in this section.
    (a) Procurement standards for States and local governments (24 CFR 
85.36)--(1) General. Nothing in this part 135 prescribes specific 
methods of procurement. However, neither section 3 nor the requirements 
of this part 135 supersede the general requirement of 24 CFR 85.36(c) 
that all procurement transactions be conducted in a competitive manner. 
Consistent with 24 CFR 85.36(c)(2), section 3 is a Federal statute that 
expressly encourages, to the maximum extent feasible, a geographic 
preference in the evaluation of bids or proposals.
    (2) Flexible Subsidy Program. Multifamily project mortgagors in the 
Flexible Subsidy Program are not required to utilize the methods of 
procurement in 24 CFR 85.36(d), and are not permitted to utilize methods 
of procurement that would result in their award of a contract to a 
business concern that submits a bid higher than the lowest responsive 
bid. A multifamily project mortgagor, however, must ensure that, to the 
greatest extent feasible, the procurement practices it selects provide 
preference to section 3 business concerns.
    (b) Procurement standards for other recipients (OMB Circular No. A-
110). Nothing in this part prescribes specific methods of procurement 
for grants and other agreements with institutions of higher education, 
hospitals, and other nonprofit organizations. Consistent with the 
requirements set forth in OMB Circular No. A-110, section 3 is a

[[Page 606]]

Federal statute that expressly encourages a geographic preference in the 
evaluation of bids or proposals.
    (c) Federal labor standards provisions. Certain construction 
contracts are subject to compliance with the requirement to pay 
prevailing wages determined under Davis-Bacon Act (40 U.S.C. 276a--276a-
7) and implementing U.S. Department of Labor regulations in 29 CFR part 
5. Additionally, certain HUD-assisted rehabilitation and maintenance 
activities on public and Indian housing developments are subject to 
compliance with the requirement to pay prevailing wage rates, as 
determined or adopted by HUD, to laborers and mechanics employed in this 
work. Apprentices and trainees may be utilized on this work only to the 
extent permitted under either Department of Labor regulations at 29 CFR 
part 5 or for work subject to HUD-determined prevailing wage rates, HUD 
policies and guidelines. These requirements include adherence to the 
wage rates and ratios of apprentices or trainees to journeymen set out 
in ``approved apprenticeship and training programs,'' as described in 
paragraph (d) of this section.
    (d) Approved apprenticeship and trainee programs. Certain 
apprenticeship and trainee programs have been approved by various 
Federal agencies. Approved apprenticeship and trainee programs include: 
an apprenticeship program approved by the Bureau of Apprenticeship and 
Training of the Department of Labor, or a State Apprenticeship Agency, 
or an on-the-job training program approved by the Bureau of 
Apprenticeship and Training, in accordance with the regulations at 29 
CFR part 5; or a training program approved by HUD in accordance with HUD 
policies and guidelines, as applicable. Participation in an approved 
apprenticeship program does not, in and of itself, demonstrate 
compliance with the regulations of this part.
    (e) Compliance with Executive Order 11246. Certain contractors 
covered by this part are subject to compliance with Executive Order 
11246, as amended by Executive Order 12086, and the Department of Labor 
regulations issued pursuant thereto (41 CFR chapter 60) which provide 
that no person shall be discriminated against on the basis of race, 
color, religion, sex, or national origin in all phases of employment 
during the performance of Federal or Federally assisted construction 
contracts.


<R04>
Subpart B--Economic Opportunities for Section 3 Residents and Section 3 
                            Business Concerns


<R05>
Sec. 135.30  Numerical goals for meeting the greatest extent feasible requirement.

    (a) General. (1) Recipients and covered contractors may demonstrate 
compliance with the ``greatest extent feasible'' requirement of section 
3 by meeting the numerical goals set forth in this section for providing 
training, employment, and contracting opportunities to section 3 
residents and section 3 business concerns.
    (2) The goals established in this section apply to the entire amount 
of section 3 covered assistance awarded to a recipient in any Federal 
Fiscal Year (FY), commencing with the first FY following the effective 
date of this rule.
    (3) For recipients that do not engage in training, or hiring, but 
award contracts to contractors that will engage in training, hiring, and 
subcontracting, recipients must ensure that, to the greatest extent 
feasible, contractors will provide training, employment, and contracting 
opportunities to section 3 residents and section 3 business concerns.
    (4) The numerical goals established in this section represent 
minimum numerical targets.
    (b) Training and employment. The numerical goals set forth in 
paragraph (b) of this section apply to new hires. The numerical goals 
reflect the aggregate hires. Efforts to employ section 3 residents, to 
the greatest extent feasible, should be made at all job levels.
    (1) Numerical goals for section 3 covered public and Indian housing 
programs. Recipients of section 3 covered public and Indian housing 
assistance (as described in Sec. 135.5) and their contractors and 
subcontractors may demonstrate compliance with this part by committing 
to employ section 3 residents as:

[[Page 607]]

    (i) 10 percent of the aggregate number of new hires for the one year 
period beginning in FY 1995;
    (ii) 20 percent of the aggregate number of new hires for the one 
period beginning in FY 1996;
    (iii) 30 percent of the aggregate number of new hires for one year 
period beginning in FY 1997 and continuing thereafter.
    (2) Numerical goals for other HUD programs covered by section 3. (i) 
Recipients of section 3 covered housing assistance provided under other 
HUD programs, and their contractors and subcontractors (unless the 
contract or subcontract awards do not meet the threshold specified in 
Sec. 135.3(a)(3)) may demonstrate compliance with this part by 
committing to employ section 3 residents as 10 percent of the aggregate 
number of new hires for each year over the duration of the section 3 
project;
    (ii) Where a managing general partner or management agent is 
affiliated, in a given metropolitan area, with recipients of section 3 
covered housing assistance, for an aggregate of 500 or more units in any 
fiscal year, the managing partner or management agent may demonstrate 
compliance with this part by committing to employ section 3 residents 
as:
    (A) 10 percent of the aggregate number of new hires for the one year 
period beginning in FY 1995;
    (B) 20 percent of the aggregate number of new hires for the one year 
period beginning in FY 1996;
    (C) 30 percent of the aggregate number of new hires for the one year 
period beginning in FY 1997, and continuing thereafter.
    (3) Recipients of section 3 covered community development 
assistance, and their contractors and subcontractors (unless the 
contract or subcontract awards do not meet the threshold specified in 
Sec. 135.3(a)(3)) may demonstrate compliance with the requirements of 
this part by committing to employ section 3 residents as:
    (i) 10 percent of the aggregate number of new hires for the one year 
period beginning in FY 1995;
    (ii) 20 percent of the aggregate number of new hires for the one 
year period beginning in FY 1996; and
    (iii) 30 percent of the aggregate number of new hires for the one 
year period beginning in FY 1997 and continuing thereafter.
    (c) Contracts. Numerical goals set forth in paragraph (c) of this 
section apply to contracts awarded in connection with all section 3 
covered projects and section 3 covered activities. Each recipient and 
contractor and subcontractor (unless the contract or subcontract awards 
do not meet the threshold specified in Sec. 135.3(a)(3)) may demonstrate 
compliance with the requirements of this part by committing to award to 
section 3 business concerns:
    (1) At least 10 percent of the total dollar amount of all section 3 
covered contracts for building trades work for maintenance, repair, 
modernization or development of public or Indian housing, or for 
building trades work arising in connection with housing rehabilitation, 
housing construction and other public construction; and
    (2) At least three (3) percent of the total dollar amount of all 
other section 3 covered contracts.
    (d) Safe harbor and compliance determinations. (1) In the absence of 
evidence to the contrary, a recipient that meets the minimum numerical 
goals set forth in this section will be considered to have complied with 
the section 3 preference requirements.
    (2) In evaluating compliance under subpart D of this part, a 
recipient that has not met the numerical goals set forth in this section 
has the burden of demonstrating why it was not feasible to meet the 
numerical goals set forth in this section. Such justification may 
include impediments encountered despite actions taken. A recipient or 
contractor also can indicate other economic opportunities, such as those 
listed in Sec. 135.40, which were provided in its efforts to comply with 
section 3 and the requirements of this part.


<R05>
Sec. 135.32  Responsibilities of the recipient.

    Each recipient has the responsibility to comply with section 3 in 
its own operations, and ensure compliance in the

[[Page 608]]

operations of its contractors and subcontractors. This responsibility 
includes but may not be necessarily limited to:
    (a) Implementing procedures designed to notify section 3 residents 
about training and employment opportunities generated by section 3 
covered assistance and section 3 business concerns about contracting 
opportunities generated by section 3 covered assistance;
    (b) Notifying potential contractors for section 3 covered projects 
of the requirements of this part, and incorporating the section 3 clause 
set forth in Sec. 135.38 in all solicitations and contracts.
    (c) Facilitating the training and employment of section 3 residents 
and the award of contracts to section 3 business concerns by undertaking 
activities such as described in the Appendix to this part, as 
appropriate, to reach the goals set forth in Sec. 135.30. Recipients, at 
their own discretion, may establish reasonable numerical goals for the 
training and employment of section 3 residents and contract award to 
section 3 business concerns that exceed those specified in Sec. 135.30;
    (d) Assisting and actively cooperating with the Assistant Secretary 
in obtaining the compliance of contractors and subcontractors with the 
requirements of this part, and refraining from entering into any 
contract with any contractor where the recipient has notice or knowledge 
that the contractor has been found in violation of the regulations in 24 
CFR part 135.
    (e) Documenting actions taken to comply with the requirements of 
this part, the results of actions taken and impediments, if any.
    (f) A State or county which distributes funds for section 3 covered 
assistance to units of local governments, to the greatest extent 
feasible, must attempt to reach the numerical goals set forth in 135.30 
regardless of the number of local governments receiving funds from the 
section 3 covered assistance which meet the thresholds for applicability 
set forth at 135.3. The State or county must inform units of local 
government to whom funds are distributed of the requirements of this 
part; assist local governments and their contractors in meeting the 
requirements and objectives of this part; and monitor the performance of 
local governments with respect to the objectives and requirements of 
this part.


<R05>
Sec. 135.34  Preference for section 3 residents in training and employment opportunities.

    (a) Order of providing preference. Recipients, contractors and 
subcontractors shall direct their efforts to provide, to the greatest 
extent feasible, training and employment opportunities generated from 
the expenditure of section 3 covered assistance to section 3 residents 
in the order of priority provided in paragraph (a) of this section.
    (1) Public and Indian housing programs. In public and Indian housing 
programs, efforts shall be directed to provide training and employment 
opportunities to section 3 residents in the following order of priority:
    (i) Residents of the housing development or developments for which 
the section 3 covered assistance is expended (category 1 residents);
    (ii) Residents of other housing developments managed by the HA that 
is expending the section 3 covered housing assistance (category 2 
residents);
    (iii) Participants in HUD Youthbuild programs being carried out in 
the metropolitan area (or nonmetropolitan county) in which the section 3 
covered assistance is expended (category 3 residents);
    (iv) Other section 3 residents.
    (2) Housing and community development programs. In housing and 
community development programs, priority consideration shall be given, 
where feasible, to:
    (i) Section 3 residents residing in the service area or neighborhood 
in which the section 3 covered project is located (collectively, 
referred to as category 1 residents); and
    (ii) Participants in HUD Youthbuild programs (category 2 residents).
    (iii) Where the section 3 project is assisted under the Stewart B. 
McKinney Homeless Assistance Act (42 U.S.C. 11301 et seq.), homeless 
persons residing in the service area or neighborhood in which the 
section 3 covered project is located shall be given the highest 
priority;

[[Page 609]]

    (iv) Other section 3 residents.
    (3) Recipients of housing assistance programs administered by the 
Assistant Secretary for Housing may, at their own discretion, provide 
preference to residents of the housing development receiving the section 
3 covered assistance within the service area or neighborhood where the 
section 3 covered project is located.
    (4) Recipients of community development programs may, at their own 
discretion, provide priority to recipients of government assistance for 
housing, including recipients of certificates or vouchers under the 
Section 8 housing assistance program, within the service area or 
neighborhood where the section 3 covered project is located.
    (b) Eligibility for preference. A section 3 resident seeking the 
preference in training and employment provided by this part shall 
certify, or submit evidence to the recipient contractor or 
subcontractor, if requested, that the person is a section 3 resident, as 
defined in Sec. 135.5. (An example of evidence of eligibility for the 
preference is evidence of receipt of public assistance, or evidence of 
participation in a public assistance program.)
    (c) Eligibility for employment. Nothing in this part shall be 
construed to require the employment of a section 3 resident who does not 
meet the qualifications of the position to be filled.


<R05>
Sec. 135.36  Preference for section 3 business concerns in contracting opportunities.

    (a) Order of providing preference. Recipients, contractors and 
subcontractors shall direct their efforts to award section 3 covered 
contracts, to the greatest extent feasible, to section 3 business 
concerns in the order of priority provided in paragraph (a) of this 
section.
    (1) Public and Indian housing programs. In public and Indian housing 
programs, efforts shall be directed to award contracts to section 3 
business concerns in the following order of priority:
    (i) Business concerns that are 51 percent or more owned by residents 
of the housing development or developments for which the section 3 
covered assistance is expended, or whose full-time, permanent workforce 
includes 30 percent of these persons as employees (category 1 
businesses);
    (ii) Business concerns that are 51 percent or more owned by 
residents of other housing developments or developments managed by the 
HA that is expending the section 3 covered assistance, or whose full-
time, permanent workforce includes 30 percent of these persons as 
employees (category 2 businesses); or
    (iii) HUD Youthbuild programs being carried out in the metropolitan 
area (or nonmetropolitan county) in which the section 3 covered 
assistance is expended (category 3 businesses).
    (iv) Business concerns that are 51 percent or more owned by section 
3 residents, or whose permanent, full-time workforce includes no less 
than 30 percent section 3 residents (category 4 businesses), or that 
subcontract in excess of 25 percent of the total amount of subcontracts 
to business concerns identified in paragraphs (a)(1)(i) and (a)(1)(ii) 
of this section.
    (2) Housing and community development programs. In housing and 
community development programs, priority consideration shall be given, 
where feasible, to:
    (i) Section 3 business concerns that provide economic opportunities 
for section 3 residents in the service area or neighborhood in which the 
section 3 covered project is located (category 1 businesses); and
    (ii) Applicants (as this term is defined in 42 U.S.C. 12899) 
selected to carry out HUD Youthbuild programs (category 2 businesses);
    (iii) Other section 3 business concerns.
    (b) Eligibility for preference. A business concern seeking to 
qualify for a section 3 contracting preference shall certify or submit 
evidence, if requested, that the business concern is a section 3 
business concern as defined in Sec. 135.5.
    (c) Ability to complete contract. A section 3 business concern 
seeking a contract or a subcontract shall submit evidence to the 
recipient, contractor, or subcontractor (as applicable), if requested, 
sufficient to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the party awarding the 
contract that the business concern is responsible and has the ability to

[[Page 610]]

perform successfully under the terms and conditions of the proposed 
contract. (The ability to perform successfully under the terms and 
conditions of the proposed contract is required of all contractors and 
subcontractors subject to the procurement standards of 24 CFR 85.36 (see 
24 CFR 85.36(b)(8)).) This regulation requires consideration of, among 
other factors, the potential contractor's record in complying with 
public policy requirements. Section 3 compliance is a matter properly 
considered as part of this determination.


<R05>
Sec. 135.38  Section 3 clause.

    All section 3 covered contracts shall include the following clause 
(referred to as the section 3 clause):

    A. The work to be performed under this contract is subject to the 
requirements of section 3 of the Housing and Urban Development Act of 
1968, as amended, 12 U.S.C. 1701u (section 3). The purpose of section 3 
is to ensure that employment and other economic opportunities generated 
by HUD assistance or HUD-assisted projects covered by section 3, shall, 
to the greatest extent feasible, be directed to low- and very low-income 
persons, particularly persons who are recipients of HUD assistance for 
housing.
    B. The parties to this contract agree to comply with HUD's 
regulations in 24 CFR part 135, which implement section 3. As evidenced 
by their execution of this contract, the parties to this contract 
certify that they are under no contractual or other impediment that 
would prevent them from complying with the part 135 regulations.
    C. The contractor agrees to send to each labor organization or 
representative of workers with which the contractor has a collective 
bargaining agreement or other understanding, if any, a notice advising 
the labor organization or workers' representative of the contractor's 
commitments under this section 3 clause, and will post copies of the 
notice in conspicuous places at the work site where both employees and 
applicants for training and employment positions can see the notice. The 
notice shall describe the section 3 preference, shall set forth minimum 
number and job titles subject to hire, availability of apprenticeship 
and training positions, the qualifications for each; and the name and 
location of the person(s) taking applications for each of the positions; 
and the anticipated date the work shall begin.
    D. The contractor agrees to include this section 3 clause in every 
subcontract subject to compliance with regulations in 24 CFR part 135, 
and agrees to take appropriate action, as provided in an applicable 
provision of the subcontract or in this section 3 clause, upon a finding 
that the subcontractor is in violation of the regulations in 24 CFR part 
135. The contractor will not subcontract with any subcontractor where 
the contractor has notice or knowledge that the subcontractor has been 
found in violation of the regulations in 24 CFR part 135.
    E. The contractor will certify that any vacant employment positions, 
including training positions, that are filled (1) after the contractor 
is selected but before the contract is executed, and (2) with persons 
other than those to whom the regulations of 24 CFR part 135 require 
employment opportunities to be directed, were not filled to circumvent 
the contractor's obligations under 24 CFR part 135.
    F. Noncompliance with HUD's regulations in 24 CFR part 135 may 
result in sanctions, termination of this contract for default, and 
debarment or suspension from future HUD assisted contracts.
    G. With respect to work performed in connection with section 3 
covered Indian housing assistance, section 7(b) of the Indian Self-
Determination and Education Assistance Act (25 U.S.C. 450e) also applies 
to the work to be performed under this contract. Section 7(b) requires 
that to the greatest extent feasible (i) preference and opportunities 
for training and employment shall be given to Indians, and (ii) 
preference in the award of contracts and subcontracts shall be given to 
Indian organizations and Indian-owned Economic Enterprises. Parties to 
this contract that are subject to the provisions of section 3 and 
section 7(b) agree to comply with section 3 to the maximum extent 
feasible, but not in derogation of compliance with section 7(b).


<R05>
Sec. 135.40  Providing other economic opportunities.

    (a) General. In accordance with the findings of the Congress, as 
stated in section 3, that other economic opportunities offer an 
effective means of empowering low-income persons, a recipient is 
encouraged to undertake efforts to provide to low-income persons 
economic opportunities other than training, employment, and contract 
awards, in connection with section 3 covered assistance.
    (b) Other training and employment related opportunities. Other 
economic opportunities to train and employ section 3 residents include, 
but need not be limited to, use of ``upward mobility'', ``bridge'' and 
trainee positions to fill vacancies; hiring section 3 residents in

[[Page 611]]

management and maintenance positions within other housing developments; 
and hiring section 3 residents in part-time positions.
    (c) Other business related economic opportunities. (l) A recipient 
or contractor may provide economic opportunities to establish, stabilize 
or expand section 3 business concerns, including micro-enterprises. Such 
opportunities include, but are not limited to the formation of section 3 
joint ventures, financial support for affiliating with franchise 
development, use of labor only contracts for building trades, purchase 
of supplies and materials from housing authority resident-owned 
businesses, purchase of materials and supplies from PHA resident-owned 
businesses and use of procedures under 24 CFR part 963 regarding HA 
contracts to HA resident-owned businesses. A recipient or contractor may 
employ these methods directly or may provide incentives to non-section 3 
businesses to utilize such methods to provide other economic 
opportunities to low-income persons.
    (2) A section 3 joint venture means an association of business 
concerns, one of which qualifies as a section 3 business concern, formed 
by written joint venture agreement to engage in and carry out a specific 
business venture for which purpose the business concerns combine their 
efforts, resources, and skills for joint profit, but not necessarily on 
a continuing or permanent basis for conducting business generally, and 
for which the section 3 business concern:
    (i) Is responsible for a clearly defined portion of the work to be 
performed and holds management responsibilities in the joint venture; 
and
    (ii) Performs at least 25 percent of the work and is contractually 
entitled to compensation proportionate to its work.


<R04>
                          Subpart C [Reserved]


<R04>
               Subpart D--Complaint and Compliance Review


<R05>
Sec. 135.70  General.

    (a) Purpose. The purpose of this subpart is to establish the 
procedures for handling complaints alleging noncompliance with the 
regulations of this part, and the procedures governing the Assistant 
Secretary's review of a recipient's or contractor's compliance with the 
regulations in this part.
    (b) Definitions. For purposes of this subpart:
    (1) Complaint means an allegation of noncompliance with regulations 
of this part made in the form described in Sec. 135.76(d).
    (2) Complainant means the party which files a complaint with the 
Assistant Secretary alleging that a recipient or contractor has failed 
or refused to comply with the regulations in this part.
    (3) Noncompliance with section 3 means failure by a recipient or 
contractor to comply with the requirements of this part.
    (4) Respondent means the recipient or contractor against which a 
complaint of noncompliance has been filed. The term ``recipient'' shall 
have the meaning set forth in Sec. 135.7, which includes PHA and IHA.


<R05>
Sec. 135.72  Cooperation in achieving compliance.

    (a) The Assistant Secretary recognizes that the success of ensuring 
that section 3 residents and section 3 business concerns have the 
opportunity to apply for jobs and to bid for contracts generated by 
covered HUD financial assistance depends upon the cooperation and 
assistance of HUD recipients and their contractors and subcontractors. 
All recipients shall cooperate fully and promptly with the Assistant 
Secretary in section 3 compliance reviews, in investigations of 
allegations of noncompliance made under Sec. 135.76, and with the 
distribution and collection of data and information that the Assistant 
Secretary may require in connection with achieving the economic 
objectives of section 3.
    (b) The recipient shall refrain from entering into a contract with 
any contractor after notification to the recipient by HUD that the 
contractor has been found in violation of the regulations in this part. 
The provisions of 24 CFR part 24 apply to the employment, engagement of 
services, awarding of contracts or funding of any contractors or 
subcontractors during any period of

[[Page 612]]

debarment, suspension or otherwise ineligible status.


<R05>
Sec. 135.74  Section 3 compliance review procedures.

    (a) Compliance reviews by Assistant Secretary. The Assistant 
Secretary shall periodically conduct section 3 compliance reviews of 
selected recipients and contractors to determine whether these 
recipients are in compliance with the regulations in this part.
    (b) Form of compliance review. A section 3 compliance review shall 
consist of a comprehensive analysis and evaluation of the recipient's or 
contractor's compliance with the requirements and obligations imposed by 
the regulations of this part, including an analysis of the extent to 
which section 3 residents have been hired and section 3 business 
concerns have been awarded contracts as a result of the methods 
undertaken by the recipient to achieve the employment, contracting and 
other economic objectives of section 3.
    (c) Where compliance review reveals noncompliance with section 3 by 
recipient or contractor. Where the section 3 compliance review reveals 
that a recipient or contractor has not complied with section 3, the 
Assistant Secretary shall notify the recipient or contractor of its 
specific deficiencies in compliance with the regulations of this part, 
and shall advise the recipient or contractor of the means by which these 
deficiencies may be corrected. HUD shall conduct a follow-up review with 
the recipient or contractor to ensure that action is being taken to 
correct the deficiencies.
    (d) Continuing noncompliance by recipient or contractor. A 
continuing failure or refusal by the recipient or contractor to comply 
with the regulations in this part may result in the application of 
sanctions specified in the contract through which HUD assistance is 
provided, or the application of sanctions specified in the regulations 
governing the HUD program under which HUD financial assistance is 
provided. HUD will notify the recipient of any continuing failure or 
refusal by the contractor to comply with the regulations in this part 
for possible action under any procurement contract between the recipient 
and the contractor. Debarment, suspension and limited denial of 
participation pursuant to HUD's regulations in 24 CFR part 24, where 
appropriate, may be applied to the recipient or the contractor.
    (e) Conducting compliance review before the award of assistance. 
Section 3 compliance reviews may be conducted before the award of 
contracts, and especially where the Assistant Secretary has reasonable 
grounds to believe that the recipient or contractor will be unable or 
unwilling to comply with the regulations in this part.
    (f) Consideration of complaints during compliance review. Complaints 
alleging noncompliance with section 3, as provided in Sec. 135.76, may 
also be considered during any compliance review conducted to determine 
the recipient's conformance with regulations in this part.


<R05>
Sec. 135.76  Filing and processing complaints.

    (a) Who may file a complaint. The following individuals and business 
concerns may, personally or through an authorized representative, file 
with the Assistant Secretary a complaint alleging noncompliance with 
section 3:
    (1) Any section 3 resident on behalf of himself or herself, or as a 
representative of persons similarly situated, seeking employment, 
training or other economic opportunities generated from the expenditure 
of section 3 covered assistance with a recipient or contractor, or by a 
representative who is not a section 3 resident but who represents one or 
more section 3 residents;
    (2) Any section 3 business concern on behalf of itself, or as a 
representative of other section 3 business concerns similarly situated, 
seeking contract opportunities generated from the expenditure of section 
3 covered assistance from a recipient or contractor, or by an individual 
representative of section 3 business concerns.
    (b) Where to file a complaint. A complaint must be filed with the 
Assistant Secretary for Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity, Department 
of Housing and Urban Development, Washington, DC, 20410.
    (c) Time of filing. (1) A complaint must be received not later than 
180 days from the date of the action or omission upon which the 
complaint is

[[Page 613]]

based, unless the time for filing is extended by the Assistant Secretary 
for good cause shown.
    (2) Where a complaint alleges noncompliance with section 3 and the 
regulations of this part that is continuing, as manifested in a number 
of incidents of noncompliance, the complaint will be timely if filed 
within 180 days of the last alleged occurrence of noncompliance.
    (3) Where a complaint contains incomplete information, the Assistant 
Secretary shall request the needed information from the complainant. In 
the event this information is not furnished to the Assistant Secretary 
within sixty (60) days of the date of the request, the complaint may be 
closed.
    (d) Contents of complaint--(1) Written complaints. Each complaint 
must be in writing, signed by the complainant, and include:
    (i) The complainant's name and address;
    (ii) The name and address of the respondent;
    (iii) A description of the acts or omissions by the respondent that 
is sufficient to inform the Assistant Secretary of the nature and date 
of the alleged noncompliance.
    (iv) A complainant may provide information to be contained in a 
complaint by telephone to HUD or any HUD Field Office, and HUD will 
reduce the information provided by telephone to writing on the 
prescribed complaint form and send the form to the complainant for 
signature.
    (2) Amendment of complaint. Complaints may be reasonably and fairly 
amended at any time. Such amendments may include, but are not limited 
to, amendments to cure, technical defects or omissions, including 
failure to sign or affirm a complaint, to clarify or amplify the 
allegations in a complaint, or to join additional or substitute 
respondents. Except for the purposes of notifying respondents, amended 
complaints will be considered as having been made as of the original 
filing date.
    (e) Resolution of complaint by recipient. (1) Within ten (10) days 
of timely filing of a complaint that contains complete information (in 
accordance with paragraphs (c) and (d) of this section), the Assistant 
Secretary shall determine whether the complainant alleges an action or 
omission by a recipient or the recipient's contractor that if proven 
qualifies as noncompliance with section 3. If a determination is made 
that there is an allegation of noncompliance with section 3, the 
complaint shall be sent to the recipient for resolution.
    (2) If the recipient believes that the complaint lacks merit, the 
recipient must notify the Assistant Secretary in writing of this 
recommendation with supporting reasons, within 30 days of the date of 
receipt of the complaint. The determination that a complaint lacks merit 
is reserved to the Assistant Secretary.
    (3) If the recipient determines that there is merit to the 
complaint, the recipient will have sixty (60) days from the date of 
receipt of the complaint to resolve the matter with the complainant. At 
the expiration of the 60-day period, the recipient must notify the 
Assistant Secretary in writing whether a resolution of the complaint has 
been reached. If resolution has been reached, the notification must be 
signed by both the recipient and the complainant, and must summarize the 
terms of the resolution reached between the two parties.
    (4) Any request for an extension of the 60-day period by the 
recipient must be submitted in writing to the Assistant Secretary, and 
must include a statement explaining the need for the extension.
    (5) If the recipient is unable to resolve the complaint within the 
60-day period (or more if extended by the Assistant Secretary), the 
complaint shall be referred to the Assistant Secretary for handling.
    (f) Informal resolution of complaint by Assistant Secretary--(1) 
Dismissal of complaint. Upon receipt of the recipient's written 
recommendation that there is no merit to the complaint, or upon failure 
of the recipient and complainant to reach resolution, the Assistant 
Secretary shall review the complaint to determine whether it presents a 
valid allegation of noncompliance with section 3. The Assistant 
Secretary may conduct further investigation if deemed necessary. Where 
the complaint fails to present a valid allegation of noncompliance with 
section 3,

[[Page 614]]

the Assistant Secretary will dismiss the complaint without further 
action. The Assistant Secretary shall notify the complainant of the 
dismissal of the complaint and the reasons for the dismissal.
    (2) Informal resolution. Where the allegations in a complaint on 
their face, or as amplified by the statements of the complainant, 
present a valid allegation of noncompliance with section 3, the 
Assistant Secretary will attempt, through informal methods, to obtain a 
voluntary and just resolution of the complaint. Where attempts to 
resolve the complaint informally fail, the Assistant Secretary will 
impose a resolution on the recipient and complainant. Any resolution 
imposed by the Assistant Secretary will be in accordance with 
requirements and procedures concerning the imposition of sanctions or 
resolutions as set forth in the regulations governing the HUD program 
under which the section 3 covered assistance was provided.
    (3) Effective date of informal resolution. The imposed resolution 
will become effective and binding at the expiration of 15 days following 
notification to recipient and complainant by certified mail of the 
imposed resolution, unless either party appeals the resolution before 
the expiration of the 15 days. Any appeal shall be in writing to the 
Secretary and shall include the basis for the appeal.
    (g) Sanctions. Sanctions that may be imposed on recipients that fail 
to comply with the regulations of this part include debarment, 
suspension and limited denial of participation in HUD programs.
    (h) Investigation of complaint. The Assistant Secretary reserves the 
right to investigate a complaint directly when, in the Assistant 
Secretary's discretion, the investigation would further the purposes of 
section 3 and this part.
    (i) Intimidatory or retaliatory acts prohibited. No recipient or 
other person shall intimidate, threaten, coerce, or discriminate against 
any person or business because the person or business has made a 
complaint, testified, assisted or participated in any manner in an 
investigation, proceeding, or hearing under this part. The identity of 
complainants shall be kept confidential except to the extent necessary 
to carry out the purposes of this part, including the conduct of any 
investigation, hearing or judicial proceeding arising thereunder.
    (j) Judicial relief. Nothing in this subpart D precludes a section 3 
resident or section 3 business concerning from exercising the right, 
which may otherwise be available, to seek redress directly through 
judicial procedures.

(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 
2529-0043)


<R04>
                 Subpart E--Reporting and Recordkeeping


<R05>
Sec. 135.90  Reporting.

    Each recipient which receives directly from HUD financial assistance 
that is subject to the requirements of this part shall submit to the 
Assistant Secretary an annual report in such form and with such 
information as the Assistant Secretary may request, for the purpose of 
determining the effectiveness of section 3. Where the program providing 
the section 3 covered assistance requires submission of an annual 
performance report, the section 3 report will be submitted with that 
annual performance report. If the program providing the section 3 
covered assistance does not require an annual performance report, the 
section 3 report is to be submitted by January 10 of each year or within 
10 days of project completion, whichever is earlier. All reports 
submitted to HUD in accordance with the requirements of this part will 
be made available to the public.

(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 
2529-0043)


<R05>
Sec. 135.92  Recordkeeping and access to records.

    HUD shall have access to all records, reports, and other documents 
or items of the recipient that are maintained to demonstrate compliance 
with the requirements of this part, or that are maintained in accordance 
with the regulations governing the specific HUD program under which 
section 3 covered assistance is provided or otherwise made available to 
the recipient or contractor.

[[Page 615]]

                          Appendix to Part 135

I. Examples of Efforts To Offer Training and Employment Opportunities to 
                           Section 3 Residents

    (1) Entering into ``first source'' hiring agreements with 
organizations representing Section 3 residents.
    (2) Sponsoring a HUD-certified ``Step-Up'' employment and training 
program for section 3 residents.
    (3) Establishing training programs, which are consistent with the 
requirements of the Department of Labor, for public and Indian housing 
residents and other section 3 residents in the building trades.
    (4) Advertising the training and employment positions by 
distributing flyers (which identify the positions to be filled, the 
qualifications required, and where to obtain additional information 
about the application process) to every occupied dwelling unit in the 
housing development or developments where category 1 or category 2 
persons (as these terms are defined in Sec. 135.34) reside.
    (5) Advertising the training and employment positions by posting 
flyers (which identify the positions to be filled, the qualifications 
required, and where to obtain additional information about the 
application process) in the common areas or other prominent areas of the 
housing development or developments. For HAs, post such advertising in 
the housing development or developments where category 1 or category 2 
persons reside; for all other recipients, post such advertising in the 
housing development or developments and transitional housing in the 
neighborhood or service area of the section 3 covered project.
    (6) Contacting resident councils, resident management corporations, 
or other resident organizations, where they exist, in the housing 
development or developments where category 1 or category 2 persons 
reside, and community organizations in HUD-assisted neighborhoods, to 
request the assistance of these organizations in notifying residents of 
the training and employment positions to be filled.
    (7) Sponsoring (scheduling, advertising, financing or providing in-
kind services) a job informational meeting to be conducted by an HA or 
contractor representative or representatives at a location in the 
housing development or developments where category 1 or category 2 
persons reside or in the neighborhood or service area of the section 3 
covered project.
    (8) Arranging assistance in conducting job interviews and completing 
job applications for residents of the housing development or 
developments where category 1 or category 2 persons reside and in the 
neighborhood or service area in which a section 3 project is located.
    (9) Arranging for a location in the housing development or 
developments where category 1 persons reside, or the neighborhood or 
service area of the project, where job applications may be delivered to 
and collected by a recipient or contractor representative or 
representatives.
    (10) Conducting job interviews at the housing development or 
developments where category 1 or category 2 persons reside, or at a 
location within the neighborhood or service area of the section 3 
covered project.
    (11) Contacting agencies administering HUD Youthbuild programs, and 
requesting their assistance in recruiting HUD Youthbuild program 
participants for the HA's or contractor's training and employment 
positions.
    (12) Consulting with State and local agencies administering training 
programs funded through JTPA or JOBS, probation and parole agencies, 
unemployment compensation programs, community organizations and other 
officials or organizations to assist with recruiting Section 3 residents 
for the HA's or contractor's training and employment positions.
    (13) Advertising the jobs to be filled through the local media, such 
as community television networks, newspapers of general circulation, and 
radio advertising.
    (14) Employing a job coordinator, or contracting with a business 
concern that is licensed in the field of job placement (preferably one 
of the section 3 business concerns identified in part 135), that will 
undertake, on behalf of the HA, other recipient or contractor, the 
efforts to match eligible and qualified section 3 residents with the 
training and employment positions that the HA or contractor intends to 
fill.
    (15) For an HA, employing section 3 residents directly on either a 
permanent or a temporary basis to perform work generated by section 3 
assistance. (This type of employment is referred to as ``force account 
labor'' in HUD's Indian housing regulations. See 24 CFR 905.102, and 
Sec. 905.201(a)(6).)
    (16) Where there are more qualified section 3 residents than there 
are positions to be filled, maintaining a file of eligible qualified 
section 3 residents for future employment positions.
    (17) Undertaking job counseling, education and related programs in 
association with local educational institutions.
    (18) Undertaking such continued job training efforts as may be 
necessary to ensure the continued employment of section 3 residents 
previously hired for employment opportunities.
    (19) After selection of bidders but prior to execution of contracts, 
incorporating into the contract a negotiated provision for a specific 
number of public housing or other section 3 residents to be trained or 
employed on the section 3 covered assistance.

[[Page 616]]

    (20) Coordinating plans and implementation of economic development 
(e.g., job training and preparation, business development assistance for 
residents) with the planning for housing and community development.

    II. Examples of Efforts To Award Contracts to Section 3 Business 
                                Concerns

    (1) Utilizing procurement procedures for section 3 business concerns 
similar to those provided in 24 CFR part 905 for business concerns owned 
by Native Americans (see section III of this Appendix).
    (2) In determining the responsibility of potential contractors, 
consider their record of section 3 compliance as evidenced by past 
actions and their current plans for the pending contract.
    (3) Contacting business assistance agencies, minority contractors 
associations and community organizations to inform them of contracting 
opportunities and requesting their assistance in identifying section 3 
businesses which may solicit bids or proposals for contracts for work in 
connection with section 3 covered assistance.
    (4) Advertising contracting opportunities by posting notices, which 
provide general information about the work to be contracted and where to 
obtain additional information, in the common areas or other prominent 
areas of the housing development or developments owned and managed by 
the HA.
    (5) For HAs, contacting resident councils, resident management 
corporations, or other resident organizations, where they exist, and 
requesting their assistance in identifying category 1 and category 2 
business concerns.
    (6) Providing written notice to all known section 3 business 
concerns of the contracting opportunities. This notice should be in 
sufficient time to allow the section 3 business concerns to respond to 
the bid invitations or request for proposals.
    (7) Following up with section 3 business concerns that have 
expressed interest in the contracting opportunities by contacting them 
to provide additional information on the contracting opportunities.
    (8) Coordinating pre-bid meetings at which section 3 business 
concerns could be informed of upcoming contracting and subcontracting 
opportunities.
    (9) Carrying out workshops on contracting procedures and specific 
contract opportunities in a timely manner so that section 3 business 
concerns can take advantage of upcoming contracting opportunities, with 
such information being made available in languages other than English 
where appropriate.
    (10) Advising section 3 business concerns as to where they may seek 
assistance to overcome limitations such as inability to obtain bonding, 
lines of credit, financing, or insurance.
    (11) Arranging solicitations, times for the presentation of bids, 
quantities, specifications, and delivery schedules in ways to facilitate 
the participation of section 3 business concerns.
    (12) Where appropriate, breaking out contract work items into 
economically feasible units to facilitate participation by section 3 
business concerns.
    (13) Contacting agencies administering HUD Youthbuild programs, and 
notifying these agencies of the contracting opportunities.
    (14) Advertising the contracting opportunities through trade 
association papers and newsletters, and through the local media, such as 
community television networks, newspapers of general circulation, and 
radio advertising.
    (15) Developing a list of eligible section 3 business concerns.
    (16) For HAs, participating in the ``Contracting with Resident-Owned 
Businesses'' program provided under 24 CFR part 963.
    (17) Establishing or sponsoring programs designed to assist 
residents of public or Indian housing in the creation and development of 
resident-owned businesses.
    (18) Establishing numerical goals (number of awards and dollar 
amount of contracts) for award of contracts to section 3 business 
concerns.
    (19) Supporting businesses which provide economic opportunities to 
low income persons by linking them to the support services available 
through the Small Business Administration (SBA), the Department of 
Commerce and comparable agencies at the State and local levels.
    (20) Encouraging financial institutions, in carrying out their 
responsibilities under the Community Reinvestment Act, to provide no or 
low interest loans for providing working capital and other financial 
business needs.
    (21) Actively supporting joint ventures with section 3 business 
concerns.
    (22) Actively supporting the development or maintenance of business 
incubators which assist Section 3 business concerns.

III. Examples of Procurement Procedures That Provide for Preference for 
                       Section 3 Business Concerns

    This Section III provides specific procedures that may be followed 
by recipients and contractors (collectively, referred to as the 
``contracting party'') for implementing the section 3 contracting 
preference for each of the competitive procurement methods authorized in 
24 CFR 85.36(d).
    (1) Small Purchase Procedures. For section 3 covered contracts 
aggregating no more than $25,000, the methods set forth in this 
paragraph (1) or the more formal procedures set forth in paragraphs (2) 
and (3) of this Section III may be utilized.

[[Page 617]]

    (i) Solicitation. (A) Quotations may be solicited by telephone, 
letter or other informal procedure provided that the manner of 
solicitation provides for participation by a reasonable number of 
competitive sources. At the time of solicitation, the parties must be 
informed of:
--the section 3 covered contract to be awarded with sufficient 
specificity;
--the time within which quotations must be submitted; and
--the information that must be submitted with each quotation.

    (B) If the method described in paragraph (i)(A) is utilized, there 
must be an attempt to obtain quotations from a minimum of three 
qualified sources in order to promote competition. Fewer than three 
quotations are acceptable when the contracting party has attempted, but 
has been unable, to obtain a sufficient number of competitive 
quotations. In unusual circumstances, the contracting party may accept 
the sole quotation received in response to a solicitation provided the 
price is reasonable. In all cases, the contracting party shall document 
the circumstances when it has been unable to obtain at least three 
quotations.
    (ii) Award. (A) Where the section 3 covered contract is to be 
awarded based upon the lowest price, the contract shall be awarded to 
the qualified section 3 business concern with the lowest responsive 
quotation, if it is reasonable and no more than 10 percent higher than 
the quotation of the lowest responsive quotation from any qualified 
source. If no responsive quotation by a qualified section 3 business 
concern is within 10 percent of the lowest responsive quotation from any 
qualified source, the award shall be made to the source with the lowest 
quotation.
    (B) Where the section 3 covered contract is to be awarded based on 
factors other than price, a request for quotations shall be issued by 
developing the particulars of the solicitation, including a rating 
system for the assignment of points to evaluate the merits of each 
quotation. The solicitation shall identify all factors to be considered, 
including price or cost. The rating system shall provide for a range of 
15 to 25 percent of the total number of available rating points to be 
set aside for the provision of preference for section 3 business 
concerns. The purchase order shall be awarded to the responsible firm 
whose quotation is the most advantageous, considering price and all 
other factors specified in the rating system.
    (2) Procurement by sealed bids (Invitations for Bids). Preference in 
the award of section 3 covered contracts that are awarded under a sealed 
bid (IFB) process may be provided as follows:
    (i) Bids shall be solicited from all businesses (section 3 business 
concerns, and non-section 3 business concerns). An award shall be made 
to the qualified section 3 business concern with the highest priority 
ranking and with the lowest responsive bid if that bid--
    (A) is within the maximum total contract price established in the 
contracting party's budget for the specific project for which bids are 
being taken, and
    (B) is not more than ``X'' higher than the total bid price of the 
lowest responsive bid from any responsible bidder. ``X'' is determined 
as follows:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                   x=lesser of:
------------------------------------------------------------------------
When the lowest responsive bid is less   10% of that bid or $9,000.
 than $100,000.
When the lowest responsive bid is:
    At least $100,000, but less than     9% of that bid, or $16,000.
     $200,000.
    At least $200,000, but less than     8% of that bid, or $21,000.
     $300,000.
    At least $300,000, but less than     7% of that bid, or $24,000.
     $400,000.
    At least $400,000, but less than     6% of that bid, or $25,000.
     $500,000.
    At least $500,000, but less than $1  5% of that bid, or $40,000.
     million.
    At least $1 million, but less than   4% of that bid, or $60,000.
     $2 million.
    At least $2 million, but less than   3% of that bid, or $80,000.
     $4 million.
    At least $4 million, but less than   2% of that bid, or $105,000.
     $7 million.
    $7 million or more.................  1\1/2\% of the lowest
                                          responsive bid, with no dollar
                                          limit.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (ii) If no responsive bid by a section 3 business concern meets the 
requirements of paragraph (2)(i) of this section, the contract shall be 
awarded to a responsible bidder with the lowest responsive bid.
    (3) Procurement under the competitive proposals method of 
procurement (Request for Proposals (RFP)). (i) For contracts and 
subcontracts awarded under the competitive proposals method of 
procurement (24 CFR 85.36(d)(3)), a Request for Proposals (RFP) shall 
identify all evaluation factors (and their relative importance) to be 
used to rate proposals.
    (ii) One of the evaluation factors shall address both the preference 
for section 3 business concerns and the acceptability of the strategy 
for meeting the greatest extent feasible requirement (section 3 
strategy), as disclosed in proposals submitted by all business concerns 
(section 3 and non-section 3 business concerns). This factor shall 
provide for

[[Page 618]]

a range of 15 to 25 percent of the total number of available points to 
be set aside for the evaluation of these two components.
    (iii) The component of this evaluation factor designed to address 
the preference for section 3 business concerns must establish a 
preference for these business concerns in the order of priority ranking 
as described in 24 CFR 135.36.
    (iv) With respect to the second component (the acceptability of the 
section 3 strategy), the RFP shall require the disclosure of the 
contractor's section 3 strategy to comply with the section 3 training 
and employment preference, or contracting preference, or both, if 
applicable. A determination of the contractor's responsibility will 
include the submission of an acceptable section 3 strategy. The contract 
award shall be made to the responsible firm (either section 3 or non-
section 3 business concern) whose proposal is determined most 
advantageous, considering price and all other factors specified in the 
RFP.


<R03>
PART 146--NONDISCRIMINATION ON THE BASIS OF AGE IN HUD PROGRAMS OR ACTIVITIES RECEIVING FEDERAL FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE--Table of Contents

<R05>


                           Subpart A--General

Sec.
146.1  Purpose of the Age Discrimination Act of 1975.
146.3  Purpose of HUD's age discrimination regulation.
146.5  Applicability of part.
146.7  Definitions.

         Subpart B--Standards for Determining Age Discrimination

146.11  Scope of subpart.
146.13  Rules against age discrimination.

                   Subpart C--Duties of HUD Recipients

146.21  General responsibilities.
146.23  Notice of subrecipients.
146.25  Assurance of compliance and recipient assessment of age 
          distinctions.
146.27  Information requirements.

    Subpart D--Investigation, Settlement, and Enforcement Procedures

146.31  Compliance reviews.
146.33  Complaints.
146.35  Mediation.
146.37  Investigation.
146.39  Enforcement procedures.
146.41  Prohibition against intimidation or retaliation.
146.43  Hearings, decisions, post-termination proceedings.
146.45  Exhaustion of administrative remedies.
146.47  Remedial and affirmative action by recipients.
146.49  Alternate funds disbursal procedure.

    Authority: 42 U.S.C. 3535(d) and 6103.

    Source: 51 FR 45266, Dec. 17, 1986, unless otherwise noted.


<R04>
                           Subpart A--General


<R05>
Sec. 146.1  Purpose of the Age Discrimination Act of 1975.

    The Age Discrimination Act of 1975 (the Act) prohibits 
discrimination on the basis of age in programs or activities receiving 
Federal financial assistance. The Act, however, permits federally 
assisted programs and activities and recipients of Federal funds to 
continue to use certain age distinctions and factors other than age 
which meet the requirements of the Act and this part.


<R05>
Sec. 146.3  Purpose of HUD's age discrimination regulation.

    The purpose of this part is to state HUD's policies and procedures 
under the Age Discrimination Act of 1975, consistent with the 
government-wide age discrimination regulation contained at 45 CFR part 
90.


<R05>
Sec. 146.5  Applicability of part.

    This part applies to each program or activity that receives Federal 
financial assistance provided by HUD.


<R05>
Sec. 146.7  Definitions.

    The terms HUD and Secretary are defined in 24 CFR part 5.
    Act means the Age Discrimination Act of 1975, 42 U.S.C. 6101-07.
    Action means any act, activity, policy, rule, standard, or method of 
administration or the use of any policy, rule, standard, or method of 
administration.
    Age means how old a person is, or the number of elapsed years from 
the date of a person's birth.
    Age distinction means any action using age or an age-related term.

[[Page 619]]

    Age-related term means a word or words which necessarily imply a 
particular age or range of ages (for example, children, adult, older 
persons, but not student).
    Federal financial assistance means any grant, entitlement, loan, 
cooperative agreement, contract (other than a procurement contract or a 
contract of insurance or guaranty), or any other arrangement by which 
HUD provides or otherwise makes available assistance in the form of:
    (a) Funds;
    (b) Service of Federal personnel; or
    (c) Real or personal property or any interest in or use of property, 
including:
    (1) Transfers or leases of property for less than fair market value 
or for reduced consideration; and
    (2) Proceeds from a subsequent transfer or lease of property if the 
Federal share of its fair market value is not returned to the Federal 
government.
    Recipient means any State or its political subdivisions; any 
instrumentality of a State or its political subdivisions; any public or 
private agency; any Indian tribe or Alaskan Native Village, institution, 
organization, or other entity; or any person to which Federal financial 
assistance is extended, directly or through another recipient. Recipient 
includes any successor, assignee, or transferee, but does not include 
the ultimate beneficiary of the assistance.
    Subrecipient means any of the entities in the definition of 
recipient to which a recipient extends or passes on Federal financial 
assistance. A subrecipient is regarded as a recipient of Federal 
financial assistance and has all the duties of a recipient set out in 
this part.
    United States means the several States, the District of Columbia, 
Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, American Samoa, Guam, Wake Island, the 
Canal Zone, the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands, the Northern 
Marianas, and the territories and possessions of the United States.

[51 FR 45266, Dec. 17, 1986, as amended at 61 FR 5206, Feb. 9, 1996]


<R04>
         Subpart B--Standards for Determining Age Discrimination


<R05>
Sec. 146.11  Scope of subpart.

    This subpart contains the standards that HUD will use to determine 
whether an age distinction, or a factor other than age that may have a 
disproportionate effect on persons of different ages, is prohibited.


<R05>
Sec. 146.13  Rules against age discrimination.

    (a) The rules stated in this paragraph are limited by the exceptions 
contained in paragraphs (b) and (c) of this section.
    (1) General rule. No person in the United States shall, on the basis 
of age, be excluded from participation in, be denied the benefits of, or 
be subjected to discrimination under, any program or activity receiving 
Federal financial assistance.
    (2) Specific rules. A recipient may not, in any program or activity 
receiving Federal financial assistance, directly or through contracting, 
licensing, or other arrangements, use age distinctions or take any other 
actions that have the effect, on the basis of age, of:
    (i) Excluding individuals from, denying them the benefits of, or 
subjecting them to discrimination under, a program or activity receiving 
Federal financial assistance; or
    (ii) Denying or limiting individuals in their opportunity to 
participate in any program or activity receiving Federal financial 
assistance.
    (3) The specific forms of age discrimination listed in paragraph 
(a)(2) of this section do not necessarily constitute a complete list.
    (b) Exceptions for normal operation or statutory objective of any 
program or activity. A recipient is permitted to take an action 
otherwise prohibited by paragraph (a) of this section if the action 
reasonably takes into account age as a factor necessary to the normal 
operation or the achievement of any statutory objective of a program or 
activity. An action reasonably takes into account age as a factor 
necessary to the normal operation or the achievement of any statutory 
objective of a program or activity, if:

[[Page 620]]

    (1) Age is used as a measure or approximation of one or more other 
characteristics; and
    (2) The other characteristics must be measured or approximated in 
order for the normal operation of the program or activity to continue, 
or to achieve any statutory objective of the program or activity; and
    (3) The other characteristics can be reasonably measured or 
approximated by the use of age; and
    (4) The other characteristics are impractical to measure directly on 
an individual basis.
    (c) Exceptions for reasonable factors other than age. A recipient is 
permitted to take action otherwise prohibited by paragraph (a) of this 
section if the action is based on a factor other than age, even though 
that action may have a disproportionate effect on persons of different 
ages. An action may be based on a factor other than age only if the 
factor bears a direct and substantial relationship to the normal 
operation of the program or activity or the achievement of a statutory 
objective.
    (d) Burden of proof. The burden of proving that an age distinction 
or other action falls within an exception described in paragraph (b) or 
(c) of this section is on the recipient of Federal financial assistance.
    (e) For the purposes of paragraphs (b) and (c), normal operation 
means the operation of a program or activity without significant changes 
that would impair its ability to meet its statutory objectives. 
Statutory objectives means any purpose of a program or activity 
expressly stated in any Federal, State, or local statute adopted by an 
elected, general purpose legislative body.
    (f) Notwithstanding paragraph (b) of this section, if a recipient 
operating a program provides special benefits to the elderly or to 
children, such use of age distinctions shall be presumed to be necessary 
to the normal operation of the program.


<R04>
                   Subpart C--Duties of HUD Recipients


<R05>
Sec. 146.21  General responsibilities.

    Each recipient has primary responsibility to ensure that its 
programs and activities that receive Federal financial assistance from 
HUD comply with the provisions of the Act, the government-wide 
regulation, and this part, and shall take steps to eliminate violations 
of the Act. A recipient also has responsibility to maintain records, 
provide information, and to afford HUD access to its records to the 
extent HUD finds necessary to determine whether a program or activity 
receiving Federal financial assistance from HUD is in compliance with 
the Act and this part.

(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 
2529-0030)

[51 FR 45266, Dec. 17, 1986, as amended at 52 FR 7408, Mar. 11, 1987]


<R05>
Sec. 146.23  Notice of subrecipients.

    Whenever a recipient passes Federal financial assistance from HUD to 
subrecipients, the recipient shall provide the subrecipient with written 
notice of its obligations under this part and the recipient will remain 
responsible for the subrecipient's compliance with respect to programs 
and activities receiving Federal financial assistance from HUD.


<R05>
Sec. 146.25  Assurance of compliance and recipient assessment of age distinctions.

    (a) Each recipient of Federal financial assistance from HUD shall 
sign a written assurance as specified by HUD that it will comply with 
the Act and this part with respect to programs and activities receiving 
Federal financial assistance from HUD.
    (b) As part of a compliance review under Sec. 146.31 or an 
investigation under Sec. 146.37, HUD may require a recipient employing 
the equivalent of 15 or more employees to complete, in a manner

[[Page 621]]

specified by the Secretary or Secretary's designee, a written self-
evaluation of any age distinction imposed in its program or activity 
receiving Federal financial assistance from HUD, so that HUD may have to 
assess the recipient's compliance with the Act. Whenever an assessment 
indicates a violation of the Act or this part, the recipient shall take 
corrective action to remedy the violation.

(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 
2529-0030)

[51 FR 45266, Dec. 17, 1986, as amended at 52 FR 7408, Mar. 11, 1987]


<R05>
Sec. 146.27  Information requirements.

    In order to make it possible for HUD to determine whether recipients 
are in compliance with the Act and this part, each recipient shall:
    (a) Keep records in a form and containing information that HUD 
determines is necessary;
    (b) Make information available to HUD upon request;
    (c) Permit reasonable access by HUD to the books, records, accounts 
and other recipient facilities and sources of information.

(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 
2529-0030)

[51 FR 45266, Dec. 17, 1986, as amended at 52 FR 7408, Mar. 11, 1987]


<R04>
    Subpart D--Investigation, Settlement, and Enforcement Procedures


<R05>
Sec. 146.31  Compliance reviews.

    (a) HUD may conduct pre-award reviews to determine whether programs 
or activities submitted for HUD assistance are consistent with the age 
distinctions set forth at Sec. 146.13(b).
    (b) If a pre-award review indicates that the proposed programs or 
activities are not consistent with the age distinctions set forth at 
Sec. 146.13(b), the application will be returned to the applicant for 
additional information or clarification or for correction consistent 
with this part.
    (c) HUD may conduct compliance reviews of recipients that will 
enable it to investigate and correct violations of this part. HUD may 
conduct these reviews even in the absence of a complaint against a 
recipient. The review may be as comprehensive as necessary for HUD to 
determine whether a violation has occurred.
    (d) If a compliance review indicates a violation, HUD will attempt 
to achieve voluntary compliance. If voluntary compliance cannot be 
achieved, HUD may begin enforcement procedures as provided in 
Sec. 146.39.


<R05>
Sec. 146.33  Complaints.

    (a) Any person, individually or as a member of a class or on behalf 
of others, may file a complaint with HUD alleging discrimination 
prohibited by the Act. A complainant shall file a complaint within 180 
days from the date the complainant first had knowledge of the alleged 
act of discrimination. However, for good cause, HUD may extend this time 
limit. The filing date for a complaint will be the date upon which the 
complaint is deemed sufficient to be processed.
    (b) HUD shall facilitate the filing of complaints and shall take the 
following measures:
    (1) Accept as a sufficient complaint any written legible statement 
which is signed by the complainant and which identifies the parties 
involved, the date the complainant first had knowledge of the alleged 
violation, and describes generally the alleged prohibited action or 
practice;
    (2) Freely permit a complainant to add information to the complaint 
to meet the requirements of a sufficient complaint;
    (3) Widely disseminate information regarding the obligations of 
recipients under the Act and this part;
    (4) Notify the complainant and the recipient of their rights under 
the complaint process, including the right to have a representative at 
all stages of the complaint process; and
    (5) Notify the complainant and the recipient of their right to 
contact HUD for information and assistance regarding the complaint 
resolution process.
    (c) HUD will return to the complainant any complaint determined to 
be outside the coverage of this part, and

[[Page 622]]

shall state the reasons why it is outside the coverage.

(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 
2529-0030)

[51 FR 45266, Dec. 17, 1986, as amended at 52 FR 7408, Mar. 11, 1987]


<R05>
Sec. 146.35  Mediation.

    (a) HUD shall refer to the Federal Mediation and Conciliation 
Service, a mediation agency designated by the Secretary of Health and 
Human Services, all complaints that:
    (1) Fall within the coverage of this part, unless the age 
distinction complained of is clearly with an exeption; and
    (2) Contain all information necessary for further processing.
    (b) Both the complainant and the recipient shall participate in the 
mediation process to the extent necessary to reach an agreement or make 
an informal judgment that an agreement is not possible. There should be 
at least one meeting by each party with the mediator during the 
mediation process. However, the recipient and the complainant need not 
meet with the mediator at the same time.
    (c) If the complainant and the recipient reach an agreement, the 
mediator shall prepare a written statement of the agreement and have the 
complainant and recipient sign it. The mediator shall send a copy of the 
agreement to HUD. HUD will take no further action on the complaint 
unless the complainant or the recipient fails to comply with the 
agreement.
    (d) The mediator shall protect the confidentiality of information 
obtained in the course of the mediation process. No mediator shall 
testify in any adjudicative proceeding, produce any document, or 
othewise disclose any information obtained in the course of the 
mediation process without the prior approval of the head of the 
mediation agency.
    (e) HUD shall use the mediation process for a maximum of 60 days 
after receiving a complaint. Mediation ends if:
    (1) 60 days elapse from the time HUD receives the complaint; or
    (2) Before the end of the 60-day period, an agreement is reached; or
    (3) Before the end of the 60-day period, the mediator determines 
that an agreement cannot be reached.

This 60-day period may be extended by the mediator, with the concurrence 
of HUD, for not more than an additional 30 days if the mediator 
determines that it is likely that an agreement will be reached during 
such extended period.


<R05>
Sec. 146.37  Investigation.

    (a) Investigation and settlement following mediation. (1) HUD shall 
investigate complaints that are unresolved after mediation or are 
reopened because of an alleged violation of a mediation agreement.
    (2) In the investigation of complaints filed under this part, HUD 
will establish facts through such methods as discussion with the 
complainant and recipient and the review of documents in the possession 
of either party. HUD may also seek the assistance of any applicable 
State agency. Where possible, HUD will settle the complaint on terms 
that are mutually agreeable to the parties.
    (3) Settlements shall be in writing and signed by the parties and by 
an authorized HUD official.
    (4) A settlement shall not affect the initiation or continuation of 
any other enforcement effort of HUD, including compliance reviews or 
investigation of other complaints involving the recipient.
    (5) A settlement reached under this paragraph (a) of this section is 
an agreement to resolve an alleged violation of the Act to the 
satisfaction of the parties involved, and does not constitute a finding 
of discrimination against the recipient.
    (b) Failure of settlement. If HUD cannot resolve the complaint 
through settlement, it may make a formal determination that the Act or 
this part has been violated and begin enforcement procedures, as 
provided in Sec. 146.39. HUD shall inform the recipient and complainant 
in writing that the matter cannot be resolved through settlement.


<R05>
Sec. 146.39  Enforcement procedures.

    (a) HUD may enforce the Act this regulation by:
    (1) Termination of a recipient's financial assistance from HUD under 
the

[[Page 623]]

program or activity involved, if the recipient has violated the Act or 
this part. The determination of the recipient's violation may be made 
only after a recipient has had an opportunity for a hearing on the 
record before an Administrative Law Judge. If the financial assistance 
consists of a Community Development Block Grant, the requirements of 
section 109(b) of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974, 42 
U.S.C. 5309, must also be satisfied before the termination of financial 
assistance. Cases settled in mediation or before hearing will not 
involve termination of a recipient's Federal financial assistance from 
HUD.
    (2) Any other means authorized by law, including, but not limited 
to:
    (i) Referral to the Department of Justice for proceedings to enforec 
any rights of the United States or obligations of the recipient created 
by the Act or this part;
    (ii) Use of any requirement of, or referral to, any Federal, State 
or local government agency that will have the effect of correcting a 
violation of the Act or this part.
    (b) Whenever the Secretary determines that a State or unit of 
general local government which is a recipient of Federal financial 
assistance under Title I of the Housing and Community Development Act of 
1974, 42 U.S.C. 5301-5317, has failed to comply with requirements of the 
Age Discrimination Act or this part with respect to a program or 
activity funded in whole or in part with such assistance, he or she 
shall notify the Governor of such State or the chief executive officer 
of such unit of general local government of the noncompliance and shall 
request the Governor or chief executive officer to secure compliance. If 
within a reasonable period of time, not to exceed 60 days, the Governor 
or chief executive officer fails or refuses to secure compliance, the 
Secretary is authorized to take the action specified in (a) of this 
section, exercise the powers and functions provided for in section 
111(a) of the Housing and Community Act of 1974, 42 U.S.C. 5311(a), or 
take such other action as may be provided by law.
    (c) HUD shall limit any termination under Sec. 146.35 to the 
particular recipient and particular program or activity HUD finds to be 
in violation of this part. HUD shall not base any part of a termination 
on a finding with respect to any program or activity of the recipient 
which does not receive Federal financial assistance from HUD.
    (d) HUD shall take no action under paragraph (a) of this section 
until:
    (1) The Secretary has advised the recipient of its failure to comply 
with the Act or this part and has determined that voluntary compliance 
cannot be achieved.
    (2) Thirty days have have elapsed after the Secretary has submitted 
a written report of the circumstances and grounds of the action to the 
committees of the Congress having legislative jurisdiction over the 
Federal program or activity involved. A report shall be filed whenever 
any action is taken under paragraph (a) of this section.
    (e)(1) The Secretary may defer the provision of new Federal 
financial assistance to a recipient when termination proceedings under 
this section are initiated.
    (2) New financial assistance from HUD includes all assistance for 
which HUD requires an application, approval, or submissions under the 
Community Development Block Grant program including renewal or 
continuation of existing activities, or authorization of new activities, 
during the deferral period. New financial assistance from HUD does not 
include increases in funding as a result of changed computation for 
formula awards or assistance approved before the beginning of a hearing 
under this section.
    (3) HUD shall not impose a deferral until the recipient has received 
a notice of an opportunity for a hearing under this section. HUD shall 
not continue a deferral for more than 60 days unless a hearing has begun 
within that time or the time for beginning the hearing has been extended 
by mutual consent of the recipient and the Secretary. HUD shall not 
continue a deferral for more than 30 days after the close of the 
hearing, unless the hearing results in a finding that the recipient has 
violated that Act or this part.

[[Page 624]]


<R05>
Sec. 146.41  Prohibition against intimidation or retaliation.

    A recipient may not engage in acts of intimidation or retaliation 
against any person who:
    (a) Attempts to assert a right protected by this part; or
    (b) Cooperates in any mediation, investigation, hearing, or other 
part of HUD's investigation, settlement, and enforcement process.


<R05>
Sec. 146.43  Hearings, decisions, post-termination proceedings.

    The provisions of 24 CFR part 180 apply to HUD enforcement of this 
part.

[61 FR 52218, Oct. 4, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 146.45  Exhaustion of administrative remedies.

    (a) A complainant may file a civil action following the exhaustion 
of administrative remedies under the Act. Administrative remedies are 
exhausted if:
    (1) 180 days have elapsed since the complainant filed the complaint 
and HUD had made no finding with regard to the complaint; or
    (2) HUD issues any finding in favor of the recipient.
    (b) If HUD fails to make a finding within 180 days or issues a 
finding in favor of the recipient, HUD shall:
    (1) Promptly advise the complainant of this fact;
    (2) Advise the complainant of his or her right to bring a civil 
action for injunctive relief; and
    (3) Inform the complainant:
    (i) That he or she may bring a civil action only in a United States 
District Court for the district in which the recipient is located or 
transacts business;
    (ii) That a complianant prevailing in a civil action has the right 
to be awarded the costs of the action, including reasonable attorney's 
fees, but that the complainant must demand these costs in the complaint;
    (iii) That before commencing the action, the complainant must give 
30 days' notice by registered mail to the Secretary of HUD, the 
Secretary of Health and Human Services, the Attorney General of the 
United States, and the recipient;
    (iv) That the notice must state: the alleged violation of the Act, 
the relief requested, the court in which the complainant is bringing the 
action, and whether or not attorney's fees are demanded in the event the 
complainant prevails; and
    (v) That the complainant may not bring an action if the same alleged 
violation of the Act by the same recipient is the subject of a pending 
action in any court of the United States.


<R05>
Sec. 146.47  Remedial and affirmative action by recipients.

    (a) Where the Secretary finds that a recipient has unlawfully 
discriminated on the basis of age, the recipient shall take any action 
that the Secretary may require to overcome the effects of the 
discrimination. If another recipient exercises control over a 
subrecipient that has unlawfully discriminated, the Secretary may 
require both recipients to take remedial action.
    (b) Even in the absence of a finding of discrimination, a recipient 
may take affirmative action to overcome the effects of conditions that 
resulted in limited participation in the recipient's program or activity 
on the basis of age.
    (c) If a recipient operating a program which serves the elderly or 
children in addition to persons of other ages provides special benefits 
to the elderly or children, the provision of those benefits shall be 
presumed to be voluntary affirmative action, provided that it does not 
have the effect of excluding otherwise eligible persons from 
participation in the program.


<R05>
Sec. 146.49  Alternate funds disbursal procedure.

    (a) Except as otherwise provided in this paragraph and to the extent 
authorized by law, the Secretary may redisburse funds withheld or 
terminated under this part directly to an alternate recipient, including 
any public or non-profit private organization or agency, State or 
political subdivision of the State. Under title I of the Housing and 
Community Development Act of 1974, 42 U.S.C. 5301, funds withheld 
because of a reduction or withdrawal of a recipient's Community 
Development Block Grant must be reallocated in the succeeding fiscal 
year, in accordance with the applicable regulations governing that 
program.

[[Page 625]]

    (b) The Secretary shall require the alternate recipient to 
demonstrate:
    (1) The ability to comply with the regulations; and
    (2) The ability to achieve the goals of the Federal statute 
authorizing the program or activity.


<R03>
PART 180--CONSOLIDATED HUD HEARING PROCEDURES FOR CIVIL RIGHTS MATTERS--Table of Contents

<R05>


                     Subpart A--General Information

Sec.
180.100   Definitions.
180.105   Scope of rules.

                   Subpart B--Administrative Law Judge

180.200   Designation.
180.205   Authority.
180.210   Withdrawal or disqualification of ALJ.
180.215   Ex Parte communications.
180.220   Separation of functions.

                           Subpart C--Parties

180.300   Rights of parties.
180.305   Representation.
180.310   Parties.
180.315   Standards of conduct.

                 Subpart D--Proceedings Prior to Hearing

180.400  Service and filing.
180.405  Time computations.
180.410  Charges under the Fair Housing Act.
180.415  Notice of proposed adverse action regarding Federal financial 
          assistance in non-Fair Housing Act matters.
180.420  Answer.
180.425  Amendments to pleadings.
180.430  Motions.
180.435  Prehearing statements.
180.440  Prehearing conferences.
180.445  Settlement negotiations before a settlement judge.
180.450  Resolution of charge or notice of proposed adverse action.

                          Subpart E--Discovery

180.500  Discovery.
180.505  Supplementation of responses.
180.510  Interrogatories.
180.515  Depositions.
180.520  Use of deposition at hearings.
180.525  Requests for production of documents or things for inspection 
          or other purposes, including physical and mental examinations.
180.530  Requests for admissions.
180.535  Protective orders.
180.540  Motion to compel discovery.
180.545  Subpoenas.

                    Subpart F--Procedures at Hearing

180.600  Date and place of hearing.
180.605  Conduct of hearings.
180.610  Waiver of right to appear.
180.615  Failure of party to appear.
180.620  Evidence.
180.625  Record of hearing.
180.630  Stipulations.
180.635  Written testimony.
180.640  In camera and protective orders.
180.645  Exhibits.
180.650  Public document items.
180.655  Witnesses.
180.660  Closing of record.
180.665  Arguments and briefs.
180.670  Initial decision of ALJ.
180.671  Assessing civil penalties for Fair Housing Act cases.
180.675  Petitions for review.
180.680  Final decisions.

          Subpart G--Post-Final Decision in Fair Housing Cases

180.700  Action upon issuance of a final decision in Fair Housing Act 
          cases.
180.705  Attorney's fees and costs.
180.710  Judicial review of final decision.
180.715  Enforcement of final decision.

     Subpart H--Post-Final Decision in Non-Fair Housing Act Matters

180.800  Post-termination proceedings.
180.805  Judicial review of final decision.

    Authority: 29 U.S.C. 794; 42 U.S.C. 2000d-1 3535(d), 3601-3619; 
5301-5320, and 6103.

    Source: 61 FR 52218, Oct. 4, 1996, unless otherwise noted.


<R04>
                     Subpart A--General Information


<R05>
Sec. 180.100  Definitions.

    As used in this part:
    (a) The terms ALJ, Department, Fair Housing Act, General Counsel, 
and HUD are defined in 24 CFR part 5, subpart A.
    (b) The terms Aggrieved Person, Assistant Secretary, Attorney 
General, Discriminatory Housing Practice, Person, and State are defined 
in 24 CFR part 103, subpart A.
    (c) Other terms used in this part are defined as follows:
    Agency has the same meaning as HUD.
    Applicant and Application have the meanings provided in 24 CFR 1.2 
or 24 CFR 8.3, as applicable.

[[Page 626]]

    Charge means the statement of facts issued under 24 CFR 103.405 upon 
which HUD has found reasonable cause to believe that a discriminatory 
housing practice has occurred or is about to occur.
    Chief Docket Clerk is the docket clerk for HUD's Office of ALJs, 409 
Third Street, SW, Suite 320, Washington, DC 20024. Telephone numbers are 
(202) 708-5004 and FAX (202) 708-5014.
    Complaint means a complaint filed under the statutes covered by this 
part.
    Complainant means the person (including the Assistant Secretary) who 
filed a complaint under the statutes covered by this part.
    Fair Housing Act matters refers to proceedings under this part 
pursuant to the Fair Housing Act and the implementing regulations at 24 
CFR parts 100 and 103.
    Federal financial assistance has the meaning provided in 24 CFR 1.2, 
6.3, 8.3, or 146.7, as applicable.
    Hearing means a trial-type proceeding that involves the submission 
of evidence, either by oral presentation or written submission, and 
briefs and oral arguments on the evidence and applicable law.
    Intervenor is a person entitled by law or permitted by the ALJ to 
participate as a party.
    Non-Fair Housing Act matters refers to proceedings under this part 
pursuant to:
    (1) Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, as amended, (42 U.S.C. 
2000d-1) and the implementing regulations at 24 CFR part 1;
    (2) Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, as amended, (29 
U.S.C. 794) and the implementing regulations at 24 CFR part 8;
    (3) The Age Discrimination Act of 1975, as amended, (42 U.S.C. 6103) 
and the implementing regulations at 24 CFR part 146; or
    (4) Section 109 of Title I of the Housing and Community Development 
Act of 1974, as amended, (42 U.S.C. 5301-5321) and the implementing 
regulations at 24 CFR part 6.
    Notice of Proposed Adverse Action is the statement of facts issued 
pursuant to a non-Fair Housing Act matter upon which HUD has found 
reason to terminate or refuse to grant or continue Federal financial 
assistance.
    Party is a person who has full participation rights in a proceeding 
under this part.
    Prevailing party has the same meaning as the term has in section 722 
of the Revised Statutes of the United States (42 U.S.C. 1988).
    Recipient has the meaning provided in 24 CFR 1.2, 6.3, 8.3, or 
146.7, as applicable.
    Respondent means the person accused of violating one of the statutes 
covered by this part, including a recipient.
    Secretary means the Secretary of HUD, or to the extent of any 
delegation of authority by the Secretary to act under any of the 
statutory authorities listed in Sec. 180.105(a), any other HUD official 
to whom the Secretary may hereafter delegate such authority.

[61 FR 52218, Oct. 4, 1996, as amended at 64 FR 3801, Jan. 25, 1999]


<R05>
Sec. 180.105  Scope of rules.

    (a) This part contains the rules of practice and procedure 
applicable to administrative proceedings before an ALJ under the 
following authorities:
    (1) The Fair Housing Act (42 U.S.C. 3601-3619) and the implementing 
regulations at 24 CFR parts 100 and 103, where no election to proceed in 
federal district court has been made;
    (2) Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000d-1), 
and the implementing regulations at 24 CFR part 1;
    (3) Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, as amended (29 
U.S.C. 794), and the implementing regulations at 24 CFR part 8;
    (4) The Age Discrimination Act of 1975 (42 U.S.C. 6103), and the 
implementing regulations at 24 CFR part 146; and
    (5) Section 109 of title I of the Housing and Community Development 
Act of 1974 (42 U.S.C. 5301-5321) and implementing regulations at 24 CFR 
part 6.
    (b) In the absence of a specific provision, the Federal Rules of 
Civil Procedure shall serve as a general guide.
    (c) Hearings under this part shall be conducted as expeditiously and 
inexpensively as possible, consistent with the needs and rights of the 
parties to obtain a fair hearing and a complete record.

[[Page 627]]

    (d) Except to the extent that a waiver would otherwise be contrary 
to law, the ALJ may, after adequate notice to all interested persons, 
modify or waive any of the rules in this part upon a determination that 
no person will be prejudiced and that the ends of justice will be 
served.
    (e) All pleadings, correspondence, exhibits, transcripts of 
testimony, exceptions, briefs, decisions, and other documents filed in 
any proceeding may be inspected in the Chief Docket Clerk's office 
during regular business hours.

[61 FR 52218, Oct. 4, 1996, as amended at 64 FR 3801, Jan. 25, 1999]


<R04>
                   Subpart B--Administrative Law Judge


<R05>
Sec. 180.200  Designation.

    Proceedings under this part shall be presided over by an ALJ 
appointed under 5 U.S.C. 3105. HUD's Chief ALJ shall designate the 
presiding ALJ.


<R05>
Sec. 180.205  Authority.

    The ALJ shall have all powers necessary to conduct fair, expeditious 
and impartial hearings, including the power to:
    (a) Administer oaths and affirmations and examine witnesses;
    (b) Rule on offers of proof and receive evidence;
    (c) Take depositions or have depositions taken when the ends of 
justice would be served;
    (d) Regulate the course of the hearing and the conduct of persons at 
the hearing;
    (e) Hold conferences for the settlement or simplification of the 
issues by consent of the parties;
    (f) Rule on motions, procedural requests, and similar matters;
    (g) Make and issue initial decisions;
    (h) Impose appropriate sanctions against any person failing to obey 
an order, refusing to adhere to reasonable standards of orderly and 
ethical conduct, or refusing to act in good faith;
    (i) Issue subpoenas if authorized by law; and
    (j) Exercise any other powers necessary and appropriate for the 
purpose and conduct of the proceeding as authorized by the rules in this 
part or in conformance with statute, including 5 U.S.C. 551-59.


<R05>
Sec. 180.210  Withdrawal or disqualification of ALJ.

    (a) Disqualification. If an ALJ finds that there is a basis for his/
her disqualification in a proceeding, the ALJ shall withdraw from the 
proceeding. Withdrawal is accomplished by entering a notice in the 
record and providing a copy of the notice to the Chief ALJ.
    (b) Motion for recusal. If a party believes that the presiding ALJ 
should be disqualified for any reason, the party may file a motion to 
recuse with the ALJ. The motion shall be supported by an affidavit 
setting forth the alleged grounds for disqualification. The ALJ shall 
rule on the motion, stating the grounds therefor.
    (c) Redesignation of ALJ. If an ALJ is disqualified, the Chief ALJ 
shall designate another ALJ to preside over further proceedings.


<R05>
Sec. 180.215  Ex Parte communications.

    (a) An ex parte communication is any direct or indirect 
communication concerning the merits of a pending proceeding, made by a 
party in the absence of any other party, to the presiding ALJ, and which 
was neither on the record nor on reasonable prior notice to all parties. 
Ex parte communications do not include communications made for the sole 
purpose of scheduling hearings, requesting extensions of time, or 
requesting information on the status of cases.
    (b) Ex parte communications are prohibited.
    (c) If the ALJ receives an ex parte communication that the ALJ knows 
or has reason to believe is prohibited, the ALJ shall promptly place the 
communication, or a written statement of the substance of the 
communication, in the record and shall furnish copies to all parties. 
Unauthorized communications shall not be taken into consideration in 
deciding any matter in issue. Any party making a prohibited ex parte 
communication may be subject to sanctions including, but not limited to, 
exclusion from the proceeding and an adverse ruling on the issue that is 
the subject of the prohibited communication.

[[Page 628]]


<R05>
Sec. 180.220  Separation of functions.

    No officer, employee, or agent of the Federal Government engaged in 
the performance of investigative, conciliatory, or prosecutorial 
functions in connection with the proceeding shall, in that proceeding or 
any factually related proceeding under this part, participate or advise 
in the decision of the ALJ, except as a witness or counsel during the 
proceedings or in its appellate review.


<R04>
                           Subpart C--Parties


<R05>
Sec. 180.300  Rights of parties.

    Each party may appear in person, be represented by counsel, examine 
or cross-examine witnesses, introduce documentary or other relevant 
evidence into the record and, in Fair Housing Act matters, request the 
issuance of subpoenas.


<R05>
Sec. 180.305  Representation.

    (a) HUD is represented by the General Counsel.
    (b) Any party may appear on his/her/its own behalf or by an 
attorney. Each party or attorney shall file a notice of appearance. The 
notice must identify the matter before the ALJ, the party on whose 
behalf the appearance is made, and the mailing address and telephone 
number of the person appearing. Similar notice shall also be given for 
any withdrawal of appearance.
    (c) An attorney must be admitted to practice before a Federal Court 
or the highest court in any State. The attorney's representation that 
he/she is in good standing before any of these courts is sufficient 
evidence of the attorney's qualifications under this section, unless 
otherwise ordered by the ALJ.


<R05>
Sec. 180.310  Parties.

    (a) Parties to proceedings under this part are HUD, the 
respondent(s), and any intervenors. Respondents include persons named as 
such in a charge issued under 24 CFR part 103 and Recipients/applicants 
named as respondents in hearing notices issued under 24 CFR parts 1, 6, 
8 or 146 and notices of proposed adverse action under this part.
    (b) An aggrieved person is not a party but may file a motion to 
intervene. Requests for intervention shall be filed within 50 days after 
the filing of the charge; however, the ALJ may allow intervention beyond 
that time. An intervenor's right to participate as a party may be 
restricted by order of the ALJ pursuant to statute, the rules in this 
part or other applicable law. Intervention shall be permitted if the 
person requesting intervention is
    (1) The aggrieved person on whose behalf the charge is issued; or
    (2) An aggrieved person who claims an interest in the property or 
transaction that is the subject of the charge and the disposition of the 
charge may, as a practical matter, impair or impede this person's 
ability to protect that interest, unless the aggrieved person is 
adequately represented by the existing parties.
    (c) A complainant in a non-Fair Housing Act matter is not a party 
but may file a motion to become an amicus curiae.
    (d) Any person may file a petition to participate in a proceeding 
under this part as an amicus curiae. An amicus curiae is not a party to 
the proceeding and may not introduce evidence at the hearing.
    (1) A petition to participate as amicus curiae shall be filed before 
the commencement of the hearing, unless the petitioner shows good cause 
for filing the petition later. The petition may be granted if the ALJ 
finds that the petitioner has a legitimate interest in the proceedings, 
and that such participation will not unduly delay the outcome and may 
contribute materially to the proper disposition thereof.
    (2) The amicus curiae may submit briefs within time limits set by 
the ALJ or by the Secretary in the event of an appeal to the Secretary.
    (3) When all parties have completed their initial examination of a 
witness, the amicus curiae may request the ALJ to propound specific 
questions to the witness. Any such request may be granted if the ALJ 
believes the proposed additional testimony may assist

[[Page 629]]

materially in elucidating factual matters at issue between the parties 
and will not expand the issues.

[61 FR 52218, Oct. 4, 1996, as amended at 64 FR 3801, Jan. 25, 1999]


<R05>
Sec. 180.315  Standards of conduct.

    (a) All persons appearing in proceedings under this part shall act 
with integrity and in an ethical manner.
    (b) The ALJ may exclude parties or their representatives for refusal 
to comply with directions, continued use of dilatory tactics, refusal to 
adhere to reasonable standards of orderly and ethical conduct, failure 
to act in good faith, or violations of the prohibitions against ex parte 
communications. If an ALJ suspends or bars an attorney from 
participating in a proceeding, the ALJ shall include in the record the 
reasons for such action. An attorney who is suspended or barred from 
participation may appeal to the Chief ALJ. The proceeding will not be 
delayed or suspended pending disposition on the appeal, except that the 
ALJ shall suspend the proceeding for a reasonable time to enable the 
party to obtain another attorney.


<R04>
                 Subpart D--Proceedings Prior to Hearing


<R05>
Sec. 180.400  Service and filing.

    (a) Service--(1) Service by the Office of ALJs. The Office of ALJs 
shall serve all notices, orders, decisions and other such documents by 
mail to each party and amicus curiae at the last known address.
    (2) Service by others. A copy of each filed document shall be served 
on each party and each amicus curiae. Service shall be made upon counsel 
if a party is represented by counsel. Service on counsel shall 
constitute service on the party. Service may be made to the last known 
address by first-class mail or other more expeditious means, such as:
    (i) Hand delivery to the person to be served or a person of suitable 
age and discretion at the place of business, residence, or usual place 
of abode of the person to be served;
    (ii) Overnight delivery; or
    (iii) Facsimile transmission or electronic means. The ALJ may place 
appropriate limits on service by facsimile transmission or electronic 
means.
    (3) Certificate of service. Every document served shall be 
accompanied by a certificate of service containing a statement as to the 
date of service, the method of service, the parties served and the 
address at which they were served, which is signed and dated by the 
person making service.
    (b) Filing--(1) Method. All documents shall be filed with the Chief 
Docket Clerk. Filing may be by first class mail, delivery, facsimile 
transmission, or electronic means; however, the ALJ may place 
appropriate limits on filing by facsimile transmission or electronic 
means.
    (2) Form. Every pleading, motion, brief, or other document shall 
contain a caption setting forth the title of the proceeding, the docket 
number assigned by the Office of ALJs, and the designation of the type 
of document (e.g., charge, motion).
    (3) Signature. Every document filed by a party shall be signed by 
the party or the party's attorney and must include the signer's address 
and telephone number. The signature constitutes a certification that: 
the signer has read the document; to the best of the signer's knowledge, 
information and belief, the statements made therein are true; and the 
document is not interposed for delay.


<R05>
Sec. 180.405  Time computations.

    (a) In computing time under this part, the time period begins the 
day following the act, event, or default and includes the last day of 
the period, unless the last day is a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday 
observed by the Federal Government, in which case the time period 
includes the next business day.
    (b) Modification of time periods. Except for time periods required 
by statute, the ALJ may enlarge or reduce any time period required under 
this part where necessary to avoid prejudicing the public interest or 
the rights of the parties. Requests for extension of time should set 
forth the reasons for the request.
    (c) Entry of orders. In computing any time period involving the date 
of the ALJ's issuance of an order or decision,

[[Page 630]]

the date of issuance is the date of service by the Chief Docket Clerk.
    (d) Computation of time for delivery by mail. When documents are 
filed by mail, three days shall be added to the prescribed time period 
for filing any responsive pleading. Documents are not filed until 
received by the Chief Docket Clerk.
    (e) Untimely filing. The ALJ may refuse to consider any motion or 
other document that is not filed in a timely fashion.


<R05>
Sec. 180.410  Charges under the Fair Housing Act.

    (a) Filing and service. Within three days after the issuance of a 
charge, the General Counsel shall file the charge with the Chief Docket 
Clerk and serve copies (with the additional information required under 
paragraph (b) of this section) on all respondents and aggrieved persons.
    (b) Contents. The charge shall consist of a short and plain written 
statement of the facts upon which reasonable cause has been found to 
believe that a discriminatory housing practice has occurred or is about 
to occur. A notification shall be served with the charge containing the 
following information:
    (1) Any complainant, respondent, or aggrieved person may elect to 
have the claims asserted in the charge decided in a civil action under 
42 U.S.C. 3612(o), in lieu of an administrative proceeding under this 
part.
    (2) Such election must be made not later than 20 days after receipt 
of service of the charge by serving written notice of such on the Chief 
Docket Clerk, each respondent, each aggrieved person on whose behalf the 
charge was issued, the Assistant Secretary, and the General Counsel.
    (3) If no person timely elects to have the claims asserted in the 
charge decided in a civil action under 42 U.S.C. 3612(o), an 
administrative proceeding will be conducted under this part.
    (4) If an administrative hearing is conducted:
    (i) The hearing will be held at a date and place specified.
    (ii) The respondent will have an opportunity to file an answer to 
the charge within 30 days after service of the charge.
    (iii) The aggrieved person may participate as a party to the 
administrative proceeding by filing a request for intervention within 50 
days after service of the charge.
    (iv) All discovery must be concluded 15 days before the date set for 
hearing.
    (v) The rules in this part will govern the proceeding.
    (5) If, at any time following service of the charge on the 
respondent, the respondent intends to enter into a contract, sale, 
encumbrance, or lease with any person regarding the property that is the 
subject of the charge, the respondent must provide a copy of the charge 
to such person before the respondent and the person enter into the 
contract, sale, encumbrance or lease.
    (c) Election of judicial determination. If the complainant, the 
respondent, or the aggrieved person on whose behalf a complaint was 
filed makes a timely election to have the claims asserted in the charge 
decided in a civil action under 42 U.S.C. 3612(o), the Chief ALJ shall 
dismiss the administrative proceeding.
    (d) Effect of a civil action on administrative proceeding. An ALJ 
may not continue an administrative proceeding under the Fair Housing Act 
after the beginning of the trial of a civil action commenced by the 
aggrieved person under an act of Congress or a State law seeking relief 
with respect to that discriminatory housing practice. If such a trial is 
commenced, the ALJ shall dismiss the administrative proceeding. The 
commencement and maintenance of a civil action for appropriate temporary 
or preliminary relief under 42 U.S.C. 3610(e) or 42 U.S.C. 3613 does not 
affect administrative proceedings under this part.


<R05>
Sec. 180.415  Notice of proposed adverse action regarding Federal financial assistance in non-Fair Housing Act matters.

    (a) Filing and service. Within 10 days after a Recipient/applicant 
has requested a hearing, as provided for in 24 CFR parts 1, 6, 8, or 
146, the General Counsel shall file a notice of proposed adverse action 
with the Chief Docket Clerk and serve copies (with the additional 
information required under

[[Page 631]]

paragraph (b) of this section) on all respondents and complainants.
    (b) Contents. The notice of proposed adverse action shall consist of 
a short and plain written statement of the facts and legal authority 
upon which the proposed action is based. A notification shall be served 
with the notice containing the following information:
    (1) That an administrative hearing will be held at a date and place 
specified.
    (2) That the respondent will have an opportunity to file an answer 
to the notice of adverse action within 30 days after its service.
    (3) That the complainant may participate as an amicus curiae by 
filing a timely request to do so.
    (4) That discovery must be concluded by a date specified.
    (5) That the rules specified in this part shall govern the 
proceeding.
    (c) Consolidation. The ALJ may provide for non-Fair Housing Act 
proceedings at HUD to be joined or consolidated for hearing with 
proceedings in other Federal departments or agencies, by agreement with 
such other departments or agencies. All parties to any proceeding 
consolidated subsequent to service of the notice of proposed adverse 
action shall be promptly served with notice of such consolidation.

[61 FR 52218, Oct. 4, 1996, as amended at 64 FR 3802, Jan. 25, 1999]


<R05>
Sec. 180.420  Answer.

    (a) Within 30 days after service of the charge or notice of proposed 
adverse action, a respondent may file an answer. The answer shall 
include:
    (1) A statement that the respondent admits, denies, or does not have 
and is unable to obtain sufficient information to admit or deny, each 
allegation made. A statement of lack of information shall have the 
effect of a denial. Any allegation that is not denied shall be deemed to 
be admitted.
    (2) A statement of each affirmative defense and a statement of facts 
supporting each affirmative defense.
    (b) Failure to file an answer within the 30-day period following 
service of the charge or notice of proposed adverse action shall be 
deemed an admission of all matters of fact recited therein and may 
result in the entry of a default decision.


<R05>
Sec. 180.425  Amendments to pleadings.

    (a) By right. HUD may amend the charge or notice of proposed adverse 
action once as a matter of right prior to the filing of the answer.
    (b) By leave. Upon such conditions as are necessary to avoid 
prejudicing the public interest and the rights of the parties, the ALJ 
may allow amendments to pleadings upon a motion of a party.
    (c) Conformance to the evidence. When issues not raised by the 
pleadings are reasonably within the scope of the original charge or 
notice of proposed adverse action and have been tried by the express or 
implied consent of the parties, the issues shall be treated in all 
respects as if they had been raised in the pleadings, and amendments may 
be made as necessary to make the pleading conform to evidence.
    (d) Supplemental pleadings. The ALJ may, upon reasonable notice, 
permit supplemental pleadings concerning transactions, occurrences or 
events that have happened or been discovered since the date of the 
pleadings and which are relevant to any of the issues involved.


<R05>
Sec. 180.430  Motions.

    (a) Motions. Any application for an order or other request shall be 
made by a motion which, unless made during an appearance before the ALJ, 
shall be in writing and shall state the specific relief requested and 
the basis therefor. Motions made during an appearance before the ALJ 
shall be stated orally and made a part of the transcript. All parties 
shall be given a reasonable opportunity to respond to written or oral 
motions or requests.
    (b) Responses to written motions. Within seven calendar days after a 
written motion is served, any party to the proceeding may file a 
response in support of, or in opposition to, the motion. Unless 
otherwise ordered by the ALJ, no further responsive documents may be 
filed. Failure to file a response within the response period constitutes 
a waiver of any objection to the granting of the motion.

[[Page 632]]

    (c) Oral argument. The ALJ may order oral argument on any motion.


<R05>
Sec. 180.435  Prehearing statements.

    (a) Before the commencement of the hearing, the ALJ may direct the 
parties to file prehearing statements.
    (b) The prehearing statement must state the name of the party 
presenting the statement and, unless otherwise directed by the ALJ, 
briefly set forth the following:
    (1) The issues involved in the proceeding;
    (2) The facts stipulated by the parties and a statement that the 
parties have made a good faith effort to stipulate to the greatest 
extent possible;
    (3) The facts in dispute;
    (4) The witnesses (together with a summary of the testimony 
expected) and exhibits to be presented at the hearing;
    (5) A brief statement of applicable law;
    (6) Conclusions to be drawn;
    (7) Estimated time required for presentation of the party's case; 
and
    (8) Such other information as may assist in the disposition of the 
proceeding.


<R05>
Sec. 180.440  Prehearing conferences.

    (a) Before the commencement of or during the course of the hearing, 
the ALJ may direct the parties to participate in a conference to 
expedite the hearing. Failure to attend a conference may constitute a 
waiver of all objections to the agreements reached at the conference and 
to any order with respect thereto.
    (b) During the conference, the ALJ may dispose of any procedural 
matters on which he/she is authorized to rule. At the conference, the 
following matters may be considered:
    (1) Pre-trial motions;
    (2) Identification, simplification and clarification of the issues;
    (3) Necessary amendments to the pleadings;
    (4) Stipulations of fact and of the authenticity, accuracy, and 
admissibility of documents;
    (5) Limitations on the number of witnesses;
    (6) Negotiation, compromise, or settlement of issues;
    (7) The exchange of proposed exhibits and witness lists;
    (8) Matters of which official notice will be requested;
    (9) Scheduling actions discussed at the conference; and
    (10) Such other matters as may assist in the disposition of the 
proceeding.
    (c) Conferences may be conducted by telephone or in person, but 
generally shall be conducted by telephone, unless the ALJ determines 
that this method is inappropriate. The ALJ shall give reasonable notice 
of the time, place and manner of the conference.
    (d) Record of conference. Unless otherwise directed by the ALJ, the 
conference will not be stenographically recorded. The ALJ will reduce 
the actions taken at the conference to a written order or, if the 
conference takes place less than seven days before the beginning of the 
hearing, may make a statement at the hearing and on the record 
summarizing the actions taken at the conference.


<R05>
Sec. 180.445  Settlement negotiations before a settlement judge.

    (a) Appointment of settlement judge. The ALJ, upon the motion of a 
party or upon his or her own motion, may request the Chief ALJ to 
appoint another ALJ to conduct settlement negotiations. The order 
appointing the settlement judge may confine the scope of settlement 
negotiations to specified issues. The order shall direct the settlement 
judge to report to the Chief ALJ within specified time periods.
    (b) Duties of settlement judge. (1) The settlement judge shall 
convene and preside over conferences and settlement negotiations between 
the parties and assess the practicalities of a potential settlement.
    (2) The settlement judge shall report to the Chief ALJ describing 
the status of the settlement negotiations, evaluating settlement 
prospects, and recommending the termination or continuation of the 
settlement negotiations.
    (c) Termination of settlement negotiations. Settlement negotiations 
shall terminate upon the order of the chief ALJ issued after 
consultation with the settlement judge. The conduct of settlement 
negotiations shall not unduly

[[Page 633]]

delay the commencement of the hearing.


<R05>
Sec. 180.450  Resolution of charge or notice of proposed adverse action.

    At any time before a final decision is issued, the parties may 
submit to the ALJ an agreement resolving the charge or notice of 
proposed adverse action. A charge under the Fair Housing Act can only be 
resolved with the agreement of the aggrieved person on whose behalf the 
charge was issued. If the agreement is in the public interest, the ALJ 
shall accept it by issuing an initial decision and consent order based 
on the agreement.


<R04>
                          Subpart E--Discovery


<R05>
Sec. 180.500  Discovery.

    (a) In general. This subpart governs discovery in aid of 
administrative proceedings under this part. Discovery in Fair Housing 
Act matters shall be completed 15 days before the date scheduled for 
hearing or at such time as the ALJ shall direct. Discovery in non-Fair 
Housing Act matters shall be completed as the ALJ directs.
    (b) Scope. The parties are encouraged to engage in voluntary 
discovery procedures. Discovery shall be conducted as expeditiously and 
inexpensively as possible, consistent with the needs of all parties to 
obtain relevant evidence. Unless otherwise ordered by the ALJ, the 
parties may obtain discovery regarding any matter, not privileged, that 
is relevant to the subject matter involved in the proceeding, including 
the existence, description, nature, custody, condition, and location of 
documents or persons having knowledge of any discoverable matter. It is 
not grounds for objection that information sought will be inadmissible 
if the information appears reasonably calculated to lead to the 
discovery of admissible evidence.
    (c) Methods. Parties may obtain discovery by one or more of the 
following methods:
    (1) Deposition upon oral examination or written questions.
    (2) Written interrogatories.
    (3) Requests for the production of documents or other evidence for 
inspection and other purposes.
    (4) Requests for admissions.
    (5) Upon motion of a party, the presiding ALJ may issue an order 
requiring a physical or mental examination of a party or of a person in 
the custody or under the legal control of a party.
    (d) Frequency and sequence. Unless otherwise ordered by the ALJ or 
restricted by this subpart, the frequency or sequence of these methods 
is not limited.
    (e) Non-intervening aggrieved person. For purposes of obtaining 
discovery from a non-intervening aggrieved person, the term party as 
used in this subpart includes the aggrieved person.


<R05>
Sec. 180.505  Supplementation of responses.

    A party is under a duty, in a timely fashion, to:
    (a) Supplement a response with respect to any question directly 
addressed to:
    (1) The identity and location of persons having knowledge of 
discoverable matters; and
    (2) The identity of each person expected to be called as an expert 
witness, the subject matter on which the expert witness is expected to 
testify, and the substance of the testimony.
    (b) Amend a response if the party later obtains information upon the 
basis of which:
    (1) The party knows the response was incorrect when made, or
    (2) The party knows the response, though correct when made, is no 
longer true, and the circumstances are such that a failure to amend the 
response is, in substance, a knowing concealment.
    (c) Supplement other responses, as imposed by order of the ALJ or by 
agreement of the parties.


<R05>
Sec. 180.510  Interrogatories.

    (a) Any party may serve on any other party written interrogatories 
to be answered by the party served. If the party served is a public or 
private corporation, a partnership, an association, or a governmental 
agency, the interrogatories may be answered by any authorized officer or 
agent who shall furnish such information as may be available to the 
party. A party may serve

[[Page 634]]

not more than 30 written interrogatories on another party without an 
order of the ALJ.
    (b) Each interrogatory shall be answered separately and fully in 
writing under oath or affirmation, unless it is objected to, in which 
event, the reasons for the objection shall be stated in lieu of an 
answer. The answers shall be signed by the person making them, and the 
objections may be signed by the attorney or other representative making 
them. The answers and objections shall be served within 15 days after 
service of the interrogatories.
    (c) It is a sufficient answer to an interrogatory to specify the 
records from which the answer may be derived or ascertained if:
    (1) The answer to the interrogatory may be derived or ascertained 
from the records of the party on whom the interrogatory has been served 
or from an examination, audit or inspection of such records, or from a 
compilation, abstract or summary based thereon, and
    (2) The burden of deriving or ascertaining the answer is 
substantially the same for the party serving the interrogatory as the 
party served. The party serving the interrogatory shall be afforded 
reasonable opportunity to examine, audit or inspect such records and to 
make copies, compilations, abstracts or summaries. The specification 
shall include sufficient detail to permit the interrogating party to 
locate and identify the individual records from which the answer may be 
ascertained.
    (d) Objections to the form of written interrogatories are waived 
unless served in writing upon the party propounding the interrogatories.


<R05>
Sec. 180.515  Depositions.

    (a) Notice. Upon written notice to the witness and to all other 
parties, a party may take the testimony of a witness by deposition and 
may request the production of specified documents or materials by the 
witness at the deposition. Notice of the taking of a deposition shall be 
given not less than five days before the deposition is scheduled. The 
notice shall state:
    (1) The purpose and general scope of the deposition;
    (2) The time and place of the deposition;
    (3) The name and address of the person before whom the deposition is 
to be taken;
    (4) The name and address of the witness; and
    (5) A specification of the documents and materials that the witness 
is requested to produce.
    (b) Deposition of an organization. If the deposition of a public or 
private corporation, partnership, association, or governmental agency is 
sought, the organization so named shall designate one or more officers, 
directors or agents to testify on its behalf, and may set forth, for 
each person designated, the matters on which he/she will testify.
    (c) Procedure at deposition. Depositions may be taken before any 
disinterested person having power to administer oaths in the location 
where the deposition is to be taken. Each deponent shall be placed under 
oath or affirmation, and the other parties will have the right to cross-
examine. The deponent may have counsel present during the deposition. 
The questions propounded and all answers and objections thereto shall be 
reduced to writing, read by or to and subscribed by the witness, and 
certified by the person before whom the deposition was taken. Non-
intervening aggrieved persons may be present at depositions in which 
they are not the deponent.
    (d) Motion to terminate or limit examination. During the taking of a 
deposition, a party or the witness may request suspension of the 
deposition on the grounds of bad faith in the conduct of the 
examination, oppression of the witness or party, or improper questioning 
or conduct. Upon request for suspension, the deposition will be 
adjourned. The objecting party or witness must immediately move the ALJ 
for a ruling on the objection. The ALJ may then limit the scope or 
manner of taking the deposition.
    (e) Waiver of deposing officer's disqualification. Objection to 
taking a deposition because of the disqualification of the officer 
before whom it is taken is waived unless made before the taking of the 
deposition begins or as soon

[[Page 635]]

thereafter as the disqualification becomes known or could have been 
discovered with reasonable diligence.
    (f) Payment of costs of deposition. The party requesting the 
deposition shall bear all costs of the deposition.


<R05>
Sec. 180.520  Use of deposition at hearings.

    (a) In general. At the hearing, any part or all of a deposition, so 
far as admissible under the Federal Rules of Evidence, may be used 
against any party who was present or represented at the taking of the 
deposition or who had due notice of the taking of the deposition, in 
accordance with the following provisions:
    (1) Any deposition may be used by any party for the purpose of 
contradicting or impeaching the testimony of the deponent as a witness.
    (2) The deposition of an expert witness may be used by any party for 
any purpose, unless the ALJ rules that such use is unfair or in 
violation of due process.
    (3) The deposition of a party, or of anyone who at the time of the 
taking of the deposition was an officer, director, or duly authorized 
agent of a public or private corporation, partnership, or association 
that is a party, may be used by any other party for any purpose.
    (4) The deposition of a witness, whether or not a party, may be used 
by any party for any purpose if the ALJ finds:
    (i) That the witness is dead;
    (ii) That the witness is out of the United States or more than 100 
miles from the place of hearing, unless it appears that the absence of 
the witness was procured by the party offering the deposition;
    (iii) That the witness is unable to attend to testify because of 
age, sickness, infirmity, or imprisonment;
    (iv) That the party offering the deposition has been unable to 
procure the attendance of the witness by subpoena; or
    (v) Whenever exceptional circumstances exist as to make it 
desirable, in the interest of justice and with due regard to the 
importance of presenting the testimony of witnesses orally in open 
hearing, to allow the deposition to be used.
    (5) If a part of a deposition is offered in evidence by a party, any 
other party may require the party to introduce all of the deposition 
that is relevant to the part introduced. Any party may introduce any 
other part of the deposition.
    (6) Substitution of parties does not affect the right to use 
depositions previously taken. If a proceeding has been dismissed and 
another proceeding involving the same subject matter is later brought 
between the same parties or their representatives or successors in 
interest, all depositions lawfully taken in the former proceeding may be 
used in the latter proceeding.
    (b) Objections to admissibility. Except as provided in this 
paragraph, objection may be made at the hearing to receiving in evidence 
any deposition or part of a deposition for any reason that would require 
the exclusion of the evidence if the witness were present and 
testifying.
    (1) Objections to the competency of a witness or to the competency, 
relevancy, or materiality of testimony are not waived by failure to make 
them before or during the taking of the deposition, unless the basis of 
the objection is one which might have been obviated or removed if 
presented at that time.
    (2) Errors and irregularities occurring at the oral examination in 
the manner of taking the deposition, in the form of the questions or 
answers, in the oath or affirmation, or in the conduct of parties, and 
errors of any kind which might be obviated, removed or cured if promptly 
presented, are waived unless reasonable objection is made at the taking 
of the deposition.


<R05>
Sec. 180.525  Requests for production of documents or things for inspection or other purposes, including physical and mental examinations.

    (a) Any party may serve on any other party a request to:
    (1) Produce and/or permit the party, or a person acting on the 
party's behalf, to inspect and copy any designated documents, or to 
inspect and copy, test, or sample any tangible things that contain or 
may lead to relevant information and that are in the possession, 
custody, or control of the party upon whom the request is served.

[[Page 636]]

    (2) Permit entry upon designated land or other property in the 
possession or control of the party upon whom the request is served for 
the purpose of inspection and measuring, photographing, testing, or 
other purposes stated in paragraph (a)(1) of this section.
    (b) Each request shall set forth with reasonable particularity the 
items or categories to be inspected and shall specify a reasonable time, 
place and manner for making the inspection and performing the related 
acts.
    (c) Within 15 days after service of the request, the party upon whom 
the request is served shall serve a written response on the party 
submitting the request. The response shall state, with regard to each 
item or category, that inspection and related activities will be 
permitted as requested, unless there are objections, in which case the 
reasons for the objection shall be stated.
    (d) Upon motion of any party, when the mental or physical condition 
(including the blood group) of a party or of a person in the custody or 
under the legal control of a party, is in controversy, the presiding ALJ 
may order the party to submit to a physical or mental examination by a 
suitably licensed or certified examiner or to produce for examination 
the person in the party's custody or legal control. The order may be 
made only on motion for good cause shown and upon notice to the person 
to be examined and to all parties and shall specify the time, place, 
manner, conditions, and scope of the examination and the person or 
persons by whom it is to be made. A report of the examiner shall be made 
in accordance with Rule 35(b) of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure.


<R05>
Sec. 180.530  Requests for admissions.

    (a) Any party may serve on any other party a written request for the 
admission of the truth of any matters relevant to the adjudication set 
forth in the request that relate to statements or opinions of fact or of 
application of law to fact, including the genuineness and authenticity 
of any documents described in or attached to the request.
    (b) Each matter for which an admission is requested is admitted 
unless, within 15 days after service of the request, or within such time 
as the ALJ allows, the party to whom the request is directed serves on 
the requesting party a sworn written answer which:
    (1) Specifically denies, in whole or in part, the matter for which 
an admission is requested;
    (2) Sets forth in detail why the party cannot truthfully admit or 
deny the matter; or
    (3) States an objection that the matter is privileged, irrelevant or 
otherwise improper in whole or in part.
    (c) An answering party may not give lack of information or knowledge 
as a reason for failure to admit or deny, unless he/she/it states that 
he/she/it has made a reasonable inquiry and that the information known 
to, or readily obtainable by, him/her/it is insufficient to enable the 
party to admit or deny.
    (d) The party requesting admissions may move for a determination of 
the sufficiency of the answers or objections. Unless the ALJ determines 
that an objection is justified, the ALJ shall order that an answer be 
served. If the ALJ determines that an answer does not comply with the 
requirements of this section, the ALJ may order either that the matter 
is admitted or that an amended answer be served.
    (e) Any matter admitted under this section is conclusively 
established unless, upon the motion of a party, the ALJ permits the 
withdrawal or amendment of the admission. Any admission made under this 
section is made for the purposes of the pending proceeding only, is not 
an admission by the party for any other purpose, and may not be used 
against the party in any other proceeding.


<R05>
Sec. 180.535  Protective orders.

    (a) Upon motion of a party or a person from whom discovery is sought 
or in accordance with Sec. 180.540(c), and for good cause shown, the ALJ 
may make appropriate orders to protect a party or person from annoyance, 
embarrassment, oppression, or undue burden or expense as a result of the 
requested discovery request. The order may direct that:
    (1) The discovery may not be had;
    (2) The discovery may be had only on specified terms and conditions, 
including at a designated time and place;

[[Page 637]]

    (3) The discovery may be had by a method of discovery other than 
that selected by the party seeking discovery;
    (4) Certain matters may not be the subject of discovery, or the 
scope of discovery may be limited to certain matters;
    (5) Discovery may be conducted with no one present other than 
persons designated by the ALJ;
    (6) A trade secret or other confidential research, development or 
commercial information may not be disclosed, or may be disclosed only in 
a designated way; or
    (7) The party or other person from whom discovery is sought may file 
specified documents or information under seal to be opened as directed 
by the ALJ.
    (b) The ALJ may permit a party or other person from whom discovery 
is sought, who is seeking a protective order, to make all or part of the 
showing of good cause in camera. If such a showing is made, upon motion 
of the party or other person from whom discovery is sought, an in camera 
record of the proceedings may be made. If the ALJ enters a protective 
order, any in camera record of such showing shall be sealed and 
preserved and made available to the ALJ or, in the event of appeal, to 
the Secretary or a court.


<R05>
Sec. 180.540  Motion to compel discovery.

    (a) If a deponent fails to answer a question propounded, or a party 
upon whom a discovery request has been made fails to respond adequately, 
objects to a request, or fails to produce documents or other inspection 
as requested, the discovering party may move the ALJ for an order 
compelling discovery in accordance with the request. The motion shall:
    (1) State the nature of the request;
    (2) Set forth the response or objection of the deponent or party 
upon whom the request was served;
    (3) Present arguments supporting the motion; and
    (4) Attach copies of all relevant discovery requests and responses.
    (b) For the purposes of this section, an evasive or incomplete 
answer or response will be treated as a failure to answer or respond.
    (c) In ruling on a motion under this section, the ALJ may enter an 
order compelling a response in accordance with the request, may issue 
sanctions under paragraph (d) of this section, or may enter a protective 
order under Sec. 180.535.
    (d) Sanctions. If a party fails to provide or permit discovery, the 
ALJ may take such action as is just, including but not limited to the 
following:
    (1) Inferring that the admission, testimony, document, or other 
evidence would have been adverse to the party;
    (2) Ordering that, for purposes of the adjudication, the matters 
regarding which the order was made or any other designated facts shall 
be taken to be established in accordance with the claim of the party 
obtaining the order;
    (3) Prohibiting the party failing to comply with the order from 
introducing evidence concerning, or otherwise relying upon, documents or 
other evidence withheld;
    (4) Ordering that the party withholding discovery not introduce into 
evidence, or otherwise use in the hearing, information obtained in 
discovery;
    (5) Permitting the requesting party to introduce secondary evidence 
concerning the information sought;
    (6) Striking any appropriate part of the pleadings or other 
submissions of the party failing to comply with such order; or
    (7) Taking such other action as may be appropriate.


<R05>
Sec. 180.545  Subpoenas.

    (a) This section governs the issuance of subpoenas in administrative 
proceedings under the Fair Housing Act. Except for time periods stated 
in the rules in this section, to the extent that this section conflicts 
with procedures for the issuance of subpoenas in civil actions in the 
United States District Court for the District in which the investigation 
of the discriminatory housing practice took place, the rules of the 
United States District Court apply.
    (b) Issuance of subpoena. Upon the written request of a party, the 
Chief ALJ or the presiding ALJ may issue a subpoena requiring the 
attendance of a witness for the purpose of giving testimony at a 
deposition or hearing and requiring the production of relevant

[[Page 638]]

books, papers, documents or tangible things.
    (c) Time of request. Requests for subpoenas in aid of discovery must 
be submitted in time to permit the conclusion of discovery 15 days 
before the date scheduled for the hearing. If a request for subpoenas of 
a witness for testimony at a hearing is submitted three days or less 
before the hearing, the subpoena shall be issued at the discretion of 
the Chief ALJ or the presiding ALJ, as appropriate.
    (d) Service. A subpoena may be served by any person who is not a 
party and is not less than 18 years of age. Service on a person shall be 
made by delivering a copy of the subpoena to the person and by tendering 
witness fees and mileage to that person. When the subpoena is issued on 
behalf of HUD, witness fees and mileage need not be tendered with the 
subpoena.
    (e) Amount of witness fees and mileage. A witness summoned by a 
subpoena issued under this part is entitled to the same witness and 
mileage fees as a witness in proceedings in United States District 
Courts. Fees payable to a witness summoned by a subpoena shall be paid 
by the party requesting the issuance of the subpoena, or where the ALJ 
determines that a party is unable to pay the fees, the fees shall be 
paid by HUD.
    (f) Motion to quash or limit subpoena. Upon a motion by the person 
served with a subpoena or by a party, made within five days after 
service of the subpoena (but in any event not less than the time 
specified in the subpoena for compliance), the ALJ may:
    (1) Quash or modify the subpoena if it is unreasonable and 
oppressive or for other good cause shown; or
    (2) Condition denial of the motion upon the advancement, by the 
party on whose behalf the subpoena was issued, of the reasonable cost of 
producing subpoenaed books, papers or documents. Where circumstances 
require, the ALJ may act upon such a motion at any time after a copy of 
the motion has been served upon the party on whose behalf the subpoena 
was issued.
    (g) Failure to comply with subpoena. If a person fails to comply 
with a subpoena issued under this section, the party requesting the 
subpoena may refer the matter to the Attorney General for enforcement in 
appropriate proceedings under 42 U.S.C. 3614(c).


<R04>
                    Subpart F--Procedures at Hearing


<R05>
Sec. 180.600  Date and place of hearing.

    (a) For Fair Housing Act Cases--(1) Time. The hearing shall commence 
not later than 120 days after the issuance of the charge, unless it is 
impracticable to do so. If the hearing cannot be commenced within this 
time period, the ALJ shall notify in writing all parties, aggrieved 
persons, amici, and the Assistant Secretary of the reasons for the 
delay.
    (2) Place. The hearing will be conducted at a place in the vicinity 
in which the discriminatory housing practice is alleged to have occurred 
or to be about to occur.
    (b) For Non-Fair Housing Matters. Hearings shall be held in 
Washington, DC, unless the ALJ determines that the convenience of the 
respondent or HUD requires that another place be selected.
    (c) The ALJ may change the time, date or place of the hearing, or 
may temporarily adjourn or continue a hearing for good cause shown.


<R05>
Sec. 180.605  Conduct of hearings.

    The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the Administrative 
Procedure Act (5 U.S.C. 551-559).


<R05>
Sec. 180.610  Waiver of right to appear.

    If all parties waive their right to appear before the ALJ, the ALJ 
need not conduct an oral hearing. Such waivers shall be in writing and 
filed with the ALJ. The ALJ shall make a record of the pleadings and 
relevant written evidence submitted by the parties. These documents may 
constitute the evidence in the proceeding, and the decision may be based 
upon this evidence.


<R05>
Sec. 180.615  Failure of party to appear.

    A default decision may be entered against a party failing to appear 
at a hearing unless such party shows good cause for such failure.

[[Page 639]]


<R05>
Sec. 180.620  Evidence.

    The Federal Rules of Evidence apply to the presentation of evidence 
in hearings under this part.


<R05>
Sec. 180.625  Record of hearing.

    (a) All oral hearings shall be recorded and transcribed by a 
reporter designated and supervised by the ALJ. The original transcript 
shall be a part of the record and shall constitute the sole official 
transcript. All exhibits introduced as evidence shall be incorporated 
into the record. The parties and the public may obtain transcripts from 
the official reporter at rates not to exceed the applicable rates fixed 
by the contract with the reporter.
    (b) Corrections to the official transcript will be permitted upon 
motion of a party. Motions for correction must be submitted within five 
days after receipt of the transcript. Corrections of the official 
transcript will be permitted only where errors of substance are involved 
and upon the ALJ's approval.


<R05>
Sec. 180.630  Stipulations.

    The parties may stipulate to any pertinent facts by oral agreement 
at the hearing or by written agreement at any time. Stipulations may be 
submitted into evidence at any time before the end of the hearing. Once 
received into evidence, a stipulation is binding on the parties.


<R05>
Sec. 180.635  Written testimony.

    The ALJ may accept and enter into the record direct testimony of 
witnesses made by verified written statement rather than by oral 
presentation at the hearing. Unless the ALJ fixes other time periods, 
affidavits shall be filed and served on the parties not later than 14 
days prior to the hearing. Witnesses whose testimony is presented by 
affidavit shall be available for cross-examination as may be required.


<R05>
Sec. 180.640  In camera and protective orders.

    The ALJ may limit discovery or the introduction of evidence, or may 
issue such protective or other orders necessary to protect privileged 
communications. If the ALJ determines that information in documents 
containing privileged matters should be made available to a party, the 
ALJ may order the preparation of a summary or extract of the 
nonprivileged matter contained in the original.


<R05>
Sec. 180.645  Exhibits.

    (a) Identification. All exhibits offered into evidence shall be 
numbered sequentially and marked with a designation identifying the 
sponsor. The original of each exhibit offered in evidence or marked for 
identification shall be filed and retained in the docket of the 
proceeding, unless the ALJ permits the substitution of a copy for the 
original.
    (b) Exchange of exhibits. One copy of each exhibit offered into 
evidence must be furnished to each of the parties and to the ALJ. If the 
ALJ does not fix a time for the exchange of exhibits, the parties shall 
exchange copies of proposed exhibits at the earliest practicable time 
before the commencement of the hearing. Exhibits submitted as rebuttal 
evidence are not required to be exchanged before the commencement of the 
hearing if the submission of such evidence could not reasonably be 
anticipated at that time.
    (c) Authenticity. The authenticity of all documents submitted or 
exchanged as proposed exhibits prior to the hearing shall be admitted 
unless written objection is filed before the commencement of the 
hearing, or unless good cause is shown for failing to file such a 
written objection.
    (d) The parties are encouraged to stipulate as to the admissibility 
of exhibits.


<R05>
Sec. 180.650  Public document items.

    Whenever a public document, such as an official report, decision, 
opinion, or published scientific or economic statistical data issued by 
any of the executive departments (or their subdivisions), legislative 
agencies or committees, or administrative agencies of the Federal 
Government (including Government-owned corporations), or a similar 
document issued by a State or its agencies is offered (in whole or in 
part), and such document (or part thereof) has been shown by the offeror 
to be reasonably available to the public, such document need not be 
produced or marked for identification, but

[[Page 640]]

may be offered for official notice, as a public document item by 
specifying the document or relevant part thereof.


<R05>
Sec. 180.655  Witnesses.

    (a) Witnesses shall testify under oath or affirmation.
    (b) If a witness fails or refuses to testify, the failure or refusal 
to answer any question found by the ALJ to be proper may be grounds for 
striking all or part of the testimony that may have been given by the 
witness, or for any other action deemed appropriate by the ALJ.


<R05>
Sec. 180.660  Closing of record.

    (a) Oral hearings. Where there is an oral hearing, the hearing ends 
on the day of the adjournment of the oral hearing or, where written 
briefs are permitted, on the date that the written briefs are due.
    (b) Hearing on written record. Where the parties have waived an oral 
hearing, the hearing ends on the date set by the ALJ as the final date 
for the receipt of submissions by the parties.
    (c) Receipt of evidence following hearing. Following the end of the 
hearing, no additional evidence may be accepted into the record, except 
with the permission of the ALJ. The ALJ may receive additional evidence 
upon a determination that new and material evidence was not readily 
available before the end of the hearing, the evidence has been timely 
submitted, and its acceptance will not unduly prejudice the rights of 
the parties.


<R05>
Sec. 180.665  Arguments and briefs.

    (a) Following the submission of evidence at an oral hearing, the 
parties may file a brief, proposed findings of fact and conclusions of 
law, or both, or, in the ALJ's discretion, make oral arguments.
    (b) Unless otherwise ordered by the ALJ, briefs and proposed 
findings of fact and conclusions of law shall be filed simultaneously by 
all parties. In Fair Housing Act cases, such filings shall be due not 
later than 45 days after the adjournment of the oral hearing. In other 
cases, they shall be due as the ALJ orders.


<R05>
Sec. 180.670  Initial decision of ALJ.

    (a) The ALJ shall issue an initial decision including findings of 
fact and conclusions of law upon each material issue of fact or law 
presented on the record. The initial decision of the ALJ shall be based 
on the whole record of the proceeding. A copy of the initial decision 
shall be served upon all parties, aggrieved persons, the Assistant 
Secretary, the Secretary, and amici, if any.
    (b) Initial decision in Fair Housing Act cases. (1) The ALJ shall 
issue an initial decision within 60 days after the end of the hearing, 
unless it is impracticable to do so. If the ALJ is unable to issue the 
initial decision within this time period (or within any succeeding 60-
day period following the initial 60-day period), the ALJ shall notify in 
writing all parties, the aggrieved person on whose behalf the charge was 
filed, and the Assistant Secretary, of the reasons for the delay.
    (2) The initial decision shall state that it will become the final 
agency decision 30 days after the date of issuance of the initial 
decision.
    (3) Findings against respondents. If the ALJ finds that a respondent 
has engaged, or is about to engage, in a discriminatory housing 
practice, the ALJ shall issue an initial decision against the respondent 
and order such relief as may be appropriate. Relief may include, but is 
not limited to:
    (i) Ordering the respondent to pay damages to the aggrieved person 
(including damages caused by humiliation and embarrassment).
    (ii) Ordering injunctive or such other equitable relief as may be 
appropriate. No such order may affect any contract, sale, encumbrance or 
lease consummated before the issuance of the initial decision that 
involved a bona fide purchaser, encumbrancer or tenant without actual 
knowledge of the charge.
    (iii) Assessing a civil penalty against any respondent to vindicate 
the public interest in accordance with Sec. 180.671.
    (A) The amount of the civil penalty may not exceed:
    (1) $11,000, if the respondent has not been adjudged to have 
committed any prior discriminatory housing practice in any 
administrative hearing or civil

[[Page 641]]

action permitted under the Fair Housing Act or any State or local fair 
housing law, or in any licensing or regulatory proceeding conducted by a 
Federal, State or local governmental agency.
    (2) $27,500, if the respondent has been adjudged to have committed 
one other discriminatory housing practice in any administrative hearing 
or civil action permitted under the Fair Housing Act, or any State or 
local fair housing law, or in any licensing or regulatory proceeding 
conducted by a Federal, State, or local government agency, and the 
adjudication was made during the five-year period preceding the date of 
filing of the charge.
    (3) $55,000, if the respondent has been adjudged to have committed 
two or more discriminatory housing practices in any administrative 
hearings or civil actions permitted under the Fair Housing Act or any 
State or local fair housing law, or in any licensing or regulatory 
proceeding conducted by a Federal, State, or local government agency, 
and the adjudications were made during the seven-year period preceding 
the date of the filing of the charge.
    (B) If the acts constituting the discriminatory housing practice 
that is the subject of the charge were committed by the same natural 
person who has previously been adjudged, in any administrative 
proceeding or civil action, to have committed acts constituting a 
discriminatory housing practice, the time periods set forth in 
paragraphs (b)(3)(iii)(A)(2) and (3) of this section do not apply.
    (C) In a proceeding involving two or more respondents, the ALJ may 
assess a civil penalty as provided under paragraph (b) of this section 
against each respondent that the ALJ determines has been engaged or is 
about to engage in a discriminatory housing practice.
    (4) Findings in favor of respondents. If the ALJ finds that the 
charging party has not established that a respondent has engaged in a 
discriminatory housing practice, the ALJ shall make an initial decision 
dismissing the charge as against that respondent.
    (c) Initial Decision in Non-Fair Housing Act matters. The ALJ shall 
issue the initial decision as soon as possible after the end of the 
hearing.
    (1) Findings against Respondents. If the ALJ finds that a respondent 
has failed to comply substantially with the statutory and regulatory 
requirements that gave rise to the notice of proposed adverse action, 
the ALJ shall issue an initial decision against the respondent.
    (i) The initial decision shall provide for suspension or termination 
of, or refusal to grant or continue, Federal financial assistance, in 
whole or in part, to the involved program or activity.
    (ii) The initial decision may contain such terms, conditions, and 
other provisions as are consistent with and will effectuate the purposes 
of the applicable statute and regulations, including provisions designed 
to assure that no Federal financial assistance will be extended for the 
program or activity unless and until the respondent corrects its 
noncompliance and satisfies the Secretary that it will fully comply with 
the relevant statute and regulations.
    (iii) The initial decision shall state that it will become final 
only upon the Secretary's approval.
    (2) Findings in favor of respondents. If the ALJ finds that a 
respondent has not failed to comply substantially with the statutory and 
regulatory requirements that gave rise to the notice of proposed adverse 
action, the ALJ shall make an initial decision dismissing the notice of 
proposed adverse action. The initial decision shall state that it will 
become the final agency decision 30 days after the date of issuance.

[61 FR 52218, Oct. 4, 1996, as amended at 64 FR 6754, Feb. 10, 1999]


<R05>
Sec. 180.671  Assessing civil penalties for Fair Housing Act cases.

    (a) Amounts. The ALJ may assess a civil penalty against any 
respondent under Sec. 180.670(b)(3) for each separate and distinct 
discriminatory housing practice (as defined in paragraph (b) of this 
section) that the respondent committed, each civil penalty in an amount 
not to exceed:
    (1) $11,000, if the respondent has not been adjudged in any 
administrative hearing or civil action permitted under the Fair Housing 
Act or any State or local fair housing law, or in any licensing or 
regulatory proceeding conducted

[[Page 642]]

by a Federal, State or local governmental agency, to have committed any 
prior discriminatory housing practice.
    (2) $27,500, if the respondent has been adjudged in any 
administrative hearing or civil action permitted under the Fair Housing 
Act, or any State or local fair housing law, or in any licensing or 
regulatory proceeding conducted by a Federal, State, or local government 
agency, to have committed one other discriminatory housing practice and 
the adjudication was made during the five-year period preceding the date 
of filing of the charge.
    (3) $55,000, if the respondent has been adjudged in any 
administrative hearings or civil actions permitted under the Fair 
Housing Act or any State or local fair housing law, or in any licensing 
or regulatory proceeding conducted by a Federal, State, or local 
government agency, to have committed two or more discriminatory housing 
practices and the adjudications were made during the seven-year period 
preceding the date of the filing of the charge.
    (b) Definition of separate and distinct discriminatory housing 
practice. A separate and distinct discriminatory housing practice is a 
single, continuous uninterrupted transaction or occurrence that violates 
section 804, 805, 806 or 818 of the Fair Housing Act. Even if such a 
transaction or occurrence violates more than one provision of the Fair 
Housing Act, violates a provision more than once, or violates the fair 
housing rights of more than one person, it constitutes only one separate 
and distinct discriminatory housing practice.
    (c) Factors for consideration by ALJ. (1) In determining the amount 
of the civil penalty to be assessed against any respondent for each 
separate and distinct discriminatory housing practice the respondent 
committed, the ALJ shall consider the following six (6) factors:
    (i) Whether that respondent has previously been adjudged to have 
committed unlawful housing discrimination;
    (ii) That respondent's financial resources;
    (iii) The nature and circumstances of the violation;
    (iv) The degree of that respondent's culpability;
    (v) The goal of deterrence; and
    (vi) Other matters as justice may require.
    (2)(i) Where the ALJ finds any respondent to have committed a 
housing-related hate act, the ALJ shall take this fact into account in 
favor of imposing a maximum civil penalty under the factors listed in 
paragraphs (c)(1)(iii), (iv), (v), and (vi) of this section.
    (ii) For purposes of this section, the term housing-related hate act 
means any act that constitutes a discriminatory housing practice under 
section 818 of the Fair Housing Act and which constitutes or is 
accompanied or characterized by actual violence, assault, bodily harm, 
and/or harm to property; intimidation or coercion that has such 
elements; or the threat or commission of any action intended to assist 
or be a part of any such act.
    (iii) Nothing in this paragraph shall be construed to require an ALJ 
to assess any amount less than a maximum civil penalty in a non-hate act 
case, where the ALJ finds that the factors listed in paragraphs 
(c)(1)(i) through (vi) of this section warrant the assessment of a 
maximum civil penalty.
    (d) Persons previously adjudged to have committed a discriminatory 
housing practice. If the acts constituting the discriminatory housing 
practice that is the subject of the charge were committed by the same 
natural person who has previously been adjudged, in any administrative 
proceeding or civil action, to have committed acts constituting a 
discriminatory housing practice, the time periods in paragraphs (a) (2) 
and (3) of this section do not apply.
    (e) Multiple discriminatory housing practices committed by the same 
respondent; multiple respondents. (1) In a proceeding where a respondent 
has been determined to have engaged in, or is about to engage in, more 
than one separate and distinct discriminatory housing practice, a 
separate civil penalty may be assessed against the respondent for each 
separate and distinct discriminatory housing practice.
    (2) In a proceeding involving two or more respondents who have been 
determined to have engaged in, or are about to engage in, one or more 
discriminatory housing practices, one or more civil penalties, as 
provided under this

[[Page 643]]

section, may be assessed against each respondent.

[64 FR 6754, Feb. 10, 1999]


<R05>
Sec. 180.675  Petitions for review.

    (a) The Secretary may affirm, modify or set aside, in whole or in 
part, the initial decision, or remand the initial decision for further 
proceedings.
    (b) Any party adversely affected by the ALJ's initial decision may 
file a motion with the Secretary explaining how and why the initial 
decision should be modified, set aside, in whole or in part, or remanded 
for further proceedings. Such petition shall be based only on the 
following grounds:
    (1) A finding of material fact is not supported by substantial 
evidence;
    (2) A necessary legal conclusion is erroneous;
    (3) The decision is contrary to law, duly promulgated rules of HUD, 
or legal precedent; or
    (4) A prejudicial error of procedure was committed.
    (c) Each issue shall be plainly and concisely stated and shall be 
supported by citations to the record when assignments of error are based 
on the record, statutes, regulations, cases, or other authorities relied 
upon. Except for good cause shown, no assignment of error by any party 
shall rely on any question of fact or law not presented to the ALJ.
    (d) Such petitions must be received by the Secretary within 15 days 
after issuance of the initial decision.
    (e) A statement in opposition to the petition for review may be 
filed. Such opposition must be received by the Secretary within 22 days 
after issuance of the initial decision.
    (f) A petition not granted within 30 days after the issuance of the 
initial decision is deemed denied.
    (g) If the Secretary remands the decision for further proceedings, 
the ALJ shall issue an initial decision on remand within 60 days after 
the date of issuance of the Secretary's decision, unless it is 
impracticable to do so. If the ALJ is unable to issue the initial 
decision within this time period (or within any succeeding 60-day period 
following the initial 60-day period), the ALJ shall notify in writing 
the parties, the aggrieved person on whose behalf the charge was filed, 
any amicus curiae and the Assistant Secretary, of the reasons for the 
delay.


<R05>
Sec. 180.680  Final decisions.

    (a) Public disclosure. HUD shall make public disclosure of each 
final decision.
    (b) Where initial decision does not provide for suspension or 
termination of, or refusal to grant or continue, Federal financial 
assistance--(1) Issuance of final decision by Secretary. The Secretary 
may review any finding of fact, conclusion of law, or order contained in 
the initial decision of the ALJ and issue a final decision in the 
proceeding. The Secretary shall serve the final decision on all parties 
no later than 30 days after the date of issuance of the initial 
decision.
    (2) No final decision by Secretary. If the Secretary does not serve 
a final decision within the time period described in paragraph (b)(1) of 
this section, the initial decision of the ALJ will become the final 
agency decision. For the purposes of this part, such a final decision 
will be considered to have been issued 30 days after the date of 
issuance of the initial decision.
    (c) Where initial decision provides for suspension or termination 
of, or refusal to grant or continue, Federal financial assistance. When 
the initial decision provides for the suspension or termination of, or 
the refusal to grant or continue, Federal financial assistance, or the 
imposition of any other sanction, such decision shall not constitute an 
order or final agency action until approved by the Secretary. Further, 
in the case of proceedings under title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 
1964, no order suspending, terminating, or refusing to grant or continue 
Federal financial assistance shall become effective until the 
requirements of 24 CFR 1.8(c) have been met.


<R04>
          Subpart G--Post-Final Decision in Fair Housing Cases


<R05>
Sec. 180.700  Action upon issuance of a final decision in Fair Housing Act cases.

    (a) Licensed or regulated businesses. (1) If a final decision 
includes a finding that a respondent has engaged or is about to engage 
in a discriminatory

[[Page 644]]

housing practice in the course of a business that is subject to 
licensing or regulation by a Federal, State or local governmental 
agency, the Assistant Secretary will notify the governmental agency of 
the decision by:
    (i) Sending copies of the findings of fact, conclusions of law and 
final decision to the governmental agency by certified mail; and
    (ii) Recommending appropriate disciplinary action to the 
governmental agency, including, where appropriate, the suspension or 
revocation of the respondent's license.
    (2) The Assistant Secretary will notify the appropriate governmental 
agencies within 30 days after the date of issuance of the final 
decision, unless a petition for judicial review of the final decision as 
described in Sec. 180.710 of this part has been filed before the 
issuance of the notification of the agency. If such a petition has been 
filed, the Assistant Secretary will provide the notification to the 
governmental agency within 30 days after the date that the final 
decision is affirmed upon review. If a petition for judicial review is 
timely filed following the notification of the governmental agency, the 
Assistant Secretary will promptly notify the governmental agency of the 
petition and withdraw his or her recommendation.
    (b) Notification to the Attorney General. If a final decision 
includes a finding that a respondent has engaged or is about to engage 
in a discriminatory housing practice and another final decision 
including such a finding was issued under this part within the five 
years preceding the date of issuance of the final decision, the General 
Counsel will notify the Attorney General of the decisions by sending a 
copy of each final decision.


<R05>
Sec. 180.705  Attorney's fees and costs.

    Following the issuance of the final decision, any prevailing party, 
except HUD, may apply for attorney's fees and costs. The ALJ will issue 
an initial decision awarding or denying such fees and costs. The initial 
decision will become HUD's final decision unless the Secretary reviews 
the initial decision and issues a final decision on fees and costs 
within 30 days. The recovery of reasonable attorney's fees and costs 
will be permitted as follows:
    (a) If the respondent is the prevailing party, HUD will be liable 
for reasonable attorney's fees and costs to the extent provided under 
the Equal Access to Justice Act (5 U.S.C. 504) and HUD's regulations at 
24 CFR part 14, and an intervenor will be liable for reasonable 
attorney's fees and costs only to the extent that the intervenor's 
participation in the administrative proceeding was frivolous or 
vexatious, or was for the purpose of harassment.
    (b) To the extent that an intervenor is a prevailing party, the 
respondent will be liable for reasonable attorney's fees unless special 
circumstances make the recovery of such fees and costs unjust.


<R05>
Sec. 180.710  Judicial review of final decision.

    (a) Any party adversely affected by a final decision may file a 
petition in the appropriate United States Court of Appeals for review of 
the decision under 42 U.S.C. 3612(i). The petition must be filed within 
30 days after the date of issuance of the final decision.
    (b) If no petition for review is filed under paragraph (a) of this 
section within 45 days after the date of issuance of the final decision, 
the findings of facts and final decision shall be conclusive in 
connection with any petition for enforcement.


<R05>
Sec. 180.715  Enforcement of final decision.

    (a) Enforcement by HUD. Following the issuance of a final decision, 
the General Counsel may petition the appropriate United States Court of 
Appeals for the enforcement of the final decision and for appropriate 
temporary relief or restraining order in accordance with 42 U.S.C. 
3612(j).
    (b) Enforcement by others. If no petition for review has been filed 
within 60 days after the date of issuance, and the General Counsel has 
not sought enforcement of the final decision as described in paragraph 
(a) of this section, any person entitled to relief under the final 
decision may petition the appropriate United States Court of Appeals

[[Page 645]]

for the enforcement of the final decision in accordance with 42 U.S.C. 
3612(m).


<R04>
     Subpart H--Post-Final Decision in Non-Fair Housing Act Matters


<R05>
Sec. 180.800  Post-termination proceedings.

    (a) A respondent adversely affected by the order terminating, 
discontinuing, or refusing Federal financial assistance in consequence 
of proceedings pursuant to this title may request the Secretary for an 
order authorizing payment, or permitting resumption, of Federal 
financial assistance. Such request shall:
    (1) Be in writing;
    (2) Affirmatively show that, since entry of the order, the 
respondent has brought its program or activity into compliance with 
statutory and regulatory requirements; and
    (3) Set forth specifically, and in detail, the steps taken to 
achieve such compliance.
    (b) If the Secretary denies such request, the respondent may request 
an expeditious hearing. The request for such a hearing shall be 
addressed to the Secretary within 30 days after the respondent is 
informed that the Secretary has refused to authorize payment or permit 
resumption of Federal financial assistance and shall specify why the 
Secretary erred in denying the request.
    (c) The procedures established by this part shall be applicable to 
any hearing.


<R05>
Sec. 180.805  Judicial review of final decision.

    A termination of or refusal to grant or to continue Federal 
financial assistance is subject to judicial review as provided in the 
applicable statute.


[[Page 647]]


<R02>
                              FINDING AIDS


<R03>

  --------------------------------------------------------------------

  A list of CFR titles, subtitles, chapters, subchapters and parts and 
an alphabetical list of agencies publishing in the CFR are included in 
the CFR Index and Finding Aids volume to the Code of Federal Regulations 
which is published separately and revised annually.

  Material Approved for Incorporation by Reference
  Table of CFR Titles and Chapters
  Alphabetical List of Agencies Appearing in the CFR
  List of CFR Sections Affected

[[Page 649]]

            Material Approved for Incorporation by Reference

                      (Revised as of April 1, 1999)

  The Director of the Federal Register has approved under 5 U.S.C. 
552(a) and 1 CFR Part 51 the incorporation by reference of the following 
publications. This list contains only those incorporations by reference 
effective as of the revision date of this volume. Incorporations by 
reference found within a regulation are effective upon the effective 
date of that regulation. For more information on incorporation by 
reference, see the preliminary pages of this volume.


24 CFR (PARTS 0 TO 199)

DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT, OFFICE OF ASSISTANT 
SECRETARY FOR EQUAL OPPORTUNITY
                                                                  24 CFR


American National Standards Institute

  11 West 42nd Street, New York, NY 10036 
  Telephone: (212) 642-4900
ANSI A117.1--1986 Providing Accessibility and                   Part 100
  Usability for Physically Handicapped People.



[[Page 651]]


<R03>
                    Table of CFR Titles and Chapters


<R04>

                     (Revised as of March 31, 1999)

                      Title 1--General Provisions

         I  Administrative Committee of the Federal Register 
                (Parts 1--49)
        II  Office of the Federal Register (Parts 50--299)
        IV  Miscellaneous Agencies (Parts 400--500)

                          Title 2--[Reserved]

                        Title 3--The President

         I  Executive Office of the President (Parts 100--199)

                           Title 4--Accounts

         I  General Accounting Office (Parts 1--99)
        II  Federal Claims Collection Standards (General 
                Accounting Office--Department of Justice) (Parts 
                100--299)

                   Title 5--Administrative Personnel

         I  Office of Personnel Management (Parts 1--1199)
        II  Merit Systems Protection Board (Parts 1200--1299)
       III  Office of Management and Budget (Parts 1300--1399)
        IV  Advisory Committee on Federal Pay (Parts 1400--1499)
         V  The International Organizations Employees Loyalty 
                Board (Parts 1500--1599)
        VI  Federal Retirement Thrift Investment Board (Parts 
                1600--1699)
       VII  Advisory Commission on Intergovernmental Relations 
                (Parts 1700--1799)
      VIII  Office of Special Counsel (Parts 1800--1899)
        IX  Appalachian Regional Commission (Parts 1900--1999)
        XI  Armed Forces Retirement Home (Part 2100)
       XIV  Federal Labor Relations Authority, General Counsel of 
                the Federal Labor Relations Authority and Federal 
                Service Impasses Panel (Parts 2400--2499)
        XV  Office of Administration, Executive Office of the 
                President (Parts 2500--2599)
       XVI  Office of Government Ethics (Parts 2600--2699)
       XXI  Department of the Treasury (Parts 3100--3199)

[[Page 652]]

      XXII  Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (Part 3201)
     XXIII  Department of Energy (Part 3301)
      XXIV  Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (Part 3401)
       XXV  Department of the Interior (Part 3501)
      XXVI  Department of Defense (Part 3601)
    XXVIII  Department of Justice (Part 3801)
      XXIX  Federal Communications Commission (Parts 3900--3999)
       XXX  Farm Credit System Insurance Corporation (Parts 4000--
                4099)
      XXXI  Farm Credit Administration (Parts 4100--4199)
    XXXIII  Overseas Private Investment Corporation (Part 4301)
      XXXV  Office of Personnel Management (Part 4501)
        XL  Interstate Commerce Commission (Part 5001)
       XLI  Commodity Futures Trading Commission (Part 5101)
      XLII  Department of Labor (Part 5201)
     XLIII  National Science Foundation (Part 5301)
       XLV  Department of Health and Human Services (Part 5501)
      XLVI  Postal Rate Commission (Part 5601)
     XLVII  Federal Trade Commission (Part 5701)
    XLVIII  Nuclear Regulatory Commission (Part 5801)
         L  Department of Transportation (Part 6001)
       LII  Export-Import Bank of the United States (Part 6201)
      LIII  Department of Education (Parts 6300--6399)
       LIV  Environmental Protection Agency (Part 6401)
      LVII  General Services Administration (Part 6701)
     LVIII  Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (Part 
                6801)
       LIX  National Aeronautics and Space Administration (Part 
                6901)
        LX  United States Postal Service (Part 7001)
       LXI  National Labor Relations Board (Part 7101)
      LXII  Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (Part 7201)
     LXIII  Inter-American Foundation (Part 7301)
       LXV  Department of Housing and Urban Development (Part 
                7501)
      LXVI  National Archives and Records Administration (Part 
                7601)
      LXIX  Tennessee Valley Authority (Part 7901)
      LXXI  Consumer Product Safety Commission (Part 8101)
     LXXIV  Federal Mine Safety and Health Review Commission (Part 
                8401)
     LXXVI  Federal Retirement Thrift Investment Board (Part 8601)
    LXXVII  Office of Management and Budget (Part 8701)

                          Title 6--[Reserved]

                         Title 7--Agriculture

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of Agriculture 
                (Parts 0--26)
            Subtitle B--Regulations of the Department of 
                Agriculture

[[Page 653]]

         I  Agricultural Marketing Service (Standards, 
                Inspections, Marketing Practices), Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 27--209)
        II  Food and Nutrition Service, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 210--299)
       III  Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service, Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Federal Crop Insurance Corporation, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 400--499)
         V  Agricultural Research Service, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Natural Resources Conservation Service, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 600--699)
       VII  Farm Service Agency, Department of Agriculture (Parts 
                700--799)
      VIII  Grain Inspection, Packers and Stockyards 
                Administration (Federal Grain Inspection Service), 
                Department of Agriculture (Parts 800--899)
        IX  Agricultural Marketing Service (Marketing Agreements 
                and Orders; Fruits, Vegetables, Nuts), Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 900--999)
         X  Agricultural Marketing Service (Marketing Agreements 
                and Orders; Milk), Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 1000--1199)
        XI  Agricultural Marketing Service (Marketing Agreements 
                and Orders; Miscellaneous Commodities), Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 1200--1299)
      XIII  Northeast Dairy Compact Commission (Parts 1300--1399)
       XIV  Commodity Credit Corporation, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 1400--1499)
        XV  Foreign Agricultural Service, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 1500--1599)
       XVI  Rural Telephone Bank, Department of Agriculture (Parts 
                1600--1699)
      XVII  Rural Utilities Service, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 1700--1799)
     XVIII  Rural Housing Service, Rural Business-Cooperative 
                Service, Rural Utilities Service, and Farm Service 
                Agency, Department of Agriculture (Parts 1800--
                2099)
      XXVI  Office of Inspector General, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 2600--2699)
     XXVII  Office of Information Resources Management, Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 2700--2799)
    XXVIII  Office of Operations, Department of Agriculture (Parts 
                2800--2899)
      XXIX  Office of Energy, Department of Agriculture (Parts 
                2900--2999)
       XXX  Office of the Chief Financial Officer, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 3000--3099)
      XXXI  Office of Environmental Quality, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 3100--3199)
     XXXII  Office of Procurement and Property Management, 
                Department of Agriculture (Parts 3200--3299)

[[Page 654]]

    XXXIII  Office of Transportation, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 3300--3399)
     XXXIV  Cooperative State Research, Education, and Extension 
                Service, Department of Agriculture (Parts 3400--
                3499)
      XXXV  Rural Housing Service, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 3500--3599)
     XXXVI  National Agricultural Statistics Service, Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 3600--3699)
    XXXVII  Economic Research Service, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 3700--3799)
   XXXVIII  World Agricultural Outlook Board, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 3800--3899)
       XLI  [Reserved]
      XLII  Rural Business-Cooperative Service and Rural Utilities 
                Service, Department of Agriculture (Parts 4200--
                4299)

                    Title 8--Aliens and Nationality

         I  Immigration and Naturalization Service, Department of 
                Justice (Parts 1--499)

                 Title 9--Animals and Animal Products

         I  Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service, Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 1--199)
        II  Grain Inspection, Packers and Stockyards 
                Administration (Packers and Stockyards Programs), 
                Department of Agriculture (Parts 200--299)
       III  Food Safety and Inspection Service, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 300--599)

                           Title 10--Energy

         I  Nuclear Regulatory Commission (Parts 0--199)
        II  Department of Energy (Parts 200--699)
       III  Department of Energy (Parts 700--999)
         X  Department of Energy (General Provisions) (Parts 
                1000--1099)
      XVII  Defense Nuclear Facilities Safety Board (Parts 1700--
                1799)

                      Title 11--Federal Elections

         I  Federal Election Commission (Parts 1--9099)

                      Title 12--Banks and Banking

         I  Comptroller of the Currency, Department of the 
                Treasury (Parts 1--199)
        II  Federal Reserve System (Parts 200--299)
       III  Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (Parts 300--399)

[[Page 655]]

        IV  Export-Import Bank of the United States (Parts 400--
                499)
         V  Office of Thrift Supervision, Department of the 
                Treasury (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Farm Credit Administration (Parts 600--699)
       VII  National Credit Union Administration (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Federal Financing Bank (Parts 800--899)
        IX  Federal Housing Finance Board (Parts 900--999)
        XI  Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council 
                (Parts 1100--1199)
       XIV  Farm Credit System Insurance Corporation (Parts 1400--
                1499)
        XV  Department of the Treasury (Parts 1500--1599)
      XVII  Office of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight, 
                Department of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 
                1700--1799)
     XVIII  Community Development Financial Institutions Fund, 
                Department of the Treasury (Parts 1800--1899)

               Title 13--Business Credit and Assistance

         I  Small Business Administration (Parts 1--199)
       III  Department of Commerce, Economic Development 
                Administration, (Parts 300--399)

                    Title 14--Aeronautics and Space

         I  Federal Aviation Administration, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 1--199)
        II  Office of the Secretary, Department of Transportation 
                (Aviation Proceedings) (Parts 200--399)
       III  Commercial Space Transportation, Federal Aviation 
                Administration, Department of Transportation 
                (Parts 400--499)
         V  National Aeronautics and Space Administration (Parts 
                1200--1299)

                 Title 15--Commerce and Foreign Trade

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of Commerce (Parts 
                0--29)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Commerce and 
                Foreign Trade
         I  Bureau of the Census, Department of Commerce (Parts 
                30--199)
        II  National Institute of Standards and Technology, 
                Department of Commerce (Parts 200--299)
       III  International Trade Administration, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Foreign-Trade Zones Board, Department of Commerce 
                (Parts 400--499)
       VII  Bureau of Export Administration, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 700--799)

[[Page 656]]

      VIII  Bureau of Economic Analysis, Department of Commerce 
                (Parts 800--899)
        IX  National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, 
                Department of Commerce (Parts 900--999)
        XI  Technology Administration, Department of Commerce 
                (Parts 1100--1199)
      XIII  East-West Foreign Trade Board (Parts 1300--1399)
       XIV  Minority Business Development Agency (Parts 1400--
                1499)
            Subtitle C--Regulations Relating to Foreign Trade 
                Agreements
        XX  Office of the United States Trade Representative 
                (Parts 2000--2099)
            Subtitle D--Regulations Relating to Telecommunications 
                and Information
     XXIII  National Telecommunications and Information 
                Administration, Department of Commerce (Parts 
                2300--2399)

                    Title 16--Commercial Practices

         I  Federal Trade Commission (Parts 0--999)
        II  Consumer Product Safety Commission (Parts 1000--1799)

             Title 17--Commodity and Securities Exchanges

         I  Commodity Futures Trading Commission (Parts 1--199)
        II  Securities and Exchange Commission (Parts 200--399)
        IV  Department of the Treasury (Parts 400--499)

          Title 18--Conservation of Power and Water Resources

         I  Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, Department of 
                Energy (Parts 1--399)
       III  Delaware River Basin Commission (Parts 400--499)
        VI  Water Resources Council (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Susquehanna River Basin Commission (Parts 800--899)
      XIII  Tennessee Valley Authority (Parts 1300--1399)

                       Title 19--Customs Duties

         I  United States Customs Service, Department of the 
                Treasury (Parts 1--199)
        II  United States International Trade Commission (Parts 
                200--299)
       III  International Trade Administration, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 300--399)

[[Page 657]]

                     Title 20--Employees' Benefits

         I  Office of Workers' Compensation Programs, Department 
                of Labor (Parts 1--199)
        II  Railroad Retirement Board (Parts 200--399)
       III  Social Security Administration (Parts 400--499)
        IV  Employees' Compensation Appeals Board, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 500--599)
         V  Employment and Training Administration, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 600--699)
        VI  Employment Standards Administration, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 700--799)
       VII  Benefits Review Board, Department of Labor (Parts 
                800--899)
      VIII  Joint Board for the Enrollment of Actuaries (Parts 
                900--999)
        IX  Office of the Assistant Secretary for Veterans' 
                Employment and Training, Department of Labor 
                (Parts 1000--1099)

                       Title 21--Food and Drugs

         I  Food and Drug Administration, Department of Health and 
                Human Services (Parts 1--1299)
        II  Drug Enforcement Administration, Department of Justice 
                (Parts 1300--1399)
       III  Office of National Drug Control Policy (Parts 1400--
                1499)

                      Title 22--Foreign Relations

         I  Department of State (Parts 1--199)
        II  Agency for International Development (Parts 200--299)
       III  Peace Corps (Parts 300--399)
        IV  International Joint Commission, United States and 
                Canada (Parts 400--499)
         V  United States Information Agency (Parts 500--599)
       VII  Overseas Private Investment Corporation, International 
                Development Cooperation Agency (Parts 700--799)
        IX  Foreign Service Grievance Board Regulations (Parts 
                900--999)
         X  Inter-American Foundation (Parts 1000--1099)
        XI  International Boundary and Water Commission, United 
                States and Mexico, United States Section (Parts 
                1100--1199)
       XII  United States International Development Cooperation 
                Agency (Parts 1200--1299)
      XIII  Board for International Broadcasting (Parts 1300--
                1399)
       XIV  Foreign Service Labor Relations Board; Federal Labor 
                Relations Authority; General Counsel of the 
                Federal Labor Relations Authority; and the Foreign 
                Service Impasse Disputes Panel (Parts 1400--1499)
        XV  African Development Foundation (Parts 1500--1599)
       XVI  Japan-United States Friendship Commission (Parts 
                1600--1699)
      XVII  United States Institute of Peace (Parts 1700--1799)

[[Page 658]]

                          Title 23--Highways

         I  Federal Highway Administration, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 1--999)
        II  National Highway Traffic Safety Administration and 
                Federal Highway Administration, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 1200--1299)
       III  National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 
                Department of Transportation (Parts 1300--1399)

                Title 24--Housing and Urban Development

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary, Department of 
                Housing and Urban Development (Parts 0--99)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Housing and Urban 
                Development
         I  Office of Assistant Secretary for Equal Opportunity, 
                Department of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 
                100--199)
        II  Office of Assistant Secretary for Housing-Federal 
                Housing Commissioner, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Parts 200--299)
       III  Government National Mortgage Association, Department 
                of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Office of Multifamily Housing Assistance 
                Restructuring, Department of Housing and Urban 
                Development (Parts 400--499)
         V  Office of Assistant Secretary for Community Planning 
                and Development, Department of Housing and Urban 
                Development (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Office of Assistant Secretary for Community Planning 
                and Development, Department of Housing and Urban 
                Development (Parts 600--699) [Reserved]
       VII  Office of the Secretary, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Housing Assistance Programs and 
                Public and Indian Housing Programs) (Parts 700--
                799)
      VIII  Office of the Assistant Secretary for Housing--Federal 
                Housing Commissioner, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Section 8 Housing Assistance 
                Programs, Section 202 Direct Loan Program, Section 
                202 Supportive Housing for the Elderly Program and 
                Section 811 Supportive Housing for Persons With 
                Disabilities Program) (Parts 800--899)
        IX  Office of Assistant Secretary for Public and Indian 
                Housing, Department of Housing and Urban 
                Development (Parts 900--999)
         X  Office of Assistant Secretary for Housing--Federal 
                Housing Commissioner, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Interstate Land Sales 
                Registration Program) (Parts 1700--1799)
       XII  Office of Inspector General, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Parts 2000--2099)
        XX  Office of Assistant Secretary for Housing--Federal 
                Housing Commissioner, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Parts 3200--3899)
       XXV  Neighborhood Reinvestment Corporation (Parts 4100--
                4199)

[[Page 659]]

                           Title 25--Indians

         I  Bureau of Indian Affairs, Department of the Interior 
                (Parts 1--299)
        II  Indian Arts and Crafts Board, Department of the 
                Interior (Parts 300--399)
       III  National Indian Gaming Commission, Department of the 
                Interior (Parts 500--599)
        IV  Office of Navajo and Hopi Indian Relocation (Parts 
                700--799)
         V  Bureau of Indian Affairs, Department of the Interior, 
                and Indian Health Service, Department of Health 
                and Human Services (Part 900)
        VI  Office of the Assistant Secretary-Indian Affairs, 
                Department of the Interior (Part 1001)
       VII  Office of the Special Trustee for American Indians, 
                Department of the Interior (Part 1200)

                      Title 26--Internal Revenue

         I  Internal Revenue Service, Department of the Treasury 
                (Parts 1--799)

           Title 27--Alcohol, Tobacco Products and Firearms

         I  Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, Department of 
                the Treasury (Parts 1--299)

                   Title 28--Judicial Administration

         I  Department of Justice (Parts 0--199)
       III  Federal Prison Industries, Inc., Department of Justice 
                (Parts 300--399)
         V  Bureau of Prisons, Department of Justice (Parts 500--
                599)
        VI  Offices of Independent Counsel, Department of Justice 
                (Parts 600--699)
       VII  Office of Independent Counsel (Parts 700--799)

                            Title 29--Labor

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of Labor (Parts 
                0--99)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Labor
         I  National Labor Relations Board (Parts 100--199)
        II  Office of Labor-Management Standards, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 200--299)
       III  National Railroad Adjustment Board (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Office of Labor-Management Standards, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 400--499)
         V  Wage and Hour Division, Department of Labor (Parts 
                500--899)
        IX  Construction Industry Collective Bargaining Commission 
                (Parts 900--999)
         X  National Mediation Board (Parts 1200--1299)

[[Page 660]]

       XII  Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service (Parts 
                1400--1499)
       XIV  Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (Parts 1600--
                1699)
      XVII  Occupational Safety and Health Administration, 
                Department of Labor (Parts 1900--1999)
        XX  Occupational Safety and Health Review Commission 
                (Parts 2200--2499)
       XXV  Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration, 
                Department of Labor (Parts 2500--2599)
     XXVII  Federal Mine Safety and Health Review Commission 
                (Parts 2700--2799)
        XL  Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation (Parts 4000--
                4999)

                      Title 30--Mineral Resources

         I  Mine Safety and Health Administration, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 1--199)
        II  Minerals Management Service, Department of the 
                Interior (Parts 200--299)
       III  Board of Surface Mining and Reclamation Appeals, 
                Department of the Interior (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Geological Survey, Department of the Interior (Parts 
                400--499)
        VI  Bureau of Mines, Department of the Interior (Parts 
                600--699)
       VII  Office of Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement, 
                Department of the Interior (Parts 700--999)

                 Title 31--Money and Finance: Treasury

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of the Treasury 
                (Parts 0--50)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Money and Finance
         I  Monetary Offices, Department of the Treasury (Parts 
                51--199)
        II  Fiscal Service, Department of the Treasury (Parts 
                200--399)
        IV  Secret Service, Department of the Treasury (Parts 
                400--499)
         V  Office of Foreign Assets Control, Department of the 
                Treasury (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Bureau of Engraving and Printing, Department of the 
                Treasury (Parts 600--699)
       VII  Federal Law Enforcement Training Center, Department of 
                the Treasury (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Office of International Investment, Department of the 
                Treasury (Parts 800--899)

                      Title 32--National Defense

            Subtitle A--Department of Defense
         I  Office of the Secretary of Defense (Parts 1--399)
         V  Department of the Army (Parts 400--699)
        VI  Department of the Navy (Parts 700--799)

[[Page 661]]

       VII  Department of the Air Force (Parts 800--1099)
            Subtitle B--Other Regulations Relating to National 
                Defense
       XII  Defense Logistics Agency (Parts 1200--1299)
       XVI  Selective Service System (Parts 1600--1699)
       XIX  Central Intelligence Agency (Parts 1900--1999)
        XX  Information Security Oversight Office, National 
                Archives and Records Administration (Parts 2000--
                2099)
       XXI  National Security Council (Parts 2100--2199)
      XXIV  Office of Science and Technology Policy (Parts 2400--
                2499)
     XXVII  Office for Micronesian Status Negotiations (Parts 
                2700--2799)
    XXVIII  Office of the Vice President of the United States 
                (Parts 2800--2899)
      XXIX  Presidential Commission on the Assignment of Women in 
                the Armed Forces (Part 2900)

               Title 33--Navigation and Navigable Waters

         I  Coast Guard, Department of Transportation (Parts 1--
                199)
        II  Corps of Engineers, Department of the Army (Parts 
                200--399)
        IV  Saint Lawrence Seaway Development Corporation, 
                Department of Transportation (Parts 400--499)

                          Title 34--Education

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary, Department of 
                Education (Parts 1--99)
            Subtitle B--Regulations of the Offices of the 
                Department of Education
         I  Office for Civil Rights, Department of Education 
                (Parts 100--199)
        II  Office of Elementary and Secondary Education, 
                Department of Education (Parts 200--299)
       III  Office of Special Education and Rehabilitative 
                Services, Department of Education (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Office of Vocational and Adult Education, Department 
                of Education (Parts 400--499)
         V  Office of Bilingual Education and Minority Languages 
                Affairs, Department of Education (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Office of Postsecondary Education, Department of 
                Education (Parts 600--699)
       VII  Office of Educational Research and Improvement, 
                Department of Education (Parts 700--799)
        XI  National Institute for Literacy (Parts 1100--1199)
            Subtitle C--Regulations Relating to Education
       XII  National Council on Disability (Parts 1200--1299)

[[Page 662]]

                        Title 35--Panama Canal

         I  Panama Canal Regulations (Parts 1--299)

             Title 36--Parks, Forests, and Public Property

         I  National Park Service, Department of the Interior 
                (Parts 1--199)
        II  Forest Service, Department of Agriculture (Parts 200--
                299)
       III  Corps of Engineers, Department of the Army (Parts 
                300--399)
        IV  American Battle Monuments Commission (Parts 400--499)
         V  Smithsonian Institution (Parts 500--599)
       VII  Library of Congress (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Advisory Council on Historic Preservation (Parts 800--
                899)
        IX  Pennsylvania Avenue Development Corporation (Parts 
                900--999)
         X  Presidio Trust (Parts 1000--1099)
        XI  Architectural and Transportation Barriers Compliance 
                Board (Parts 1100--1199)
       XII  National Archives and Records Administration (Parts 
                1200--1299)
       XIV  Assassination Records Review Board (Parts 1400--1499)

             Title 37--Patents, Trademarks, and Copyrights

         I  Patent and Trademark Office, Department of Commerce 
                (Parts 1--199)
        II  Copyright Office, Library of Congress (Parts 200--299)
        IV  Assistant Secretary for Technology Policy, Department 
                of Commerce (Parts 400--499)
         V  Under Secretary for Technology, Department of Commerce 
                (Parts 500--599)

           Title 38--Pensions, Bonuses, and Veterans' Relief

         I  Department of Veterans Affairs (Parts 0--99)

                       Title 39--Postal Service

         I  United States Postal Service (Parts 1--999)
       III  Postal Rate Commission (Parts 3000--3099)

                  Title 40--Protection of Environment

         I  Environmental Protection Agency (Parts 1--799)
         V  Council on Environmental Quality (Parts 1500--1599)

          Title 41--Public Contracts and Property Management

            Subtitle B--Other Provisions Relating to Public 
                Contracts
        50  Public Contracts, Department of Labor (Parts 50-1--50-
                999)

[[Page 663]]

        51  Committee for Purchase From People Who Are Blind or 
                Severely Disabled (Parts 51-1--51-99)
        60  Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs, Equal 
                Employment Opportunity, Department of Labor (Parts 
                60-1--60-999)
        61  Office of the Assistant Secretary for Veterans 
                Employment and Training, Department of Labor 
                (Parts 61-1--61-999)
            Subtitle C--Federal Property Management Regulations 
                System
       101  Federal Property Management Regulations (Parts 101-1--
                101-99)
       105  General Services Administration (Parts 105-1--105-999)
       109  Department of Energy Property Management Regulations 
                (Parts 109-1--109-99)
       114  Department of the Interior (Parts 114-1--114-99)
       115  Environmental Protection Agency (Parts 115-1--115-99)
       128  Department of Justice (Parts 128-1--128-99)
            Subtitle D--Other Provisions Relating to Property 
                Management [Reserved]
            Subtitle E--Federal Information Resources Management 
                Regulations System
       201  Federal Information Resources Management Regulation 
                (Parts 201-1--201-99) [Reserved]
            Subtitle F--Federal Travel Regulation System
       300  General (Parts 300-1--300.99)
       301  Temporary Duty (TDY) Travel Allowances (Parts 301-1--
                301-99)
       302  Relocation Allowances (Parts 302-1--302-99)
       303  Payment of Expenses Connected with the Death of 
                Certain Employees (Parts 303-1--303-2)
       304  Payment from a Non-Federal Source for Travel Expenses 
                (Parts 304-1--304-99)

                        Title 42--Public Health

         I  Public Health Service, Department of Health and Human 
                Services (Parts 1--199)
        IV  Health Care Financing Administration, Department of 
                Health and Human Services (Parts 400--499)
         V  Office of Inspector General-Health Care, Department of 
                Health and Human Services (Parts 1000--1999)

                   Title 43--Public Lands: Interior

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of the Interior 
                (Parts 1--199)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Public Lands
         I  Bureau of Reclamation, Department of the Interior 
                (Parts 200--499)
        II  Bureau of Land Management, Department of the Interior 
                (Parts 1000--9999)

[[Page 664]]

       III  Utah Reclamation Mitigation and Conservation 
                Commission (Parts 10000--10005)

             Title 44--Emergency Management and Assistance

         I  Federal Emergency Management Agency (Parts 0--399)
        IV  Department of Commerce and Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 400--499)

                       Title 45--Public Welfare

            Subtitle A--Department of Health and Human Services 
                (Parts 1--199)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Public Welfare
        II  Office of Family Assistance (Assistance Programs), 
                Administration for Children and Families, 
                Department of Health and Human Services (Parts 
                200--299)
       III  Office of Child Support Enforcement (Child Support 
                Enforcement Program), Administration for Children 
                and Families, Department of Health and Human 
                Services (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Office of Refugee Resettlement, Administration for 
                Children and Families Department of Health and 
                Human Services (Parts 400--499)
         V  Foreign Claims Settlement Commission of the United 
                States, Department of Justice (Parts 500--599)
        VI  National Science Foundation (Parts 600--699)
       VII  Commission on Civil Rights (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Office of Personnel Management (Parts 800--899)
         X  Office of Community Services, Administration for 
                Children and Families, Department of Health and 
                Human Services (Parts 1000--1099)
        XI  National Foundation on the Arts and the Humanities 
                (Parts 1100--1199)
       XII  Corporation for National and Community Service (Parts 
                1200--1299)
      XIII  Office of Human Development Services, Department of 
                Health and Human Services (Parts 1300--1399)
       XVI  Legal Services Corporation (Parts 1600--1699)
      XVII  National Commission on Libraries and Information 
                Science (Parts 1700--1799)
     XVIII  Harry S. Truman Scholarship Foundation (Parts 1800--
                1899)
       XXI  Commission on Fine Arts (Parts 2100--2199)
      XXII  Christopher Columbus Quincentenary Jubilee Commission 
                (Parts 2200--2299)
     XXIII  Arctic Research Commission (Part 2301)
      XXIV  James Madison Memorial Fellowship Foundation (Parts 
                2400--2499)
       XXV  Corporation for National and Community Service (Parts 
                2500--2599)

[[Page 665]]

                          Title 46--Shipping

         I  Coast Guard, Department of Transportation (Parts 1--
                199)
        II  Maritime Administration, Department of Transportation 
                (Parts 200--399)
       III  Coast Guard (Great Lakes Pilotage), Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 400--499)
        IV  Federal Maritime Commission (Parts 500--599)

                      Title 47--Telecommunication

         I  Federal Communications Commission (Parts 0--199)
        II  Office of Science and Technology Policy and National 
                Security Council (Parts 200--299)
       III  National Telecommunications and Information 
                Administration, Department of Commerce (Parts 
                300--399)

           Title 48--Federal Acquisition Regulations System

         1  Federal Acquisition Regulation (Parts 1--99)
         2  Department of Defense (Parts 200--299)
         3  Department of Health and Human Services (Parts 300--
                399)
         4  Department of Agriculture (Parts 400--499)
         5  General Services Administration (Parts 500--599)
         6  Department of State (Parts 600--699)
         7  United States Agency for International Development 
                (Parts 700--799)
         8  Department of Veterans Affairs (Parts 800--899)
         9  Department of Energy (Parts 900--999)
        10  Department of the Treasury (Parts 1000--1099)
        12  Department of Transportation (Parts 1200--1299)
        13  Department of Commerce (Parts 1300--1399)
        14  Department of the Interior (Parts 1400--1499)
        15  Environmental Protection Agency (Parts 1500--1599)
        16  Office of Personnel Management Federal Employees 
                Health Benefits Acquisition Regulation (Parts 
                1600--1699)
        17  Office of Personnel Management (Parts 1700--1799)
        18  National Aeronautics and Space Administration (Parts 
                1800--1899)
        19  United States Information Agency (Parts 1900--1999)
        20  Nuclear Regulatory Commission (Parts 2000--2099)
        21  Office of Personnel Management, Federal Employees 
                Group Life Insurance Federal Acquisition 
                Regulation (Parts 2100--2199)
        23  Social Security Administration (Parts 2300--2399)
        24  Department of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 
                2400--2499)
        25  National Science Foundation (Parts 2500--2599)
        28  Department of Justice (Parts 2800--2899)
        29  Department of Labor (Parts 2900--2999)

[[Page 666]]

        34  Department of Education Acquisition Regulation (Parts 
                3400--3499)
        35  Panama Canal Commission (Parts 3500--3599)
        44  Federal Emergency Management Agency (Parts 4400--4499)
        51  Department of the Army Acquisition Regulations (Parts 
                5100--5199)
        52  Department of the Navy Acquisition Regulations (Parts 
                5200--5299)
        53  Department of the Air Force Federal Acquisition 
                Regulation Supplement (Parts 5300--5399)
        54  Defense Logistics Agency, Department of Defense (Part 
                5452)
        57  African Development Foundation (Parts 5700--5799)
        61  General Services Administration Board of Contract 
                Appeals (Parts 6100--6199)
        63  Department of Transportation Board of Contract Appeals 
                (Parts 6300--6399)
        99  Cost Accounting Standards Board, Office of Federal 
                Procurement Policy, Office of Management and 
                Budget (Parts 9900--9999)

                       Title 49--Transportation

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of Transportation 
                (Parts 1--99)
            Subtitle B--Other Regulations Relating to 
                Transportation
         I  Research and Special Programs Administration, 
                Department of Transportation (Parts 100--199)
        II  Federal Railroad Administration, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 200--299)
       III  Federal Highway Administration, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Coast Guard, Department of Transportation (Parts 400--
                499)
         V  National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 
                Department of Transportation (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Federal Transit Administration, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 600--699)
       VII  National Railroad Passenger Corporation (AMTRAK) 
                (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  National Transportation Safety Board (Parts 800--999)
         X  Surface Transportation Board, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 1000--1399)
        XI  Bureau of Transportation Statistics, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 1400--1499)

                   Title 50--Wildlife and Fisheries

         I  United States Fish and Wildlife Service, Department of 
                the Interior (Parts 1--199)

[[Page 667]]

        II  National Marine Fisheries Service, National Oceanic 
                and Atmospheric Administration, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 200--299)
       III  International Fishing and Related Activities (Parts 
                300--399)
        IV  Joint Regulations (United States Fish and Wildlife 
                Service, Department of the Interior and National 
                Marine Fisheries Service, National Oceanic and 
                Atmospheric Administration, Department of 
                Commerce); Endangered Species Committee 
                Regulations (Parts 400--499)
         V  Marine Mammal Commission (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Fishery Conservation and Management, National Oceanic 
                and Atmospheric Administration, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 600--699)

                      CFR Index and Finding Aids

            Subject/Agency Index
            List of Agency Prepared Indexes
            Parallel Tables of Statutory Authorities and Rules
            List of CFR Titles, Chapters, Subchapters, and Parts
            Alphabetical List of Agencies Appearing in the CFR



[[Page 669]]




<R03>
           Alphabetical List of Agencies Appearing in the CFR


<R04>

                     (Revised as of March 31, 1999)

                                                  CFR Title, Subtitle or 
                     Agency                               Chapter

Administrative Committee of the Federal Register  1, I
Advanced Research Projects Agency                 32, I
Advisory Commission on Intergovernmental          5, VII
     Relations
Advisory Committee on Federal Pay                 5, IV
Advisory Council on Historic Preservation         36, VIII
African Development Foundation                    22, XV
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 57
Agency for International Development              22, II
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 7
Agricultural Marketing Service                    7, I, IX, X, XI
Agricultural Research Service                     7, V
Agriculture Department
  Agricultural Marketing Service                  7, I, IX, X, XI
  Agricultural Research Service                   7, V
  Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service      7, III; 9, I
  Chief Financial Officer, Office of              7, XXX
  Commodity Credit Corporation                    7, XIV
  Cooperative State Research, Education, and      7, XXXIV
       Extension Service
  Economic Research Service                       7, XXXVII
  Energy, Office of                               7, XXIX
  Environmental Quality, Office of                7, XXXI
  Farm Service Agency                             7, VII, XVIII
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 4
  Federal Crop Insurance Corporation              7, IV
  Food and Nutrition Service                      7, II
  Food Safety and Inspection Service              9, III
  Foreign Agricultural Service                    7, XV
  Forest Service                                  36, II
  Grain Inspection, Packers and Stockyards        7, VIII; 9, II
       Administration
  Information Resources Management, Office of     7, XXVII
  Inspector General, Office of                    7, XXVI
  National Agricultural Library                   7, XLI
  National Agricultural Statistics Service        7, XXXVI
  Natural Resources Conservation Service          7, VI
  Operations, Office of                           7, XXVIII
  Procurement and Property Management, Office of  7, XXXII
  Rural Business-Cooperative Service              7, XVIII, XLII
  Rural Development Administration                7, XLII
  Rural Housing Service                           7, XVIII, XXXV
  Rural Telephone Bank                            7, XVI
  Rural Utilities Service                         7, XVII, XVIII, XLII
  Secretary of Agriculture, Office of             7, Subtitle A
  Transportation, Office of                       7, XXXIII
  World Agricultural Outlook Board                7, XXXVIII
Air Force Department                              32, VII
  Federal Acquisition Regulation Supplement       48, 53
Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, Bureau of          27, I
AMTRAK                                            49, VII
American Battle Monuments Commission              36, IV
American Indians, Office of the Special Trustee   25, VII
Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service        7, III; 9, I
Appalachian Regional Commission                   5, IX

[[Page 670]]

Architectural and Transportation Barriers         36, XI
     Compliance Board
Arctic Research Commission                        45, XXIII
Armed Forces Retirement Home                      5, XI
Army Department                                   32, V
  Engineers, Corps of                             33, II; 36, III
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 51
Assassination Records Review Board                36, XIV
Benefits Review Board                             20, VII
Bilingual Education and Minority Languages        34, V
     Affairs, Office of
Blind or Severely Disabled, Committee for         41, 51
     Purchase From People Who Are
Board for International Broadcasting              22, XIII
Census Bureau                                     15, I
Central Intelligence Agency                       32, XIX
Chief Financial Officer, Office of                7, XXX
Child Support Enforcement, Office of              45, III
Children and Families, Administration for         45, II, III, IV, X
Christopher Columbus Quincentenary Jubilee        45, XXII
     Commission
Civil Rights, Commission on                       45, VII
Civil Rights, Office for                          34, I
Coast Guard                                       33, I; 46, I; 49, IV
Coast Guard (Great Lakes Pilotage)                46, III
Commerce Department                               44, IV
  Census Bureau                                   15, I`
  Economic Affairs, Under Secretary               37, V
  Economic Analysis, Bureau of                    15, VIII
  Economic Development Administration             13, III
  Emergency Management and Assistance             44, IV
  Export Administration, Bureau of                15, VII
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 13
  Fishery Conservation and Management             50, VI
  Foreign-Trade Zones Board                       15, IV
  International Trade Administration              15, III; 19, III
  National Institute of Standards and Technology  15, II
  National Marine Fisheries Service               50, II, IV, VI
  National Oceanic and Atmospheric                15, IX; 50, II, III, IV, 
       Administration                             VI
  National Telecommunications and Information     15, XXIII; 47, III
       Administration
  National Weather Service                        15, IX
  Patent and Trademark Office                     37, I
  Productivity, Technology and Innovation,        37, IV
       Assistant Secretary for
  Secretary of Commerce, Office of                15, Subtitle A
  Technology, Under Secretary for                 37, V
  Technology Administration                       15, XI
  Technology Policy, Assistant Secretary for      37, IV
Commercial Space Transportation                   14, III
Commodity Credit Corporation                      7, XIV
Commodity Futures Trading Commission              5, XLI; 17, I
Community Planning and Development, Office of     24, V, VI
     Assistant Secretary for
Community Services, Office of                     45, X
Comptroller of the Currency                       12, I
Construction Industry Collective Bargaining       29, IX
     Commission
Consumer Product Safety Commission                5, LXXI; 16, II
Cooperative State Research, Education, and        7, XXXIV
     Extension Service
Copyright Office                                  37, II
Corporation for National and Community Service    45, XII, XXV
Cost Accounting Standards Board                   48, 99
Council on Environmental Quality                  40, V
Customs Service, United States                    19, I
Defense Contract Audit Agency                     32, I
Defense Department                                5, XXVI; 32, Subtitle A
  Advanced Research Projects Agency               32, I
  Air Force Department                            32, VII

[[Page 671]]

  Army Department                                 32, V; 33, II; 36, III, 
                                                  48, 51
  Defense Intelligence Agency                     32, I
  Defense Logistics Agency                        32, I, XII; 48, 54
  Engineers, Corps of                             33, II; 36, III
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 2
  National Imagery and Mapping Agency             32, I
  Navy Department                                 32, VI; 48, 52
  Secretary of Defense, Office of                 32, I
Defense Contract Audit Agency                     32, I
Defense Intelligence Agency                       32, I
Defense Logistics Agency                          32, XII; 48, 54
Defense Nuclear Facilities Safety Board           10, XVII
Delaware River Basin Commission                   18, III
Drug Enforcement Administration                   21, II
East-West Foreign Trade Board                     15, XIII
Economic Affairs, Under Secretary                 37, V
Economic Analysis, Bureau of                      15, VIII
Economic Development Administration               13, III
Economic Research Service                         7, XXXVII
Education, Department of                          5, LIII
  Bilingual Education and Minority Languages      34, V
       Affairs, Office of
  Civil Rights, Office for                        34, I
  Educational Research and Improvement, Office    34, VII
       of
  Elementary and Secondary Education, Office of   34, II
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 34
  Postsecondary Education, Office of              34, VI
  Secretary of Education, Office of               34, Subtitle A
  Special Education and Rehabilitative Services,  34, III
       Office of
  Vocational and Adult Education, Office of       34, IV
Educational Research and Improvement, Office of   34, VII
Elementary and Secondary Education, Office of     34, II
Employees' Compensation Appeals Board             20, IV
Employees Loyalty Board                           5, V
Employment and Training Administration            20, V
Employment Standards Administration               20, VI
Endangered Species Committee                      50, IV
Energy, Department of                             5, XXIII; 10, II, III, X
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 9
  Federal Energy Regulatory Commission            5, XXIV; 18, I
  Property Management Regulations                 41, 109
Energy, Office of                                 7, XXIX
Engineers, Corps of                               33, II; 36, III
Engraving and Printing, Bureau of                 31, VI
Environmental Protection Agency                   5, LIV; 40, I
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 15
  Property Management Regulations                 41, 115
Environmental Quality, Office of                  7, XXXI
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission           5, LXII; 29, XIV
Equal Opportunity, Office of Assistant Secretary  24, I
     for
Executive Office of the President                 3, I
  Administration, Office of                       5, XV
  Environmental Quality, Council on               40, V
  Management and Budget, Office of                25, III, LXXVII; 48, 99
  National Drug Control Policy, Office of         21, III
  National Security Council                       32, XXI; 47, 2
  Presidential Documents                          3
  Science and Technology Policy, Office of        32, XXIV; 47, II
  Trade Representative, Office of the United      15, XX
       States
Export Administration, Bureau of                  15, VII
Export-Import Bank of the United States           5, LII; 12, IV
Family Assistance, Office of                      45, II
Farm Credit Administration                        5, XXXI; 12, VI
Farm Credit System Insurance Corporation          5, XXX; 12, XIV
Farm Service Agency                               7, VII, XVIII
Federal Acquisition Regulation                    48, 1

[[Page 672]]

Federal Aviation Administration                   14, I
  Commercial Space Transportation                 14, III
Federal Claims Collection Standards               4, II
Federal Communications Commission                 5, XXIX; 47, I
Federal Contract Compliance Programs, Office of   41, 60
Federal Crop Insurance Corporation                7, IV
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation             5, XXII; 12, III
Federal Election Commission                       11, I
Federal Emergency Management Agency               44, I
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 44
Federal Employees Group Life Insurance Federal    48, 21
     Acquisition Regulation
Federal Employees Health Benefits Acquisition     48, 16
     Regulation
Federal Energy Regulatory Commission              5, XXIV; 18, I
Federal Financial Institutions Examination        12, XI
     Council
Federal Financing Bank                            12, VIII
Federal Highway Administration                    23, I, II; 49, III
Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation            1, IV
Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight Office       12, XVII
Federal Housing Finance Board                     12, IX
Federal Labor Relations Authority, and General    5, XIV; 22, XIV
     Counsel of the Federal Labor Relations 
     Authority
Federal Law Enforcement Training Center           31, VII
Federal Maritime Commission                       46, IV
Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service        29, XII
Federal Mine Safety and Health Review Commission  5, LXXIV; 29, XXVII
Federal Pay, Advisory Committee on                5, IV
Federal Prison Industries, Inc.                   28, III
Federal Procurement Policy Office                 48, 99
Federal Property Management Regulations           41, 101
Federal Property Management Regulations System    41, Subtitle C
Federal Railroad Administration                   49, II
Federal Register, Administrative Committee of     1, I
Federal Register, Office of                       1, II
Federal Reserve System                            12, II
  Board of Governors                              5, LVIII
Federal Retirement Thrift Investment Board        5, VI, LXXVI
Federal Service Impasses Panel                    5, XIV
Federal Trade Commission                          5, XLVII; 16, I
Federal Transit Administration                    49, VI
Federal Travel Regulation System                  41, Subtitle F
Fine Arts, Commission on                          45, XXI
Fiscal Service                                    31, II
Fish and Wildlife Service, United States          50, I, IV
Fishery Conservation and Management               50, VI
Food and Drug Administration                      21, I
Food and Nutrition Service                        7, II
Food Safety and Inspection Service                9, III
Foreign Agricultural Service                      7, XV
Foreign Assets Control, Office of                 31, V
Foreign Claims Settlement Commission of the       45, V
     United States
Foreign Service Grievance Board                   22, IX
Foreign Service Impasse Disputes Panel            22, XIV
Foreign Service Labor Relations Board             22, XIV
Foreign-Trade Zones Board                         15, IV
Forest Service                                    36, II
General Accounting Office                         4, I, II
General Services Administration                   5, LVII
  Contract Appeals, Board of                      48, 61
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 5
  Federal Property Management Regulations System  41, 101, 105
  Federal Travel Regulation System                41, Subtitle F
  General                                         41, 300
  Payment From a Non-Federal Source for Travel    41, 304
       Expenses
  Payment of Expenses Connected With the Death    41, 303
       of Certain Employees
  Relocation Allowances                           41, 302

[[Page 673]]

  Temporary Duty (TDY) Travel Allowances          41, 301
Geological Survey                                 30, IV
Government Ethics, Office of                      5, XVI
Government National Mortgage Association          24, III
Grain Inspection, Packers and Stockyards          7, VIII; 9, II
     Administration
Harry S. Truman Scholarship Foundation            45, XVIII
Health and Human Services, Department of          5, XLV; 45, Subtitle A
  Child Support Enforcement, Office of            45, III
  Children and Families, Administration for       45, II, III, IV, X
  Community Services, Office of                   45, X
  Family Assistance, Office of                    45, II
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 3
  Food and Drug Administration                    21, I
  Health Care Financing Administration            42, IV
  Human Development Services, Office of           45, XIII
  Indian Health Service                           25, V
  Inspector General (Health Care), Office of      42, V
  Public Health Service                           42, I
  Refugee Resettlement, Office of                 45, IV
Health Care Financing Administration              42, IV
Housing and Urban Development, Department of      5, LXV; 24, Subtitle B
  Community Planning and Development, Office of   24, V, VI
       Assistant Secretary for
  Equal Opportunity, Office of Assistant          24, I
       Secretary for
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 24
  Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight, Office    12, XVII
       of
  Government National Mortgage Association        24, III
  Housing--Federal Housing Commissioner, Office   24, II, VIII, X, XX
       of Assistant Secretary for
  Inspector General, Office of                    24, XII
  Multifamily Housing Assistance Restructuring,   24, IV
       Office of
  Public and Indian Housing, Office of Assistant  24, IX
       Secretary for
  Secretary, Office of                            24, Subtitle A, VII
Housing--Federal Housing Commissioner, Office of  24, II, VIII, X, XX
     Assistant Secretary for
Human Development Services, Office of             45, XIII
Immigration and Naturalization Service            8, I
Independent Counsel, Office of                    28, VII
Indian Affairs, Bureau of                         25, I, V
Indian Affairs, Office of the Assistant           25, VI
     Secretary
Indian Arts and Crafts Board                      25, II
Indian Health Service                             25, V
Information Agency, United States                 22, V
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 19
Information Resources Management, Office of       7, XXVII
Information Security Oversight Office, National   32, XX
     Archives and Records Administration
Inspector General
  Agriculture Department                          7, XXVI
  Health and Human Services Department            42, V
  Housing and Urban Development Department        24, XII
Institute of Peace, United States                 22, XVII
Inter-American Foundation                         5, LXIII; 22, X
Intergovernmental Relations, Advisory Commission  5, VII
     on
Interior Department
  American Indians, Office of the Special         25, VII
       Trustee
  Endangered Species Committee                    50, IV
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 14
  Federal Property Management Regulations System  41, 114
  Fish and Wildlife Service, United States        50, I, IV
  Geological Survey                               30, IV
  Indian Affairs, Bureau of                       25, I, V
  Indian Affairs, Office of the Assistant         25, VI
       Secretary
  Indian Arts and Crafts Board                    25, II
  Land Management, Bureau of                      43, II
  Minerals Management Service                     30, II
  Mines, Bureau of                                30, VI

[[Page 674]]

  National Indian Gaming Commission               25, III
  National Park Service                           36, I
  Reclamation, Bureau of                          43, I
  Secretary of the Interior, Office of            43, Subtitle A
  Surface Mining and Reclamation Appeals, Board   30, III
       of
  Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement,     30, VII
       Office of
Internal Revenue Service                          26, I
International Boundary and Water Commission,      22, XI
     United States and Mexico, United States 
     Section
International Development, Agency for             22, II
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 7
International Development Cooperation Agency,     22, XII
     United States
  International Development, Agency for           22, II; 48, 7
  Overseas Private Investment Corporation         5, XXXIII; 22, VII
International Fishing and Related Activities      50, III
International Investment, Office of               31, VIII
International Joint Commission, United States     22, IV
     and Canada
International Organizations Employees Loyalty     5, V
     Board
International Trade Administration                15, III; 19, III
International Trade Commission, United States     19, II
Interstate Commerce Commission                    5, XL
James Madison Memorial Fellowship Foundation      45, XXIV
Japan-United States Friendship Commission         22, XVI
Joint Board for the Enrollment of Actuaries       20, VIII
Justice Department                                5, XXVIII; 28, I
  Drug Enforcement Administration                 21, II
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 28
  Federal Claims Collection Standards             4, II
  Federal Prison Industries, Inc.                 28, III
  Foreign Claims Settlement Commission of the     45, V
       United States
  Immigration and Naturalization Service          8, I
  Offices of Independent Counsel                  28, VI
  Prisons, Bureau of                              28, V
  Property Management Regulations                 41, 128
Labor Department                                  5, XLII
  Benefits Review Board                           20, VII
  Employees' Compensation Appeals Board           20, IV
  Employment and Training Administration          20, V
  Employment Standards Administration             20, VI
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 29
  Federal Contract Compliance Programs, Office    41, 60
       of
  Federal Procurement Regulations System          41, 50
  Labor-Management Standards, Office of           29, II, IV
  Mine Safety and Health Administration           30, I
  Occupational Safety and Health Administration   29, XVII
  Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration     29, XXV
  Public Contracts                                41, 50
  Secretary of Labor, Office of                   29, Subtitle A
  Veterans' Employment and Training, Office of    41, 61; 20, IX
       the Assistant Secretary for
  Wage and Hour Division                          29, V
  Workers' Compensation Programs, Office of       20, I
Labor-Management Standards, Office of             29, II, IV
Land Management, Bureau of                        43, II
Legal Services Corporation                        45, XVI
Library of Congress                               36, VII
  Copyright Office                                37, II
Management and Budget, Office of                  5, III, LXXVII; 48, 99
Marine Mammal Commission                          50, V
Maritime Administration                           46, II
Merit Systems Protection Board                    5, II
Micronesian Status Negotiations, Office for       32, XXVII
Mine Safety and Health Administration             30, I
Minerals Management Service                       30, II
Mines, Bureau of                                  30, VI

[[Page 675]]

Minority Business Development Agency              15, XIV
Miscellaneous Agencies                            1, IV
Monetary Offices                                  31, I
Multifamily Housing Assistance Restructuring,     24, IV
     Office of
National Aeronautics and Space Administration     5, LIX; 14, V
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 18
National Agricultural Library                     7, XLI
National Agricultural Statistics Service          7, XXXVI
National Archives and Records Administration      5, LXVI; 36, XII
  Information Security Oversight Office           32, XX
National Bureau of Standards                      15, II
National Capital Planning Commission              1, IV
National Commission for Employment Policy         1, IV
National Commission on Libraries and Information  45, XVII
     Science
National and Community Service, Corporation for   45, XII, XXV
National Council on Disability                    34, XII
National Credit Union Administration              12, VII
National Drug Control Policy, Office of           21, III
National Foundation on the Arts and the           45, XI
     Humanities
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration    23, II, III; 49, V
National Imagery and Mapping Agency               32, I
National Indian Gaming Commission                 25, III
National Institute for Literacy                   34, XI
National Institute of Standards and Technology    15, II
National Labor Relations Board                    5, LXI; 29, I
National Marine Fisheries Service                 50, II, IV, VI
National Mediation Board                          29, X
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration   15, IX; 50, II, III, IV, 
                                                  VI
National Park Service                             36, I
National Railroad Adjustment Board                29, III
National Railroad Passenger Corporation (AMTRAK)  49, VII
National Science Foundation                       5, XLIII; 45, VI
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 25
National Security Council                         32, XXI
National Security Council and Office of Science   47, II
     and Technology Policy
National Telecommunications and Information       15, XXIII; 47, III
     Administration
National Transportation Safety Board              49, VIII
National Weather Service                          15, IX
Natural Resources Conservation Service            7, VI
Navajo and Hopi Indian Relocation, Office of      25, IV
Navy Department                                   32, VI
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 52
Neighborhood Reinvestment Corporation             24, XXV
Northeast Dairy Compact Commission                7, XIII
Nuclear Regulatory Commission                     5, XLVIII; 10, I
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 20
Occupational Safety and Health Administration     29, XVII
Occupational Safety and Health Review Commission  29, XX
Offices of Independent Counsel                    28, VI
Operations Office                                 7, XXVIII
Overseas Private Investment Corporation           5, XXXIII; 22, VII
Panama Canal Commission                           48, 35
Panama Canal Regulations                          35, I
Patent and Trademark Office                       37, I
Payment From a Non-Federal Source for Travel      41, 304
     Expenses
Payment of Expenses Connected With the Death of   41, 303
     Certain Employees
Peace Corps                                       22, III
Pennsylvania Avenue Development Corporation       36, IX
Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration       29, XXV
Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation              29, XL
Personnel Management, Office of                   5, I, XXXV; 45, VIII
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 17
  Federal Employees Group Life Insurance Federal  48, 21
     Acquisition Regulation
[[Page 676]]

  Federal Employees Health Benefits Acquisition   48, 16
       Regulation
Postal Rate Commission                            5, XLVI; 39, III
Postal Service, United States                     5, LX; 39, I
Postsecondary Education, Office of                34, VI
President's Commission on White House             1, IV
     Fellowships
Presidential Commission on the Assignment of      32, XXIX
     Women in the Armed Forces
Presidential Documents                            3
Presidio Trust                                    36, X
Prisons, Bureau of                                28, V
Procurement and Property Management, Office of    7, XXXII
Productivity, Technology and Innovation,          37, IV
     Assistant Secretary
Public Contracts, Department of Labor             41, 50
Public and Indian Housing, Office of Assistant    24, IX
     Secretary for
Public Health Service                             42, I
Railroad Retirement Board                         20, II
Reclamation, Bureau of                            43, I
Refugee Resettlement, Office of                   45, IV
Regional Action Planning Commissions              13, V
Relocation Allowances                             41, 302
Research and Special Programs Administration      49, I
Rural Business-Cooperative Service                7, XVIII, XLII
Rural Development Administration                  7, XLII
Rural Housing Service                             7, XVIII, XXXV
Rural Telephone Bank                              7, XVI
Rural Utilities Service                           7, XVII, XVIII, XLII
Saint Lawrence Seaway Development Corporation     33, IV
Science and Technology Policy, Office of          32, XXIV
Science and Technology Policy, Office of, and     47, II
     National Security Council
Secret Service                                    31, IV
Securities and Exchange Commission                17, II
Selective Service System                          32, XVI
Small Business Administration                     13, I
Smithsonian Institution                           36, V
Social Security Administration                    20, III; 48, 23
Soldiers' and Airmen's Home, United States        5, XI
Special Counsel, Office of                        5, VIII
Special Education and Rehabilitative Services,    34, III
     Office of
State Department                                  22, I
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 6
Surface Mining and Reclamation Appeals, Board of  30, III
Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement,       30, VII
     Office of
Surface Transportation Board                      49, X
Susquehanna River Basin Commission                18, VIII
Technology Administration                         15, XI
Technology Policy, Assistant Secretary for        37, IV
Technology, Under Secretary for                   37, V
Tennessee Valley Authority                        5, LXIX; 18, XIII
Thrift Supervision Office, Department of the      12, V
     Treasury
Trade Representative, United States, Office of    15, XX
Transportation, Department of                     5, L
  Coast Guard                                     33, I; 46, I; 49, IV
  Coast Guard (Great Lakes Pilotage)              46, III
  Commercial Space Transportation                 14, III
  Contract Appeals, Board of                      48, 63
  Emergency Management and Assistance             44, IV
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 12
  Federal Aviation Administration                 14, I
  Federal Highway Administration                  23, I, II; 49, III
  Federal Railroad Administration                 49, II
  Federal Transit Administration                  49, VI
  Maritime Administration                         46, II
  National Highway Traffic Safety Administration  23, II, III; 49, V
  Research and Special Programs Administration    49, I
  Saint Lawrence Seaway Development Corporation   33, IV

[[Page 677]]

  Secretary of Transportation, Office of          14, II; 49, Subtitle A
  Surface Transportation Board                    49, X
  Transportation Statistics Bureau                49, XI
Transportation, Office of                         7, XXXIII
Transportation Statistics Brureau                 49, XI
Travel Allowances, Temporary Duty (TDY)           41, 301
Treasury Department                               5, XXI; 12, XV; 17, IV
  Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, Bureau of        27, I
  Community Development Financial Institutions    12, XVIII
       Fund
  Comptroller of the Currency                     12, I
  Customs Service, United States                  19, I
  Engraving and Printing, Bureau of               31, VI
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 10
  Federal Law Enforcement Training Center         31, VII
  Fiscal Service                                  31, II
  Foreign Assets Control, Office of               31, V
  Internal Revenue Service                        26, I
  International Investment, Office of             31, VIII
  Monetary Offices                                31, I
  Secret Service                                  31, IV
  Secretary of the Treasury, Office of            31, Subtitle A
  Thrift Supervision, Office of                   12, V
Truman, Harry S. Scholarship Foundation           45, XVIII
United States and Canada, International Joint     22, IV
     Commission
United States and Mexico, International Boundary  22, XI
     and Water Commission, United States Section
Utah Reclamation Mitigation and Conservation      43, III
     Commission
Veterans Affairs Department                       38, I
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 8
Veterans' Employment and Training, Office of the  41, 61; 20, IX
     Assistant Secretary for
Vice President of the United States, Office of    32, XXVIII
Vocational and Adult Education, Office of         34, IV
Wage and Hour Division                            29, V
Water Resources Council                           18, VI
Workers' Compensation Programs, Office of         20, I
World Agricultural Outlook Board                  7, XXXVIII

[[Page 679]]


<R03>
List of CFR Sections Affected

<R04>

All changes in this volume of the Code of Federal Regulations which were 
made by documents published in the Federal Register since January 1, 
1986, are enumerated in the following list. Entries indicate the nature 
of the changes effected. Page numbers refer to Federal Register pages. 
The user should consult the entries for chapters and parts as well as 
sections for revisions.
For the period before January 1, 1986, see the ``List of CFR Sections 
Affected, 1949-1963, 1964-1972, and 1973-1985'' published in seven 
separate volumes.

                                  1986

24 CFR
                                                                   51 FR
                                                                    Page
Subtitle A
13  Added..........................................................19830
    Authority citation corrected...................................43608
13.1  Corrected....................................................43608
15  Authority citation revised; section authority citations 
        removed....................................................20479
15.21  (a)(4) revised; (c) added; interim..........................20479
    (a)(4) and (c) revised; OMB number (effective date pending)....44286
15.31  Revised; eff. 5-7-86........................................10617
15  Appendix added.................................................20479
    Appendix removed (effective date pending)......................44286
16  Appendix A revised; eff. 5-7-86................................10195
17  Authority citation revised; subpart authority citations 
        removed....................................................39749
17.150--17.161  Undesignated center heading added (effective date 
        pending)...................................................39750
17.150  Added (effective date pending).............................39750
17.151  Added (effective date pending).............................39750
17.152  Added (effective date pending).............................39750
17.153  Added (effective date pending).............................39750
17.154  Added (effective date pending).............................39750
17.155  Added (effective date pending).............................39750
17.156  Added (effective date pending).............................39751
17.157  Added (effective date pending).............................39751
17.158  Added (effective date pending).............................39751
17.159  Added (effective date pending).............................39751
17.160  Added (effective date pending).............................39751
17.161  Added (effective date pending).............................39751
20.15--20.25 (Subpart C)  Removed..................................28365
27.25  (a)(3)(ii) revised..........................................21518
35  Authority citation revised; section authority citations 
        removed....................................................27787
35.1--35.5 (Subpart A)  Revised....................................27787
35.20--35.24 (Subpart C)  Revised..................................27788
35.25  Removed.....................................................27788
35.54  Revised.....................................................27788
35.56  (a) (1), (2), and (3) revised; (a)(4) removed...............27789
35  Appendixes I and II removed....................................27789
42  Revised; eff. 5-1-86......................................7011, 7022
42.10  Correctly designated........................................12848
42.102  OMB number..................................................6912
42.103  OMB number..................................................6912
42.104  OMB number..................................................6912
42.106  OMB number..................................................6912
42.107  OMB number..................................................6912
42.203  OMB number..................................................6912
42.205  OMB number..................................................6912
42.207  OMB number..................................................6912

[[Page 680]]

43  Authority citation revised; section authority citations 
        removed.....................................................7012
43.1--43.16 (Subpart A)  Removed; eff. 5-1-86.......................7012
43.28  Introductory text amended....................................6912
44  Revision confirmed (effective date pending)....................30480
    Eff. 10-8-86...................................................37567
Chapter I
111.108  (d) addition confirmed (effective date pending)...........30480
    Eff. 10-8-86...................................................37567
115  List of jurisdictions.............................595, 11577, 36222
146  Added (effective date pending)................................45266

                                  1987

24 CFR
                                                                   52 FR
                                                                    Page
Subtitle A
0  Revised.........................................................27113
14  Added..........................................................27126
15  Authority citation and heading revised.........................12160
15.1  (g), (h) and (i) added.......................................12160
15.2  Revised......................................................12160
15.21  (a)(4) and (c) revised; OMB number; eff. 3-2-87..............3795
15.72  Revised.....................................................12160
15.73  Revised.....................................................12160
15.74  Revised.....................................................12161
15.81 (Subpart I)  Redesignated as 15.91 (Subpart J)...............12161
15.81--15.86 (Subpart I)  Added....................................12161
15.91 (Subpart J)  Redesignated from 15.81 (Subpart I).............12161
15  Appendix removal; eff. 3-2-87...................................3795
17.60--17.161 (Subpart C)  Authority citation revised..............35414
17.65  (a) and (b) introductory text and (1) revised...............35414
17.150--17.161  Undesignated center heading added; eff. 3-2-87......3795
17.150  Added; eff. 3-2-87..........................................3795
17.151  Added; eff. 3-2-87..........................................3795
17.152  Added; eff. 3-2-87..........................................3795
17.153  Added; eff. 3-2-87..........................................3795
17.154  Added; eff. 3-2-87L3795
17.155  Added; eff. 3-2-87..........................................3795
17.156  Added; eff. 3-2-87..........................................3795
17.157  Added; eff. 3-2-87..........................................3795
17.158  Added; eff. 3-2-87..........................................3795
17.159  Added; eff. 3-2-87..........................................3795
17.160  Added; eff. 3-2-87..........................................3795
17.161  Added; eff. 3-2-87..........................................3795
20.10  Introductory text revised...................................27130
24  Revised; interim (effective date pending)......................37116
    Eff. 11-16-87..................................................42634
25.9  (e) revised..................................................15304
35  Authority citation revised......................................1890
35.24  Revised......................................................1890
35.56  (a)(1) revised...............................................1891
35.70  (Subpart G) Added............................................1891
40  Appendix A Note revised; eff. 5-5-87............................9477
Chapter I
115  List of jurisdictions.........................................15304
    Determination..................................................41419
146.21  OMB number; eff. 4-10-87....................................7808
146.25  OMB number; eff. 4-10-87....................................7408
146.27  OMB number; eff. 4-10-87....................................7408
146.83  OMB number; eff. 4-10-87....................................7408

                                  1988

24 CFR
                                                                   53 FR
                                                                    Page
Subtitle A
8  Added (effective date pending in part)..........................20233
8.4  (b)(1)(v) corrected...........................................28115
8.21  (c)(1)(iii) corrected........................................28115
8.24  (b) corrected................................................28115
8.30  Corrected....................................................28115
8.56  (c)(6) heading, (g) introductory text and (2), (h)(1), and 
        (j) (1) and (2) corrected..................................28115
    (i) corrected..................................................34634
8.57  (a) introductory text corrected..............................28115
8.67  (o) corrected................................................28115
8.70  (c) corrected................................................28115
15  Authority citation revised.....................................37547
15.14  Revised (effective date pending)............................37547
15.15  Added (effective date pending)..............................37548
15.16  Added (effective date pending)..............................37549
15.17  Added (effective date pending)..............................37549

[[Page 681]]

15.18  Added (effective date pending)..............................37549
24  Revised; nomenclature change (interim effective date pending 
        in part)............................................19182, 19204
24.100  (d) and (e) added..........................................19182
24.105  (f) (1) and (2), (p) (2) through (22), (u) (1) and (2), 
        (v) (1) and (2), and (w) through (cc) added................19182
    (n) republished; interim.......................................30051
    Confirmed......................................................45903
24.110  (a)(1)(i)(A), (ii)(C) (3) through (20), (d) and (e) added 
                                                                   19183
    (a) introductory text and (2)(ii) republished; interim.........30051
    Confirmed......................................................45903
24.115  (d) added..................................................19183
24.200  (c)(8), (d), (e), and (f) added............................19183
    (c)(2) republished; (e)(1) revised; interim....................30051
    Confirmed......................................................45903
24.215  (a) added..................................................19184
24.220  (c) and (d) added..........................................19184
24.305  (d)(1), (e), and (f) added.................................19184
24.313  Revised....................................................19184
    (b)(2)(ii) correctly revised...................................30049
24.314  Revised....................................................19185
24.320  (d) added..................................................19185
24.325  (a)(3) and (b)(4) added....................................19185
24.400  (d) added..................................................19185
24.410  (c) added..................................................19185
24.411  Revised....................................................19185
24.412  Revised....................................................19186
24.413  Revised....................................................19186
24.415  (d) added..................................................19186
24.500  (c) added..................................................19186
24.505  (f) through (h) added......................................19186
24.600--24.613 (Subpart F)  Added..................................19186
28  Added..........................................................24001
35.5  (b) revised; (c) added.......................................20798
35.22  Amended.....................................................20798
35.24  (b)(1), (2)(ii) and (4) revised.............................20798
35.56  (a) (1) and (2) revised.....................................20799
42  Revised; interim; eff. 4-2-89...................................4965
43  Removed; interim; eff. 4-2-89...................................4965
44.1  (d) revised; eff. 10-1-88.....................................8056
44.15  Revised; eff. 10-1-88........................................8056
50.20  (n) added; interim..........................................11238
    (o) added......................................................30192
58  Authority citation revised.....................................30193
58.35  (a)(6) added................................................30193
85  Added; eff. 10-1-88.......................................8068, 8087
Chapter I
105  Revised.......................................................24196
111.106  OMB number.................................................9869
111.108  (e) added; eff. 10-1-88....................................8057
    OMB number......................................................9869
115  Determination of list changes..................................6964
    List of jurisdictions..........................................23757
115.10  (a) revised................................................24203

                                  1989

24 CFR
                                                                   54 FR
                                                                    Page
Subtitle A
8.3  Corrected......................................................8188
14  Authority citation revised......................................3283
8.21  Amended (OMB number).........................................37645
8.24  Amended (OMB number).........................................37645
8.25  Amended (OMB number).........................................37645
8.51  Amended (OMB number).........................................37645
8.55  Amended (OMB number).........................................37645
14.115  (a) (8) and (9) amended; (a)(10) added......................3283
15.14  Eff. 3-3-89..................................................8321
15.15  Eff. 3-3-89..................................................8321
15.16  Eff. 3-3-89..................................................8321
15.17  Eff. 3-3-89..................................................8321
15.18  Eff. 3-3-89..................................................8321
24  Heading and authority citation revised..........................4957
    Heading corrected...............................................6364
24.105  (n) confirmed as final eff. 3-3-89..........................8321
24.110  (a) introductory text and (2)(ii) confirmed as final eff. 
        3-3-89......................................................8321
24.200  (c)(2) confirmed as final eff. 3-3-89.......................8321
24.305  (c) (3) and (4) amended; (c)(5) added; interim........4950, 4957
24.320  (a) revised; interim..................................4950, 4957
24.600--24.613 (Subpart F)  Redesignated as 24.700--24.713 
        (Subpart G); interim..................................4950, 4957
24.600--24.630 (Subpart F)  Added; interim....................4950, 4957
24.700--24.713 (Subpart G)  Redesignated from 24.600--24.613 
        (Subpart F); interim..................................4950, 4957
24  Appendix C added; interim.................................4951, 4957
42  Regulations at 53 FR 4965 confirmed; see regulation codified 
        at 49 CFR 24................................................8912

[[Page 682]]

43  Removal at 53 FR 4965 confirmed; see regulation codified at 49 
        CFR 24......................................................8912
50.36  Nomenclature change.........................................39525
51.102  (e) nomenclature change....................................39525
90  Added (effective date pending).................................46569
    Regulation at 54 FR 46569 effective 12-21-89...................52396
Chapter I
100  Revised........................................................3283
103  Added..........................................................3292
    Appendix redesignated from 105 Appendix.........................3308
104  Added..........................................................3298
105  Removed........................................................3308
    Appendix redesignated as 103 Appendix...........................3308
106  Heading and authority citation revised.........................3308
106.1  Revised......................................................3308
106.2  Revised......................................................3308
109  Revised........................................................3308
110  Authority citation revised.....................................3310
110.1  Revised......................................................3310
110.5  (b), (e), (g) and (h) revised................................3311
110.10  (a) introductory text and (c) revised.......................3311
110.15  Revised.....................................................3311
110.25  (a) revised.................................................3311
111  Revised.......................................................20098
    Effective date corrected.......................................25713
115  Revised........................................................3311
121  Added..........................................................3316
125  Added; eff. 5-9-89.............................................6498
100--121 (Subchapter A)  Appendix I added...........................3317

                                  1990

24 CFR
                                                                   55 FR
                                                                    Page
Subtitle A
16  Appendix A revised..............................................2064
24.600--24.635  Regulation at 54 FR 4950, 4956 confirmed; revised 
                                                            21688, 21695
24  Appendix C regulation at 54 FR 4950, 4956 confirmed; revised 
                                                            21690, 21695
25  Authority citation revised.....................................18872
25.9  (x) added....................................................18872
    (b) revised....................................................33286
44.1  (c)(2) revised................................................8463
49  Added..........................................................18492
50  Authority citation revised.....................................27608
50.20  (p) added...................................................27608
    (n) added......................................................38962
87  Added; interim............................................6737, 6750
Chapter I
103  Authority citation revised....................................53293
103.200  (a)(3) revised............................................53293
103.225  Revised....................................................3211
103.300  (a) revised...............................................53294
103.400  (a)(1)(ii) and (c)(2) revised..............................3211
    Revised........................................................53294
109  Authority citation revised....................................53294
109.16  (a) revised................................................53294

                                  1991

24 CFR
                                                                   56 FR
                                                                    Page
Subtitle A
4  Added...........................................................22090
8  Authority citation revised........................................920
8.22  (a) amended....................................................920
8.25  Heading, (a), (3), (b), and (c) introductory text amended......920
8  Appendix A amended................................................920
12  Added; eff. 4-15-92............................................11042
30  Added..........................................................23631
35.24  (b)(2)(i) amended; interim..................................15172
    (b)(4) amended...................................................920
50  Authority citation revised.....................................30326
50.4  (c) revised..................................................30326
58  Authority citation revised.....................................30326
58.5  (c) revised..................................................30326
60  Added...................................................28012, 28020
60.101  (b)(5) corrected...........................................29756
60.103  (f) corrected..............................................29756
86  Added..........................................................22941
86.20  OMB numbers.................................................30430
86.25  OMB numbers.................................................30430
86  Appendix C added...............................................57488
90.1  (a) revised..................................................56126
91  Added; interim..................................................4484
    Regulations at 56 FR 4484 comment time extended................49683
91.15  OMB number pending...........................................4484
    Amended; OMB number; interim....................................9169
91.20  OMB number pending...........................................4484
    Amended; OMB number; interim....................................9169
91.25  OMB number pending...........................................4484
    Amended; OMB number; interim....................................9169

[[Page 683]]

    Existing text designated as (a); (b) added.....................56126
91.30  OMB number pending...........................................4484
    Amended; OMB number; interim....................................9169
91.35  OMB number pending...........................................4484
    Amended; OMB number; interim....................................9169
91.40  OMB number pending...........................................4484
    Amended; OMB number; interim....................................9169
91.45  OMB number pending...........................................4484
    Amended; OMB number; interim....................................9169
91.50  OMB number pending...........................................4484
    Amended; OMB number; interim....................................9169
91.55  OMB number pending...........................................4484
    Amended; OMB number; interim....................................9169
91.70  OMB number pending...........................................4484
    Amended; OMB number; interim....................................9169
91.75  OMB number pending...........................................4484
    Amended; OMB number; interim....................................9169
92  Added; interim.................................................65338
92.51  OMB number pending..........................................65338
92.152  OMB number pending.........................................65338
92.631  OMB number pending.........................................65338
92.632  OMB number pending.........................................65338
0--99 (Subtitle A)  Appendix added................4412, 4437, 4458, 4494
    Regulations at 56 FR 4412, 4436, and 4458 comment time 
extended...........................................................32326
Chapter I
100.205  (a) revised; eff. 4-19-92.................................11665
    Technical correction...........................................18878
100-125 (Subchapter A)  Appendix II added...........................9496
    Appendix III added........................................9472, 9515
103.405  (a)(3) revised............................................55078
111.107  Introductory text republished; (a) revised................22643
100--125 (Subchapter A)  Appendix II corrected.....................28704
    Appendix I amended.............................................55078
    Appendix II corrected..........................................56544

                                  1992

24 CFR
                                                                   57 FR
                                                                    Page
Subtitle A
0  Authority citation revised......................................28783
0.735-101  Revised.................................................28783
0.735-102  Revised.................................................28783
0.735-104  Revised.................................................28783
4  Authority citation revised......................................34248
4.5  Amended.......................................................34249
4.10  (a) revised..................................................34249
4.100  (b) revised.................................................34249
4.105  (a)(1) and (7) revised; (c) added...........................34249
12  Implementation..................................................1942
20  Authority citation revised.....................................20201
20.3  (a) revised..................................................20201
20.10  Amended.....................................................20201
24.700  Amended....................................................58339
24.710  (a)(3) revised.............................................58339
25  Revised........................................................31051
    Regulation on 57 FR 31051 effective date corrected.............31754
25.2  Corrected....................................................37085
25.3  Corrected....................................................37085
25.4  (b) corrected................................................37085
25.5  (b), (c)(3) and (d)(3)(i) corrected..........................37085
    (c)(3) corrected...............................................40111
25.9  (cc) corrected...............................................37085
    (b), (h) and (u) revised.......................................58339
25.13  Corrected...................................................37085
30.320  (c) introductory text and (k) revised......................58339
44  Heading and authority citation revised.........................33254
44.3  (c) amended..................................................33254
44.6  (a) revised; (b) amended.....................................33254
45  Added..........................................................33254
50  Authority citation revised..............................12036, 32110
50.3  (i) added; interim...........................................32110
50.17  (i) redesignated as (j); new (i) added; interim.............32110
50.19  Added; interim...............................................1386
    Revised; interim...............................................32110
50.20  (q) added; inerim............................................1386
    (n) revised; interim...........................................12036
    (o) revised; interim...........................................32110
70  Added; interim.................................................14756
85  Authority citation revised.....................................33255
85.26  (b)(1) and (2) amended......................................33255
86  Appendix C amended..............................................2677
91  Revised........................................................40053
91.40  (c) corrected...............................................46068
92.2  Amended; interim......................................58863, 60964
92.50--92.66 (Subpart B)  Heading revised..........................58864
92.50--92.52  Undesignated center heading added; interim...........58864
92.50  (b) revised; interim........................................58864

[[Page 684]]

92.60--92.66  Undesignated center heading and sections added; 
        interim....................................................58864
92.101  (a) revised; interim.......................................60964
92.150  (b)(3) and (c)(7) revised; interim.........................60965
92.151  (d) redesignated as (e); (a) and new (e) revised; new (d) 
        added; interim.............................................60965
92.204  (a)(2)(i)(A) and (B) revised; interim......................60965
92.205  (c) revised; interim.......................................60965
92.206  (a)(4) redesignated as (c)(5) and revised; (f) added; 
        interim....................................................60965
92.211  (a)(2) revised; interim....................................60966
92.214  Revised; interim...........................................60966
92.217  Corrected...................................................2951
92.220  (a)(1)(i) and (2) revised; (b)(3) and (4) amended; (b)(5) 
        added; interim.............................................60966
92.250  Revised; interim...........................................60966
92.251  Revised; interim...........................................60966
92.252  (a)(1)(ii), (2) introductory text, (5) introductory text 
        and (c) revised; (e) added; interim........................60967
92.254  (a)(1)(ii) and (4) revised; (c) added; interim.............60967
92.300  (c) revised; interim.......................................60968
92.500  (a) and (d)(1) through (4) revised; (d)(5) removed; 
        interim....................................................60968
92.502  (d) revised; (g) added; interim............................60968
92.504  (c)(13) amended; interim...................................60968
0--99 (Subtitle A)  Appendixes revised..................1527, 1562, 1597
    Appendix A amended; interim....................................14758
Chapter I
103  Authority citation revised....................................18398
103.200  (a) introductory text and (3) revised.....................39116
103.400  (a)(1) and (2)(ii) revised................................18398
135  Authority citation revised....................................40113
135.1  (a) revised.................................................40113
135.5  (g) revised.................................................40113
135.10  Revised....................................................40113
135.15  Revised....................................................40113
135.20  Amended....................................................40113
135.65  Revised....................................................40113
135.125  Removed...................................................40113
135.140  Removed...................................................40113

                                  1993

24 CFR
                                                                   58 FR
                                                                    Page
Subtitle A
4.5  Regulation at 57 FR 34249 confirmed...........................61017
4.10  Regulation at 57 FR 34249 confirmed..........................61017
4.100  Regulation at 57 FR 34249 confirmed.........................61017
4.105  Regulation at 57 FR 34249 confirmed.........................61017
25.9  (x) revised..................................................47379
27  Authority citation revised.....................................34884
27.1  Amended......................................................34884
27.3  Amended......................................................34884
27.5  (a) amended..................................................34884
27.20  (a), (b)(1), (c)(1) and (3) revised; (c)(5) added...........34884
50  Authority citation revised.....................................41336
50.1  (c) revised..................................................41336
50.17  Introductory text and (a) revised...........................41336
50.19  Corrected...................................................17164
    Introductory text revised; (i) added...........................41337
50.20  (a) revised.................................................41337
50.21  (b) removed; (a) introductory text, (1) and (2) 
        redesignated as introductory text, (a) and (b).............41337
50.22  Removed.....................................................41337
50.36  Removed.....................................................41337
50.43  Removed.....................................................41337
58.1  Revised; interim.............................................34139
58.2  Revised; interim.............................................34139
58.4  Revised; interim.............................................34140
58.5  Heading, introductory text, (c) and (i) revised; (b)(1) 
        removed; (b)(2) and (3) redesignated as (b)(1) and (2); 
        interim....................................................34140
58.6  Added; interim...............................................34140
58.10  Amended; interim............................................34141
58.13  Revised; interim............................................34141
58.14  Amended; interim............................................34141
58.15  (a) revised; interim........................................34141
58.18 (Subpart C)  Heading and text revised; interim...............34141
58.22  Amended; interim............................................34141
58.23  Revised; interim............................................34141
58.31  Revised; interim............................................34141
58.32  (a) amended; interim........................................34141
58.35  (a)(1) introductory text and (b) amended; (a)(2), (4) 
        introductory text and (c) revised; (a)(7), (8) and (d) 
        added; interim.............................................34142

[[Page 685]]

58.52  Amended; interim............................................34142
58.66  Amended; interim............................................34142
58.71  Revised; interim............................................34142
58.77  (a) revised; (b) amended; interim...........................34142
86  Authority citation revised.....................................47058
86.15  Amended.....................................................47058
86.20  (f) removed; (g) and (l) redesignated as (f) and (g)........47058
86.25  (f) removed; (g) and (h) redesignated as (f) and (g)........47058
86  appendix A amended......................................47058, 47059
    appendix B revised.............................................47059
91  Authority citation revised.....................................13689
91.1  (b)(1)(ii), (2)(ix) and (x) revised; (b)(1)(v), (2)(xi) 
        through (xv), (4) and (c) added; (b)(3) amended; eff. 4-
        12-93......................................................13689
91.5  Amended; eff. 4-12-93........................................13689
91.15  (a) revised; eff. 4-12-93...................................13689
91.17  (a)(2)(i)(A) and (b)(2)(i) revised; eff. 4-12-93............13690
91.19  Partial waiver..............................................49156
    (b)(1) revised; (c)(1) amended; (g) redesignated as (h); new 
(g) added; eff. 4-12-93............................................13690
91.21  (b) and (c) revised; (d) redesignated as (f); new (d) and 
        (e) added; eff. 4-12-93....................................13690
91.25  (a), (b)(1), (c)(7) and (d)(2) revised; (b)(3) and (f) 
        amended; eff. 4-12-93......................................13690
91.40  (a) and (c) revised; eff. 4-12-93...........................13691
91.42  (a)(2)(i)(A) and (b)(2)(i) revised; eff. 4-12-93............13961
91.44  Partial waiver..............................................49156
    Second (b) and (c) through (f) redesignated as (c) through (f) 
and (h); (b)(1) revised; new (g) added; eff. 4-12-93...............13691
91.46  (c) and (d) redesignated as (e) and (f); new (c) and (d) 
        added; (b) and new (e) revised; eff. 4-12-93...............13692
91.50--91.53 (Subpart D)  Removed; eff. 4-12-93....................13692
91.57  Revised; eff. 4-12-93.......................................13692
91.70  (a) revised; eff. 4-12-93...................................13692
91.80  Revised; eff. 4-12-93.......................................13692
91.82  (c) introductory text revised; eff. 4-12-93.................13692
91.85  (a)(3) revised; (b) amended; eff. 4-12-93...................13693
92.2  Amended; interim.............................................34142
92.50  (f) added; interim..........................................34143
92.51  Removed; interim............................................34143
92.52  Revised; interim............................................34143
92.61  (b)(2), (4), (5), (c)(2) and (5) revised; interim...........34143
92.62  (a) and (b) revised; interim................................34143
92.63  Revised; interim............................................34144
92.101  (c) revised; interim.......................................34144
92.102  (b)(2) revised; (c) added; interim.........................34144
92.103  (b) introductory text revised; interim.....................34144
92.107  (b) revised; interim.......................................34144
92.150  (c)(2) and (3) removed; (c)(4) through (9) redesignated as 
        (c)(2) through (7); (b)(5), (6) and new (c)(2) revised; 
        interim....................................................34144
92.152  Revised; interim...........................................34144
92.203  Revised; interim...........................................34145
92.205  (a)(1) and (2) revised; interim............................34145
92.206  (e) and (f) revised; (g) added; interim....................34145
92.208  Removed; interim...........................................34145
92.209  Removed; interim...........................................34145
92.210  Revised; interim...........................................34145
92.211  (b) revised; interim.......................................34145
92.218  (a) revised; (c) redesignated as (d); new (c) added; 
        interim....................................................34145
92.220  (a)(3) revised; (a)(6) added; interim......................34146
92.221  Revised; interim...........................................34146
92.222  Revised; interim...........................................34146
92.252  (a)(5) amended; interim....................................34146
92.253  (c) revised; interim.......................................34147
92.254  (a)(1)(i), (ii), (4), (b) introductory text and (1) 
        revised; interim...........................................34147
92.300  Revised; interim...........................................34147
92.302  (a)(2), (b)(1)(iv), (d), (e) and (f) revised; (a)(3), 
        (b)(1)(v), (c)(6) and (7) added; interim...................34148
92.350  (a)(4) revised; interim....................................34148
92.400  (a)(4) and (5) revised; (a)(6) added; interim..............34148
92.500  (a) amended; (d)(2) revised; interim.......................34149
92.504  (c) introductory text revised; (d) redesignated as (e); 
        new (d) added; interim.....................................34149
92.600  Revised; interim...........................................34149
92.610  Revised; interim...........................................34149
92.611  (a)(1) revised; interim....................................34150
92.612  (a)(4) and (e) revised; interim............................34150

[[Page 686]]

92.613  (a) revised; (i) added; interim............................34150
92.614  (a)(1)(ii), (2) introductory text and (c) revised; (a)(5) 
        amended; (e) added; interim................................34150
92.615  (a)(1)(i), (ii), (4), (b) introductory text and (1) 
        revised; (c) added; interim................................34151
92.616  Added; interim.............................................34151
92.620  Revised; interim...........................................34152
92.621  Revised; interim...........................................34152
92.642  (b)(1) revised; interim....................................34152
Subtitle  A appendix C removed.....................................36526
Chapter I
100.135  (c) and (d) corrected; CFR correction......................2988

                                  1994

24 CFR
                                                                   59 FR
                                                                    Page
Subtitle A
8.28  (a)(1) amended; eff. 4-25-94.................................14092
8  Appendixes A and B amended; eff. 4-25-94........................14092
9  Added...........................................................31047
12.3  Amended; eff. 4-25-94........................................14092
16  Authority citation revised......................................9407
16.15  (c) and (d) added............................................9407
17  Authority citation revised..............................34579, 59647
17.60--17.161 (Subpart C)  Authority citation revised..............59647
17.60  (a) revised.................................................34579
17.62  Revised.....................................................34579
17.64  (a) revised.................................................34580
17.65  (b) revised.................................................34580
17.72  (e) revised.................................................34580
17.110  (b) revised................................................34580
17.161  (a) revised................................................59647
24  Authority citation revised.....................................18482
24.700  Revised....................................................18482
28.5  (c)(2) amended; eff. 4-25-94..........................14092, 14093
42  Revised........................................................29329
44  Regulation at 57 FR 33254 confirmed.............................2738
44.3  Regulation at 57 FR 33254 confirmed...........................2738
44.6  Regulation at 57 FR 33254 confirmed...........................2738
45  Regulation at 57 FR 33254 confirmed.............................2738
50  Authority citation revised..............................17199, 19107
50.3  Regulation at 57 FR 32110 confirmed..........................17199
50.4  (b)(3) removed; (b)(1) and (2) revised.......................19107
50.17  Regulation at 57 FR 32110 confirmed.........................17199
50.19  Regulations at 57 FR 32110 and 58 FR 41337 confirmed........17199
50.20  Regulations at 57 FR 32110 and 58 FR 41337 confirmed........17199
55  Added..........................................................19107
55.12  (b)(2) amended..............................................33199
55.22  Heading revised; (a) introductory text and (b)(1) 
        introductory text amended..................................33199
58  Authority citation revised.....................................44260
58.1  (c) introductory text, (3) and (4) amended; (c)(5) added; 
        interim....................................................44260
58.2  (a)(4) revised; interim......................................44260
58.4  (c)(1) amended; interim......................................44260
58.5  (b)(1) revised...............................................19112
58.77  (d) added; interim..........................................44260
81  Authority citation revised.....................................61506
81.41--81.49 (Subpart E)  Continued................................54366
81.51 (Subpart F)  Added...........................................61506
84  Added; interim in part.........................................47011
85.26  Regulation at 57 FR 33255 confirmed..........................2738
86.15  Amended;  eff. 4-25-94......................................14093
86  appendix C  amended.............................................4579
87  Authority citation revised......................................5321
87.110  (a)(2) and (b)(2) revised...................................5321
92  Waiver.........................................................22506
92.2  Amended; interim; eff. 5-19-94 through 6-30-95...............18631
    Amended; interim; eff. 10-26-95................................44261
    Regulation at 59 FR 44261 eff. date corrected to 9-26-94 
through 6-30-95....................................................49291
92.4  Added; interim; eff. 5-19-94 through 6-30-95.................18631
    Redesignated as 92.5; new 92.4 added; interim; eff. 10-26-94 
through 6-30-95....................................................44261
    Regulation at 59 FR 44261 eff. date corrected to 9-26-94 
through 6-30-95....................................................49291
92.5  Redesignated from 92.4; interim; eff. 10-26-94 through 6-30-
        95.........................................................44261
    Regulation at 59 FR 44261 eff. date corrected to 9-26-94 
through 6-30-95....................................................49291

[[Page 687]]

92.50  (f) redesignated as (d)(5) and revised; interim; eff. 5-19-
        94 through 6-30-95.........................................18631
92.61  Heading revised; interim; eff. 5-19-94 through 6-30-95......18631
    (b)(4) revised; interim; eff. 10-26-94 through 6-30-95.........44261
    Regulation at 59 FR 44261 eff. date corrected to 9-26-94 
through 6-30-95....................................................49291
92.64  (a)(1) revised; interim; eff. 5-19-94 through 6-30-95.......18632
92.150  (b)(2) revised; interim; eff. 5-19-94 through 6-30-95......18632
    (b)(5) and (c)(4) revised; interim; eff. 10-26-94 through 6-
30-95..............................................................44261
    Regulation at 59 FR 44261 eff. date corrected to 9-26-94 
through 6-30-95....................................................49291
92.204  (a)(1) revised; interim; eff. 5-19-94 through 6-30-95......18632
92.205  (a)(1) revised; interim; eff. 5-19-94 through 6-30-95......18632
    (a)(1) revised; interim; eff. 10-26-94 through 6-30-95.........44261
    Regulation at 59 FR 44261 eff. date corrected to 9-26-94 
through 6-30-95....................................................49291
92.206  Heading, (a)(2), (3), (b), (c) introductory text, (5), (d) 
        and (e) revised; (c)(6) and (7) added; (f) and (g) 
        removed; interim; eff. 5-19-94 through 6-30-95.............18632
    (b) revised; interim; eff. 10-26-94 through 6-30-95............44261
    Regulation at 59 FR 44261 eff. date corrected to 9-26-94 
through 6-30-95....................................................49291
92.207  Added; interim; eff. 5-19-94 through 6-30-95...............18633
92.208  Added; interim; eff. 5-19-94 through 6-30-95...............18633
92.209  Added; interim; eff. 5-19-94 through 6-30-95...............18633
92.211  (a)(2) and (f)(3) revised; (a)(3) added; interim; eff. 5-
        19-94 through 6-30-95......................................18633
    (a)(2) revised; interim; eff. 10-26-94 through 6-30-95.........44261
    Regulation at 59 FR 44261 eff. date corrected to 9-26-94 
through 6-30-95....................................................49291
92.214  (a)(8) revised; interim; eff. 5-19-94 through 6-30-95......18634
    (a)(7) revised; interim; eff. 10-26-94 through 6-30-95.........44262
    Regulation at 59 FR 44262 eff. date corrected to 9-26-94 
through 6-30-95....................................................49291
92.216  (a)(1) and (2) revised; interim; eff. 10-26-94 through 6-
        30-95......................................................44262
    Regulation at 59 FR 44262 eff. date corrected to 9-26-94 
through 6-30-95....................................................49291
92.218  (a) introductory text and (c) revised; (e) added; interim; 
        eff. 5-19-94 through 6-30-95...............................18634
    (a) revised; interim; eff. 10-26-94 through 6-30-95............44262
    Regulation at 59 FR 44262 eff. date corrected to 9-26-94 
through 6-30-95....................................................49291
92.219  Revised; interim; eff. 5-19-94 through 6-30-95.............18634
92.220  (a)(1) introductory text, (2), (3) and (5) revised; 
        interim; eff. 5-19-94 through 6-30-95......................18634
92.221  (a)(7) and (c) added; interim; eff. 5-19-94 through 6-30-
        95.........................................................18635
92.222  (a)(2) added; interim; eff. 5-19-94 through 6-30-95........18635
92.252  (b)  amended; eff. 4-25-94.................................14093
    (a)(2)(iii) added; (a)(5) amended; (d) revised; interim; eff. 
5-19-94 through 6-30-95............................................18635
    (a)(2)(iii) revised; interim; eff. 10-26-94 through 6-30-95....44262
    Regulation at 59 FR 44262 eff. date corrected to 9-26-94 
through 6-30-95....................................................49291
92.254  (a)(1)(i), (4) introductory text, (ii)(C) and (b)(1) 
        revised; (a)(4)(ii)(D) added; interim; eff. 5-19-94 
        through 6-30-95............................................18636
    (a)(3), (4)(ii)(C) and (D) revised; interim; eff. 10-26-94 
through 6-30-95....................................................44262
    Regulation at 59 FR 44262 eff. date corrected to 9-26-94 
through 6-30-95....................................................49291
92.255  Revised; OMB number; interim; eff. 5-19-94 through 6-30-95
                                                                   18636
92.256  Revised; interim; eff. 5-19-94 through 6-30-95.............18636
92.257  Revised; interim; eff. 10-26-94 through 6-30-95............44262

[[Page 688]]

    Regulation at 59 FR 44262 eff. date corrected to 9-26-94 
through 6-30-95....................................................49291
92.259  Added; interim; eff. 5-19-94 through 6-30-95...............18636
92.300  (b), (e) and (f) revised; interim; eff. 5-19-94 through 6-
        20-95......................................................18637
92.350  (a)(4) introductory text revised...........................33893
92.352  (b) revised; interim; eff. 10-26-94 through 6-30-95........44262
    Regulation at 59 FR 44262 eff. date corrected to 9-26-94 
through 6-30-95....................................................49291
92.353  (e) revised; interim; eff. 10-26-94 through 6-30-95........44262
    Regulation at 59 FR 44262 eff. date corrected to 9-26-94 
through 6-30-95....................................................49291
92.354  (a) revised; interim; eff. 5-19-94 through 6-30-95.........18637
    (a)(2) revised; interim; eff. 10-26-94 through 6-30-95.........44263
    Regulation at 59 FR 44263 eff. date corrected to 9-26-94 
through 6-30-95....................................................49291
92.502  (b)(1) revised; interim; eff. 5-19-94 through 6-30-95......18637
92.504  (e)(1) revised; interim; eff. 5-19-94 through 6-30-95......18637
92.506  Revised.....................................................2738
92.508  (a)(4)(v) revised; interim; eff. 5-19-94 through 6-30-95 
                                                                   18637
92.625  Added; interim; eff. 5-19-94 through 6-30-95...............18638
92.631  (c)(5) added...............................................33893
92.633  Revised; interim; eff. 10-26-94 through 6-30-95............44263
    Regulation at 59 FR 44263 eff. date corrected to 9-26-94 
through 6-30-95....................................................49291
92.646  Revised.....................................................2738
Subtitle  A Appendixes A and B amended.............................33893
Chapter I
103.335  Amended...................................................39956
103.400  (a)(2), (3), (b) and (c) revised..........................39956
    (a)(2)(i) correctly revised....................................46759
103.405  (a)(1) and (b) introductory text amended..................39956
    (b) corrected..................................................46759
104  Authority citation revised.....................................1645
104.500  (c)(3) revised; (c)(5) added...............................1645
104.540  Heading revised; (a)(3) and (b)(4) removed; (d) added......1645
    Heading corrected; (a)(1), (2), (b)(2) and (3) amended.........15112
Chapter  I subchapter A appendix IV added..........................33363
135  Revised; interim; eff. 8-1-94 through 6-30-95.................33880

                                  1995

24 CFR
                                                                   60 FR
                                                                    Page
Subtitle A
1  Appendix removed................................................47262
3  Removed.........................................................47262
8  Appendixes A and B removed......................................47262
11  Removed........................................................47262
15  Authority citation revised.....................................11903
15.1  Amended; eff. 4-3-95.........................................11903
15.13  (b) revised; eff. 4-3-95....................................11903
15.14  (a), (b), (c), (e) and (f) revised; eff. 4-3-95.............11903
15.21  (a)(7) revised; eff. 4-3-95.................................11903
15.31  (a) and (b)(1) revised; (b)(2) removed; eff. 4-3-95.........11903
15.31--15.33 (Subpart D)  Removed..................................47262
15.32  Revised; eff. 4-3-95........................................11904
15.33  (a) introductory text, (6), (b) and (c) revised; eff. 4-3-
        95.........................................................11904
15.41  (c) revised; eff. 4-3-95....................................11904
15.42  Revised; eff. 4-3-95........................................11904
15.51  Revised; eff. 4-3-95........................................11904
15.52  Revised; eff. 4-3-95........................................11904
15.54  Added; eff. 4-3-95..........................................11904
15.61  Revised; eff. 4-3-95........................................11905
15.71  Amended.....................................................58456
15.81  (b) revised.................................................58457
16  Appendix A removed.............................................47262
24  Authority citation revised.....................................33048
24.100  Revised....................................................33040
    Revised; (e) and (f) added.....................................33048
24.105  Amended.............................................33040, 33048
24.110  (c) revised................................................33041
    Amended; (a)(1)(i)(A)(3) and (3) added; (c) revised; (d) 
amended............................................................33048
24.115  (d) removed................................................33048
24.200  Revised....................................................33041
    Revised; (c)(8), (9) and (d) added.............................33048
24.215  Revised.............................................33041, 33048
24.220  Revised.............................................33041, 33048
24.225  Revised.............................................33041, 33048
24.305  (d) revised................................................33049
24.313  Revised....................................................33049

[[Page 689]]

24.314  Revised....................................................33049
24.400  (d) removed................................................33050
24.410  (c) removed................................................33050
24.411  Revised....................................................33050
24.412  Revised....................................................33050
24.413  Revised....................................................33050
24.415  (d) removed................................................33051
24.705  (c) amended................................................33051
24.710  (a)(3) amended.............................................33051
24.711  Revised....................................................33051
24.712  Revised....................................................33051
24.713  Revised....................................................33051
24.714  Added......................................................33051
24  Appendixes A and B revised..............................33042, 33048
    Appendixes A, B and C removed..................................47262
25  Authority citation revised.....................................39237
25.2  Amended; eff. 4-13-95........................................13835
    Revised........................................................39237
25.3  Amended; eff. 4-13-95........................................13835
    Amended........................................................39237
25.5  (c)(1), (2) and (d)(4)(iii) revised..........................39237
25.7  Revised......................................................39237
25.8  Revised......................................................39238
25.9  (cc) revised; eff. 4-13-95...................................13836
    (i), (w), (x) and (bb) revised; (ee) added.....................39238
25.12  (a) amended.................................................39238
25.16  Revised.....................................................39238
25.17  Removed.....................................................39238
26  Authority citation revised.....................................39238
26  Heading revised................................................50209
26.1--26.26 (Subpart A)  Heading revised...........................50209
26.1  Amended......................................................39239
26.2--26.5 (Subpart B)  Designation removed........................50209
26.6--26.8 (Subpart C)  Designation removed........................50209
26.9--26.16 (Subpart D)  Designation removed.......................50209
26.17--26.21 (Subpart E)  Designation removed......................50209
26.22--26.24 (Subpart F)  Designation removed......................50209
26.25--26.26 (Subpart G)  Designation removed......................50209
26.27--26.54 (Subpart B)  Added....................................50210
29  Added..........................................................57489
39  Removed........................................................47262
40  Appendix A removed.............................................47262
44.10  (f) revised; eff. 4-24-95...................................15482
45.4  Revised; eff. 4-24-95........................................15483
49  Removed........................................................47262
58  Authority citation revised.....................................13520
    Heading revised; interim; eff. 4-12-95.........................13520
58.1  (c)(4) and (5) amended; (c)(6), (7) and (8) added; interim; 
        eff. in part 4-12-95, in part 10-14-96 and in part 4-12-95 
        through 10-14-96...........................................13520
    (a), (b) and (c) introductory text amended; interim; eff. 4-
12-95..............................................................13522
58.2  (a)(4) revised; (a)(6) and (7) added; interim; eff. in part 
        4-12-95, in part 10-14-96 and in part 4-12-95 through 10-
        14-96......................................................13520
    (a)(3) amended; interim; eff. 4-12-95..........................13522
    (a)(7)(ii) introductory text and (D) revised; (a)(7)(ii)(E) 
added; interim.....................................................48611
58.4  (b) revised; interim; eff. 4-12-95...........................13520
    (b) amended; interim; eff. 4-12-95.............................13522
58.5  Introductory text amended; interim; eff. 4-12-95.............13522
58.6  (a)(2) revised; interim; eff. 4-12-95........................13521
    Introductory text and (c) amended; interim; eff. 4-12-95.......13522
58.7  Added; interim; eff. 4-12-95.................................13521
58.10  Revised; interim; eff. 4-12-95..............................13521
      Amended; interim.............................................48611
58.11  Revised; interim; eff. 4-12-95 through 10-14-96.............13521
58.12  Amended; interim; eff. 4-12-95..............................13522
58.13  Introductory text, (a) and (b) amended; interim; eff. 4-12-
        95.........................................................13522
58.14  Amended; interim; eff. 4-12-95..............................13522
58.15  Introductory text and concluding text amended; interim; 
        eff. 4-12-95...............................................13522
58.30  Amended; interim; eff. 4-12-95..............................13522
58.32  (a) and (b) amended; interim; eff. 4-12-95..................13522
58.34  (a) introductory text and (b) revised; interim; eff. 4-12-
        95.........................................................13521

[[Page 690]]

58.35  (b), (c) introductory text and (d) amended; interim; eff. 
        4-12-95....................................................13522
58.36  Amended; interim; eff. 4-12-95..............................13522
58.37  (a)(2), (6) and (b) amended; interim; eff. 4-12-95..........13522
58.40  Amended; interim; eff. 4-12-95..............................13522
58.41  Amended; interim; eff. 4-12-95..............................13522
58.42  Amended; interim; eff. 4-12-95..............................13522
58.43  Amended; interim; eff. 4-12-95..............................13522
58.44  Introductory text and concluding text amended; interim; 
        eff. 4-12-95...............................................13522
58.46  Revised; interim; eff. 4-12-95..............................13521
58.47  Revised; interim; eff. 4-12-95..............................13521
58.50  Amended; interim; eff. 4-12-95..............................13522
58.52  Amended; interim; eff. 4-12-95..............................13522
58.55  Amended; interim; eff. 4-12-95..............................13522
58.56  Amended; interim; eff. 4-12-95..............................13522
58.57  Amended; interim; eff. 4-12-95..............................13522
58.59  Amended; interim; eff. 4-12-95..............................13522
58.60  Amended; interim; eff. 4-12-95..............................13522
58.61  Amended; interim; eff. 4-12-95..............................13522
58.62  Amended; interim; eff. 4-12-95..............................13522
58.63  Amended; interim; eff. 4-12-95..............................13522
58.64  Revised; interim; eff. 4-12-95..............................13521
58.65  Amended; interim; eff. 4-12-95..............................13522
58.66  Amended; interim; eff. 4-12-95..............................13522
58.70  Amended; interim; eff. 4-12-95..............................13522
58.71  Revised.....................................................13523
58.73  Amended; interim; eff. 4-12-95..............................13522
58.74  Amended; interim; eff. 4-12-95..............................13522
58.75  Introductory text (a) through (d), (e)(2), (3) and (g) 
        amended; interim; eff. 4-12-95.............................13522
58.76  Introductory text and (e) amended; interim; eff. 4-12-95....13522
58.77  (b), (d)(1) introductory text, (ii), (iv) and (2) revised; 
        interim; eff. 4-12-95......................................13523
    (d) heading revised; (d)(2) amended; interim...................48611
81  Revised........................................................61888
84  Regulation at 59 FR 47011 confirmed............................32104
85.36  (d), (g), (h) and (i) revised........................19639, 19642
86  Regulation status notification.................................67325
86  Appendixes A and B removed.....................................47262
90  Removed........................................................47262
91  Revised.........................................................1896
    Technical correction............................................2813
    Waiver..........................................................6967
91.2  (b)(10) amended..............................................16379
91.5  Corrected.....................................................4861
91.15  (a)(2) revised..............................................45043
91.105  (a)(1) corrected...........................................10427
91.220  Corrected (OMB number)......................................4861
91.225  Corrected (OMB number)......................................4861
91.230  Corrected (OMB number)......................................4861
91.235  Corrected (OMB number)......................................4861
91.310  Corrected (OMB number)......................................4861
91.320  Corrected (OMB number)......................................4861
    (g)(1)(i) and (ii) designation removed.........................16379
91.330  Corrected (OMB number)......................................4861
91.402  (b)(1) corrected...........................................10427
91.430  Corrected (OMB number)......................................4861
92  Technical correction............................................2813
92.2  Amended.......................................................1914
92.52  Revised......................................................1914
92.103  (a) revised.................................................1914
92.104  Revised (OMB number)........................................1914
92.105  Revised (OMB number)........................................1914
92.150  Revised (OMB number)........................................1914
92.151  Removed.....................................................1914

[[Page 691]]

92.152  Removed.....................................................1914
92.200  Amended.....................................................1914
92.201  (a) and (b)(1) amended......................................1914
92.204  (c) amended.................................................1914
92.207  (f) amended.................................................1914
92.211  (a)(1) revised..............................................1914
92.220  (a)(6)(ii) amended..........................................1915
92.222  (a)(3) and (4) amended......................................1915
92.300  (b) amended.................................................1915
92.302  (b)(2) amended..............................................1915
92.350  (b) amended.................................................1915
92.450  (b) amended.................................................1915
92.451  (a)(1)(iii) and (2) amended.................................1915
92.453  (b)(2)(ii) amended..........................................1915
91.500  (b) introductory text revised..............................56909
91.600  Added......................................................50802
92.2  Regulations at 59 FR 18631 and 44261 eff. date extended to 
        6-30-96....................................................34136
    Amended; interim...............................................36023
92.4  Regulations at 59 FR 18631 and 44261 eff. date extended to 
        6-30-96....................................................34136
92.5  Regulation at 59 FR 44261 eff. date extended to 6-30-96......34136
    Revised; interim...............................................36024
92.50  Regulation at 59 FR 19631 eff. date extended to 6-30-96.....34136
92.61  Regulations at 59 FR 18631 and 44261 eff. date extended to 
        6-30-96....................................................34136
92.64  Regulation at 59 FR 18632 eff. date extended to 6-30-96.....34136
92.150  Regulations at 59 FR 18632 and 44261 eff. date extended to 
        6-30-96....................................................34136
92.204  Regulation at 59 FR 18632 eff. date extended to 6-30-96....34136
92.205  Regulations at 59 FR 18632 and 44261 eff. date extended to 
        6-30-96....................................................34136
    (b) revised; interim...........................................36024
92.206  Regulations at 59 FR 18632 and 44261 eff. date extended to 
        6-30-96....................................................34136
92.207  Regulation at 59 FR 18633 eff. date extended to 6-30-96....34136
92.208  Regulation at 59 FR 18633 eff. date extended to 6-30-96....34136
92.209  Regulation at 59 FR 18633 eff. date extended to 6-30-96....34136
92.210  (f) revised; interim.......................................36024
92.211  Regulations at 59 FR 18633 and 44261 eff. date extended to 
        6-30-96....................................................34136
    Revised; interim...............................................36024
92.214  Regulations at 59 FR 18634 and 44262 eff. date extended to 
        6-30-96....................................................34136
92.216  Regulation at 59 FR 44262 eff. date extended to 6-30-96....34136
92.218  Regulations at 59 FR 18634 and 44262 eff. date extended to 
        6-30-96....................................................34136
    (f) added; interim.............................................36025
92.219  Regulation at 59 FR 18634 eff. date extended to 6-30-96....34136
92.220  Regulation at 59 FR 18634 eff. date extended to 6-30-96....34136
    (a)(1)(ii)(A). (2) and (5) introductory text revised; interim 
                                                                   36025
92.221  Regulation at 59 FR 18635 eff. date extended to 6-30-96....34136
92.222  Regulation at 59 FR 18635 eff. date extended to 6-30-96....34136
92.252  Regulations at 59 FR 18635 and 44262 eff. date extended to 
        6-30-96....................................................34136
    (a)(2)(i) and (ii) revised; interim............................36025
92.254  Regulations at 59 FR 18636 and 44262 eff. date extended to 
        6-30-96....................................................34136
    (a)(4)(ii) revised; interim....................................36026
92.255  Regulation at 59 FR 18636 eff. date extended to 6-30-96....34136
92.256  Regulation at 59 FR 18636 eff. date extended to 6-30-96....34136
92.257  Regulation at 59 FR 44262 eff. date extended to 6-30-96....34136
92.259  Regulation at 59 FR 18636 eff. date extended to 6-30-96....34136
92.300  Regulation at 59 FR 18637 eff. date extended to 6-30-96....34136
92.352  Regulation at 59 FR 44262 eff. date extended to 6-30-96....34136
92.353  Regulation at 59 FR 44262 eff. date extended to 6-30-96....34136
92.354  Regulations at 59 FR 18637 and 44263 eff. date extended to 
        6-30-96....................................................34136
92.356  (a)(1) and (2) revised; interim............................36026
92.502  Regulation at 59 FR 18637 eff. date extended to 6-30-96....34136
92.504  Regulation at 59 FR 18637 eff. date extended to 6-30-96....34136
92.505  Revised; interim...........................................36026

[[Page 692]]

92.508  (c)(1) amended..............................................1915
    Regulation at 59 FR 18637 eff. date extended to 6-30-96........34136
92.509  (b) revised.................................................1915
92.602  Revised; eff. 4-10-95......................................13348
92.625  Regulation at 59 FR 18638 eff. date extended to 6-30-96....34136
92.633  Regulation at 59 FR 44263 eff. date extended to 6-30-96....34136
Subtitle  A Appendixes A and B amended.............................16378
    Appendix D removed.............................................47262
Chapter I
100  Authority citation revised....................................43327
100.304  Revised...................................................43327
100.305  Added.....................................................43327
100.306  Added.....................................................43328
100.307  Added.....................................................43329
100.310  Added.....................................................43330
100.315  Added.....................................................43330
100.316  Added.....................................................43330
103.405  (b)(3) revised............................................58452
103  Appendix removed..............................................47262
106  Removed.......................................................47262
120  Removed.......................................................47262
125  Revised.......................................................58452
130  Removed.......................................................47262
135.2  Revised.....................................................28326

                                  1996

24 CFR
                                                                   61 FR
                                                                    Page
Subtitle A
0  Authority citation revised.......................................5202
    Revised; eff. 5-6-96...........................................15350
0.1  Revised.......................................................36251
0.2  Redesignated from 0.735-203...................................19188
2  Removed.........................................................52217
0.3  Redesignated from 0.735-204...................................19188
0.735-102  Amended..................................................5202
0.735-106  Removed..................................................5202
0.735-203  Redesignated as 0.2.....................................19188
0.735-204  Redesignated as 0.3.....................................19188
1  Authority citation revised......................................52217
1.9  (b) revised; (c), (d) and (e) removed.........................52217
1.10  Removed; new 1.10 redesignated from 1.12.....................52217
1.11  Removed......................................................52217
1.12  Redesignated as 1.10.........................................52217
4  Revised.........................................................14448
4.5  Amended........................................................5202
5  Added............................................................5202
    Authority citation revised...........9041, 9537, 11113, 13616, 54498
    Technical correction...........................................64617
5.210--5.238 (Subpart B)  Added....................................11113
5.210--5.238 (Subpart B)  Authority citation added.................54498
5.300--5.363 (Subpart C)  Added.....................................9538
5.300--5.380 (Subpart C)  Authority citation added.................54498
5.400--5.405 (Subpart D)  Added.....................................5665
5.405  (c)(2) revised..............................................13616
5.410  Added (OMB number)...........................................9041
5.415  Added (OMB number)...........................................9043
5.420  Added........................................................9044
5.425  Added........................................................9045
5.430  Added........................................................9045
5.500--5.528 (Subpart E)  Added....................................13616
    Authority citation added.......................................54498
5.501  Added; interim..............................................60538
5.508  (b)(1), (2), (h)(2) and (3) introductory text revised; 
        interim....................................................60538
5.510  (b) revised; interim........................................60539
5.512  (a) revised; interim........................................60539
5.514  (b), (c)(1), (e)(1) and (f)(1) revised; (f)(2) removed; 
        (f)(3) and (4) redesignated as (f)(2) and (3); interim.....60539
5.516  (c) introductory text revised; interim......................60539
5.518  (a), (b)(3) and (5) revised; interim........................60539
5.526  Revised; interim............................................60540
5.601--5.617 (Subpart F)  Added....................................54498
7  Revised.........................................................14228
8  Authority citation revised................................5203, 52218
8.32  (a) revised...................................................5203
8.58  (b) revised; (c), (d) and (e) removed........................52218
8.59  Removed......................................................52218
8.60--8.71 (Subpart E)  Removed....................................52218
10  Authority citation revised.....................................13273
10.3  (c) added....................................................13273
12  Authority citation revised......................................5203
    Removed........................................................14453
12.3  Amended; introductory text added..............................5203
15  Authority citation revised......................................5203
15.1  Amended; introductory text added..............................5203
15.86  Removed......................................................5204
16.2  (b)(4) removed; (b)(5) through (b)(8) redesignated as (b)(4) 
        through (b)(7)..............................................5204

[[Page 693]]

17.1--17.12 (Subpart A)  Authority citation revised.................5204
17.1  (c) revised...................................................5204
20  Authority citation revised.....................................13280
20.3  (a) revised..................................................13280
20.10  Introductory text redesignated as (a); (b), (c) and (d) 
        added......................................................13280
    Amended........................................................13281
25.3  Amended........................................................685
25.5  Revised........................................................685
25.9  (l) and (p) revised............................................685
25.12  Removed; new 25.12 redesignated from 25.13....................685
25.13  Redesignated as 25.12; new 25.13 redesignated from 25.14 
        and revised (OMB numbers)....................................685
25.14  Redesignated as 25.13; new 25.14 redesignated from 25.16......685
25.15  Removed; new 25.15 redesignated from 25.18....................685
25.16  Redesignated as 25.14.........................................685
25.18  Redesignated as 25.15.........................................685
27  Authority citation revised......................................5204
      Revised......................................................48548
27.3  Amended; introductory text revised............................5204
28  Authority citation revised......................................5204
    Revised........................................................50213
28.3  Amended; introductory text added..............................5204
29  Removed........................................................48552
30  Authority citation revised......................................5204
    Revised........................................................50215
30.10  Amended; introductory text revised...........................5204
35  Authority citation revised................................5204, 9082
35.3  Amended.......................................................5204
35.70 (Subpart G)  Removed..........................................5204
35.80--35.98 (Subpart H)  Added.....................................9082
35.88  OMB number pending...........................................9083
35.90  OMB number pending...........................................9084
35.92  OMB number pending...........................................9084
35.94  OMB number pending...........................................9084
40  Authority citation revised......................................5204
40.5  Removed.......................................................5204
40.7  Added.........................................................5204
42  Revised........................................................51757
50  Revised........................................................50916
51  Authority citation revised...............................5204, 13332
51.2  Revised......................................................13333
51.3  Revised......................................................13333
51.5  Removed......................................................13333
51.100  (a) introductory text and (b) revised......................13333
51.101  (a)(1) introductory text, (ii), (2) and (3) revised; 
        (a)(1)(iii) removed........................................13333
51.102  (a) and (d) removed; (b), (c) and (e) redesignated as (a), 
        (b) and (c); new (b) introductory text and new (c) revised
                                                                   13333
51.104  (a)(1) removed; (a) introductory text redesignated as 
        (a)(1); (a)(2), (b) introductory text, (1)(ii) and (2) 
        revised....................................................13333
51.105  (a)(1) revised.............................................13334
51.106  (a)(4) introductory text revised...........................13334
51.200--51.208 (Subpart C)  Authority citation revsied..............5204
51.200  Introductory text amended..................................13334
51.201  Amended; introductory text added............................5204
    Amended........................................................13334
51.202  (a) amended................................................13334
51.203  (d) added..................................................13334
51.206  Revised....................................................13334
51.207  Revised....................................................13334
51.300  (a) and (b) designation removed............................13334
51.302  (a) amended................................................13334
51.303  (a)(3) revised.............................................13334
51.304  Revised....................................................13335
52  Authority citation revised......................................5204
52.2  Amended.......................................................5205
52.13  Removed......................................................5205
58  Revised; eff. 5-30-96..........................................19122
58.1  Eff. in part 10-14-96........................................19123
58.2  Eff. in part 10-14-96........................................19123
60  Authority citation revised.....................................36463
60.101  Revised....................................................36463
60.102  Removed....................................................36463
60.103  Removed....................................................36463
60.107  Removed....................................................36463
60.108  Removed....................................................36463
60.109  Removed....................................................36463
60.110  Removed....................................................36463
60.111  Removed....................................................36463
60.112  Removed....................................................36463
60.113  Removed....................................................36463
60.114  Removed....................................................36463
60.115  Removed....................................................36463
60.116  Removed....................................................36463
60.117  Removed....................................................36463
60.118  Removed....................................................36463
60.119  Removed....................................................36463
60.120  Removed....................................................36463

[[Page 694]]

60.122  Removed....................................................36463
60.123  Removed....................................................36463
60.124  Removed....................................................36463
81  Authority citation revised.....................................50218
81.2  (b) amended; (c) added; interim..............................63947
81.46  (e)(1) amended..............................................50218
81.82  (b)(2) amended..............................................50218
81.83  (b)(2) amended; (d)(3) revised..............................50218
81.84  (b)(2) and (d) revised; (h)(1) and (j)(2) amended...........50219
81.85  (c)(1) amended..............................................50219
81.91--81.99 (Subpart H)  Revised; interim.........................63948
86  Removed.........................................................4876
91.5  Amended; introductory text added..............................5205
91.205  (b)(1) amended.............................................51760
91.220  (g)(2)(iii) added..........................................48750
91.305  (b)(1) amended.............................................51760
91.315  (e) designated as (e)(1); new (e)(2) added; interim (OMB 
        number pending)............................................54920
91.320  (g)(2)(iii) added..........................................48750
    (g)(1) amended; interim........................................54920
91.500  (b) introductory text revised; interim.....................54920
92  Authority citation revised................................5205, 9037
92  Revised........................................................48750
92.1  Revised; interim..............................................9037
92.2  Amended; introductory text added..............................5205
    Amended; interim................................................9037
92.3  Removed.......................................................5205
92.4  Revised; interim..............................................9037
92.50  (d)(3) revised...............................................1824
92.52  Removed; interim.............................................9037
92.100  Removed; interim............................................9037
92.212  Removed; interim............................................9037
92.213  Revised; interim............................................9037
92.214  (a)(2) revised; interim.....................................9037
92.215  Revised; interim............................................9037
92.251  (a) amended; interim........................................9037
92.302  Revised; interim............................................9037
92.350  (a) revised.................................................5205
92.353  (e) revised................................................51760
92.357  Removed.....................................................5205
92.358  Removed; interim............................................9037
92.400  Revised; interim............................................9037
92.600--92.652 (Subpart M)  Removed; interim.......................32295
0--99  Appendixes A and B removed...................................7943
Chapter I
100  Authority citation revised.....................................5205
100.20  Amended.....................................................5205
100.304  Revised............................................14379, 18249
100.305  Removed...................................................14379
100.306  Removed...................................................14379
100.307  Removed...................................................14379
100.310  Removed...................................................14379
100.315  Removed...................................................14379
100.316  Removed...................................................14379
103  Authority citation revised..............................5205, 14379
103.9  Amended; introductory text revised...........................5205
103.30  (b) revised................................................14379
103.45  Amended....................................................52218
103.50  Amended....................................................52218
103.100  Amended...................................................52218
103.105  (a) and (b) designation removed...........................14379
103.110  (c) revised...............................................14379
103.115  Amended...................................................52218
103.215  (b) revised; interim......................................41482
    Amended........................................................52218
103.225  Revised...................................................14380
103.330  Amended...................................................52218
103.405  Amended...................................................52218
103.410  Amended...................................................52218
103.500  Amended...................................................52218
104  Authority citation revised.....................................5205
    Removed........................................................52218
104.20  Amended; introductory text added............................5205
107  Authority citation revised.....................................5205
107.15  (a) revised; (b) removed; (c) through (g) redesignated as 
        (b) through (f).............................................5205
109  Authority citation revised.....................................5205
    Removed........................................................14380
109.15  (b) revised.................................................5205
110  Authority citation revised.....................................5205
110.5  (a) revised; (f) removed; (g), (h) and (i) redesignated as 
        (f), (g) and (h)............................................5205
111  Authority citation revised.....................................5205
    Removed; interim................................................7675
    Regulation at 61 FR 7675 confirmed.............................41284
111.101  Amended; introductory text revised.........................5205
115  Revised; interim...............................................7675
    Regulation at 61 FR 7675 confirmed; revised....................41284
125  Authority citation revised.....................................5206
125.103  Amended....................................................5206
100--125 (Subchapter A)  Appendix I removed........................41291

[[Page 695]]

135  Authority citation revised.....................................5206
135.5  Amended; introductory text revised...........................5206
146  Authority citation revised..............................5206, 52218
146.7  Amended; introductory text revised...........................5206
146.43  Revised....................................................52218
180  Added.........................................................52218
Chapter  I Appendixes II, III and IV removed.........................794

                                  1997

24 CFR
                                                                   62 FR
                                                                    Page
Subtitle A
5.107  Added; interim..............................................61617
5.410  (d)(1)(i) amended...........................................27125
5.609  Regulation at 61 FR 54502 confirmed.........................24337
5.617  (b)(3) revised..............................................27125
18  Added...........................................................6096
24.110  (a)(3)(ii) revised.........................................20081
25.2  Amended......................................................20081
25.3  Amended......................................................20081
25.9  (x) and (cc) revised.........................................20081
44  Removed; interim...............................................61617
45  Removed; interim...............................................61617
50.19  (a), (b)(14), (17) and (c) revised; (b) heading and (24) 
        added......................................................15802
55.12  (b)(3) revised; (b)(4) added................................15802
81.2  Regulation at 62 FR 63947 confirmed; (b) amended.............28977
81.91--81.99 (Subpart H)  Regulation at 62 FR 63948 confirmed......28977
81.92  (a) revised.................................................28977
81.93  (c)(1) amended..............................................28977
81.94  (a) and (b)(2) amended......................................28977
81.96  (d) amended.................................................28977
84.26  (a), (b) and (c) revised; interim...........................61617
84.82  (e)(1), (2) and (3) revised; interim........................61617
85.26  (a), (b) introductory text and (1) revised; interim.........61617
92.50  (d)(1) revised..............................................28928
92.202  (b) revised................................................28928
92.203  (a)(1) introductory text, (b)(1) and (c) revised...........28928
92.205  (d) amended................................................28928
92.206  (a)(5) added...............................................28928
92.209  (c)(2) and (j)(5) revised..................................28928
92.214  (a)(6) revised.............................................28929
92.219  (b)(1)(i) and (2)(iv) revised..............................28929
92.220  (a)(10) amended; (b)(4) revised............................28929
    (a)(1)(iii)(B)(2) and (3) revised; (a)(1)(iii)(B)(4) added.....44840
92.250  (a) revised................................................28929
92.251  (a) revised................................................28929
92.252  (h) amended................................................28929
    (i)(2) amended.................................................44840
92.300  (a)(1) amended; (f) heading revised........................28930
92.350  Revised....................................................28930
92.353  (c)(2)(i)(C)(1)(ii) revised................................28930
92.355  Revised....................................................28930
92.356  (f)(1) revised.............................................28930
92.358  Added......................................................28930
92.453  Revised....................................................44840
92.500  (d) revised................................................28930
92.505  (c) added..................................................28930
92.507  Revised....................................................44840
92.552  (b) revised................................................44840
Chapter I
100.140  Added.....................................................66432
100.141  Added.....................................................66432
100.142  Added.....................................................66432
100.143  Added.....................................................66432
100.144  Added.....................................................66432
100.145  Added.....................................................66432
100.146  Added.....................................................66433
100.147  Added.....................................................66433
100.148  Added.....................................................66433
103.1  (c) amended......
</pre></body></html>
