<html><body><pre>
[Title 50 CFR ]
[Code of Federal Regulations (annual edition) - October 1, 2010 Edition]
[From the U.S. Government Printing Office]



[[Page 1]]

          
<R02>
          50


          Part 17 (Sec.  17.95(c) to end of Sec.  17.95)

                         Revised as of October 1, 2010


          Wildlife and Fisheries
          
<R03>


________________________

          Containing a codification of documents of general 
          applicability and future effect

          As of October 1, 2010
          With Ancillaries
                    Published by
                    Office of the Federal Register
                    National Archives and Records
                    Administration
                    A Special Edition of the Federal Register

[[Page ii]]

          U.S. GOVERNMENT OFFICIAL EDITION NOTICE

          Legal Status and Use of Seals and Logos
          <GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT>
          
          The seal of the National Archives and Records Administration 
              (NARA) authenticates the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) as 
              the official codification of Federal regulations established 
              under the Federal Register Act. Under the provisions of 44 
              U.S.C. 1507, the contents of the CFR, a special edition of the 
              Federal Register, shall be judicially noticed. The CFR is 
              prima facie evidence of the original documents published in 
              the Federal Register (44 U.S.C. 1510).

          It is prohibited to use NARA's official seal and the stylized Code 
              of Federal Regulations logo on any republication of this 
              material without the express, written permission of the 
              Archivist of the United States or the Archivist's designee. 
              Any person using NARA's official seals and logos in a manner 
              inconsistent with the provisions of 36 CFR part 1200 is 
              subject to the penalties specified in 18 U.S.C. 506, 701, and 
              1017.

          Use of ISBN Prefix

          This is the Official U.S. Government edition of this publication 
              and is herein identified to certify its authenticity. Use of 
              the 0-16 ISBN prefix is for U.S. Government Printing Office 
              Official Editions only. The Superintendent of Documents of the 
              U.S. Government Printing Office requests that any reprinted 
              edition clearly be labeled as a copy of the authentic work 
              with a new ISBN.

              <GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT>
              
          U . S . G O V E R N M E N T P R I N T I N G O F F I C E

          ------------------------------------------------------------------

          U.S. Superintendent of Documents <bullet<ls-thn-eq> Washington, DC 
              20402-0001

          http://bookstore.gpo.gov

          Phone: toll-free (866) 512-1800; DC area (202) 512-1800

[[Page iii]]



<R02>
                            Table of Contents


<R03>
                                                                    Page
  Explanation.................................................       v

  Title 50:
          Chapter I--United States Fish and Wildlife Service, 
          Department of the Interior (Continued)                     3
  Finding Aids:
      Table of CFR Titles and Chapters........................    1075
      Alphabetical List of Agencies Appearing in the CFR......    1095
      List of CFR Sections Affected...........................    1105

[[Page iv]]





                     ----------------------------

                     Cite this Code: CFR
                     To cite the regulations in 
                       this volume use title, 
                       part and section number. 
                       Thus, 50 CFR 17.95 refers 
                       to title 50, part 17, 
                       section 95.

                     ----------------------------

[[Page v]]



                               EXPLANATION

    The Code of Federal Regulations is a codification of the general and 
permanent rules published in the Federal Register by the Executive 
departments and agencies of the Federal Government. The Code is divided 
into 50 titles which represent broad areas subject to Federal 
regulation. Each title is divided into chapters which usually bear the 
name of the issuing agency. Each chapter is further subdivided into 
parts covering specific regulatory areas.
    Each volume of the Code is revised at least once each calendar year 
and issued on a quarterly basis approximately as follows:

Title 1 through Title 16.................................as of January 1
Title 17 through Title 27..................................as of April 1
Title 28 through Title 41...................................as of July 1
Title 42 through Title 50................................as of October 1

    The appropriate revision date is printed on the cover of each 
volume.

LEGAL STATUS

    The contents of the Federal Register are required to be judicially 
noticed (44 U.S.C. 1507). The Code of Federal Regulations is prima facie 
evidence of the text of the original documents (44 U.S.C. 1510).

HOW TO USE THE CODE OF FEDERAL REGULATIONS

    The Code of Federal Regulations is kept up to date by the individual 
issues of the Federal Register. These two publications must be used 
together to determine the latest version of any given rule.
    To determine whether a Code volume has been amended since its 
revision date (in this case, October 1, 2010), consult the ``List of CFR 
Sections Affected (LSA),'' which is issued monthly, and the ``Cumulative 
List of Parts Affected,'' which appears in the Reader Aids section of 
the daily Federal Register. These two lists will identify the Federal 
Register page number of the latest amendment of any given rule.

EFFECTIVE AND EXPIRATION DATES

    Each volume of the Code contains amendments published in the Federal 
Register since the last revision of that volume of the Code. Source 
citations for the regulations are referred to by volume number and page 
number of the Federal Register and date of publication. Publication 
dates and effective dates are usually not the same and care must be 
exercised by the user in determining the actual effective date. In 
instances where the effective date is beyond the cut-off date for the 
Code a note has been inserted to reflect the future effective date. In 
those instances where a regulation published in the Federal Register 
states a date certain for expiration, an appropriate note will be 
inserted following the text.

OMB CONTROL NUMBERS

    The Paperwork Reduction Act of 1980 (Pub. L. 96-511) requires 
Federal agencies to display an OMB control number with their information 
collection request.

[[Page vi]]

Many agencies have begun publishing numerous OMB control numbers as 
amendments to existing regulations in the CFR. These OMB numbers are 
placed as close as possible to the applicable recordkeeping or reporting 
requirements.

OBSOLETE PROVISIONS

    Provisions that become obsolete before the revision date stated on 
the cover of each volume are not carried. Code users may find the text 
of provisions in effect on a given date in the past by using the 
appropriate numerical list of sections affected. For the period before 
January 1, 2001, consult either the List of CFR Sections Affected, 1949-
1963, 1964-1972, 1973-1985, or 1986-2000, published in eleven separate 
volumes. For the period beginning January 1, 2001, a ``List of CFR 
Sections Affected'' is published at the end of each CFR volume.

``[RESERVED]'' TERMINOLOGY

    The term ``[Reserved]'' is used as a place holder within the Code of 
Federal Regulations. An agency may add regulatory information at a 
``[Reserved]'' location at any time. Occasionally ``[Reserved]'' is used 
editorially to indicate that a portion of the CFR was left vacant and 
not accidentally dropped due to a printing or computer error.

INCORPORATION BY REFERENCE

    What is incorporation by reference? Incorporation by reference was 
established by statute and allows Federal agencies to meet the 
requirement to publish regulations in the Federal Register by referring 
to materials already published elsewhere. For an incorporation to be 
valid, the Director of the Federal Register must approve it. The legal 
effect of incorporation by reference is that the material is treated as 
if it were published in full in the Federal Register (5 U.S.C. 552(a)). 
This material, like any other properly issued regulation, has the force 
of law.
    What is a proper incorporation by reference? The Director of the 
Federal Register will approve an incorporation by reference only when 
the requirements of 1 CFR part 51 are met. Some of the elements on which 
approval is based are:
    (a) The incorporation will substantially reduce the volume of 
material published in the Federal Register.
    (b) The matter incorporated is in fact available to the extent 
necessary to afford fairness and uniformity in the administrative 
process.
    (c) The incorporating document is drafted and submitted for 
publication in accordance with 1 CFR part 51.
    What if the material incorporated by reference cannot be found? If 
you have any problem locating or obtaining a copy of material listed as 
an approved incorporation by reference, please contact the agency that 
issued the regulation containing that incorporation. If, after 
contacting the agency, you find the material is not available, please 
notify the Director of the Federal Register, National Archives and 
Records Administration, 8601 Adelphi Road, College Park, MD 20740-6001, 
or call 202-741-6010.

CFR INDEXES AND TABULAR GUIDES

    A subject index to the Code of Federal Regulations is contained in a 
separate volume, revised annually as of January 1, entitled CFR Index 
and Finding Aids. This volume contains the Parallel Table of Authorities 
and Rules. A list of CFR titles, chapters, subchapters, and parts and an 
alphabetical list of agencies publishing in the CFR are also included in 
this volume.
    An index to the text of ``Title 3--The President'' is carried within 
that volume.

[[Page vii]]

    The Federal Register Index is issued monthly in cumulative form. 
This index is based on a consolidation of the ``Contents'' entries in 
the daily Federal Register.
    A List of CFR Sections Affected (LSA) is published monthly, keyed to 
the revision dates of the 50 CFR titles.

REPUBLICATION OF MATERIAL

    There are no restrictions on the republication of material appearing 
in the Code of Federal Regulations.

INQUIRIES

    For a legal interpretation or explanation of any regulation in this 
volume, contact the issuing agency. The issuing agency's name appears at 
the top of odd-numbered pages.
    For inquiries concerning CFR reference assistance, call 202-741-6000 
or write to the Director, Office of the Federal Register, National 
Archives and Records Administration, 8601 Adelphi Road, College Park, MD 
20740-6001 or e-mail fedreg.info@nara.gov.

SALES

    The Government Printing Office (GPO) processes all sales and 
distribution of the CFR. For payment by credit card, call toll-free, 
866-512-1800, or DC area, 202-512-1800, M-F 8 a.m. to 4 p.m. e.s.t. or 
fax your order to 202-512-2250, 24 hours a day. For payment by check, 
write to: US Government Printing Office - New Orders, P.O. Box 979050, 
St. Louis, MO 63197-9000. For GPO Customer Service call 202-512-1803.

ELECTRONIC SERVICES

    The full text of the Code of Federal Regulations, the LSA (List of 
CFR Sections Affected), The United States Government Manual, the Federal 
Register, Public Laws, Public Papers, Daily Compilation of Presidential 
Documents and the Privacy Act Compilation are available in electronic 
format via Federalregister.gov. For more information, contact Electronic 
Information Dissemination Services, U.S. Government Printing Office. 
Phone 202-512-1530, or 888-293-6498 (toll-free). E-mail, 
gpoaccess@gpo.gov.
    The Office of the Federal Register also offers a free service on the 
National Archives and Records Administration's (NARA) World Wide Web 
site for public law numbers, Federal Register finding aids, and related 
information. Connect to NARA's web site at www.archives.gov/federal-
register. The NARA site also contains links to GPO Access.

    Raymond A. Mosley,
    Director,
    Office of the Federal Register.
    October 1, 2010.







[[Page ix]]



                               THIS TITLE

    Title 50--Fish and Wildlife is composed of nine volumes. The parts 
in these volumes are arranged in the following order: Parts 1-16; part 
17 (17.1 to 17.95(b)), part 17 (17.95(c) to end of 17.95), part 17 
(17.96 to 17.99(h)), part 17 (17.99(i) to end of part 17), parts 18-199, 
parts 200-599, parts 600-659, and part 660 to end. The first six volumes 
consist of parts 1-16, part 17 (17.1 to 17.95(b)), part 17 (17.95(c) to 
end of 17.95), part 17 (17.96 to 17.99(h)), part 17 (17.99(i) to end of 
part 17), and parts 18-199 and contain the current regulations issued 
under chapter I--United States Fish and Wildlife Service, Department of 
the Interior. The seventh volume (parts 200-599) contains the current 
regulations issued under chapter II--National Marine Fisheries Service, 
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, Department of Commerce; 
chapter III--International Fishing and Related Activities, chapter IV--
Joint Regulations (United States Fish and Wildlife Service, Department 
of the Interior and National Marine Fisheries Service, National Oceanic 
and Atmospheric Administration, Department of Commerce); Endangered 
Species Committee regulations; and chapter V--Marine Mammal Commission. 
The eighth and ninth volumes (parts 600-659 and part 660 to end) contain 
the current regulations issued under chapter VI--Fishery Conservation 
and Management, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, 
Department of Commerce. The contents of these volumes represent all 
current regulations codified under this title of the CFR as of October 
1, 2010.

    Alphabetical listings of endangered and threatened wildlife and 
plants appear in Sec. Sec.  17.11 and 17.12.

    The OMB control numbers for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric 
Administration appear in 15 CFR 902.1.

    For this volume, Cheryl E. Sirofchuck was Chief Editor. The Code of 
Federal Regulations publication program is under the direction of 
Michael L. White, assisted by Ann Worley.

[[Page 1]]


<R01>
                    TITLE 50--WILDLIFE AND FISHERIES


<R02>

   (This book contains part 17, Sec.  17.95(c) to end of Sec.  17.95)

  --------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                    Part

chapter i--United States Fish and Wildlife Service, 
  Department of the Interior (Continued)....................          17

[[Page 3]]


<R02>
 CHAPTER I--UNITED STATES FISH AND WILDLIFE SERVICE, DEPARTMENT OF THE 
                          INTERIOR (CONTINUED)


<R03>

  --------------------------------------------------------------------

   SUBCHAPTER B--TAKING, POSSESSION, TRANSPORTATION, SALE, PURCHASE, 
 BARTER, EXPORTATION, AND IMPORTATION OF WILDLIFE AND PLANTS (CONTINUED)
Part                                                                Page
17              Endangered and threatened wildlife and 
                    plants (Continued)......................           5

[[Page 5]]


<R03>
SUBCHAPTER B_TAKING, POSSESSION, TRANSPORTATION, SALE, PURCHASE, BARTER, 
     EXPORTATION, AND IMPORTATION OF WILDLIFE AND PLANTS (CONTINUED)

<R03>
PART 17_ENDANGERED AND THREATENED WILDLIFE AND PLANTS (CONTINUED)--Table of Contents



              Subpart I_Interagency Cooperation (Continued)

Sec.
17.95 Critical habitat--fish and wildlife. (Continued)

    Authority: 16 U.S.C. 1361-1407; 16 U.S.C. 1531-1544; 16 U.S.C. 4201-
4245; Pub. L. 99-625, 100 Stat. 3500; unless otherwise noted.

    Source: 40 FR 44415, Sept. 26, 1975, unless otherwise noted.


<R04>
              Subpart I_Interagency Cooperation (Continued)

    Editorial Note: Paragraphs (a)-(b) of Sec.  17.95 appear in 50 Part 
17, Sec. Sec.  17.1 to 17.95(b).


<R05>
Sec. 17.95  Critical habitat--fish and wildlife. (Continued)

    (c) Reptiles.

             Culebra Island Giant Anole (Anolis roosevetti)

    Note: No text. Map follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.051
    
                 Mona Boa (Epicrates monensis monensis)

    Commonwealth of Puerto Rico. Mona Island--entire island.
    Note: Map follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.052
    
                 American Crocodile (Crocodylus acutus)

    Florida. All land and water within the following boundary: Beginning 
at the easternmost tip of Turkey Point, Dade County, on the coast of 
Biscayne Bay; thence southeastward along a straight line to Christmas 
Point at the southernmost tip of Elliott Key; thence southwestward along 
a line following the shores of the Atlantic Ocean side of Old Rhodes 
Key, Palo Alto Key, Anglefish Key, Key Largo, Plantation Key, Windley 
Key, Upper Matecumbe Key, Lower Matecumbe Key, and Long Key, to the 
westernmost tip of Long Key; thence Northwestward along a straight line 
to the westernmost tip of Middle Cape; thence northward along the shore 
of the Gulf of Mexico to the north side of the mouth of Little Sable 
Creek; thence eastward along a straight line to the northernmost point 
of Nine-Mile Pond; thence northeastward along a straight line to the 
point of beginning.
    Note: No map.

              Monito Gecko (Sphaerodactylus micropithecus)

    Puerto Rico. Isla Monito--entire island.
    Note: Map follows:

[[Page 6]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.053

                 Mona Ground Iguana (Cyclura stejnegeri)

    Commonwealth of Puerto Rico. Mona Island--entire island.
    Note: Map follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.054
    
           Coachella Valley Fringe-Toed Lizard (Uma inornata)

    California. Riverside County. S\1/2\ Section 5, SE\1/4\ Section 6, 
E\1/2\ Section 7, all of sections 8 through 11, W\1/2\ Section 12, W\1/
2\ Section 13, all of sections 14 through 16, E\1/2\ Section 17, E\1/
2\NW\1/4\ Section 17, E\1/2\SW\1/4\ Section 17, all of sections 21 
through 26, E\1/2\NW\1/4\, NW\1/4\SE\1/4\, E\1/2\SE\1/4\, NE\1/4\ 
Section 27, all of sections 35 and 36, T4S R6E.
    Note: Map follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.055
    
                 St. Croix Ground Lizard (Ameiva polops)

    U.S. Virgin Islands. Protestant Cay, roughly defined by the 
coordinates 64[deg]42[min]15[sec] N. and 17[deg]45[min]7.5[sec] W.; and 
Green Cay, roughly defined by the coordinates 67[deg]37[min]30[sec] N. 
and 17[deg]46[min][sec] W.
    Note: Map follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.056
    
    New Mexican Ridge-Nosed Rattlesnake (Crotalus willardi obscurus)

    New Mexico. Hidalgo County. Elevations between 6,200 feet and 8,532 
feet in Bear, Indian, and Spring Canyons, Animas Mountains.
    Note: Map follows:

[[Page 7]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.057

           Concho Water Snake (Nerodia harteri paucimaculata)

    Texas: Areas of land and water as follows:
    1. Tom Green and Concho Counties. Concho River: The mainstream river 
channel and river banks, up to a level on both banks that is 15 vertical 
feet above the water level at median discharge (but not extending more 
than \1/2\ mile upstream on any tributary stream); extending from 
Mullin's Crossing, northeast of the town of Veribest downstream to the 
confluence of the Concho and Colorado Rivers.
    2. Runnels, Concho, Coleman, and McCulloch Counties. Colorado River: 
The mainsteam river channel and river banks, up to a level on both banks 
that is 15 vertical feet above the water level at median discharge (but 
not extending more than \1/2\ mile upstream on any tributary steam); 
extending from the Farm to Market Road 3115 bridge near the town of 
Maverick downstream to the confluence of the Colorado River and Salt 
Creek, northeast of the town of Doole.
    3. The entire future Stacy Reservoir basin up to the conservation 
pool level of 1551.5 feet elevation, and including reservoir banks up to 
15 vertical feet above the 1551.5 feet elevation, and including 
tributary streams for not more than \1/2\ mile upstream from the 
conservation pool level.
    4. Constituent elements include shallow riffles and rapids with 
rocky cover, minimum steam flows, dirt banks, rocky shorelines, and 
woody riparian vegetation. Minimum flows include the following:
    (a) A continous, daily flow of 10.0 cubic feet/second (cfs) in the 
Colorado River from E.V. Spence Reservoir to Ballinger, Texas.
    (b) A flushing flow of 600 cfs from E.V. Spence Reservoir for a 
duration of 3 consecutive days (at any time during the months of 
November through February), at least every other year for channel 
maintenance.
    (c) A continuous, daily minimum flow of 11.0 cfs in the Colorado 
River between Stacy Dam and Pecan Bayou between April and September each 
year, and a minimum of 2.5 cfs between October and March of each year.
    (d) Flushing flows of 2500 cfs from Stacy Reservoir for 2 
consecutive days at least once every 2 years for channel maintenance.
    Note: Map follows:

[[Page 8]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.058


[[Page 9]]



         Desert Tortoise--Mojave Population (Gopherus agassizii)

    Index map of approximate locations of critical habitat units 
follows:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.059

    California. Areas of land as follows:
    1. Fremont-Kramer Unit. Kern, Los Angeles, and San Bernardino 
Counties. From BLM Maps: Victorville 1978 and Cuddeback Lake 1978. 
(Index map location A).
    Mt. Diablo Meridian: T. 29 S., R. 39 E., secs. 13, 14, 22-26, 35, 
and 36; T. 29 S., R. 40 E., secs. 12-33; T. 29 S., R. 41 E., secs. 7, 8, 
17-20, 27-30, and 32-36; T. 30 S., R. 38 E., secs. 24-26, 35, and 36; T. 
30 S., R. 39 E., secs. 1-36 except secs. 3-5; T. 30 S., R. 40 E., secs. 
4-9 and 13-36 except those portions of secs. 13, 14, and 23 lying 
northwesterly of the Randsburg-Mojave Road; T. 30 S., R. 41 E., secs. 1-
36 except secs. 5-8 and 20 and those portions of secs. 17 and 18 lying 
easterly of U.S. Hwy. 395; T. 30 S., R. 42 E., secs. 7-10, 15-22, and 
27-34; T. 31 S., R. 40 E., secs. 1 and 6 except that portion of sec. 6 
lying southeasterly of the Randsburg-Mojave Road; T. 31 S., R. 41 E., 
secs. 1-17, 20-29, and 32-36 except those portions of secs. 20, 29 and 
32 lying westerly of U.S. Hwy. 395; T. 31 S., R. 42 E., secs. 3-10, 15-
22, and 27-34; T. 32 S., R. 41 E., secs. 1-4, 9-16, 21-28, and 34-36 
except those portions of secs. 4, 9, 16, 21, 27, 28, and 34 lying 
westerly of U.S. Hwy. 395; T. 32 S., R. 42 E.; T. 32 S., R. 43 E., secs. 
4-9, 16-21, and 28-33.
    San Bernardino Meridian: T. 7 N., R. 5 W., secs. 2-11 and 14-18 
except that portion of sec. 18 lying west of U.S. Hwy. 395; T. 7 N., R. 
6 W., secs. 1-6, 12, and 13 except those portions of secs. 1, 12, and 13 
lying westerly of U.S. Hwy. 395; T. 7 N., R. 7 W., secs. 1-6; T. 7 N., 
R. 8 W., secs. 1-4; T. 8 N., R. 4 W., secs. 6, 7, and 18; T. 8 N., R. 5 
W., secs. 1-35 except secs. 24 and 25; T. 8 N., R. 6 W.; T. 8 N., R. 7 
W.; T. 8 N., R. 8 W., secs. 1-28, and 33-36; T. 8 N., R. 9 W., secs. 1 
and 7-24; T. 9 N., R. 4 W., secs. 2-11, 14-23, 30, and 31; T. 9 N., R. 5 
W.; T. 9 N., R. 6 W.; T. 9 N., R. 7 W., secs. 1-4, 9-16, and 19-36; T. 9 
N., R. 8 W., secs. 24, 25, and 31-36; T. 9 N., R. 9 W., sec. 36; T. 10 
N., R. 4 W., secs. 6, 7, 18-20, and 29-34; T. 10 N., R. 5 W.; T. 10 N., 
R. 6 W., secs. 1-36 except sec. 6; T. 10 N., R. 7 W., secs. 9-16, 21-28, 
and 33-36; T. 11 N., R. 5 W., secs. 2-11, 14-23, and 26-35; T. 11 N., R. 
6 W., secs. 1-36 except those portions of secs. 6, 7, 18, 19, 30, and 31 
lying westerly of U.S. Hwy. 395; T. 11 N., R. 7 W., that portion of sec. 
1 lying easterly U.S. Hwy. 395; T. 12 N., R. 5 W., secs. 31-35; T. 12 
N., R. 6 W., secs. 31-36; T. 12 N., R. 7 W., that portion of sec. 36 
lying easterly of U.S. Hwy. 395.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.060

    2. Superior-Cronese Unit. San Bernardino County. From BLM Maps: 
Cuddeback Lake 1978, Soda Mts. 1978, Victorville 1978, and Newberry 
Springs 1978. (Index map location B).
    Mt. Diablo Meridian: T. 29 S., R. 42 E., secs. 35 and 36; T. 29 S., 
R. 43 E., secs. 25, 26, and 31-36; T. 29 S., R. 44 E., secs. 20-36; T. 
29 S., R. 45 E., secs. 14-16, 19-23, and 25-36; T. 29 S., R. 46 E., 
secs. 30-32; T. 30 S., R. 42 E., secs. 1, 2, 11-14, 23-26, 35, and 36; 
T. 30 S., R. 43 E.; T. 30 S., R. 44 E.; T. 30 S., R. 45 E.; T. 30 S., R. 
46 E., secs. 3-36; T. 30 S., R. 47 E., secs. 7-10, 15-22, and 27-34; T. 
31 S., R. 42 E., secs. 1, 2, 11-14, 23-26, 35, and 36; T. 31 S., R. 43 
E.; T. 31 S., R. 44 E.; T. 31 S., R. 45 E.; T. 31 S., R. 46 E.; T. 31 
S., R. 47 E., secs. 3-10, 15-22, and 27-34; T. 32 S., R. 43 E., secs. 1-
3, 10-15, 22-27, and 34-36; T. 32 S., R. 44 E.; T. 32 S., R. 45 E.; T. 
32 S., R. 46 E.; T. 32 S., R. 47 E., secs. 3-10, 15-22, and 27-34.
    San Bernardino Meridian: T. 9 N., R. 1 W., those portions of secs. 1 
and 2 lying northerly of Interstate Hwy. 15; T. 9 N., R. 1 E., that 
portion of sec. 6 lying northerly of Interstate Hwy. 15; T. 10 N., R. 2 
W., secs. 1-29; T. 10 N., R. 1 W., secs. 1-28, 30, and 33-36 except 
those portions of secs. 33-35 lying southwesterly of Interstate Hwy. 15; 
T. 10 N., R. 1 E., secs. 18, 19, 30, and 31; T. 10 N., R. 2

[[Page 10]]

E., secs. 1-5, 8-17, and 22-34 except those portions of secs. 25, 26, 
and 34 lying southeasterly of Interstate Hwy. 15; T. 10 N., R. 3 E., 
secs. 1-12, 14-21, and 30 except those portions of secs. 11, 12, 14-16, 
19-21, and 30 lying southeasterly of Interstate Hwy. 15; T. 10 N., R. 4 
E., those portions of secs. 5-7 lying northwesterly of Interstate Hwy. 
15; T. 11 N., R. 5 W., secs. 1 and 12; T. 11 N., R. 4 W., secs. 1-7, 9, 
11, and 12; T. 11 N., R. 3 W., secs. 1-18; T. 11 N., R. 2 W.; T. 11 N., 
R. 1 W.; T. 11 N., R. 1 E., secs. 1-31; T. 11 N., R. 2 E., secs. 1-36 
except sec. 31; T. 11 N., R. 3 E.; T. 11 N., R. 4 E., secs. 1-34 except 
those portions of secs. 25, 26, 33, and 34 lying southeasterly of 
Interstate Hwy. 15; T. 11 N., R. 5 E., secs. 1-11 and 15-20 except those 
portions of secs. 1, 2, 10, 11, 15-17, 19, and 20 lying southeasterly of 
Interstate Hwy. 15; T. 12 N., R. 5 W., sec. 36; T. 12 N., R. 4 W., secs. 
31-36; T. 12 N., R. 3 W., secs. 31-36; T. 12 N., R. 2 W., secs. 31-36; 
T. 12 N., R. 1 W., secs. 31-36; T. 12 N., R. 1 E.; T. 12 N., R. 2 E., 
secs. 3-36; T. 12 N., R. 3 E., secs. 7-36; T. 12 N., R. 4 E., secs. 7-
36; T. 12 N., R. 5 E., secs. 1-5 and 7-36; T. 12 N., R. 6 E., secs. 5-9, 
15-22, and 27-34 except those portions of secs. 31-34 lying southerly of 
Interstate Hwy. 15; T. 13 N., R. 1 E.; T. 13 N., R. 2 E., secs. 19 and 
29-34; T. 13 N., R. 5 E., secs. 26-28 and 32-36; T. 14 N., R. 1 E., 
secs. 5-10, 15-23, and 24-36.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.061

    3. Ord-Rodman Unit. San Bernardino County. From BLM Maps: Newberry 
Springs 1978 and Victorville 1978. (Index map location C).
    San Bernardino Meridian: T. 6 N., R. 1 E., secs. 1-6, 10-15, 22-27, 
and 34-36; T. 6 N., R. 2 E., secs. 1-11, 14-22, and 28-33; T. 7 N., R. 1 
W., secs. 1-4, 9-15, 22-26, 35, and 36 except those portions of secs. 4, 
9, 10, 15, 22, 23, 26, and 35 lying southwesterly of State Hwy. 247; T. 
7 N., R. 1 E.; T. 7 N., R. 2 E.; T. 7 N., R. 3 E.; T. 7 N., R. 4 E.; T. 
7 N., R. 5 E., secs. 4-9 and 17-19 except those portions of secs. 4, 8, 
9, and 17-19 lying southerly of the northern boundary of Twentynine 
Palms Marine Corps Base; T. 8 N., R. 1 W., secs. 1-18, 20-29, and 32-36 
except those portions of secs. 6, 7, 17, 18, 20, 29, 32, and 33 lying 
southwesterly of State Hwy. 247; T. 8 N., R. 1 E.; T. 8 N., R. 2 E., 
secs. 2-36; T. 8 N., R. 3 E., secs. 7 and 18-36; T. 8 N., R. 4 E., secs. 
13-16 and 18-36; T. 8 N., R. 5 E., secs. 16-18, 19-21, 28-30, and 31-33 
except those portions of secs. 16 and 17 lying northerly of Interstate 
Hwy. 40; T. 8 N., R. 6 E., secs. 18-21 and 27-36 except those portions 
of secs. 18-21, 27, 28, 34, and 35 lying northerly of Interstate Hwy. 
40; T. 9 N., R. 1 W., secs. 19, 20, and 25-36 except those portions of 
secs. 19, 20, and 29-31 lying westerly of State Hwy. 247; T. 9 N., R. 1 
E., secs. 25-36 except those portions of secs. 25-27 lying northerly of 
Interstate Hwy. 40; T. 9 N., R. 2 E., secs. 27-35 except those portions 
of secs. 27-30 lying northerly of Interstate Hwy. 40.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.062

    4. Chuckwalla Unit. Imperial and Riverside Counties. From BLM Maps: 
Chuckwalla <greek-i>18 1978, Parker-Blythe <greek-i>16 1978, Salton Sea 
<greek-i>20 1978, and Midway Well <greek-i>21 1979. (Index map location 
D).
    San Bernardino Meridian: T. 3 S., R. 13 E., secs. 19-21 and 27-35; 
T. 4 S., R. 8 E., secs. 1-6, 8-16, 22-26, and 36; T. 4 S., R. 9 E., 
secs. 6-10, and 15-36; T. 4 S., R. 10 E., secs. 19-21, and 27-34; T. 4 
S., R. 13 E., secs. 2-36 except secs. 12 and 13; T. 4 S., R. 14 E., 
secs. 27-36; T. 4 S., R. 15 E., secs. 31 and 32; T. 5 S., R. 9 E., secs. 
1-4, 12, 13, and 24; T. 5 S., R. 10 E., secs. 2-36 except sec. 31; T. 5 
S., R. 11 E., secs. 19-21 and 28-33; T. 5 S., R. 12 E., sec. 36; T. 5 
S., R. 13 E., secs. 1-36 except secs. 6 and 7; T. 5 S., R. 14 E.; T. 5 
S., R. 15 E., secs. 4-9, 16-21, 25, S \1/2\ sec. 26, S \1/2\ sec. 27, 
and secs. 28-36; T. 5 S., R. 16 E., secs. 28-35; T. 6 S., R. 10 E., 
secs. 1-4, 9-16, 21-26, 35 and 36; T. 6 S., R. 11 E., secs. 4-36; T. 6 
S., R. 12 E.; T. 6 S., R. 13 E.; T. 6 S., R. 14 E.; T. 6 S., R. 15 E.; 
T. 6 S., R. 16 E.; T. 6 S., R. 17 E., secs. 5-9, and 14-36; T. 6 S., R. 
18 E., secs. 29-36; T. 6 S., R. 19 E., secs. 31-36; T. 6 S., R. 20 E., 
secs. 31-34; T. 7 S., R. 11 E., sec. 1; T. 7 S., R. 12 E., secs. 1-6, 9-
15, and 23-25; T. 7 S., R. 13 E., secs. 1-30 and 31-36; T. 7 S., R. 14 
E.; T. 7 S., R. 15 E.; T. 7 S., R. 16 E.; T. 7 S., R. 17 E.; T. 7 S., R. 
18 E.; T. 7 S., R. 19 E.; T. 7 S., R. 20 E., secs. 3-10, 14-23, and 26-
35; T. 8 S., R. 13 E., secs. 1, 2, and 11-14; T. 8 S., R. 14 E., secs. 
1-18, and secs. 21-26; T. 8 S., R. 15 E., secs. 1-30 and 34-36; T. 8 S., 
R. 16 E.; T. 8 S., R. 17 E.; T. 8 S., R. 18 E.; T. 8 S., R. 19 E.; T. 8 
S., R. 20 E., secs. 3-10, 15-22, and 28-33; T. 9 S., R. 15 E., sec. 1; 
T. 9 S., R. 16 E., secs. 1-17, 20-29, and 32-36; T. 9 S., R. 17 E.; T.

[[Page 11]]

9 S., R. 18 E.; T. 9 S., R. 19 E.; T. 9 S., R. 20 E., secs. 5-8, 17-20, 
and 29-33; T. 10 S., R. 16 E., secs. 1-5, 9-16, and 22-26; T. 10 S., R. 
17 E.; T. 10 S., R. 18 E.; T. 10 S., R. 19 E.; T. 10 S., R. 20 E., secs. 
3-36; T. 10 S., R. 21 E., secs. 18-21 and 28-34; T. 10 \1/2\ S., R. 21 
E., secs. 31-33; T. 11 S., R. 17 E., secs. 1-5 and 8-15; T. 11 S., R. 18 
E., secs. 1-24; T. 11 S., R. 19 E., secs. 1-26, 35, and 36; T. 11 S., R. 
20 E., secs. 1-23 and 26-34; T. 11 S., R. 21 E., secs. 4-8; T. 12 S., R. 
19 E., secs. 1, 2, 11-14, 23-26, 35, and 36; T. 12 S., R. 20 E., secs. 
3-10, 15-22, and 27-34; T. 13 S., R. 19 E., secs. 1, 2, 11, 12, 22-27, 
and 34-36; T. 13 S., R. 20 E., secs. 3-10, 14-23, and 26-34.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.063

    5. Pinto Mountain Unit. Riverside and San Bernardino Counties. From 
BLM Maps: Yucca Valley 1982, Sheep Hole Mountains 1978, Chuckwalla 1978, 
and Palm Springs <greek-i>17 1978. (Index map location E).
    San Bernardino Meridian: T. 1 S., R. 9 E., secs. 10-15, 24, 25, and 
36; T. 1 S., R. 10 E., secs. 7-36; T. 1 S., R. 11 E., secs. 7-36; T. 1 
S., R. 12 E., secs. 7-36 except sec. 12; T. 1 S., R. 13 E., secs. 13-36; 
T. 1 S., R. 14 E., secs. 13-32; T. 1 S., R. 15 E., secs. 13-30 and 36; 
T. 1 S., R. 16 E., secs. 18, 19, and 30-32; T. 2 S., R. 9 E., secs. 1, 
12, and 13; T. 2 S., R. 10 E., secs. 1-24; T. 2 S., R. 11 E., secs. 1-
24; T. 2 S., R. 12 E., secs. 1-22 except sec. 13; T. 2 S., R. 13 E., 
secs. 3-6; T. 2 S., R. 15 E., sec. 1; T. 2 S., R. 16 E., secs. 4-9, 16, 
17, 20, 21, 28, 29, 32, and 33; T. 3 S., R. 16 E., secs. 4, 5, 8, and 9.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.064

    6. Chemehuevi Unit. San Bernardino County. From BLM Maps: Sheep Hole 
Mts. 1978, Parker 1979, Needles 1978, and Amboy 1991. (Index map 
location F).
    San Bernardino Meridian: T. 1 S., R. 22 E., those portions of secs. 
3-5 lying northwesterly of the Atchison Topeka and Santa Fe Railroad; T. 
1 S., R. 23 E., those portions of secs. 1-3 lying northerly of the 
Atchison Topeka and Santa Fe Railroad except that portion of sec. 1 
lying easterly of U.S. Hwy. 95; T. 1 N., R. 22 E., secs. 1-4, 9-16, 20-
29, and 32-36 except those portions of secs. 34-36 lying southerly of 
the Atchison Topeka and Santa Fe Railroad; T. 1 N., R. 23 E., secs. 1-36 
except those portions of secs. 31-34 lying southerly of Atchison Topeka 
and Santa Fe Railroad; T. 1 N., R. 24 E., secs. 4-9, 16-21, and 29-31; 
T. 2 N., R. 18 E., secs. 1-5, and 9-14; T. 2 N., R. 19 E., secs. 2-10, 
and 16-18; T. 2 N., R. 22 E., secs. 1-5, 8-16, 21-28, and 33-36; T. 2 
N., R. 23 E., secs. 5-8, 17-21, and 26-36; T. 2 N., R. 24 E., secs. 31 
and 32; T. 3 N., R. 17 E., secs. 12, 13, 24, and 25; T. 3 N., R. 18 E.; 
T. 3 N., R. 19 E., secs. 1-35; T. 3 N., R. 20 E., secs. 5-8, 18, and 19; 
T. 3 N., R. 21 E., secs. 1-5, 9-16, 23, and 24; T. 3 N., R. 22 E., secs. 
1-36 except sec. 31; T. 3 N., R. 23 E., secs. 2-11, 14-22, and 28-32; T. 
4 N., R. 18 E., secs. 1, 2, 10-15, 21-28, and 32-36; T. 4 N., R. 19 E.; 
T. 4 N., R. 20 E., secs. 1-12, 16-20, and 29-32; T. 4 N., R. 21 E., 
secs. 1-17, 20-29, and 32-36; T. 4 N., R. 22 E.; T. 4 N., R. 23 E., 
secs. 1-35; T. 4 N., R. 24 E., Secs 6, 7, 18, and 19; T. 5 N., R. 15 E., 
secs. 1-6; T. 5 N., R. 16 E., secs. 4-6; T. 5 N., R. 18 E., secs. 1-6, 
8-17, 22-26, 35, and 36; T. 5 N., R. 19 E.; T. 5 N., R. 20 E.; T. 5 N., 
R. 21 E.; T. 5 N., R. 22 E., secs. 2-36; (Unsurveyed) T. 5 N., R. 23 E., 
protracted secs. 19, and 29-33; T. 6 N., R. 14 E., secs. 1-3, 10-15, and 
23-25; T. 6 N., R. 15 E.; T. 6 N., R. 16 E., secs. 1-23, and 27-34; T. 6 
N., R. 17 E., secs. 1-18, 22-26, and 36; T. 6 N., R. 18 E.; T. 6 N., R. 
19 E.; T. 6 N., R. 20 E.; T. 6 N., R. 21 E.; T. 6 N., R. 22 E., secs. 3-
10, 15-23, and 26-35; T. 7 N., R. 14 E., secs. 1-5, 8-17, 21-28, and 33-
36; T. 7 N., R. 15 E.; T. 7 N., R. 16 E.; T. 7 N., R. 17 E.; T. 7 N., R. 
18 E.; T. 7 N., R. 19 E.; T. 7 N., R. 20 E.; T. 7 N., R. 21 E.; T. 7 N., 
R. 22 E., secs. 18-20, and 28-34; T. 8 N., R. 14 E., secs. 13, 23-28, 
and 31-36 except those portions of secs. 13, 23, 24, 26, 27, 28, 31, 32, 
and 33 lying northwesterly of Interstate Hwy. 40; T. 8 N., R. 15 E., 
secs. 9-36 except those portions of secs. 9-12, 17, and 18 lying 
northwesterly of Interstate Hwy. 40; T. 8 N., R. 16 E., secs. 1, 2, and 
7-36 except those portions of secs. 1, 2, and 7-10 and 11 lying 
northerly of Interstate Hwy. 40; T. 8 N., R. 17 E., secs. 1-36 except 
those portions of secs. 1-6 lying northerly of Interstate Hwy. 40; T. 8 
N., R. 18 E., secs. 1-36 except that portion of sec. 6 lying northerly 
of Interstate Hwy. 40; T. 8 N., R. 19 E.; T. 8 N., R. 20 E.; T. 8 N., R. 
21 E., secs. 7, 17-21, and 27-35; T. 9 N., R. 18 E., those portions of 
secs. 31-36 lying southerly of Interstate Hwy. 40; T. 9 N., R. 19 E., 
secs. 23-29 and 31-36 except those portions of secs.

[[Page 12]]

23, 24, 26-29, 31, and 32 lying northerly of Interstate Hwy. 40; T. 9 
N., R. 20 E., secs. 19, 20, and 29-33 except those portions of secs. 19 
and 20 lying northerly of Interstate Hwy. 40 and S\1/2\ S\1/2\ sec. 27, 
SW\1/4\ SW\1/4\ sec. 26, and W\1/2\ W\1/2\ sec. 35.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.065

    7. Ivanpah Unit. San Bernardino County. From BLM Maps: Amboy 1991, 
Ivanpah 1979, and Mesquite Lake 1990. (Index map location G).
    San Bernardino Meridian: T. 9 N., R. 12 E., secs. 1, 2, 11-14, and 
24; T. 9 N., R. 13 E., secs. 4-9, 16-21, and 28-30; T. 10 N., R. 12 E., 
secs. 25, 35, and 36; T. 10 N., R. 13 E., secs. 3-10, 16-21, and 28-33; 
T. 11 N., R. 12 E., secs. 1, 12, 13, 24, 25, and 36; T. 11 N., R. 13 E., 
secs. 1-12, 15-21, and 28-33; T. 11 N., R. 14 E., sec. 6; T. 12 N., R. 
11 E., secs. 1-5 and 9-15; T. 12 N., R. 12 E., secs. 1-18, 21-27, 35, 
and 36; T. 12 N., R. 13 E.; T. 12 N., R. 14 E., secs. 4-9, 16-21, and 
29-32; T. 13 N., R. 10 E., secs. 1-5, 10-14, 24, and 25; T. 13 N., R. 11 
E.; T. 13 N., R. 12 E.; T. 13 N., R. 13 E.; T. 13 N., R. 14 E., secs. 3-
9, 16-21, and 28-33; T. 14 N., R. 9 E., secs. 1, 12, 13, and 24; T. 14 
N., R. 10 E.; (Unsurveyed) T. 14 N., R. 11 E., Protracted secs. 1-35; T. 
14 N., R. 11 E., sec. 36; T. 14 N., R. 12 E.; T. 14 N., R. 13 E.; T. 14 
N., R. 14 E., secs. 1-5, 8-17, and 19-35; T. 14 N., R. 15 E., secs. 1-
12, and 14-22; T. 14 N., R. 16 E., sec. 6; T. 15 N., R. 9 E., secs. 24, 
25, and 36; T. 15 N., R. 10 E., secs. 1-36 except sec. 6; T. 15 N., R. 
11 E.; T. 15 N., R. 12 E.; T. 15 N., R. 13 E., secs. 3-11 and 14-36; T. 
15 N., R. 14 E., secs. 12, 13, 23-28, and 33-36; T. 15 N., R. 15 E.; T. 
15 N., R. 16 E., secs. 1-11, 14-22, and 28-33; T. 15\1/2\ N., R. 14 E., 
secs. 24 and 25; T. 15\1/2\ N., R. 15 E., secs. 19-36; T. 15\1/2\ N., R. 
16 E., secs. 19-35; T. 16 N., R. 10 E., secs. 25, 35, and 36; T. 16 N., 
R. 11 E.; T. 16 N., R. 12 E.; T. 16 N., R. 12\1/2\ E., secs. 12, 13, 24, 
25, and 36; T. 16 N., R. 13 E., secs. 7, 17-20, and 29-33; T. 16 N., R. 
14 E., secs. 24, 25, 35, and 36 except those portions of secs. 24 and 35 
lying northwesterly of Interstate Hwy. 15; T. 16 N., R. 15 E., secs. 1-
3, 10-14, and 23-36; T. 16 N., R. 16 E., secs. 6-8, 16-22, and 26-36; T. 
17 N., R. 11 E., secs. 1-5, 8-17, 20-29, and 31-36; T. 17 N., R. 12 E., 
secs. 3-10, 14-23, and 26-36; T. 18 N., R. 11 E., secs. 13, 14, 22-28, 
and 33-36; T. 18 N., R. 12 E., secs. 18-20, and 28-33.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.066

    8. Piute-Eldorado Unit. San Bernardino County. From BLM Maps: Amboy 
1991, Needles 1978, and Ivanpah 1979. (Index map location H).
    San Bernardino Meridian: T. 8 N., R. 14 E., secs. 1-4, 8-17, 19-24, 
26-30, 32, and 33 except those portions of secs. 13, 23, 24, 26-28, 32, 
and 33 lying southeasterly of Interstate Hwy. 40; T. 8 N., R. 15 E., 
secs. 1-12, 17, and 18 except those portions of secs. 1, 8-12, 17, and 
18 lying southeasterly of Interstate Hwy. 40; T. 8 N., R. 16 E., secs. 
1-10 except those portions of sections 1-3 and 6-10 lying southerly of 
Interstate Hwy. 40; T. 8 N., R. 17 E., those portions of secs. 1-6 lying 
northerly of Interstate Hwy. 40; T. 9 N., R. 14 E., secs. 1-3, 10-15, 
22-28, and 33-36; T. 9 N., R. 15 E.; T. 9 N., R. 16 E.; T. 9 N., R. 17 
E., secs. 1-36 except that portion of sec. 36 lying southerly of 
Interstate Hwy. 40; T. 9 N., R. 18 E., secs. 1-36 except those portions 
of secs. 31-36 lying southerly of Interstate Hwy. 40; T. 9 N., R. 19 E., 
secs. 1-24 and 26-32 except those portions of secs. 26-29, 31, and 32 
lying southerly of Interstate Hwy. 40; T. 9 N., R. 20 E., secs. 3-8 and 
17-20 except those portions of secs. 19 and 20 lying southerly of 
Interstate Hwy. 40; T. 10 N., R. 14 E., secs. 11-14, 22-27, and 34-36; 
T. 10 N., R. 15 E., secs. 1-3, 9-16, and 18-36; T. 10 N., R. 16 E.; T. 
10 N., R. 17 E.; T. 10 N., R. 18 E.; T. 10 N., R. 19 E.; T. 10 N., R. 20 
E.; T. 10 N., R. 21 E., secs. 3-10, 15-22, and 28-31; T. 11 N., R. 15 
E., secs. 9, 15, 16, 21, 22, 25-29, and 33-36; T. 11 N., R. 16 E., secs. 
9, 15, 16, 21-23, 25-28, 31, and 33-36; T. 11 N., R. 17 E., secs. 8, 12-
17, and 19-36; T. 11 N., R. 18 E., secs. 1-4 and 7-36; T. 11 N., R. 19 
E., secs. 1-13, 18, 19, 23-27, and 29-36; T. 11 N., R. 20 E., secs. 1-
11, 14-23, and 26-35; T. 12 N., R. 19 E.; T. 12 N., R. 20 E., secs. 3-11 
and 13-36; T. 12 N., R. 21 E., secs. 19, 30, and 31; T. 13 N., R. 19 E., 
secs. 3-

[[Page 13]]

11 and 13-36; T. 13 N., R. 20 E., secs. 19 and 29-33; T. 14 N., R. 19 
E., secs. 19 and 29-33.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.067

    Nevada. Areas of land as follows:
    9. Piute-Eldorado Unit. Clark County. From BLM Maps: Mesquite Lake 
1990, Boulder City 1978, Ivanpah 1979, and Davis Dam 1979. (Index map 
location H).
    Mt. Diablo Meridian: T. 23 S., R. 64 E., secs. 31-36 except that 
portion of sec. 31 lying northwesterly of the powerline and also except 
those portions of secs. 34-36 lying northeasterly of the powerline; T. 
23 \1/2\ S., R. 64 E., secs. 31-36 except that portion of sec. 31 lying 
northwesterly of the powerline; T. 23 \1/2\ S., R. 65 E., that portion 
of sec. 31 lying southwesterly of the powerline; T. 24 S., R. 63 E., 
secs. 1, 2, 11-15, 22-28, and 33-36 except those portions of secs. 1, 2, 
11, 14, and 15 lying northwesterly of the powerline and those portions 
of secs. 22, 27, 28, and 33 lying northwesterly of U.S. Hwy. 95; T. 24 
S., R. 64 E.; T. 24 S., R. 65 E., secs. 6, 7, 18, 19, 30, and 31; T. 25 
S., R. 61 E., secs. 13-15, E \1/2\ sec. 16, E \1/2\ sec. 21, secs. 22-
27, E \1/2\ sec. 28, secs. 35 and 36; T. 25 S., R. 62 E., secs. 4-9, and 
secs. 16-36; T. 25 S., R. 63 E., secs. 1-4, 9-16, and 19-36 except those 
portions of secs. 4, 9, and 16 lying northwesterly of U.S. Hwy. 95; T. 
25 S., R. 64 E., secs. 1-35 except secs. 13, 24, and 25,; T. 25 S. R. 65 
E., sec. 6; T. 26 S., R. 61 E., secs. 1, 2, 11-14, 24, 25, and 36; T. 26 
S., R. 62 E., secs. 1-36 except secs. 28 and 33; T. 26 S., R. 63 E., 
secs. 2-36 except sec. 12; T. 26 S., R. 64 E., secs. 18-20, and 29-33; 
T. 27 S., R. 62 E., secs. 1-3, 5-8, 10-15, 22-26, 35, and 36; T. 27 S., 
R. 62 \1/2\ E., secs. 1, 12, 13, 24, 25, and 36; T. 27 S., R. 63 E.; T. 
27 S., R. 64 E., secs. 4-9, 16-21, and 26-36; T. 27 S., R. 65 E., secs. 
31-35; T. 28 S., R. 62 E., secs. 1-3, 9-16, 21-28, and 33-36; T. 28 S., 
R. 63 E., secs. 1-20, and 29-32; T. 28 S., R. 64 E., secs. 1-18, 21-26, 
35, and 36; T. 28 S., R. 65 E., secs. 2-11, 14-21, and 28-35; T. 29 S., 
R. 62 E., secs. 1-4, 9-16, 21-28, 34, 35 and 36; T. 29 S., R. 63 E., 
secs. 5-10, 15-23, and 26-36; T. 29 S., R. 64 E., secs. 1-3, 9-16, 21-
28, and 31-36; T. 29 S., R. 65 E., secs. 2-36 except secs. 12 and 13; T. 
29 S., R. 66 E., secs. 30-32; T. 30 S., R. 62 E., secs. 1, 2, and 11-14; 
T. 30 S., R. 63 E., secs. 1-36 except secs. 30 and 31; T. 30 S., R. 64 
E.; T. 30 S., R. 65 E., secs. 1-26, 30, 31, 35, and 36; T. 30 S., R. 66 
E., secs. 4-9, 16-21, and 28-33; T. 31 S., R. 63 E., secs. 1-5, 8-16, 
22-26, and 36; T. 31 S., R. 64 E.; T. 31 S., R. 65 E., secs. 1, 2, 6, 
11-14, and 23-36 except that portion of sec. 36 lying southwesterly of 
State Hwy. 163; T. 31 S., R. 66 E., secs. 3-10, 15-22, and 27-34 except 
that portion of sec. 31 lying southwesterly of State Hwy. 163; T. 32 S., 
R. 64 E., secs. 1-6, 8-16, 22-26, and 36; T. 32 S., R. 65 E., secs. 1-
12, 17-20, and 29-32 except those portions of secs. 1 and 9-12 lying 
southeasterly or easterly of State Hwy. 163; T. 32 S., R. 66 E., those 
portions of secs. 3-6 lying northerly of State Hwy. 163; T. 33 S., R. 65 
E., sec. 5.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.068

    10. Mormon Mesa Unit. Clark and Lincoln Counties. From BLM Maps: 
Pahranagat 1978, Clover Mts. 1978, Overton 1978, Indian Springs 1979, 
Lake Mead 1979, and Las Vegas 1986. (Index map location I).
    Mt. Diablo Meridian: T. 9 S., R. 62 E., secs. 13-15, 22-27, and 34-
36 except those portions of secs. 15, 22, 27, and 34 lying westerly of 
the easterly boundary line of the Desert National Wildlife Range; T. 9 
S., R. 63 E., secs. 18, 19, 30, and 31; T. 10 S., R. 62 E., secs. 1, 2, 
11-14, 23-25, and 36 except those portions of secs. 14, 23, 35, and 36 
lying westerly of the easterly boundary line of the Desert National 
Wildlife Range; T. 10 S., R. 63 E., secs. 6, 7, 13-15, 18-20, and 22-36; 
T. 10 S., R. 64 E., secs. 13-24 and 26-34; T. 10 S., R. 65 E., secs. 18, 
and 19; T. 11 S., R. 62 E., that portion of sec. 1 lying easterly of the 
easterly boundary line of the Desert National Wildlife Range; T. 11 S., 
R. 63 E.; T. 11 S., R. 64 E., secs. 4-9, 17-20, 30, and 31; T. 11 S., R. 
66 E., secs. 31-36; T. 12 S., R. 63 E.; T. 12 S., R. 64 E., secs. 6, 7, 
and 25-36; T. 12 S., R. 65 E., secs. 1, 12, 13, and 24-36 except those 
portions of secs. 1, 2, 13, and 24 lying westerly of Union Pacific 
Railroad; T. 12 S., R. 66 E.; T. 12 S., R. 67 E., secs. 6-8, 16-22, and 
27-33; T. 12 S., R. 68 E.,

[[Page 14]]

secs. 23-29 and 31-36; T. 12 S., R. 69 E., secs. 1-5, 8-17, and 19-36; 
T. 12\1/2\ S., R. 62 E., that portion of sec. 36 lying easterly of the 
easterly boundary line of the Desert National Wildlife Range; T. 13 S., 
R. 62 E., those portions of secs. 1, 12, 13, 24, and 25 lying easterly 
of the easterly line of the Desert National Wildlife Range; T. 13 S., R. 
63 E.; T. 13 S., R. 64 E.; T. 13 S., R. 65 E., secs. 1-24, N \1/2\ 26, N 
\1/2\ 27, N \1/2\ and SW \1/4\ sec. 28, 29-32, and W \1/2\ 33; T. 13 S., 
R. 66 E., secs. 1-26, W \1/2\ sec. 27, 35, and 36; T. 13 S., R. 67 E.; 
T. 13 S., R. 68 E., secs. 1-36 except those portions of secs. 25 and 33-
36 lying southeasterly of Interstate Hwy. 15; T. 13 S., R. 69 E., secs. 
1-30 except those portions of secs. 25-30 lying southerly of Interstate 
Hwy. 15; T. 13 S., R. 70 E., secs. 6, 7, 18, 19, 30, and 31 except those 
portions of secs. 30 and 31 lying southerly of Interstate Hwy. 15; T. 
13\1/2\ S., R. 63 E., secs. 31-36; T. 13\1/2\ S., R. 64 E., secs. 31-36 
except that portion of sec. 36 lying southwesterly of State Hwy. 168; T. 
14 S., R. 63 E., secs. 1-23, and 26-35; T. 14 S., R. 64 E., secs. 2-6, 
8-11, 15, and 16; T. 14 S., R. 66 E., secs. 1, E \1/2\ sec. 2, 12, E \1/
2\ sec. 13, and E \1/2\ sec. 24; T. 14 S., R. 67 E., secs. 1-12 and 14-
22 except those portions of secs. 12, 14, 15, 21, and 22 lying southerly 
of Interstate Hwy. 15; T. 14 S., R. 68 E., those portions of secs. 4-7 
lying northwesterly of Interstate Hwy. 15; T. 15 S., R. 63 E., secs. 2-
11, 14-22, and 27-34; T. 16 S., R. 63 E., secs. 3-10, 15-22, and 28-33; 
T. 17 S., R. 63 E., secs. 7-9, 16-21, and 28-32 except those portions of 
secs. 29 and 32 lying easterly of the westerly boundary line of the Apex 
Disposal Road; T. 18 S., R. 63 E., secs. 5-8, 17-19, and 29-31 except 
those portions of secs. 5, 8, 17-19, and 29-31 lying easterly of the 
westerly boundary line of the Apex Disposal Road and that portion of 
sec. 31 lying westerly of the easterly boundary line of Desert National 
Wildlife Range.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.069

    11. Gold Butte-Pakoon Unit. Clark County. From BLM Maps: Overton 
1978 and Lake Mead 1979. (Index map location J).
    Mt. Diablo Meridian: T. 13 S., R. 71 E., secs. 32-34; T. 14 S., R. 
69 E., secs. 24-26, and 34-36; T. 14 S., R. 70 E., secs. 1, and 10-36; 
T. 14 S., R. 71 E., secs. 3-10, 15-22, and 27-34; T. 15 S., R. 69 E., 
secs. 1-3, 9-16, 21-28, and 33-36; T. 15 S., R. 70 E., secs. 2-11, 15-
22, and 28-33; T. 16 S., R. 69 E., secs. 1-36 except secs. 6, 7, and 29-
32; T. 16 S., R. 70 E., secs. 4-36 except sec. 12; T. 16 S., R. 71 E., 
secs. 19, and 29-32; T. 17 S., R. 69 E., secs. 1-3, 11-14, 24, 25, and 
36; T. 17 S., R. 70 E.; T. 17 S., R. 71 E., secs. 4-10, 15-22, and 27-
34; T. 18 S., R. 69 E., sec. 1; T. 18 S., R. 70 E., secs. 1-6, 10-15, 
22-27, and 34-36; T. 18 S., R. 71 E., secs. 3-10, 15-22, and 27-34; T. 
19 S., R. 71 E., secs. 3, 4, 9, 10, 15, 16, 21, 22, 27, 28, 33 and 34; 
T. 20 S., R. 71 E., secs. 3 and 4.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.070

    12. Beaver Dam Slope Unit. Lincoln County. From BLM Maps: Clover 
Mountains 1978 and Overton 1978. (Index map location K).
    Mt. Diablo Meridian: T. 8 1/2 S., R. 71 E., that portion of sec. 34 
lying south of a westerly extension of the north line of sec. 26, T. 41 
S., R. 20 W. (Salt Lake Meridian), Washington County, Utah; T. 9 S., R. 
71 E., secs. 3, 10, 15-17, 20-22, 27-29, and 32-34; T. 10 S., R. 70 E., 
secs. 19-36; T. 10 S., R. 71 E., secs. 3-5, 7-10, 15-22, and 27-34; T. 
11 S., R. 70 E.; T. 11 S., R. 71 E., secs. 3-10, 15-22, and 27-34; T. 12 
S., R. 70 E., secs. 1-12, 14-23, and 28-33; T. 12 S., R. 71 E., secs. 3-
10.

[[Page 15]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.071

    Utah. Areas of land as follows:
    13. Beaver Dam Slope Unit. Washington County. From BLM Maps: St. 
George 1980 and Clover Mts. 1978. (Index map location K).
    Salt Lake Meridian: T. 40 S., R. 19 W., S 1/2 sec. 28, S 1/2 sec. 
29, S 1/2 sec. 31, secs. 32 and 33; T. 41 S., R. 19 W., S 1/2 sec. 2, S 
1/2 sec. 3, secs. 4, 5, 6, E 1/2 sec. 7, secs. 8-11, 15-17, E 1/2 sec. 
18, and secs. 19-22, and 28-33; T. 41 S., R. 20 W., E 1/2 sec. 1, secs. 
24-26, 35, and 36; T. 42 S., R. 19 W., secs. 4-9, 16-22, and 27-34; T. 
42 S., R. 20 W., secs. 1, 2, 11-14, 23-26, 35, and 36; T. 43 S., R. 18 
W., secs. 7, 8, S 1/2 sec. 16, secs. 17-21, and 27-34; T. 43 S., R. 19 
W., secs. 1-36 except N 1/2 sec. 1; T. 43 S., R. 20 W., secs. 1, 2, 11-
14, 23-26, 35, and 36.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.072

    14. Upper Virgin River Unit. Washington County. From BLM Map: St. 
George 1980. (Index map location L).
    Salt Lake Meridian: T. 41 S., R. 13 W., secs. 17-21 except NW 1/4 NW 
1/4 sec. 18, also W 1/2 and W 1/2 E 1/2 sec. 27, sec. 28 except that 
portion lying westerly of Gould Wash, N 1/2 sec. 29, N 1/2 sec. 30, N 1/
2 N 1/2 sec. 33 except that portion lying westerly of Gould Wash, and N 
1/2 NW 1/4 and NW 1/4 NE 1/4 sec. 34; T. 41 S., R. 14 W., S 1/2 S 1/2 
and NE 1/4 SE 1/4 and SE 1/4 NE 1/4 sec. 13, that portion of sec. 14 
lying westerly of Red Cliff Road, secs. 15-17 except N 1/2 NW 1/4 and SW 
1/4 NW 1/4 sec. 17, secs. 19-22, that portion of sec. 23 lying westerly 
of Red Cliff Road and westerly of Interstate Hwy. 15, sec. 24, E 1/2 and 
N 1/2 SE 1/4 and SW 1/4 SE 1/4 sec. 25, and those portions of secs. 26, 
27, and 32-34 lying northwesterly of Interstate Hwy. 15; T. 41 S., R. 15 
W., secs. 14, 19, 20, and 22-36; T. 41 S., R. 16 W., secs. 4, 9, 10, S 
1/2 sec. 14, 15-16, 19, 21, W 1/2 sec. 22, secs. 24-25 except W 1/2 SW 
1/4 sec. 24 and W 1/2 NW 1/4 and NW 1/4 SW 1/4 sec. 25, and W 1/2 W 1/2 
sec. 25, SW 1/4 NE 1/4 and NW 1/4 NW 1/4 and S 1/2 NW 1/4 and SW 1/4 and 
W 1/2 SE 1/4 sec. 27, E 1/2 and E 1/2 W 1/2 and NW 1/4 NW 1/4 and SW 1/4 
SW 1/4 sec. 28, N 1/2 and SE 1/4 and E 1/2 SW 1/4 sec. 30, NE 1/4 sec. 
31, N 1/2 sec. 32, N 1/2 and SE 1/4 and N 1/2 SW 1/4 sec. 33, sec. 34, 
SE 1/4 SE 1/4 and that portion of sec. 35 lying westerly of State Hwy. 
18, and sec. 36; T. 41 S., R. 17 W., secs. 9, 14-16, NE 1/4 sec. 21, N 
1/2 sec. 22, NW 1/4 and E 1/2 sec. 23, sec. 24, and NE 1/4 sec. 25; T. 
42 S., R. 14 W., those portions of secs. 5 and 6 lying northwesterly of 
Interstate Hwy. 15; T. 42 S., R. 15 W., sec. 1, N 1/2 and N 1/2 S 1/2 
sec. 2, NE 1/4 and W 1/2 sec. 3, secs. 4-9, W 1/2 W 1/2 sec. 10, N 1/2 N 
1/2 sec. 12, secs. 16-18, N 1/2 and N 1/2 SE 1/4 and NE 1/4 SW 1/4 sec. 
19, and W 1/2 NW 1/4 and NW 1/4 SW 1/4 sec. 20, except those portions of 
secs. 1 and 12 lying southeasterly of Interstate Hwy. 15; T. 42 S., R. 
16 W., secs. 1-2, NW 1/4 and E 1/2 sec. 3, NE 1/4 NE 1/4 sec. 4, NE 1/4 
sec. 10, NW 1/4 and E 1/2 sec. 11-12, E 1/2 and NW 1/4 and N 1/2 SW 1/4 
sec. 13 except that portion lying westerly of State Hwy. 18, and N 1/2 
NE 1/4 sec. 24.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.073

    Arizona. Areas of land as follows:
    15. Beaver Dam Slope Unit. Mohave County. From BLM Maps: Overton 
1978 and Littlefield 1987. (Index map location K).
    Gila and Salt River Meridian: T. 41 N., R. 14 W., secs. 6, 7, 18, 
and 19; T. 41 N., R. 15 W., secs. 1-24, 26-28, 30, and 31; T. 41 N., R. 
16 W., secs. 1-5, 8-17, 20-29, and 32-36; T. 42 N., R. 14 W., sec. 31; 
T. 42 N., R. 15 W., secs. 31-36; T. 42 N., R. 16 W., secs. 32-36.

[[Page 16]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.074

    16. Gold Butte-Pakoon Unit. Mohave County. From BLM Maps: Overton 
1978, Littlefield 1987, Mount Trumbull 1986, and Lake Mead 1979. (Index 
map location J).
    Gila and Salt River Meridian: T. 32 N., R. 15 W., secs. 1-18 except 
those portions of secs. 13-18 lying south of the Lake Mead National 
Recreation area boundary line; T. 32 N., R. 16 W., secs. 1, 2, 12, and 
13; T. 32 1/2 N., R. 15 W., secs. 31-36; T. 32 1/2 N., R. 16 W., secs. 
35 and 36; T. 33 N., R. 14 W., secs. 4-8, 18, 19, and 28-31; T. 33 N., 
R. 15 W.; T. 33 N., R. 16 W., secs. 1-14, 17-20, 23-26, 29-32, 35, and 
36; T. 34 N., R. 14 W., secs. 4-9, 17-19, 30, 31, 33, and 34; T. 34 N., 
R. 15 W.; T. 34 N., R. 16 W.; T. 35 N., R. 14 W., secs. 3-9, 16-22, and 
28-35 ; T. 35 N., R. 15 W.; T. 35 N., R. 16 W.; T. 36 N., R. 14 W., 
secs. 2-11, 14-22, and 27-34; T. 36 N., R. 15 W.; T. 36 N., R. 16 W., 
secs. 1-36 except secs. 4-9; T. 37 N., R. 14 W., secs. 15, 22, 27, 31, 
and 33-35; T. 37 N., R. 15 W., secs. 5, 8, 17-22, and 27-36; T. 37 N., 
R. 16 W., sec. 35; T. 38 N., R. 15 W., sec. 6; T. 38 N., R. 16 W., secs. 
1-12 and 14-22; T. 39 N., R. 15 W., secs. 2-10, 16-21, and 29-32; T. 39 
N., R. 16 W., secs. 1, 12, 13, 20, 23-29, and 32-36; T. 40 N., R. 14 W., 
sec. 6; T. 40 N., R. 15 W., secs. 1, 10-15, and 21-36.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.075

    Primary constituent elements: Desert lands that are used or 
potentially used by the desert tortoise for nesting, sheltering, 
foraging, dispersal, or gene flow.

              Hawksbill Sea Turtle (Eretmochelys imbricata)

    Puerto Rico: (1) Isla Mona. All areas of beachfront on the west, 
south, and east sides of the island from mean high tide inland to a 
point 150 meters from shore. This includes all 7.2 kilometers of beaches 
on Isla Mona. (2) Culebra Island. The following areas of beachfront on 
the north shore of the island from mean high tide inland to a point 150 
meters from shore: Playa Resaca, Playa Brava, and Playa Larga. (3) Cayo 
Norte. South beach, from mean high tide inland to a point 150 meters 
from shore. (4) Isla Culebrita. All beachfront areas on the southwest 
facing shore, east facing shore, and northwest facing shore of the 
island from mean high tide inland to a point 150 meters from shore.
    Note: Maps follow.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.076
    

[[Page 17]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.077

              Leatherback Sea Turtle (Dermochelys coriacea)

    U.S. Virgin Islands--A strip of land 0.2 mile wide (from mean high 
tide inland) at Sandy Point Beach on the western end of the island of 
St. Croix beginning at the southwest cape to the south and running 1.2 
miles northwest and then northeast along the western and northern 
shoreline, and from the southwest cape 0.7 mile east along the southern 
shoreline.
    Note: Map follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.078
    
       Plymouth Red-Bellied Turtle (Chrysemys rubriventris bangsi)

    Massachusetts (Plymouth County).

    An area including Briggs Reservoir, Cooks Pond, Little South Pond, 
South Triangle Pond, Great South Pond, Powderhorn Pond, Boat Pond, Hoyte 
Pond, Gunners Exchange Pond, Crooked Pond and Island Pond as follows: 
Beginning at the intersection of the centerline of the right-of-way of 
the Boston Edison and New Bedford Gas and Edison Light Company 
transmission lines and the westerly right-of-way line of Long Pond Road, 
thence southeasterly, along the westerly right-of-way line of Long Pond 
Road, 10,370 feet to the intersection of the said right-of-way line and 
the boundary line of the Myles Standish State Forest; thence southerly 
and westerly, along the boundary line of the Myles Standish State 
Forest, crossing and re-crossing Snake Hill Road, 11,200 feet, more or 
less; thence westerly, leaving the boundary line of the State Forest, 
1,550 feet, more or less, to the boundary line of the Myles Standish 
State Forest; thence westerly, along the boundary line of the Myles 
Standish State Forest, 9,180 feet, more or less, to the intersection of 
the boundary of the said State Forest and the easterly right-of-way line 
of the Algonquin Gas Transmission Company pipeline; thence northerly, 
along the easterly right-of-way line of the said pipeline, 6,223 feet, 
more or less, to the intersection of the easterly right-of-way line of 
the said pipeline and the northerly right-of-way line of Kings Pond 
Plain Road; thence northeasterly, along the northerly right-of-way line 
of said road 3,100 feet to a point; thence northerly, 800 feet, more or 
less, to the southerly right-of-way line of the Boston Edison and new 
Bedford Gas and Edison Light Company transmission lines; thence 
northwesterly, along the southerly right-of-way base of the said 
transmission lines, 4,150 feet, more or less, to the intersection of the 
southerly right-of-way line of the said transmission lines and the 
easterly right-of-way line of the Algonquin Gas Transmission Company 
pipeline; thence northerly, along the easterly right-of-way line of the 
said pipeline, 2,500 feet, more or less, to the intersection of the 
easterly right-of-way line of the said pipeline and the southerly right-
of-way line of Black Cat Road; thence southeasterly, along the southerly 
right-of-way line of said road, crossing South Pond Road and continuing 
southeasterly, along the southerly right-of-way line of an unnamed road, 
10,370 feet, more or less, to a point; thence southerly 2,300 feet, more 
or less, to the northerly right-of-way line of the Boston Edison and New 
Bedford Gas and Edison Light Company transmission lines, thence 
easterly, along the northerly right-of-way line of the said transmission 
lines, 1,300 feet, more or less, to the intersection of the northerly 
right-of-way line of the said transmission lines and the westerly right-
of-way line of Long Pond Road; thence southerly, along the westerly 
right-of-way line of said road, 100 feet, more or less, the place of 
beginning.
    Note: Map follows:

[[Page 18]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.079

          Alameda Whipsnake (Masticophis lateralis euryxanthus)

    (1) Critical habitat units are depicted for Alameda, Contra Costa, 
San Joaquin, and Santa Clara counties, California, on the maps below.
    (2) The primary constituent elements (PCEs) of critical habitat for 
the Alameda whipsnake (Masticophis lateralis euryxanthus) are the 
habitat components that provide:
    (i) Scrub/shrub communities with a mosaic of open and closed canopy: 
Scrub/shrub vegetation dominated by low- to medium-stature woody shrubs 
with a mosaic of open and closed canopy, as characterized by the 
chamise, chamise-eastwood manzanita, chaparral whitethorn, and interior 
live oak shrub vegetation series occurring at elevations from sea level 
to approximately 3,850 feet (1,170 meters). Such scrub/shrub vegetation 
within these series form a pattern of open and closed canopy used by the 
Alameda whipsnake for shelter from predators; temperature regulation, 
because it provides sunny and shady locations; prey-viewing 
opportunities; and nesting habitat and substrate. These features 
contribute to support a prey base consisting of western fence lizards 
and other prey species such as skinks, frogs, snakes, and birds.
    (ii) Woodland or annual grassland plant communities contiguous to 
lands containing PCE 1: Woodland or annual grassland vegetation series 
comprised of one or more of the following: Blue oak, coast live oak, 
California bay, California buckeye, and California annual grassland 
vegetation series. This mosaic of vegetation supports a prey base 
consisting of western fence lizards and other prey species such as 
skinks, frogs, snakes, and birds, and provides opportunities for: 
Foraging, by allowing snakes to come in contact with and visualize, 
track, and capture prey (especially western fence lizards, along with 
other prey such as skinks, frogs, birds); short and long distance 
dispersal within, between, or adjacent to areas containing essential 
features (i.e., PCE 1 or PCE 3); and contact with other Alameda 
whipsnakes for mating and reproduction.
    (iii) Lands containing rock outcrops, talus, and small mammal 
burrows. These areas are used for retreats (shelter), hibernacula, 
foraging, and dispersal, and provide additional prey population support 
functions.
    (3) Critical habitat does not include manmade structures existing on 
the effective date of this rule and not containing one or more of the 
primary constituent elements, such as buildings, aqueducts, airports, 
and roads, and the land on which such structures are located.

                       Critical Habitat Unit Maps

    (4) GIS data layers defining map units were created on a base of 
USGS 7.5[min] quadrangles, and critical habitat units were then mapped 
using Universal Transverse Mercator (UTM) coordinates.
    (5) Note: Index map (Map 1) follows:

[[Page 19]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR02OC06.000

    (6) Unit 1: Tilden-Briones Unit, Alameda and Contra Costa Counties, 
California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles Benecia, Richmond, Briones 
Valley, Walnut Creek. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 
coordinates (E, N): 559589, 4200848; 559600, 4200866; 559610, 4200873; 
559622, 4200883; 559668, 4200910; 559710, 4200940; 559715, 4200943; 
559727, 4200952; 559753, 4200969; 559781, 4200994; 559806, 4201021; 
559817, 4201037; 559840,

[[Page 20]]

4201073; 559850, 4201093; 559874, 4201113; 559878, 4201115; 559895, 
4201123; 559909, 4201130; 559929, 4201135; 559955, 4201148; 560009, 
4201170; 560047, 4201192; 560059, 4201212; 560058, 4201230; 560055, 
4201250; 560049, 4201289; 560047, 4201306; 560041, 4201332; 560035, 
4201363; 560029, 4201381; 560024, 4201403; 560018, 4201432; 560016, 
4201456; 560009, 4201486; 560008, 4201508; 560027, 4201518; 560061, 
4201509; 560277, 4201575; 560304, 4201584; 560308, 4201587; 560316, 
4201583; 560411, 4201602; 560673, 4201602; 560694, 4201602; 560784, 
4201604; 560794, 4201635; 560795, 4201674; 560794, 4201701; 560795, 
4201737; 560793, 4201770; 560784, 4201808; 560789, 4201847; 560781, 
4201888; 560778, 4201912; 560787, 4201944; 560802, 4201953; 560814, 
4201960; 560827, 4201961; 560841, 4201962; 560859, 4201967; 560885, 
4201957; 560924, 4201964; 560963, 4201972; 561010, 4201974; 561046, 
4201975; 561085, 4201974; 561112, 4201969; 561131, 4201962; 561143, 
4201941; 561158, 4201908; 561162, 4201880; 561176, 4201857; 561200, 
4201847; 561244, 4201832; 561286, 4201830; 561337, 4201830; 561384, 
4201835; 561422, 4201840; 561464, 4201835; 561497, 4201814; 561518, 
4201778; 561523, 4201757; 561522, 4201714; 561523, 4201670; 561535, 
4201628; 561567, 4201583; 561633, 4201578; 561664, 4201585; 561676, 
4201599; 561698, 4201630; 561743, 4201673; 561773, 4201694; 561793, 
4201727; 561809, 4201771; 561825, 4201815; 561840, 4201826; 561863, 
4201820; 561892, 4201798; 561922, 4201775; 561950, 4201759; 561983, 
4201753; 562031, 4201743; 562087, 4201741; 562142, 4201740; 562201, 
4201735; 562251, 4201731; 562327, 4201726; 562402, 4201715; 562451, 
4201695; 562483, 4201684; 562515, 4201676; 562520, 4201673; 562524, 
4201668; 562648, 4201533; 562609, 4201434; 562618, 4201405; 562618, 
4201401; 562629, 4201363; 562660, 4201340; 562698, 4201311; 562741, 
4201294; 562778, 4201281; 562820, 4201273; 562852, 4201262; 562877, 
4201265; 562892, 4201277; 562923, 4201298; 562949, 4201336; 562974, 
4201369; 563001, 4201384; 563007, 4201373; 563208, 4201106; 563205, 
4201067; 563205, 4201065; 563161, 4201021; 563142, 4200970; 563186, 
4200952; 563142, 4200832; 563139, 4200818; 563123, 4200790; 563125, 
4200770; 563146, 4200742; 563162, 4200718; 563186, 4200699; 563215, 
4200696; 563243, 4200706; 563272, 4200721; 563288, 4200746; 563308, 
4200752; 563332, 4200763; 563376, 4200779; 563421, 4200784; 563442, 
4200782; 563501, 4200700; 563552, 4200705; 563575, 4200685; 563598, 
4200656; 563709, 4200752; 563829, 4200743; 564014, 4200365; 564039, 
4200383; 564043, 4200372; 564054, 4200336; 564087, 4200298; 564131, 
4200262; 564176, 4200238; 564206, 4200230; 564240, 4200230; 564288, 
4200239; 564318, 4200251; 564348, 4200269; 564383, 4200299; 564422, 
4200330; 564466, 4200350; 564498, 4200363; 564540, 4200391; 564575, 
4200417; 564612, 4200445; 564623, 4200459; 564628, 4200460; 564628, 
4200465; 564626, 4200508; 564625, 4200550; 564601, 4200580; 564489, 
4200581; 564471, 4200581; 564471, 4200584; 564477, 4200616; 564487, 
4200636; 564471, 4200649; 564475, 4200653; 564528, 4200688; 564593, 
4200648; 564634, 4200740; 564648, 4200799; 564514, 4200855; 564437, 
4200917; 564365, 4200985; 564332, 4201032; 564294, 4201014; 564285, 
4201011; 564265, 4201031; 564236, 4201060; 564207, 4201086; 564224, 
4201161; 564184, 4201193; 564147, 4201209; 564148, 4201210; 564178, 
4201233; 564210, 4201259; 564246, 4201295; 564274, 4201321; 564316, 
4201359; 564319, 4201361; 564442, 4201318; 564455, 4201349; 564461, 
4201348; 564501, 4201340; 564549, 4201331; 564564, 4201357; 564567, 
4201388; 564566, 4201432; 564555, 4201478; 564531, 4201503; 564495, 
4201540; 564480, 4201553; 564654, 4201564; 564602, 4201626; 564638, 
4201649; 564692, 4201649; 564764, 4201721; 564810, 4201767; 564900, 
4201803; 564973, 4201957; 565036, 4202002; 565145, 4201993; 565263, 
4202011; 565354, 4202038; 565390, 4201984; 565444, 4201984; 565535, 
4201921; 565616, 4201757; 565689, 4201739; 565707, 4201776; 565761, 
4201748; 565807, 4201767; 565825, 4201803; 565916, 4201839; 565943, 
4201739; 565861, 4201667; 565816, 4201585; 565816, 4201522; 565897, 
4201576; 566015, 4201603; 566079, 4201522; 566197, 4201495; 566287, 
4201513; 566323, 4201540; 566396, 4201549; 566441, 4201612; 566423, 
4201694; 566378, 4201803; 566342, 4201893; 566278, 4201975; 566233, 
4202066; 566224, 4202093; 566242, 4202183; 566251, 4202256; 566414, 
4202156; 566421, 4202175; 566459, 4202274; 566532, 4202637; 566577, 
4203099; 566668, 4203507; 567592, 4204522; 568182, 4205111; 568472, 
4205447; 568476, 4205455; 568831, 4206130; 568847, 4206125; 568875, 
4206127; 568906, 4206134; 568926, 4206141; 568939, 4206151; 568947, 
4206174; 568941, 4206195; 568937, 4206225; 568932, 4206254; 568928, 
4206288; 568927, 4206308; 568925, 4206339; 568921, 4206370; 568913, 
4206408; 568910, 4206442; 568899, 4206491; 568895, 4206528; 568900, 
4206560; 568915, 4206578; 568948, 4206582; 568959, 4206575; 568975, 
4206565; 568998, 4206552; 569027, 4206533; 569052, 4206513; 569089, 
4206488; 569127, 4206468; 569163, 4206457; 569207, 4206436; 569241, 
4206414; 569271, 4206411; 569306, 4206389; 569333, 4206380; 569376, 
4206378; 569391, 4206415; 569400, 4206433; 569400, 4206513; 569403, 
4206596; 569397, 4206647; 569375, 4206689; 569320, 4206753; 569275, 
4206791; 569231, 4206839; 569195, 4206859; 569173, 4206878; 569173, 
4206904; 569224, 4206929; 569269, 4206942; 569317, 4206952; 569368, 
4206958; 569439, 4206971; 569512, 4206993; 569560, 4207000; 569653, 
4207009; 569717, 4207019; 569781, 4207019; 569826, 4207028; 569839, 
4207044; 569861, 4207055; 569880, 4207074; 569899, 4207089; 569928, 
4207115; 569965, 4207146; 570045, 4207198; 570111, 4207248; 570172, 
4207285; 570215, 4207316; 570262, 4207355; 570304, 4207381; 570355, 
4207412; 570424, 4207449; 570451, 4207464; 570507, 4207492; 570534, 
4207505; 570605, 4207531; 570687, 4207563; 570733, 4207594; 570760, 
4207613; 570788, 4207630; 570820, 4207650; 570850, 4207667; 570868, 
4207677; 570918, 4207695; 570966, 4207705; 571001, 4207706; 571057, 
4207695; 571070, 4207694; 571112, 4207711; 571145, 4207731; 571159, 
4207740; 571170, 4207748; 571214, 4207783; 571248, 4207829; 571264, 
4207848; 571286, 4207865; 571309, 4207875; 571370, 4207888; 571421, 
4207892; 571456, 4207896; 571497, 4207895; 571550, 4207894; 571617, 
4207896; 571671, 4207893; 571706, 4207895; 571744, 4207892; 571777, 
4207886; 571811, 4207880; 571860, 4207871; 571900, 4207859; 571961, 
4207836; 571997, 4207824; 572010, 4207821; 572096, 4207796; 572124, 
4207776; 572155, 4207742; 572185, 4207709; 572219, 4207674; 572245, 
4207647; 572261, 4207633; 572291, 4207609; 572309, 4207594; 572318, 
4207585; 572336, 4207561; 572350, 4207536; 572369, 4207506; 572385, 
4207476; 572402, 4207449; 572424, 4207421; 572450, 4207395; 572491, 
4207352; 572526, 4207323; 572564, 4207295; 572589, 4207272; 572622, 
4207237; 572641, 4207215; 572666,

[[Page 21]]

4207187; 572699, 4207151; 572733, 4207112; 572768, 4207070; 572791, 
4207041; 572815, 4207014; 572831, 4206995; 572845, 4206979; 572858, 
4206959; 572864, 4206944; 572878, 4206912; 572881, 4206900; 572897, 
4206859; 572909, 4206820; 572924, 4206769; 572934, 4206708; 572945, 
4206655; 572950, 4206603; 572952, 4206576; 572955, 4206545; 572957, 
4206510; 572963, 4206472; 572969, 4206440; 572976, 4206417; 572987, 
4206395; 573004, 4206355; 573022, 4206317; 573043, 4206272; 573057, 
4206243; 573073, 4206211; 573094, 4206178; 573116, 4206145; 573133, 
4206121; 573147, 4206103; 573180, 4206076; 573205, 4206061; 573239, 
4206048; 573264, 4206043; 573281, 4206042; 573300, 4206040; 573350, 
4206038; 573368, 4206037; 573405, 4206034; 573453, 4206014; 573478, 
4205993; 573511, 4205970; 573542, 4205949; 573613, 4205923; 573679, 
4205909; 573702, 4205901; 573714, 4205898; 573740, 4205895; 573800, 
4205892; 573879, 4205889; 573957, 4205890; 574007, 4205890; 574050, 
4205891; 574081, 4205892; 574182, 4205885; 574218, 4205871; 574272, 
4205858; 574344, 4205841; 574407, 4205826; 574430, 4205822; 574472, 
4205813; 574520, 4205802; 574554, 4205797; 574589, 4205795; 574638, 
4205745; 574687, 4205708; 574737, 4205663; 574789, 4205614; 574835, 
4205564; 574873, 4205508; 574890, 4205463; 574898, 4205445; 574925, 
4205416; 574947, 4205386; 574948, 4205327; 574950, 4205216; 574953, 
4205090; 574988, 4205087; 575042, 4204930; 575062, 4204924; 575111, 
4204861; 575111, 4204836; 575172, 4204793; 575241, 4204764; 575416, 
4204759; 575468, 4204711; 575555, 4204713; 575553, 4204762; 575663, 
4204768; 575768, 4204779; 575854, 4204792; 575859, 4204779; 576227, 
4204939; 576222, 4204952; 576383, 4205009; 576392, 4205002; 576402, 
4204994; 576413, 4204977; 576471, 4204831; 576517, 4204744; 576518, 
4204744; 576520, 4204737; 576537, 4204692; 576563, 4204635; 576588, 
4204586; 576613, 4204538; 576635, 4204495; 576656, 4204446; 576675, 
4204407; 576700, 4204359; 576724, 4204321; 576743, 4204271; 576754, 
4204241; 576770, 4204197; 576783, 4204152; 576795, 4204097; 576800, 
4204053; 576795, 4204005; 576791, 4203960; 576765, 4203912; 576750, 
4203894; 576765, 4203871; 576573, 4203766; 576477, 4203728; 576427, 
4203685; 576426, 4203684; 576431, 4203680; 576441, 4203672; 576448, 
4203667; 576465, 4203672; 576511, 4203685; 576513, 4203685; 576546, 
4203664; 576700, 4203708; 576700, 4203694; 576699, 4203675; 576712, 
4203673; 576729, 4203671; 576712, 4203531; 576654, 4203432; 576645, 
4203426; 576637, 4203399; 576627, 4203344; 576616, 4203317; 576612, 
4203308; 576609, 4203299; 576608, 4203299; 576585, 4203295; 576559, 
4203305; 576542, 4203296; 576528, 4203277; 576518, 4203265; 576494, 
4203262; 576457, 4203257; 576412, 4203264; 576358, 4203250; 576332, 
4203263; 576215, 4203352; 576217, 4203332; 576218, 4203332; 576218, 
4203330; 576219, 4203319; 576156, 4203317; 576140, 4203316; 576129, 
4203292; 576136, 4203265; 575971, 4203325; 575985, 4203337; 575981, 
4203430; 575812, 4203328; 575812, 4203328; 575813, 4203332; 575793, 
4203351; 575733, 4203379; 575600, 4203414; 575550, 4203365; 575550, 
4203365; 575544, 4203371; 575528, 4203379; 575484, 4203433; 575442, 
4203433; 575406, 4203351; 575400, 4203338; 575394, 4203338; 574863, 
4203334; 574863, 4203334; 574816, 4203333; 574814, 4203317; 574805, 
4203293; 574789, 4203257; 574773, 4203228; 574746, 4203193; 574722, 
4203163; 574695, 4203133; 574665, 4203106; 574677, 4203080; 574665, 
4203035; 574719, 4202955; 574744, 4202888; 574773, 4202784; 574779, 
4202765; 574777, 4202755; 574769, 4202706; 574785, 4202699; 574788, 
4202678; 574793, 4202627; 574798, 4202578; 574803, 4202544; 574446, 
4202541; 574352, 4202580; 574354, 4202445; 574446, 4202434; 574534, 
4202424; 574559, 4202422; 574596, 4202398; 574639, 4202361; 574686, 
4202347; 574749, 4202325; 574734, 4202316; 574700, 4202310; 574679, 
4202319; 574650, 4202325; 574622, 4202340; 574597, 4202348; 574566, 
4202347; 574557, 4202331; 574564, 4202309; 574574, 4202293; 574593, 
4202276; 574623, 4202258; 574654, 4202248; 574684, 4202238; 574706, 
4202226; 574737, 4202205; 574758, 4202188; 574781, 4202170; 574781, 
4202172; 574783, 4202184; 574846, 4202186; 574855, 4202199; 574862, 
4202235; 574877, 4202256; 574927, 4202280; 574933, 4202300; 574974, 
4202269; 574973, 4202239; 574964, 4201505; 575052, 4201535; 575241, 
4201597; 575195, 4201668; 575198, 4201759; 575232, 4201791; 575271, 
4201928; 575242, 4201927; 575276, 4202021; 575534, 4202030; 575603, 
4201994; 575630, 4201998; 575934, 4202051; 576037, 4201903; 575925, 
4201664; 575940, 4201645; 575959, 4201630; 575979, 4201619; 576000, 
4201612; 576024, 4201610; 576038, 4201606; 576045, 4201614; 576066, 
4201544; 576150, 4201518; 576170, 4201561; 576165, 4201595; 576222, 
4201746; 576282, 4201829; 576248, 4201881; 576272, 4201920; 576235, 
4201988; 576323, 4202106; 576390, 4202154; 576421, 4202154; 576452, 
4202128; 576506, 4202156; 576554, 4202156; 576553, 4202325; 576572, 
4202357; 576752, 4202358; 576822, 4202289; 576913, 4202375; 576922, 
4202382; 576934, 4202365; 576961, 4202338; 576988, 4202306; 577016, 
4202282; 577035, 4202279; 577057, 4202280; 577079, 4202300; 577096, 
4202321; 577104, 4202338; 577110, 4202362; 577127, 4202369; 577142, 
4202361; 577143, 4202360; 577165, 4202394; 577276, 4202319; 577286, 
4202312; 577299, 4202332; 577351, 4202409; 577375, 4202446; 577370, 
4202469; 577358, 4202508; 577328, 4202547; 577295, 4202574; 577291, 
4202575; 577261, 4202610; 577272, 4202622; 577191, 4202613; 577186, 
4202604; 577102, 4202647; 577004, 4202699; 576997, 4202698; 576967, 
4202695; 576954, 4202695; 576903, 4202757; 576898, 4202764; 576879, 
4202771; 576865, 4202787; 576861, 4202806; 576863, 4202821; 576864, 
4202822; 576857, 4202826; 576834, 4202850; 576825, 4202860; 576810, 
4202852; 576807, 4202859; 576803, 4202885; 576806, 4202886; 576806, 
4202886; 576795, 4202904; 576806, 4202918; 576804, 4202960; 576824, 
4202960; 576829, 4203023; 576828, 4203083; 576809, 4203080; 576809, 
4203083; 576811, 4203113; 576822, 4203124; 576826, 4203141; 576871, 
4203175; 576875, 4203164; 576875, 4203164; 576876, 4203165; 576897, 
4203150; 576931, 4203258; 576973, 4203390; 576955, 4203427; 576963, 
4203455; 576949, 4203459; 576995, 4203594; 577025, 4203581; 577050, 
4203637; 577032, 4203654; 577085, 4203711; 577062, 4203730; 577063, 
4203731; 577045, 4203748; 577064, 4203768; 577070, 4203780; 577090, 
4203780; 577122, 4203780; 577152, 4203809; 577123, 4203838; 577122, 
4203839; 577126, 4203855; 577126, 4203856; 577128, 4203858; 577130, 
4203871; 577129, 4203872; 577128, 4203872; 577123, 4203886; 577128, 
4203890; 577248, 4203967; 577503, 4204117; 577524, 4204130; 577581, 
4204065; 577547, 4204027; 577516, 4203997; 577478, 4203946; 577496, 
4203906; 577427, 4203867; 577404, 4203859; 577381, 4203855; 577356, 
4203855; 577348, 4203849; 577347, 4203843; 577350, 4203832; 577354, 
4203829; 577370, 4203789; 577398,

[[Page 22]]

4203786; 577468, 4203821; 577544, 4203867; 577613, 4203946; 577628, 
4203963; 577637, 4203955; 577728, 4203834; 577827, 4203697; 577839, 
4203724; 577842, 4203721; 577878, 4203682; 577922, 4203646; 577968, 
4203601; 578004, 4203568; 578032, 4203538; 578036, 4203533; 577989, 
4203469; 578035, 4203421; 578041, 4203420; 578026, 4203410; 577997, 
4203384; 577972, 4203354; 577964, 4203342; 577926, 4203313; 577834, 
4203315; 577836, 4203269; 577888, 4203272; 577940, 4203186; 577956, 
4203244; 577966, 4203246; 578004, 4203264; 578032, 4203296; 578067, 
4203326; 578090, 4203349; 578146, 4203330; 578173, 4203288; 578187, 
4203263; 578199, 4203229; 578202, 4203204; 578222, 4203168; 578242, 
4203139; 578238, 4203134; 578287, 4203060; 578331, 4202980; 578377, 
4203024; 578400, 4203000; 578413, 4203008; 578439, 4202982; 578457, 
4202958; 578472, 4202938; 578479, 4202910; 578463, 4202880; 578446, 
4202864; 578404, 4202846; 578354, 4202821; 578317, 4202804; 578296, 
4202788; 578283, 4202763; 578294, 4202728; 578311, 4202694; 578326, 
4202674; 578342, 4202655; 578380, 4202644; 578420, 4202642; 578455, 
4202648; 578497, 4202651; 578536, 4202658; 578585, 4202686; 578609, 
4202712; 578640, 4202741; 578659, 4202763; 578673, 4202772; 578690, 
4202774; 578708, 4202769; 578735, 4202752; 578755, 4202730; 578782, 
4202696; 578808, 4202675; 578840, 4202679; 578866, 4202692; 578904, 
4202707; 578945, 4202699; 578955, 4202695; 578979, 4202684; 579013, 
4202665; 579036, 4202647; 579053, 4202628; 579077, 4202605; 579074, 
4202582; 579068, 4202577; 579053, 4202561; 579022, 4202548; 578985, 
4202534; 578959, 4202523; 578952, 4202505; 578944, 4202480; 578933, 
4202447; 578907, 4202425; 578880, 4202417; 578843, 4202414; 578797, 
4202416; 578774, 4202415; 578748, 4202413; 578745, 4202394; 578760, 
4202376; 578802, 4202363; 578839, 4202358; 578866, 4202350; 578689, 
4202259; 578647, 4202240; 578514, 4202180; 578556, 4202165; 578418, 
4202044; 578395, 4202016; 578347, 4201956; 578167, 4202075; 578180, 
4202322; 578129, 4202378; 578067, 4202323; 578065, 4202314; 578053, 
4202305; 578040, 4202279; 578030, 4202240; 578016, 4202196; 578006, 
4202168; 577990, 4202146; 577967, 4202130; 577933, 4202116; 577896, 
4202112; 577877, 4202109; 577851, 4202131; 577816, 4202100; 577782, 
4202069; 577749, 4202101; 577564, 4202280; 577529, 4202245; 577485, 
4202199; 577485, 4202199; 577485, 4202198; 577460, 4202173; 577370, 
4202080; 577376, 4202072; 577433, 4202019; 577363, 4201778; 577331, 
4201778; 577332, 4201711; 577396, 4201713; 577394, 4201779; 577428, 
4201779; 577430, 4201779; 577512, 4201779; 577530, 4201779; 577537, 
4201779; 577537, 4201770; 577538, 4201706; 577545, 4201705; 577544, 
4201700; 577540, 4201671; 577542, 4201638; 577541, 4201632; 577538, 
4201611; 577536, 4201564; 577534, 4201530; 577538, 4201529; 577538, 
4201402; 577538, 4201293; 577537, 4201253; 577536, 4201192; 577535, 
4201120; 577534, 4201081; 577536, 4201079; 577534, 4201077; 577533, 
4201030; 577538, 4200585; 577552, 4200594; 577608, 4200632; 577613, 
4200617; 577621, 4200607; 577640, 4200605; 577659, 4200614; 577681, 
4200630; 577705, 4200650; 577728, 4200669; 577767, 4200692; 577786, 
4200702; 577810, 4200710; 577827, 4200701; 577834, 4200697; 577849, 
4200689; 578289, 4200465; 578511, 4200312; 578408, 4200202; 578408, 
4200201; 578384, 4200180; 578284, 4200090; 578248, 4200058; 578332, 
4199980; 578336, 4199979; 578335, 4199978; 578400, 4199934; 578410, 
4199922; 578467, 4199857; 578476, 4199822; 578457, 4199735; 578361, 
4199646; 578289, 4199669; 578237, 4199677; 578204, 4199683; 578151, 
4199678; 578145, 4199661; 578199, 4199638; 578317, 4199588; 578296, 
4199524; 578257, 4199464; 578209, 4199408; 578213, 4199362; 578134, 
4199277; 578107, 4199251; 578080, 4199250; 578043, 4199213; 577984, 
4199186; 578027, 4199158; 578065, 4199194; 578090, 4199182; 578063, 
4199113; 578034, 4199097; 577976, 4199082; 577965, 4199072; 577947, 
4199026; 577934, 4198990; 577989, 4199022; 578085, 4199082; 578120, 
4199131; 578127, 4199141; 578202, 4199253; 578307, 4199384; 578293, 
4199408; 578332, 4199460; 578353, 4199450; 578376, 4199468; 578490, 
4199606; 578558, 4199671; 578548, 4199703; 578627, 4199727; 578664, 
4199697; 578679, 4199663; 578696, 4199653; 578746, 4199655; 578798, 
4199609; 578909, 4199444; 578515, 4199325; 578494, 4199343; 578464, 
4199342; 578443, 4199319; 578444, 4199289; 578465, 4199270; 578318, 
4199132; 578347, 4199129; 578393, 4199102; 578412, 4199086; 578431, 
4199059; 578437, 4199032; 578442, 4199010; 578428, 4198978; 578417, 
4198958; 578414, 4198942; 578402, 4198941; 578203, 4199021; 578194, 
4199011; 578213, 4198971; 578220, 4198933; 578265, 4198888; 578279, 
4198865; 578289, 4198800; 578291, 4198793; 578298, 4198747; 578130, 
4198670; 578107, 4198717; 578107, 4198717; 578063, 4198646; 577915, 
4198592; 577914, 4198585; 577904, 4198580; 577903, 4198581; 577892, 
4198559; 577878, 4198531; 577861, 4198504; 577848, 4198471; 577827, 
4198453; 577815, 4198437; 577799, 4198413; 577796, 4198408; 577864, 
4198261; 577830, 4198271; 577780, 4198264; 577731, 4198288; 577714, 
4198260; 577674, 4198299; 577671, 4198289; 577672, 4198262; 577673, 
4198232; 577679, 4198218; 577680, 4198196; 577686, 4198176; 577686, 
4198160; 577688, 4198146; 577688, 4198118; 577689, 4198097; 577690, 
4198088; 577690, 4198078; 577682, 4198058; 577672, 4198043; 577649, 
4198017; 577622, 4197994; 577589, 4197982; 577556, 4197977; 577556, 
4197951; 577562, 4197928; 577572, 4197905; 577584, 4197874; 577593, 
4197853; 577591, 4197828; 577567, 4197811; 577536, 4197821; 577516, 
4197831; 577515, 4197831; 577516, 4197830; 577508, 4197762; 577429, 
4197762; 577430, 4197756; 577441, 4197730; 577451, 4197711; 577474, 
4197673; 577482, 4197666; 577488, 4197672; 577535, 4197621; 577555, 
4197599; 577613, 4197520; 577653, 4197458; 577684, 4197403; 577722, 
4197348; 577734, 4197239; 577737, 4197211; 577741, 4197160; 577742, 
4197127; 577730, 4197021; 577724, 4196998; 577737, 4196969; 577766, 
4196954; 577768, 4196921; 577735, 4196882; 577708, 4196898; 577708, 
4196898; 577688, 4196910; 577627, 4196905; 577596, 4196918; 577546, 
4196938; 577521, 4196951; 577509, 4196935; 577483, 4196947; 577435, 
4196939; 577460, 4196893; 577412, 4196906; 577402, 4196908; 577399, 
4196911; 577333, 4196950; 577294, 4196957; 577242, 4196987; 577243, 
4196904; 577245, 4196840; 577377, 4196780; 577413, 4196717; 577438, 
4196720; 577539, 4196735; 577571, 4196739; 577621, 4196706; 577720, 
4196591; 577741, 4196567; 577710, 4196462; 577815, 4196397; 577817, 
4196396; 577881, 4196284; 577926, 4196101; 577928, 4196094; 577946, 
4196033; 577878, 4195883; 577945, 4195861; 578135, 4195648; 578135, 
4195648; 578137, 4195644; 578141, 4195630; 578143, 4195624; 578143, 
4195624; 578090, 4195543; 578080, 4195527; 578055, 4195549; 577980, 
4195616; 577981, 4195723; 577981, 4195727; 577961, 4195734; 577958, 
4195735; 577905, 4195718; 577877,

[[Page 23]]

4195669; 577822, 4195567; 577760, 4195614; 577761, 4195616; 577772, 
4195630; 577777, 4195636; 577691, 4195699; 577663, 4195678; 577612, 
4195640; 577578, 4195615; 577329, 4195684; 577312, 4195688; 577246, 
4195707; 577160, 4195731; 577157, 4195732; 577125, 4195731; 577072, 
4195730; 577077, 4195742; 577099, 4195794; 577015, 4195791; 577022, 
4195747; 577019, 4195743; 577017, 4195742; 577026, 4195729; 577008, 
4195728; 576942, 4195727; 576926, 4195727; 576931, 4195700; 576950, 
4195592; 576895, 4195531; 576936, 4195472; 576945, 4195478; 576952, 
4195482; 576961, 4195457; 576950, 4195432; 576946, 4195423; 576949, 
4195401; 576946, 4195383; 576932, 4195362; 576929, 4195344; 576935, 
4195311; 576935, 4195310; 576940, 4195281; 576920, 4195284; 576914, 
4195285; 576861, 4195294; 576813, 4195302; 576803, 4195304; 576757, 
4195323; 576670, 4195356; 576668, 4195357; 576669, 4195358; 576705, 
4195420; 576704, 4195475; 576626, 4195509; 576615, 4195496; 576613, 
4195494; 576580, 4195522; 576594, 4195548; 576538, 4195578; 576499, 
4195511; 576477, 4195438; 576469, 4195413; 576454, 4195412; 576389, 
4195415; 576358, 4195435; 576296, 4195474; 576238, 4195511; 576169, 
4195539; 576170, 4195542; 576170, 4195542; 576090, 4195574; 576020, 
4195551; 575992, 4195558; 575787, 4195668; 575829, 4195785; 575829, 
4195785; 575837, 4195804; 575844, 4195867; 575776, 4195887; 575766, 
4195866; 575745, 4195856; 575707, 4195858; 575653, 4195884; 575639, 
4195878; 575622, 4195870; 575591, 4195870; 575590, 4196115; 575260, 
4196113; 575179, 4196112; 575019, 4196111; 574968, 4196111; 574917, 
4196111; 574872, 4196072; 574860, 4196005; 574704, 4196004; 574702, 
4196110; 574633, 4196109; 574290, 4196108; 574366, 4196205; 574365, 
4196436; 574365, 4196444; 574326, 4196475; 574294, 4196481; 574227, 
4196520; 574173, 4196532; 574112, 4196537; 574000, 4196554; 573946, 
4196599; 573918, 4196596; 573891, 4196576; 573830, 4196635; 573840, 
4196652; 573757, 4196656; 573758, 4196566; 573750, 4196552; 573588, 
4196643; 573365, 4196769; 573237, 4196937; 572967, 4196827; 572909, 
4196822; 572715, 4196763; 572675, 4196764; 572599, 4196749; 572520, 
4196762; 572458, 4196795; 572422, 4196970; 572342, 4197052; 572025, 
4197097; 571893, 4197104; 571721, 4197127; 571489, 4197179; 571327, 
4197231; 571031, 4197288; 571036, 4197334; 570991, 4197340; 570955, 
4197362; 570939, 4197372; 570919, 4197410; 570873, 4197450; 570800, 
4197494; 570797, 4197491; 570794, 4197497; 570737, 4197520; 570687, 
4197495; 570620, 4197478; 570582, 4197421; 570564, 4197372; 570546, 
4197296; 570513, 4197291; 570439, 4197280; 570481, 4197264; 570505, 
4197245; 570540, 4197220; 570529, 4197198; 570492, 4197209; 570433, 
4197226; 570473, 4197138; 570360, 4197057; 570301, 4197053; 570303, 
4197014; 570266, 4196934; 570274, 4196922; 570249, 4196902; 570265, 
4196829; 570235, 4196805; 570245, 4196764; 570265, 4196669; 570265, 
4196627; 570265, 4196568; 570293, 4196500; 570298, 4196498; 570294, 
4196490; 570343, 4196413; 570371, 4196368; 570323, 4196259; 570185, 
4196258; 570186, 4196221; 570182, 4196076; 570191, 4196075; 570447, 
4196078; 570428, 4195831; 570413, 4195618; 570626, 4195533; 570848, 
4195445; 570778, 4195390; 570184, 4194917; 570160, 4194904; 570115, 
4194878; 570071, 4194857; 570058, 4194848; 570056, 4194834; 569756, 
4194603; 569733, 4194586; 569640, 4194514; 569633, 4194514; 569631, 
4194510; 569554, 4194466; 569507, 4194430; 569495, 4194402; 569413, 
4194308; 569257, 4194294; 569224, 4194317; 568839, 4194095; 568798, 
4193986; 568832, 4193941; 568867, 4193955; 568902, 4193912; 568958, 
4193839; 568372, 4193367; 568401, 4193278; 568467, 4193201; 568479, 
4193179; 568497, 4193087; 568500, 4193074; 568535, 4192993; 568652, 
4192885; 568829, 4192725; 568816, 4192719; 568794, 4192710; 568668, 
4192690; 568516, 4192684; 568350, 4192684; 568198, 4192684; 568154, 
4192688; 568059, 4192697; 567874, 4192737; 567735, 4192796; 567596, 
4192862; 567470, 4192915; 567365, 4192955; 567193, 4193015; 567014, 
4193041; 566895, 4193034; 566776, 4192988; 566650, 4192915; 566650, 
4192915; 566627, 4192907; 566624, 4192906; 566624, 4192905; 566624, 
4192905; 566597, 4192895; 566552, 4192888; 566521, 4192917; 566488, 
4192936; 566462, 4192947; 566440, 4192960; 566427, 4192961; 566400, 
4192966; 566374, 4192986; 566356, 4193003; 566343, 4193028; 566329, 
4193054; 566313, 4193082; 566303, 4193114; 566300, 4193137; 566308, 
4193173; 566304, 4193194; 566299, 4193206; 566295, 4193224; 566289, 
4193242; 566272, 4193263; 566264, 4193283; 566257, 4193304; 566244, 
4193328; 566218, 4193353; 566191, 4193372; 566172, 4193392; 566153, 
4193417; 566142, 4193427; 566130, 4193452; 566116, 4193473; 566110, 
4193492; 566107, 4193514; 566107, 4193528; 566135, 4193541; 566161, 
4193552; 566206, 4193554; 566224, 4193561; 566242, 4193562; 566256, 
4193561; 566279, 4193564; 566318, 4193554; 566350, 4193555; 566369, 
4193539; 566383, 4193537; 566412, 4193510; 566443, 4193494; 566492, 
4193479; 566516, 4193476; 566576, 4193472; 566614, 4193469; 566635, 
4193452; 566659, 4193446; 566685, 4193446; 566726, 4193452; 566775, 
4193453; 566815, 4193462; 566865, 4193470; 566882, 4193472; 566928, 
4193481; 566957, 4193473; 566973, 4193477; 566999, 4193498; 567067, 
4193498; 567140, 4193530; 567231, 4193610; 567262, 4193679; 567196, 
4193738; 567112, 4193745; 567064, 4193797; 566998, 4193888; 566914, 
4193947; 566907, 4193947; 566744, 4194028; 566704, 4194054; 566645, 
4194123; 566629, 4194171; 566590, 4194250; 566542, 4194313; 566475, 
4194340; 566430, 4194341; 566357, 4194341; 566306, 4194332; 566236, 
4194326; 566187, 4194311; 566166, 4194288; 566181, 4194263; 566226, 
4194236; 566297, 4194219; 566346, 4194200; 566359, 4194141; 566321, 
4194109; 566219, 4194071; 566123, 4194045; 566121, 4194043; 566085, 
4194028; 566045, 4194009; 566000, 4193982; 565973, 4193974; 565949, 
4193974; 565929, 4193985; 565924, 4194001; 565935, 4194013; 565972, 
4194030; 565986, 4194039; 565987, 4194043; 565994, 4194065; 565999, 
4194093; 565974, 4194197; 565965, 4194189; 565956, 4194186; 565953, 
4194186; 565949, 4194187; 565945, 4194192; 565943, 4194195; 565945, 
4194202; 565948, 4194209; 565948, 4194210; 565950, 4194215; 565949, 
4194231; 565939, 4194249; 565923, 4194263; 565904, 4194273; 565885, 
4194283; 565866, 4194296; 565852, 4194308; 565845, 4194312; 565841, 
4194314; 565831, 4194315; 565821, 4194311; 565811, 4194302; 565798, 
4194289; 565779, 4194291; 565761, 4194300; 565755, 4194322; 565755, 
4194340; 565752, 4194362; 565770, 4194383; 565785, 4194398; 565819, 
4194420; 565866, 4194442; 565891, 4194460; 565919, 4194465; 565958, 
4194462; 565969, 4194455; 565986, 4194446; 566001, 4194440; 566020, 
4194434; 566040, 4194431; 566058, 4194437; 566074, 4194447; 566088, 
4194458; 566099, 4194472; 566109, 4194480; 566121, 4194495; 566126, 
4194508; 566112, 4194521; 566103, 4194532; 566069, 4194560; 566057, 
4194586; 566045, 4194618; 566026,

[[Page 24]]

4194655; 566019, 4194681; 566006, 4194705; 565985, 4194738; 565976, 
4194749; 565920, 4194749; 565872, 4194728; 565854, 4194719; 565832, 
4194719; 565820, 4194726; 565795, 4194734; 565773, 4194719; 565761, 
4194712; 565747, 4194694; 565734, 4194685; 565721, 4194674; 565702, 
4194663; 565686, 4194654; 565668, 4194651; 565650, 4194655; 565637, 
4194648; 565622, 4194645; 565601, 4194642; 565588, 4194640; 565575, 
4194637; 565559, 4194637; 565538, 4194643; 565522, 4194648; 565509, 
4194650; 565472, 4194660; 565458, 4194661; 565442, 4194671; 565435, 
4194687; 565439, 4194719; 565454, 4194754; 565456, 4194779; 565460, 
4194815; 565455, 4194847; 565447, 4194877; 565445, 4194905; 565447, 
4194921; 565447, 4194956; 565448, 4194986; 565456, 4195011; 565466, 
4195024; 565463, 4195042; 565454, 4195052; 565441, 4195063; 565419, 
4195084; 565408, 4195090; 565396, 4195102; 565382, 4195127; 565370, 
4195137; 565359, 4195146; 565343, 4195143; 565325, 4195121; 565306, 
4195101; 565295, 4195090; 565281, 4195074; 565258, 4195057; 565219, 
4195034; 565190, 4195018; 565160, 4195014; 565127, 4195009; 565113, 
4195012; 565081, 4195008; 565051, 4194998; 565029, 4194989; 565013, 
4194970; 564996, 4194953; 564979, 4194948; 564964, 4194951; 564949, 
4194967; 564948, 4194986; 564949, 4195005; 564953, 4195018; 564955, 
4195044; 564957, 4195058; 564951, 4195077; 564942, 4195097; 564931, 
4195114; 564920, 4195131; 564911, 4195141; 564876, 4195174; 564861, 
4195179; 564840, 4195187; 564817, 4195200; 564795, 4195226; 564762, 
4195259; 564738, 4195281; 564712, 4195315; 564683, 4195340; 564665, 
4195356; 564642, 4195375; 564626, 4195391; 564612, 4195406; 564592, 
4195421; 564575, 4195441; 564565, 4195453; 564553, 4195473; 564540, 
4195468; 564532, 4195474; 564512, 4195476; 564481, 4195468; 564449, 
4195463; 564420, 4195458; 564390, 4195452; 564373, 4195446; 564348, 
4195701; 564487, 4195799; 564397, 4195881; 564368, 4195873; 564342, 
4195867; 564314, 4195886; 564283, 4195904; 564263, 4195925; 564253, 
4195948; 564232, 4195968; 564224, 4195980; 564213, 4196012; 564194, 
4196038; 564172, 4196029; 564139, 4196011; 564101, 4195997; 564069, 
4195996; 564028, 4196023; 564005, 4196063; 563978, 4196099; 563970, 
4196131; 563963, 4196161; 563954, 4196194; 563912, 4196245; 563886, 
4196211; 563874, 4196195; 563848, 4196223; 563837, 4196235; 563814, 
4196215; 563672, 4196374; 563668, 4196379; 563374, 4196709; 563398, 
4196736; 563390, 4196745; 563353, 4196786; 563361, 4196794; 563374, 
4196806; 563372, 4196815; 563368, 4196838; 563324, 4196856; 563294, 
4196891; 563274, 4196912; 563271, 4196960; 563277, 4196964; 563271, 
4196972; 563265, 4196984; 563255, 4196996; 563235, 4197007; 563205, 
4197055; 563186, 4197043; 563168, 4197079; 563163, 4197088; 563149, 
4197105; 563120, 4197133; 563107, 4197145; 563084, 4197172; 563077, 
4197184; 563070, 4197195; 563052, 4197180; 563045, 4197174; 563026, 
4197197; 563000, 4197243; 562983, 4197271; 562945, 4197316; 562925, 
4197338; 562792, 4197491; 562755, 4197535; 562721, 4197596; 562710, 
4197616; 562691, 4197651; 562660, 4197663; 562660, 4197668; 562654, 
4197671; 562641, 4197682; 562629, 4197697; 562622, 4197704; 562612, 
4197722; 562597, 4197755; 562582, 4197785; 562563, 4197812; 562545, 
4197821; 562522, 4197832; 562498, 4197840; 562481, 4197843; 562454, 
4197845; 562433, 4197852; 562412, 4197866; 562392, 4197882; 562380, 
4197892; 562385, 4197969; 562334, 4197999; 562316, 4198008; 562286, 
4198022; 562253, 4198072; 562234, 4198106; 562323, 4198187; 562340, 
4198202; 562293, 4198255; 562289, 4198258; 562274, 4198273; 562204, 
4198341; 562172, 4198372; 562161, 4198373; 562136, 4198392; 562126, 
4198391; 562028, 4198432; 561966, 4198470; 561938, 4198488; 561911, 
4198517; 561858, 4198567; 561833, 4198643; 561789, 4198671; 561716, 
4198706; 561475, 4198986; 561222, 4199269; 561229, 4199290; 561241, 
4199326; 561155, 4199391; 561058, 4199464; 561057, 4199464; 561046, 
4199476; 560935, 4199588; 560845, 4199680; 560590, 4199939; 560545, 
4199874; 560535, 4199859; 560524, 4199843; 560513, 4199853; 560435, 
4199926; 560447, 4199939; 560454, 4199946; 560510, 4200002; 560509, 
4200103; 560508, 4200141; 560507, 4200172; 560445, 4200222; 560418, 
4200390; 560502, 4200435; 560502, 4200435; 560499, 4200577; 560482, 
4200603; 560460, 4200629; 560443, 4200647; 560423, 4200667; 560410, 
4200681; 560384, 4200707; 560347, 4200709; 560305, 4200700; 560224, 
4200695; 560218, 4200724; 560170, 4200698; 560075, 4200679; 560070, 
4200609; 560069, 4200592; 560069, 4200590; 560066, 4200591; 560040, 
4200605; 559975, 4200626; 559910, 4200633; 559865, 4200650; 559821, 
4200653; 559787, 4200684; 559678, 4200689; 559675, 4200682; 559668, 
4200687; 559655, 4200696; 559633, 4200718; 559617, 4200742; 559611, 
4200753; 559601, 4200788; 559591, 4200818; returning to 559589, 4200848; 
excluding 565010, 4199872; 564877, 4199656; 564878, 4199620; 564977, 
4199555; 565008, 4199524; 565015, 4199497; 565039, 4199385; 565060, 
4199332; 565083, 4199317; 565156, 4199348; 565189, 4199315; 565220, 
4199264; 565216, 4199173; 565239, 4199148; 565346, 4199105; 565346, 
4199075; 565313, 4199018; 565314, 4198968; 565334, 4198947; 565433, 
4198908; 565464, 4198882; 565468, 4198722; 565491, 4198715; 565518, 
4198776; 565553, 4198817; 565586, 4198822; 565617, 4198789; 565617, 
4198751; 565600, 4198698; 565595, 4198644; 565618, 4198609; 565621, 
4198543; 565650, 4198470; 565653, 4198406; 565638, 4198355; 565646, 
4198330; 565644, 4198198; 565657, 4198193; 565710, 4198201; 565733, 
4198142; 565756, 4198137; 565818, 4198182; 565856, 4198167; 565913, 
4198111; 565931, 4198068; 565969, 4198018; 566006, 4197947; 566008, 
4197922; 566026, 4197914; 566089, 4197714; 566165, 4197710; 566209, 
4197682; 566232, 4197619; 566286, 4197594; 566314, 4197574; 566353, 
4197480; 566381, 4197450; 566534, 4197360; 566570, 4197355; 566628, 
4197381; 566712, 4197390; 566959, 4197351; 566959, 4197318; 566806, 
4197119; 566799, 4197083; 566809, 4197063; 566829, 4197071; 566905, 
4197150; 566968, 4197186; 567067, 4197208; 567087, 4197198; 567115, 
4197155; 567178, 4197018; 567188, 4196978; 567222, 4196940; 567240, 
4196889; 567378, 4196786; 567403, 4196784; 567434, 4196820; 567456, 
4196830; 567487, 4196831; 567494, 4196818; 567495, 4196780; 567462, 
4196731; 567463, 4196698; 567550, 4196610; 567547, 4196600; 567555, 
4196595; 567558, 4196572; 567546, 4196524; 567587, 4196481; 567606, 
4196354; 567621, 4196344; 567669, 4196355; 567697, 4196330; 567718, 
4196276; 567711, 4196256; 567645, 4196238; 567612, 4196214; 567607, 
4196194; 567617, 4196187; 567711, 4196195; 567782, 4196181; 567806, 
4196150; 567827, 4196079; 567809, 4196046; 567809, 4196026; 567891, 
4195978; 567907, 4195940; 567968, 4195918; 568064, 4195911; 568092, 
4195901; 568116, 4195871; 568134, 4195821; 568149, 4195805; 568228, 
4195829; 568253, 4195806; 568289, 4195797; 568333, 4195754; 568376, 
4195739; 568444,

[[Page 25]]

4195740; 568480, 4195722; 568546, 4195746; 568584, 4195716; 568645, 
4195731; 568722, 4195691; 568762, 4195692; 568815, 4195733; 568815, 
4195743; 568830, 4195756; 568914, 4195744; 568968, 4195668; 569004, 
4195628; 569028, 4195567; 569034, 4195453; 569062, 4195441; 569084, 
4195481; 569081, 4195573; 569034, 4195664; 568937, 4195798; 568847, 
4195830; 568749, 4195819; 568713, 4195803; 568677, 4195808; 568639, 
4195841; 568570, 4195855; 568532, 4195880; 568504, 4195885; 568438, 
4195877; 568415, 4195884; 568369, 4195942; 568308, 4195962; 568267, 
4196007; 568241, 4196050; 568185, 4196078; 568164, 4196105; 568163, 
4196194; 568143, 4196225; 568147, 4196311; 568139, 4196326; 568116, 
4196331; 568098, 4196351; 568070, 4196442; 568006, 4196475; 567946, 
4196576; 567895, 4196591; 567877, 4196608; 567877, 4196672; 567904, 
4196718; 567903, 4196845; 567841, 4196981; 567843, 4197027; 567863, 
4197091; 567878, 4197111; 567931, 4197134; 568010, 4197128; 568025, 
4197135; 568026, 4197148; 568027, 4197161; 567994, 4197181; 567862, 
4197169; 567735, 4197153; 567705, 4197163; 567671, 4197196; 567560, 
4197151; 567534, 4197164; 567501, 4197202; 567505, 4197334; 567492, 
4197351; 567418, 4197399; 567400, 4197427; 567405, 4197450; 567468, 
4197473; 567468, 4197516; 567371, 4197520; 567351, 4197533; 567340, 
4197576; 567365, 4197642; 567412, 4197711; 567415, 4197734; 567361, 
4197736; 567241, 4197606; 567205, 4197600; 567182, 4197608; 567182, 
4197638; 567197, 4197676; 567176, 4197765; 567153, 4197788; 567117, 
4197805; 567056, 4197817; 567030, 4197845; 567030, 4197893; 567012, 
4197906; 566989, 4197905; 566951, 4197880; 566936, 4197826; 566909, 
4197790; 566883, 4197790; 566826, 4197907; 566857, 4197950; 566884, 
4198016; 566950, 4198052; 566949, 4198088; 566926, 4198154; 566905, 
4198171; 566860, 4198174; 566811, 4198148; 566749, 4198084; 566642, 
4198088; 566616, 4198115; 566616, 4198146; 566646, 4198179; 566646, 
4198192; 566628, 4198220; 566609, 4198301; 566530, 4198391; 566524, 
4198432; 566562, 4198488; 566578, 4198659; 566555, 4198658; 566505, 
4198635; 566434, 4198556; 566406, 4198560; 566383, 4198581; 566350, 
4198631; 566323, 4198776; 566254, 4198846; 566233, 4198894; 566174, 
4198957; 566168, 4199021; 566137, 4199058; 566109, 4199147; 566110, 
4199254; 566127, 4199312; 566215, 4199501; 566275, 4199593; 566287, 
4199601; 566341, 4199604; 566396, 4199653; 566565, 4199746; 566737, 
4199831; 566760, 4199874; 566841, 4199875; 566828, 4199913; 566833, 
4199961; 566930, 4200163; 566919, 4200201; 566897, 4200196; 566869, 
4200137; 566776, 4200022; 566736, 4200001; 566657, 4200001; 566637, 
4199990; 566592, 4199916; 566562, 4199885; 566519, 4199862; 566372, 
4199812; 566296, 4199802; 566248, 4199753; 566078, 4199749; 565996, 
4199796; 565960, 4199796; 565958, 4199748; 565997, 4199636; 566001, 
4199570; 565971, 4199478; 565891, 4199325; 565871, 4199325; 565807, 
4199370; 565686, 4199435; 565566, 4199576; 565444, 4199631; 565418, 
4199725; 565367, 4199771; 565361, 4199832; 565343, 4199842; 565242, 
4199861; 565165, 4199912; 565125, 4199878; 565094, 4199868; returning to 
565010, 4199872; and excluding 569193, 4197159; 569166, 4197029; 569175, 
4196978; 569248, 4196700; 569266, 4196677; 569414, 4196617; 569568, 
4196517; 569801, 4196306; 569869, 4196304; 569892, 4196317; 569924, 
4196373; 569928, 4196541; 569950, 4196597; 569983, 4196618; 570110, 
4196619; 570145, 4196647; 570153, 4196683; 570142, 4196705; 570096, 
4196756; 570053, 4196771; 569989, 4196765; 569890, 4196784; 569852, 
4196799; 569808, 4196875; 569810, 4196906; 569825, 4196929; 569984, 
4197027; 570007, 4197067; 570026, 4197162; 570054, 4197167; 570092, 
4197152; 570156, 4197145; 570166, 4197155; 570186, 4197222; 570289, 
4197296; 570297, 4197314; 570296, 4197370; 570253, 4197372; 570185, 
4197349; 570106, 4197338; 570086, 4197348; 570060, 4197378; 570060, 
4197406; 570095, 4197459; 570109, 4197515; 570162, 4197574; 570166, 
4197717; 570203, 4197783; 570291, 4197903; 570291, 4197964; 570305, 
4198020; 570341, 4198061; 570399, 4198090; 570467, 4198101; 570533, 
4198101; 570683, 4198069; 570714, 4198039; 570730, 4197999; 570778, 
4197951; 570802, 4197893; 570858, 4197850; 570915, 4197741; 570979, 
4197686; 571068, 4197649; 571112, 4197621; 571143, 4197571; 571296, 
4197514; 571360, 4197476; 571446, 4197447; 571479, 4197444; 571530, 
4197458; 571626, 4197456; 571824, 4197514; 571910, 4197512; 572007, 
4197475; 572137, 4197446; 572188, 4197446; 572370, 4197486; 572418, 
4197512; 572555, 4197536; 572601, 4197508; 572690, 4197542; 572736, 
4197550; 572794, 4197523; 572845, 4197485; 572899, 4197460; 572950, 
4197455; 573062, 4197444; 573115, 4197462; 573125, 4197475; 573112, 
4197493; 573056, 4197494; 572937, 4197496; 572873, 4197518; 572796, 
4197594; 572788, 4197617; 572803, 4197696; 572777, 4197700; 572765, 
4197690; 572730, 4197616; 572661, 4197603; 572626, 4197585; 572593, 
4197579; 572552, 4197599; 572494, 4197599; 572478, 4197609; 572476, 
4197634; 572486, 4197662; 572526, 4197721; 572525, 4197784; 572505, 
4197792; 572492, 4197782; 572427, 4197641; 572418, 4197603; 572397, 
4197580; 572276, 4197574; 572174, 4197532; 572139, 4197550; 572078, 
4197552; 572067, 4197572; 572003, 4197642; 571914, 4197657; 571850, 
4197682; 571810, 4197684; 571777, 4197673; 571675, 4197672; 571660, 
4197690; 571583, 4197702; 571583, 4197776; 571557, 4197775; 571517, 
4197752; 571431, 4197744; 571428, 4197794; 571372, 4197804; 571313, 
4197837; 571186, 4197835; 571130, 4197870; 571084, 4197916; 571076, 
4197933; 571090, 4198033; 571072, 4198050; 570963, 4198098; 570957, 
4198123; 570970, 4198166; 571000, 4198194; 571071, 4198218; 571098, 
4198246; 571121, 4198284; 571120, 4198330; 571108, 4198348; 571041, 
4198380; 571036, 4198398; 571043, 4198444; 571068, 4198513; 571103, 
4198551; 571159, 4198582; 571179, 4198605; 571211, 4198720; 571208, 
4198773; 571187, 4198796; 571154, 4198795; 570986, 4198618; 570917, 
4198620; 570902, 4198595; 570885, 4198534; 570867, 4198513; 570816, 
4198518; 570788, 4198540; 570742, 4198619; 570706, 4198656; 570675, 
4198656; 570676, 4198626; 570702, 4198575; 570702, 4198537; 570692, 
4198527; 570651, 4198516; 570628, 4198526; 570580, 4198574; 570534, 
4198581; 570513, 4198606; 570457, 4198601; 570447, 4198629; 570454, 
4198705; 570430, 4198865; 570340, 4198940; 570315, 4198940; 570307, 
4198894; 570321, 4198808; 570303, 4198589; 570275, 4198541; 570235, 
4198533; 570165, 4198588; 570167, 4198669; 570177, 4198705; 570176, 
4198763; 570158, 4198809; 570138, 4198806; 570118, 4198783; 570071, 
4198658; 570040, 4198648; 569994, 4198688; 569948, 4198705; 569908, 
4198710; 569908, 4198687; 569916, 4198674; 569936, 4198632; 569939, 
4198591; 569932, 4198563; 569872, 4198471; 569872, 4198451; 569943, 
4198431; 569967, 4198396; 569969, 4198357; 569912, 4198301; 569858, 
4198278; 569851, 4198257; 569821, 4198227; 569819, 4198173; 569829, 
4198120; 569718,

[[Page 26]]

4198099; 569692, 4198109; 569597, 4198209; 569398, 4198385; 569349, 
4198461; 569313, 4198461; 569319, 4198412; 569458, 4198188; 569553, 
4198084; 569630, 4197978; 569651, 4197935; 569667, 4197847; 569713, 
4197799; 569698, 4197745; 569676, 4197732; 569622, 4197727; 569553, 
4197759; 569528, 4197759; 569528, 4197731; 569569, 4197665; 569567, 
4197615; 569540, 4197579; 569535, 4197551; 569589, 4197508; 569600, 
4197432; 569607, 4197427; 569600, 4197396; 569516, 4197385; 569437, 
4197395; 569343, 4197447; 569323, 4197450; 569267, 4197416; 569209, 
4197418; 569181, 4197393; 569171, 4197372; 569169, 4197319; 569182, 
4197258; returning to 569193, 4197159.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit 1 is provided in paragraph (c)(7)(ii) of this 
section.
    (7) Unit 2: Oakland-Las Trampas, Alameda and Contra Costa Counties, 
California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles Oakland East, Las Trampas 
Ridge, Diablo, and Hayward. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, 
NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 571706, 4187420; 571707, 4187421; 571716, 
4187451; 571727, 4187468; 571744, 4187490; 571756, 4187508; 571757, 
4187509; 571759, 4187532; 571763, 4187571; 571791, 4187646; 571825, 
4187732; 571832, 4187744; 571768, 4187924; 571751, 4187967; 571760, 
4187990; 571768, 4188011; 571781, 4188026; 571784, 4188027; 571801, 
4188031; 571833, 4188037; 571847, 4188046; 571858, 4188064; 571875, 
4188082; 571889, 4188088; 571893, 4188091; 571896, 4188095; 571896, 
4188099; 571894, 4188105; 571889, 4188115; 571883, 4188127; 571882, 
4188131; 571881, 4188133; 571874, 4188139; 571867, 4188142; 571869, 
4188144; 571870, 4188147; 571873, 4188153; 571877, 4188157; 571881, 
4188161; 571886, 4188165; 571886, 4188165; 571887, 4188165; 571887, 
4188166; 571888, 4188166; 571970, 4188166; 572045, 4188160; 572146, 
4188147; 572259, 4188110; 572340, 4188072; 572447, 4188022; 572560, 
4187984; 572686, 4187965; 572824, 4187978; 572943, 4188003; 573050, 
4188034; 573163, 4188053; 573251, 4188072; 573371, 4188084; 573484, 
4188097; 573597, 4188103; 573710, 4188122; 573804, 4188122; 573898, 
4188116; 573986, 4188110; 574055, 4188110; 574149, 4188116; 574237, 
4188122; 574257, 4188128; 574325, 4188147; 574377, 4188181; 574417, 
4188200; 574462, 4188219; 574506, 4188251; 574532, 4188257; 574559, 
4188255; 574595, 4188243; 574671, 4188202; 574720, 4188178; 574784, 
4188151; 574851, 4188129; 574880, 4188128; 574915, 4188133; 574952, 
4188142; 574985, 4188145; 575011, 4188148; 575032, 4188129; 575085, 
4188086; 575123, 4188062; 575145, 4188029; 575188, 4187979; 575247, 
4187914; 575286, 4187884; 575323, 4187866; 575346, 4187881; 575374, 
4187887; 575422, 4187858; 575450, 4187851; 575471, 4187835; 575514, 
4187792; 575542, 4187762; 575570, 4187738; 575637, 4187712; 575669, 
4187690; 575696, 4187677; 575706, 4187662; 575710, 4187644; 575705, 
4187631; 575693, 4187617; 575685, 4187605; 575714, 4187557; 575731, 
4187532; 575756, 4187493; 575778, 4187453; 575796, 4187419; 575810, 
4187401; 575830, 4187378; 575844, 4187365; 575883, 4187331; 575900, 
4187309; 575938, 4187268; 575975, 4187234; 575999, 4187206; 576010, 
4187191; 576021, 4187178; 576025, 4187160; 576017, 4187139; 576025, 
4187109; 576034, 4187085; 576054, 4187060; 576071, 4187037; 576103, 
4186998; 576130, 4186976; 576151, 4186962; 576165, 4186950; 576214, 
4186909; 576246, 4186887; 576271, 4186860; 576285, 4186851; 576285, 
4186887; 576280, 4186901; 576305, 4186895; 576323, 4186892; 576351, 
4186868; 576365, 4186840; 576382, 4186826; 576403, 4186793; 576410, 
4186758; 576418, 4186721; 576422, 4186672; 576431, 4186640; 576455, 
4186595; 576483, 4186563; 576522, 4186540; 576540, 4186531; 576573, 
4186516; 576617, 4186500; 576647, 4186471; 576698, 4186434; 576741, 
4186412; 576784, 4186389; 576828, 4186362; 576865, 4186341; 576890, 
4186319; 576908, 4186301; 576918, 4186292; 576919, 4186268; 576939, 
4186211; 576961, 4186191; 576989, 4186123; 577003, 4186087; 577018, 
4186047; 577028, 4186006; 577037, 4185975; 577048, 4185937; 577052, 
4185907; 577044, 4185888; 577014, 4185884; 576994, 4185863; 576992, 
4185806; 577000, 4185748; 577000, 4185691; 576995, 4185650; 576987, 
4185615; 576986, 4185589; 576973, 4185569; 576956, 4185538; 576951, 
4185517; 576955, 4185497; 576969, 4185458; 576987, 4185413; 577009, 
4185384; 577020, 4185357; 577034, 4185341; 577052, 4185346; 577078, 
4185351; 577086, 4185361; 577101, 4185376; 577129, 4185377; 577159, 
4185364; 577219, 4185358; 577250, 4185388; 577260, 4185400; 577301, 
4185373; 577309, 4185354; 577320, 4185332; 577333, 4185301; 577351, 
4185280; 577383, 4185260; 577414, 4185254; 577441, 4185255; 577491, 
4185234; 577514, 4185223; 577544, 4185233; 577561, 4185255; 577570, 
4185278; 577567, 4185291; 577558, 4185302; 577542, 4185311; 577529, 
4185314; 577510, 4185312; 577520, 4185336; 577542, 4185344; 577559, 
4185346; 577583, 4185348; 577601, 4185349; 577630, 4185345; 577650, 
4185329; 577665, 4185322; 577679, 4185316; 577693, 4185306; 577707, 
4185296; 577729, 4185273; 577737, 4185264; 577734, 4185255; 577742, 
4185226; 577748, 4185173; 577764, 4185130; 577775, 4185083; 577782, 
4185053; 577802, 4185000; 577810, 4184990; 577859, 4184961; 577874, 
4184960; 577871, 4184928; 577885, 4184903; 577920, 4184864; 577939, 
4184840; 577985, 4184805; 578040, 4184768; 578085, 4184750; 578135, 
4184742; 578163, 4184741; 578187, 4184743; 578212, 4184749; 578243, 
4184761; 578249, 4184800; 578243, 4184825; 578238, 4184875; 578240, 
4184897; 578235, 4184935; 578230, 4184956; 578226, 4184993; 578220, 
4185031; 578216, 4185050; 578213, 4185073; 578227, 4185072; 578262, 
4185046; 578275, 4185042; 578287, 4185051; 578298, 4185075; 578294, 
4185105; 578281, 4185129; 578292, 4185145; 578303, 4185170; 578320, 
4185191; 578333, 4185222; 578332, 4185287; 578326, 4185329; 578311, 
4185376; 578300, 4185413; 578294, 4185471; 578284, 4185489; 578266, 
4185508; 578241, 4185518; 578222, 4185513; 578211, 4185495; 578209, 
4185446; 578215, 4185404; 578216, 4185342; 578209, 4185297; 578202, 
4185265; 578145, 4185242; 578137, 4185239; 578084, 4185239; 578033, 
4185229; 577980, 4185239; 577945, 4185275; 577934, 4185307; 577920, 
4185350; 577911, 4185403; 577904, 4185467; 577904, 4185506; 577904, 
4185540; 577907, 4185634; 577926, 4185691; 577956, 4185791; 577977, 
4185843; 577980, 4185850; 578013, 4185903; 578038, 4185917; 578073, 
4185943; 578101, 4185961; 578150, 4185972; 578206, 4185967; 578217, 
4185958; 578239, 4185947; 578287, 4185938; 578330, 4185930; 578387, 
4185914; 578427, 4185911; 578457, 4185918; 578486, 4185957; 578504, 
4185965; 578525, 4185975; 578554, 4185980; 578587, 4185973; 578628, 
4185976; 578678, 4185983; 578731, 4185995; 578768, 4186014; 578803, 
4186041; 578804, 4186044; 578881, 4186031; 579094, 4186094; 579221, 
4186099; 579275, 4186121; 579352, 4186171; 579424, 4186243; 579528, 
4186334;

[[Page 27]]

579610, 4186361; 579700, 4186375; 579777, 4186343; 579800, 4186343; 
579913, 4186384; 580017, 4186438; 580053, 4186470; 580107, 4186587; 
580148, 4186623; 580148, 4186625; 580116, 4186705; 580107, 4186773; 
580053, 4186881; 579854, 4187288; 579795, 4187311; 579736, 4187393; 
579573, 4187424; 579456, 4187411; 579420, 4187442; 579415, 4187469; 
579397, 4187533; 579388, 4187573; 579352, 4187646; 579298, 4187791; 
579212, 4187953; 579144, 4188026; 579130, 4188071; 579003, 4188302; 
578832, 4188302; 578773, 4188324; 578732, 4188347; 578672, 4188405; 
578748, 4188508; 578783, 4188556; 578895, 4188582; 578900, 4188576; 
578900, 4188576; 578917, 4188593; 578922, 4188626; 578914, 4188660; 
578936, 4188693; 578958, 4188703; 578984, 4188719; 579018, 4188732; 
579048, 4188745; 579062, 4188775; 579063, 4188778; 579180, 4188868; 
579109, 4188917; 579116, 4188925; 579117, 4188956; 579104, 4188979; 
579084, 4189001; 579054, 4189040; 579046, 4189051; 579228, 4189052; 
579246, 4189157; 579199, 4189178; 579168, 4189192; 579243, 4189244; 
579295, 4189281; 579295, 4189354; 579217, 4189314; 579201, 4189306; 
579150, 4189399; 579150, 4189419; 579149, 4189477; 578994, 4189492; 
578994, 4189414; 578649, 4189419; 578612, 4189480; 578435, 4189486; 
578438, 4189519; 578456, 4189605; 578474, 4189645; 578501, 4189704; 
578519, 4189713; 578551, 4189736; 578619, 4189790; 578696, 4189835; 
578723, 4189903; 578755, 4189939; 578777, 4189976; 578786, 4190071; 
578804, 4190138; 578845, 4190206; 578881, 4190270; 578913, 4190272; 
578896, 4190263; 578938, 4190252; 578973, 4190242; 578980, 4190229; 
579006, 4190209; 579036, 4190186; 579037, 4190186; 579067, 4190163; 
579085, 4190150; 579100, 4190140; 579138, 4190138; 579147, 4190171; 
579159, 4190185; 579175, 4190206; 579190, 4190256; 579201, 4190290; 
579241, 4190339; 579249, 4190414; 579301, 4190411; 579350, 4190408; 
579374, 4190373; 579419, 4190349; 579483, 4190345; 579606, 4190266; 
579629, 4190235; 579657, 4190210; 579702, 4190197; 579793, 4190185; 
579793, 4190185; 579906, 4190178; 579954, 4190194; 580009, 4190148; 
580042, 4190149; 580041, 4190145; 580046, 4190149; 580041, 4190115; 
580035, 4190084; 580020, 4190025; 580019, 4190018; 580003, 4190002; 
579976, 4189965; 579969, 4189926; 579965, 4189870; 580170, 4189874; 
580164, 4189928; 580241, 4190157; 580242, 4190158; 580246, 4190154; 
580346, 4190092; 580385, 4190071; 580436, 4190051; 580513, 4190034; 
580514, 4190033; 580610, 4190033; 580609, 4190164; 580605, 4190346; 
580606, 4190349; 580611, 4190348; 580612, 4190348; 580654, 4190253; 
580684, 4190258; 580696, 4190261; 580714, 4190266; 580734, 4190284; 
580653, 4190471; 580655, 4190477; 580675, 4190477; 580712, 4190469; 
580744, 4190468; 580766, 4190473; 580737, 4190564; 580735, 4190566; 
580742, 4190598; 580743, 4190630; 580710, 4190650; 580654, 4190809; 
580735, 4190839; 580737, 4190842; 580737, 4190842; 580695, 4190930; 
580686, 4190949; 580687, 4190949; 580724, 4190994; 580781, 4191063; 
580791, 4191055; 580848, 4191065; 580843, 4191050; 580851, 4191011; 
580866, 4190962; 580879, 4190918; 580896, 4190914; 580914, 4190924; 
580941, 4190951; 580964, 4190983; 580965, 4190973; 580958, 4190948; 
580962, 4190927; 580979, 4190903; 580991, 4190885; 581002, 4190855; 
581003, 4190844; 581003, 4190819; 581010, 4190791; 581024, 4190776; 
581032, 4190772; 581057, 4190768; 581095, 4190770; 581125, 4190756; 
581145, 4190739; 581166, 4190732; 581172, 4190738; 581231, 4190723; 
581287, 4190700; 581309, 4190678; 581307, 4190657; 581304, 4190630; 
581305, 4190612; 581316, 4190579; 581314, 4190549; 581312, 4190549; 
581193, 4190527; 581154, 4190396; 581235, 4190263; 581268, 4190283; 
581308, 4190236; 581390, 4190258; 581420, 4190260; 581423, 4190218; 
581421, 4190198; 581424, 4190175; 581433, 4190158; 581444, 4190149; 
581475, 4190122; 581508, 4190096; 581533, 4190079; 581564, 4190066; 
581594, 4190057; 581623, 4190058; 581648, 4190061; 581697, 4190063; 
581733, 4190071; 581789, 4190070; 581825, 4190066; 581848, 4190054; 
581868, 4190025; 581881, 4190004; 581906, 4189988; 581942, 4189970; 
581956, 4189958; 581977, 4189921; 581997, 4189898; 582044, 4189871; 
582080, 4189861; 582130, 4189842; 582155, 4189819; 582170, 4189806; 
582194, 4189778; 582219, 4189760; 582245, 4189744; 582271, 4189729; 
582295, 4189723; 582337, 4189715; 582382, 4189698; 582415, 4189680; 
582442, 4189639; 582450, 4189615; 582462, 4189575; 582470, 4189554; 
582476, 4189536; 582500, 4189503; 582525, 4189470; 582542, 4189447; 
582575, 4189400; 582602, 4189346; 582625, 4189298; 582636, 4189283; 
582645, 4189280; 582790, 4189203; 582960, 4189113; 582985, 4189099; 
583060, 4189078; 583061, 4189078; 583273, 4189019; 583334, 4189094; 
583230, 4189179; 583294, 4189284; 583253, 4189439; 583286, 4189458; 
583324, 4189584; 583108, 4189725; 583075, 4189801; 583072, 4189804; 
583072, 4189817; 583067, 4189850; 583065, 4189867; 583083, 4189901; 
583113, 4189936; 583126, 4189941; 583165, 4189958; 583209, 4189971; 
583220, 4189975; 583335, 4189977; 583317, 4190355; 583314, 4190356; 
583317, 4190357; 583312, 4190446; 583307, 4190539; 583306, 4190565; 
583336, 4190623; 583337, 4190625; 583375, 4190663; 583397, 4190663; 
583427, 4190663; 583499, 4190656; 583573, 4190755; 583607, 4190801; 
583610, 4190801; 583609, 4190804; 583903, 4190822; 583907, 4190813; 
583907, 4190812; 583907, 4190812; 583968, 4190690; 583984, 4190656; 
583994, 4190636; 584086, 4190447; 584114, 4190392; 584026, 4190377; 
583964, 4190357; 583968, 4190277; 583887, 4190259; 583867, 4190323; 
583808, 4190242; 583754, 4190267; 583694, 4190209; 583774, 4190138; 
583724, 4190064; 583745, 4190051; 583765, 4190030; 583809, 4189998; 
583874, 4189971; 583935, 4189920; 583964, 4189871; 584061, 4189766; 
584100, 4189670; 584145, 4189630; 584135, 4189626; 584151, 4189608; 
584174, 4189579; 584200, 4189531; 584200, 4189531; 584140, 4189507; 
584223, 4189404; 584197, 4189361; 584148, 4189280; 584247, 4189222; 
584458, 4189260; 584458, 4189260; 584481, 4189245; 584499, 4189212; 
584434, 4189155; 584443, 4189073; 584546, 4189138; 584548, 4189129; 
584535, 4189100; 584526, 4189072; 584502, 4189015; 584497, 4189002; 
584439, 4188974; 584349, 4188983; 584349, 4188984; 584316, 4189004; 
584279, 4189027; 584246, 4189036; 584226, 4189016; 584283, 4188956; 
584336, 4188914; 584451, 4188841; 584511, 4188795; 584512, 4188795; 
584450, 4188719; 584436, 4188718; 584277, 4188712; 584279, 4188665; 
584356, 4188523; 584380, 4188523; 584376, 4188447; 584566, 4188447; 
584581, 4188448; 584619, 4188391; 584619, 4188391; 584619, 4188391; 
584628, 4188377; 584646, 4188316; 584649, 4188306; 584723, 4188326; 
584741, 4188330; 584749, 4188338; 584784, 4188367; 584780, 4188373; 
584780, 4188373; 584805, 4188338; 584972, 4188451; 584973, 4188448; 
584975, 4188456; 584996, 4188470; 585065, 4188374; 585116, 4188289; 
585131, 4188251; 585134, 4188226; 585137, 4188204; 585123, 4188175; 
585157, 4188144; 585118, 4188116;

[[Page 28]]

585122, 4188112; 585224, 4187998; 585290, 4188057; 585291, 4188058; 
585293, 4188060; 585322, 4188086; 585387, 4188013; 585336, 4187981; 
585336, 4187981; 585365, 4187930; 585370, 4187915; 585386, 4187889; 
585406, 4187867; 585428, 4187842; 585456, 4187817; 585485, 4187791; 
585513, 4187772; 585531, 4187752; 585551, 4187731; 585570, 4187704; 
585585, 4187673; 585609, 4187636; 585628, 4187606; 585641, 4187618; 
585647, 4187621; 585695, 4187639; 585709, 4187663; 585711, 4187637; 
585724, 4187602; 585751, 4187575; 585772, 4187535; 585780, 4187519; 
585714, 4187446; 585718, 4187289; 585719, 4187221; 585720, 4187185; 
585720, 4187184; 585721, 4187158; 585722, 4187101; 585729, 4187080; 
585729, 4187079; 585753, 4186996; 585808, 4186921; 585802, 4186926; 
585805, 4186922; 585819, 4186897; 585490, 4187081; 585466, 4187094; 
585461, 4186866; 585494, 4186824; 585533, 4186846; 585528, 4186859; 
585832, 4186868; 585831, 4186866; 585836, 4186869; 585891, 4186735; 
585890, 4186735; 585902, 4186689; 585720, 4186691; 585722, 4186639; 
585750, 4186637; 585748, 4186628; 585741, 4186562; 585765, 4186486; 
585761, 4186475; 585750, 4186437; 585719, 4186437; 585745, 4186365; 
585812, 4186380; 585837, 4186402; 585900, 4186394; 585934, 4186390; 
585988, 4186401; 585995, 4186425; 586025, 4186439; 586052, 4186421; 
586070, 4186435; 586124, 4186384; 586022, 4186289; 585996, 4186269; 
585948, 4186246; 585936, 4186157; 585782, 4186212; 585739, 4186228; 
585739, 4186098; 585739, 4185967; 585739, 4185809; 585955, 4185947; 
585968, 4185930; 585971, 4185926; 586013, 4185871; 585997, 4185833; 
585968, 4185760; 585991, 4185775; 586033, 4185726; 586039, 4185719; 
586083, 4185668; 586146, 4185594; 586168, 4185571; 586190, 4185558; 
586248, 4185471; 586238, 4185448; 586342, 4185521; 586356, 4185501; 
586400, 4185531; 586416, 4185526; 586433, 4185512; 586447, 4185514; 
586465, 4185507; 586474, 4185506; 586480, 4185503; 586484, 4185499; 
586500, 4185475; 586511, 4185461; 586533, 4185440; 586556, 4185418; 
586571, 4185396; 586577, 4185379; 586582, 4185359; 586591, 4185354; 
586610, 4185345; 586621, 4185333; 586631, 4185307; 586630, 4185282; 
586632, 4185254; 586645, 4185199; 586739, 4185019; 587160, 4185020; 
587162, 4185018; 587372, 4185015; 587384, 4185092; 587392, 4185136; 
587415, 4185157; 587435, 4185174; 587435, 4185174; 587435, 4185174; 
587485, 4185199; 587522, 4185217; 587567, 4185221; 587605, 4185238; 
587608, 4185239; 587627, 4185246; 587652, 4185256; 587659, 4185258; 
587690, 4185270; 587705, 4185252; 587705, 4185252; 587705, 4185252; 
587694, 4185239; 587695, 4185200; 587704, 4185161; 587721, 4185124; 
587743, 4185101; 587778, 4185076; 587811, 4185066; 587815, 4185065; 
587817, 4185064; 587833, 4185059; 587902, 4185111; 587946, 4185154; 
587948, 4185159; 587949, 4185158; 587966, 4185147; 587940, 4185119; 
587932, 4185097; 587882, 4185037; 587882, 4185037; 587773, 4184945; 
587740, 4184748; 587965, 4184460; 588249, 4184573; 588254, 4184566; 
588267, 4184561; 588288, 4184557; 588307, 4184559; 588337, 4184571; 
588367, 4184588; 588382, 4184598; 588415, 4184590; 588445, 4184575; 
588479, 4184530; 588503, 4184503; 588518, 4184470; 588536, 4184433; 
588551, 4184408; 588562, 4184384; 588573, 4184358; 588586, 4184338; 
588605, 4184310; 588617, 4184282; 588625, 4184258; 588629, 4184245; 
588642, 4184217; 588645, 4184210; 588655, 4184192; 588932, 4184209; 
588954, 4184164; 588958, 4184164; 588971, 4184151; 588990, 4184113; 
588997, 4184090; 589011, 4184066; 589027, 4184031; 589058, 4183979; 
589062, 4183958; 589063, 4183953; 589068, 4183934; 589058, 4183925; 
589050, 4183923; 589009, 4183924; 588941, 4183911; 588933, 4183889; 
588977, 4183792; 589121, 4183474; 589036, 4183450; 588877, 4183409; 
588629, 4183397; 588617, 4183343; 588585, 4183204; 588591, 4183060; 
588624, 4182930; 588678, 4182812; 588706, 4182764; 588643, 4182720; 
588685, 4182661; 588748, 4182704; 588822, 4182599; 589256, 4182617; 
589529, 4182206; 589528, 4182109; 589513, 4182107; 589491, 4182097; 
589486, 4182077; 589492, 4182044; 589492, 4182044; 589158, 4182039; 
589160, 4181853; 589160, 4181853; 589161, 4181806; 589162, 4181692; 
589042, 4181714; 588881, 4181517; 588560, 4181409; 588361, 4181441; 
588361, 4181490; 588355, 4181901; 588056, 4181855; 587726, 4181803; 
587756, 4181737; 587802, 4181752; 587849, 4181748; 587888, 4181742; 
587932, 4181736; 587948, 4181734; 587990, 4181758; 588068, 4181705; 
588152, 4181587; 588181, 4181541; 588177, 4181515; 588198, 4181453; 
588212, 4181343; 588241, 4181315; 588185, 4181121; 588188, 4181098; 
588168, 4181097; 588061, 4181063; 588040, 4181050; 588041, 4181049; 
588012, 4181034; 587891, 4180950; 587787, 4180869; 587690, 4180958; 
587565, 4180998; 587502, 4180998; 587384, 4180990; 587298, 4181021; 
587274, 4181092; 587274, 4181225; 587235, 4181398; 587188, 4181515; 
587055, 4181672; 586874, 4181861; 586670, 4181994; 586592, 4181994; 
586521, 4182017; 586474, 4182064; 586419, 4182096; 586372, 4182112; 
586333, 4182166; 586074, 4182355; 585792, 4182527; 585556, 4182637; 
585446, 4182692; 585266, 4182810; 585264, 4182807; 585015, 4182457; 
585015, 4182425; 585038, 4182355; 585046, 4182300; 585015, 4182276; 
584968, 4182198; 584944, 4182127; 584936, 4182049; 584968, 4181915; 
584999, 4181766; 584973, 4181615; 584952, 4181477; 584910, 4181233; 
584814, 4181063; 584825, 4180978; 584782, 4180936; 584750, 4180819; 
584251, 4180861; 583806, 4181031; 583392, 4181382; 582606, 4182199; 
581871, 4182797; 581863, 4182804; 581831, 4182687; 581842, 4182581; 
581820, 4182443; 581672, 4182273; 581672, 4182264; 581682, 4182125; 
581704, 4181997; 581672, 4181796; 581566, 4181605; 581544, 4181477; 
581619, 4181201; 581651, 4181010; 581629, 4180777; 581629, 4180681; 
581714, 4180639; 581873, 4180575; 581980, 4180479; 582001, 4180278; 
582033, 4180140; 582043, 4179917; 582107, 4179768; 582118, 4179566; 
582118, 4179120; 582224, 4179046; 582394, 4178961; 582457, 4178823; 
582574, 4178600; 582606, 4178399; 582691, 4178303; 582691, 4178176; 
582744, 4178059; 582680, 4177857; 582691, 4177730; 582797, 4177443; 
582882, 4177284; 582893, 4177231; 582935, 4177125; 583031, 4177040; 
583041, 4176944; 583036, 4176877; 582970, 4176854; 582939, 4176805; 
582913, 4176773; 582882, 4176745; 582837, 4176717; 582798, 4176689; 
582776, 4176658; 582779, 4176647; 582808, 4176613; 582856, 4176588; 
582882, 4176570; 582903, 4176548; 582904, 4176536; 582880, 4176494; 
582848, 4176440; 582838, 4176423; 582847, 4176412; 582869, 4176398; 
582894, 4176384; 582926, 4176371; 582955, 4176337; 582948, 4176317; 
582925, 4176285; 582894, 4176252; 582866, 4176226; 582862, 4176182; 
582866, 4176144; 582852, 4176123; 582826, 4176101; 582809, 4176099; 
582796, 4176101; 582771, 4176098; 582734, 4176089; 582719, 4176075; 
582669, 4176052; 582649, 4176039; 582635, 4176024; 582637, 4175999; 
582636, 4175967; 582649, 4175926; 582665, 4175887; 582686, 4175855; 
582712, 4175810; 582711, 4175783;

[[Page 29]]

582708, 4175736; 582703, 4175699; 582708, 4175669; 582720, 4175638; 
582737, 4175608; 582724, 4175597; 582712, 4175574; 582697, 4175554; 
582699, 4175539; 582708, 4175508; 582709, 4175506; 582687, 4175494; 
582639, 4175468; 582618, 4175434; 582641, 4175408; 582628, 4175357; 
582630, 4175355; 582630, 4175355; 582637, 4175343; 582647, 4175322; 
582654, 4175300; 582653, 4175291; 582607, 4175288; 582530, 4175262; 
582496, 4175180; 582492, 4175178; 582446, 4175182; 582316, 4175238; 
582237, 4175262; 582171, 4175315; 582104, 4175328; 582038, 4175304; 
581925, 4175267; 581821, 4175262; 581715, 4175278; 581663, 4175293; 
581607, 4175291; 581569, 4175253; 581567, 4175251; 581567, 4175251; 
581540, 4175233; 581440, 4175350; 581239, 4175537; 581168, 4175640; 
581136, 4175763; 581117, 4176047; 581084, 4176190; 581052, 4176357; 
581013, 4176538; 581026, 4176687; 581175, 4176848; 581317, 4176900; 
581427, 4176978; 581478, 4177120; 581478, 4177236; 581311, 4177204; 
581110, 4177062; 580942, 4176919; 580833, 4176616; 580787, 4176396; 
580820, 4176261; 580871, 4176144; 580942, 4175989; 580858, 4175938; 
580816, 4175992; 580805, 4176080; 580690, 4176299; 580633, 4176448; 
580621, 4176690; 580667, 4176828; 579816, 4177334; 579793, 4177426; 
579781, 4177564; 579793, 4177737; 579793, 4177818; 579666, 4177956; 
579597, 4178082; 579597, 4178151; 579816, 4178174; 580000, 4178232; 
580149, 4178335; 580264, 4178485; 580172, 4178565; 580057, 4178807; 
580011, 4178957; 579908, 4179198; 579827, 4179463; 579770, 4179647; 
579747, 4179808; 579741, 4179808; 579597, 4179808; 579597, 4179818; 
579589, 4179826; 579578, 4179955; 579475, 4180043; 579404, 4180073; 
579381, 4180108; 579322, 4180131; 579301, 4180184; 579243, 4180206; 
579225, 4180234; 579222, 4180264; 579168, 4180310; 579168, 4180365; 
579122, 4180398; 579124, 4180423; 579184, 4180480; 579184, 4180531; 
579103, 4180540; 579092, 4180558; 579097, 4180586; 579117, 4180637; 
579106, 4180677; 579119, 4180718; 579134, 4180736; 579133, 4180772; 
579092, 4180804; 579085, 4180824; 579102, 4180853; 579120, 4180863; 
579124, 4180921; 579155, 4180952; 579228, 4181001; 579288, 4181123; 
579287, 4181169; 579246, 4181217; 579217, 4181298; 579220, 4181321; 
579252, 4181357; 579326, 4181398; 579440, 4181425; 579516, 4181458; 
579558, 4181502; 579558, 4181520; 579551, 4181527; 579482, 4181516; 
579426, 4181488; 579343, 4181482; 579282, 4181461; 579249, 4181464; 
579208, 4181483; 579188, 4181481; 579130, 4181437; 579089, 4181444; 
579016, 4181426; 578993, 4181433; 578980, 4181453; 578964, 4181519; 
578933, 4181511; 578886, 4181468; 578871, 4181419; 578846, 4181389; 
578810, 4181383; 578767, 4181426; 578756, 4181454; 578753, 4181492; 
578727, 4181545; 578700, 4181535; 578685, 4181440; 578696, 4181387; 
578691, 4181347; 578663, 4181351; 578653, 4181361; 578616, 4181458; 
578593, 4181468; 578583, 4181462; 578579, 4181384; 578567, 4181348; 
578554, 4181340; 578498, 4181342; 578473, 4181317; 578435, 4181334; 
578379, 4181300; 578278, 4181282; 578234, 4181297; 578216, 4181319; 
578216, 4181360; 578258, 4181462; 578203, 4181614; 578195, 4181665; 
578172, 4181690; 578162, 4181743; 578133, 4181778; 578120, 4181816; 
578110, 4181824; 578102, 4181877; 578028, 4181884; 578018, 4181894; 
578007, 4181942; 578060, 4182047; 578087, 4182080; 578105, 4182134; 
578186, 4182134; 578183, 4182165; 578173, 4182177; 578178, 4182208; 
578195, 4182223; 578205, 4182287; 578184, 4182315; 578189, 4182335; 
578259, 4182442; 578355, 4182504; 578413, 4182515; 578451, 4182561; 
578517, 4182590; 578588, 4182595; 578634, 4182575; 578700, 4182573; 
578741, 4182554; 578777, 4182508; 578810, 4182450; 578834, 4182374; 
578868, 4182313; 578924, 4182281; 578978, 4182228; 579031, 4182198; 
579123, 4182199; 579201, 4182182; 579322, 4182112; 579375, 4182123; 
579473, 4182169; 579575, 4182173; 579583, 4182183; 579580, 4182203; 
579539, 4182238; 579539, 4182264; 579627, 4182308; 579635, 4182321; 
579644, 4182422; 579725, 4182456; 579724, 4182487; 579714, 4182499; 
579713, 4182593; 579713, 4182613; 579680, 4182606; 579660, 4182580; 
579650, 4182519; 579585, 4182460; 579583, 4182366; 579561, 4182350; 
579515, 4182350; 579444, 4182293; 579399, 4182273; 579335, 4182270; 
579302, 4182279; 579246, 4182320; 579165, 4182329; 579109, 4182318; 
579086, 4182331; 578999, 4182426; 578962, 4182523; 578954, 4182571; 
578928, 4182586; 578855, 4182608; 578819, 4182648; 578778, 4182676; 
578726, 4182734; 578693, 4182723; 578648, 4182695; 578597, 4182700; 
578567, 4182720; 578503, 4182691; 578447, 4182696; 578414, 4182708; 
578381, 4182741; 578361, 4182728; 578349, 4182659; 578280, 4182623; 
578227, 4182625; 578217, 4182587; 578161, 4182571; 578149, 4182530; 
578134, 4182505; 578058, 4182461; 578062, 4182331; 578034, 4182301; 
578030, 4182275; 577999, 4182242; 577997, 4182221; 577987, 4182196; 
577944, 4182157; 577907, 4182114; 577886, 4182116; 577866, 4182136; 
577840, 4182197; 577799, 4182242; 577786, 4182275; 577775, 4182349; 
577757, 4182377; 577759, 4182433; 577728, 4182458; 577727, 4182539; 
577702, 4182592; 577701, 4182645; 577668, 4182681; 577664, 4182772; 
577626, 4182802; 577661, 4182902; 577628, 4182901; 577579, 4182886; 
577531, 4182895; 577480, 4182948; 577456, 4183001; 577408, 4183047; 
577392, 4183074; 577401, 4183204; 577421, 4183235; 577500, 4183258; 
577535, 4183320; 577567, 4183348; 577576, 4183472; 577644, 4183615; 
577691, 4183682; 577711, 4183750; 577734, 4183789; 577746, 4183842; 
577766, 4183881; 577902, 4184014; 577961, 4184136; 577989, 4184167; 
578021, 4184251; 578021, 4184274; 578021, 4184284; 578001, 4184282; 
577971, 4184230; 577885, 4184138; 577815, 4184011; 577770, 4183964; 
577677, 4183905; 577667, 4183872; 577538, 4183744; 577516, 4183655; 
577436, 4183522; 577391, 4183483; 577361, 4183475; 577305, 4183477; 
577236, 4183535; 577167, 4183550; 577090, 4183595; 577082, 4183613; 
577084, 4183661; 577069, 4183714; 577041, 4183721; 577008, 4183668; 
576973, 4183660; 576939, 4183680; 576891, 4183720; 576895, 4183796; 
576869, 4183834; 576862, 4183862; 576844, 4183862; 576834, 4183846; 
576824, 4183790; 576773, 4183790; 576694, 4183840; 576561, 4183973; 
576550, 4183996; 576553, 4184027; 576583, 4184085; 576572, 4184093; 
576501, 4184100; 576455, 4184145; 576403, 4184236; 576374, 4184358; 
576351, 4184398; 576338, 4184441; 576315, 4184479; 576289, 4184560; 
576255, 4184603; 576224, 4184671; 576139, 4184770; 576113, 4184876; 
576092, 4184914; 576081, 4185051; 576150, 4185217; 576233, 4185383; 
576273, 4185436; 576371, 4185526; 576381, 4185557; 576378, 4185590; 
576360, 4185625; 576354, 4185673; 576305, 4185813; 576266, 4185868; 
576225, 4185906; 576194, 4185966; 576192, 4185972; 576202, 4185995; 
576204, 4186045; 576191, 4186053; 576168, 4186032; 576151, 4186002; 
576132, 4185831; 576150, 4185786; 576205, 4185677; 576205, 4185662; 
576215, 4185652; 576233, 4185599; 576236, 4185517; 576227, 4185479; 
576179, 4185428; 576064, 4185201;

[[Page 30]]

576034, 4185180; 575948, 4185090; 575908, 4185077; 575882, 4185100; 
575806, 4185145; 575772, 4185239; 575741, 4185271; 575667, 4185294; 
575657, 4185291; 575657, 4185258; 575696, 4185218; 575701, 4185177; 
575719, 4185154; 575722, 4185099; 575835, 4184985; 575864, 4184912; 
575897, 4184889; 575938, 4184841; 575990, 4184710; 576108, 4184574; 
576119, 4184551; 576121, 4184508; 576135, 4184470; 576258, 4184319; 
576266, 4184273; 576299, 4184215; 576308, 4184167; 576349, 4184088; 
576365, 4184017; 576399, 4183921; 576502, 4183787; 576600, 4183618; 
576689, 4183599; 576745, 4183551; 576865, 4183506; 576942, 4183449; 
576985, 4183441; 577125, 4183372; 577179, 4183324; 577177, 4183286; 
577164, 4183260; 577160, 4183232; 577183, 4183197; 577186, 4183154; 
577178, 4183131; 577179, 4183072; 577187, 4183060; 577187, 4182999; 
577197, 4182986; 577213, 4182908; 577262, 4182875; 577280, 4182850; 
577298, 4182779; 577431, 4182704; 577465, 4182661; 577475, 4182626; 
577496, 4182588; 577540, 4182451; 577563, 4182416; 577569, 4182317; 
577611, 4182218; 577645, 4182162; 577691, 4182125; 577704, 4182061; 
577807, 4181869; 577869, 4181814; 577892, 4181746; 577962, 4181675; 
577969, 4181657; 577967, 4181612; 577920, 4181550; 577927, 4181522; 
577945, 4181500; 577984, 4181419; 577977, 4181388; 577959, 4181378; 
577868, 4181377; 577781, 4181419; 577727, 4181485; 577681, 4181490; 
577668, 4181530; 577617, 4181601; 577556, 4181628; 577507, 4181610; 
577482, 4181627; 577454, 4181670; 577422, 4181749; 577389, 4181759; 
577371, 4181774; 577358, 4181814; 577333, 4181847; 577309, 4181920; 
577253, 4181930; 577225, 4181955; 577222, 4181993; 577183, 4182049; 
577178, 4182079; 577155, 4182107; 577144, 4182150; 577134, 4182163; 
577083, 4182162; 577058, 4182172; 577047, 4182190; 576994, 4182220; 
576991, 4182271; 576952, 4182308; 576917, 4182333; 576883, 4182376; 
576847, 4182470; 576818, 4182498; 576800, 4182543; 576794, 4182660; 
576766, 4182710; 576679, 4182776; 576640, 4182816; 576568, 4182930; 
576545, 4182983; 576522, 4183010; 576506, 4183015; 576506, 4183014; 
576307, 4183277; 576275, 4183301; 576236, 4183342; 576193, 4183382; 
576165, 4183423; 576148, 4183458; 576107, 4183496; 576077, 4183541; 
576049, 4183586; 576019, 4183601; 575968, 4183612; 575931, 4183608; 
575914, 4183606; 575878, 4183623; 575850, 4183633; 575828, 4183633; 
575809, 4183636; 575785, 4183655; 575777, 4183670; 575766, 4183706; 
575743, 4183739; 575687, 4183747; 575670, 4183756; 575659, 4183771; 
575650, 4183794; 575610, 4183811; 575509, 4183871; 575486, 4183893; 
575476, 4183970; 575413, 4184009; 575325, 4184048; 575286, 4184092; 
575257, 4184150; 575208, 4184267; 575173, 4184358; 574651, 4184981; 
574584, 4185041; 574438, 4185139; 574346, 4185217; 574229, 4185324; 
574151, 4185382; 574063, 4185460; 573966, 4185529; 573834, 4185650; 
573795, 4185709; 573727, 4185821; 573639, 4185933; 573532, 4186016; 
573420, 4186079; 573298, 4186201; 573255, 4186220; 573201, 4186245; 
573147, 4186293; 573079, 4186381; 573031, 4186444; 572875, 4186517; 
572753, 4186581; 572690, 4186586; 572646, 4186595; 572568, 4186644; 
572529, 4186737; 572485, 4186771; 572280, 4186912; 572134, 4187019; 
572003, 4187141; 571939, 4187185; 571900, 4187234; returning to 571706, 
4187420.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit 2 (Unit 1, Unit 2, and Unit 6 (Map 2) 
follows:

[[Page 31]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR02OC06.001

    (8) Unit 3: Hayward-Pleasanton Ridge, Alameda County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles Hayward, Newark, Dublin, 
and Niles. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E, N): 585269, 4165999; 585371, 4166270; 585519, 4166567; 585450, 
4166770; 585431, 4166955; 585623, 4167122; 585713, 4167237; 585733, 
4167344; 585763, 4167406; 585800, 4167440; 585819, 4167443; 585875, 
4167470; 585920, 4167470;

[[Page 32]]

585930, 4167470; 585952, 4167464; 585987, 4167462; 586262, 4167359; 
586524, 4167014; 586710, 4167050; 586725, 4167112; 586738, 4167184; 
586741, 4167200; 586738, 4167237; 586744, 4167250; 586759, 4167275; 
586746, 4167307; 586733, 4167314; 586730, 4167349; 586719, 4167443; 
586755, 4167465; 586782, 4167533; 586796, 4167652; 586895, 4167475; 
586894, 4167475; 586924, 4167422; 586941, 4167422; 586973, 4167053; 
587028, 4167054; 587029, 4167040; 587030, 4167024; 587030, 4167024; 
587030, 4167024; 587032, 4166970; 587059, 4166943; 587086, 4166942; 
587106, 4166933; 587159, 4166923; 587177, 4166933; 587191, 4166944; 
587201, 4166952; 587214, 4166964; 587245, 4166945; 587312, 4166906; 
587326, 4166909; 587355, 4166915; 587370, 4166898; 587378, 4166889; 
587442, 4166875; 587453, 4166885; 587525, 4166937; 587579, 4166871; 
587655, 4166806; 587755, 4166771; 587765, 4166767; 587766, 4166404; 
587767, 4166201; 587891, 4166132; 588035, 4166079; 588064, 4166075; 
588160, 4165989; 588151, 4165958; 588199, 4165920; 588288, 4165905; 
588435, 4165906; 588444, 4165874; 588460, 4165492; 588106, 4165477; 
588124, 4165066; 587770, 4165051; 587771, 4164884; 588557, 4164310; 
589385, 4164346; 589368, 4165876; 589365, 4166259; 589175, 4166273; 
589139, 4166304; 589139, 4166304; 589140, 4166304; 589141, 4166304; 
589143, 4166304; 589144, 4166304; 589145, 4166304; 589146, 4166304; 
589147, 4166304; 589148, 4166304; 589149, 4166304; 589151, 4166304; 
589152, 4166304; 589153, 4166304; 589154, 4166304; 589155, 4166304; 
589156, 4166304; 589157, 4166304; 589159, 4166304; 589160, 4166304; 
589161, 4166304; 589162, 4166304; 589163, 4166305; 589164, 4166305; 
589192, 4166310; 589200, 4166317; 589200, 4166318; 589201, 4166318; 
589201, 4166319; 589202, 4166319; 589202, 4166320; 589202, 4166320; 
589203, 4166321; 589203, 4166321; 589203, 4166322; 589204, 4166322; 
589204, 4166323; 589204, 4166323; 589204, 4166324; 589205, 4166324; 
589205, 4166325; 589205, 4166325; 589205, 4166326; 589206, 4166327; 
589206, 4166327; 589206, 4166328; 589206, 4166328; 589206, 4166329; 
589206, 4166329; 589206, 4166330; 589207, 4166331; 589207, 4166331; 
589207, 4166332; 589207, 4166332; 589207, 4166333; 589207, 4166334; 
589207, 4166334; 589207, 4166335; 589207, 4166335; 589207, 4166336; 
589207, 4166337; 589206, 4166337; 589206, 4166338; 589206, 4166338; 
589206, 4166339; 589206, 4166339; 589206, 4166340; 589206, 4166341; 
589205, 4166341; 589205, 4166342; 589205, 4166342; 589205, 4166343; 
589205, 4166343; 589204, 4166344; 589204, 4166344; 589199, 4166354; 
589198, 4166355; 589198, 4166355; 589198, 4166356; 589198, 4166356; 
589197, 4166356; 589197, 4166357; 589197, 4166357; 589196, 4166358; 
589196, 4166358; 589196, 4166358; 589195, 4166359; 589195, 4166359; 
589195, 4166359; 589194, 4166360; 589194, 4166360; 589193, 4166360; 
589193, 4166360; 589193, 4166361; 589192, 4166361; 589192, 4166361; 
589191, 4166361; 589191, 4166362; 589190, 4166362; 589190, 4166362; 
589189, 4166362; 589189, 4166362; 589188, 4166363; 589188, 4166363; 
589187, 4166363; 589187, 4166363; 589174, 4166365; 589173, 4166366; 
589172, 4166366; 589172, 4166366; 589171, 4166366; 589171, 4166366; 
589170, 4166366; 589169, 4166367; 589169, 4166367; 589168, 4166367; 
589167, 4166367; 589167, 4166368; 589166, 4166368; 589166, 4166368; 
589165, 4166369; 589164, 4166369; 589164, 4166369; 589163, 4166370; 
589145, 4166381; 589145, 4166381; 589144, 4166382; 589144, 4166382; 
589143, 4166382; 589143, 4166382; 589142, 4166383; 589142, 4166383; 
589141, 4166383; 589141, 4166383; 589140, 4166383; 589140, 4166383; 
589139, 4166384; 589139, 4166384; 589138, 4166384; 589138, 4166384; 
589137, 4166384; 589137, 4166384; 589136, 4166384; 589136, 4166384; 
589135, 4166384; 589134, 4166384; 589134, 4166384; 589133, 4166384; 
589133, 4166384; 589132, 4166384; 589132, 4166384; 589131, 4166384; 
589131, 4166384; 589130, 4166384; 589130, 4166384; 589129, 4166383; 
589129, 4166383; 589128, 4166383; 589128, 4166383; 589122, 4166381; 
589121, 4166380; 589121, 4166380; 589120, 4166380; 589120, 4166380; 
589119, 4166379; 589119, 4166379; 589118, 4166379; 589118, 4166379; 
589117, 4166378; 589117, 4166378; 589116, 4166378; 589116, 4166377; 
589100, 4166365; 589063, 4166369; 589063, 4166369; 589003, 4166420; 
588991, 4166418; 588913, 4166496; 589008, 4166621; 588926, 4166711; 
588883, 4166692; 588780, 4166774; 588757, 4166753; 588501, 4166908; 
588193, 4167217; 588192, 4167218; 588491, 4167267; 588860, 4167493; 
588871, 4167510; 588871, 4167510; 588551, 4167496; 588495, 4168400; 
588136, 4168395; 588130, 4168799; 587859, 4168799; 587859, 4168847; 
587327, 4169253; 586635, 4168711; 586635, 4168711; 586635, 4168701; 
586626, 4168705; 586571, 4168705; 586534, 4168742; 586351, 4168898; 
586259, 4168990; 586241, 4169091; 586186, 4169137; 586149, 4169182; 
586121, 4169237; 586094, 4169348; 586075, 4169458; 586048, 4169614; 
586048, 4169733; 586057, 4169870; 586167, 4169971; 586314, 4170035; 
586397, 4170091; 586470, 4170155; 586690, 4170173; 586881, 4170173; 
587061, 4170205; 587082, 4170332; 587050, 4170596; 586818, 4170882; 
586606, 4171263; 586468, 4171475; 586469, 4171668; 586479, 4171682; 
586502, 4171722; 586523, 4171744; 586553, 4171782; 586571, 4171809; 
586592, 4171842; 586603, 4171866; 586618, 4171899; 586631, 4171917; 
586643, 4171939; 586650, 4171954; 586655, 4171964; 586665, 4171988; 
586671, 4172002; 586680, 4172037; 586681, 4172048; 586673, 4172077; 
586667, 4172100; 586661, 4172111; 586651, 4172125; 586637, 4172137; 
586628, 4172145; 586597, 4172164; 586587, 4172169; 586571, 4172174; 
586528, 4172189; 586511, 4172196; 586487, 4172206; 586437, 4172227; 
586416, 4172240; 586374, 4172262; 586353, 4172281; 586332, 4172299; 
586318, 4172319; 586308, 4172335; 586299, 4172351; 586291, 4172364; 
586279, 4172382; 586273, 4172393; 586265, 4172416; 586253, 4172437; 
586248, 4172453; 586244, 4172468; 586244, 4172482; 586244, 4172493; 
586246, 4172512; 586250, 4172531; 586259, 4172550; 586270, 4172585; 
586282, 4172626; 586298, 4172653; 586313, 4172673; 586325, 4172693; 
586338, 4172714; 586349, 4172731; 586362, 4172752; 586373, 4172770; 
586384, 4172789; 586390, 4172810; 586393, 4172819; 586399, 4172845; 
586403, 4172869; 586404, 4172883; 586406, 4172912; 586408, 4172921; 
586412, 4172933; 586417, 4172946; 586436, 4172958; 586460, 4172965; 
586482, 4172977; 586497, 4172989; 586509, 4173001; 586519, 4173012; 
586535, 4173024; 586551, 4173037; 586562, 4173049; 586582, 4173069; 
586592, 4173077; 586608, 4173092; 586625, 4173107; 586645, 4173124; 
586664, 4173140; 586676, 4173149; 586689, 4173161; 586706, 4173175; 
586715, 4173184; 586724, 4173195; 586753, 4173212; 586764, 4173214; 
586788, 4173216; 586805, 4173223; 586825, 4173227; 586856, 4173232; 
586887, 4173239; 586908, 4173243; 586932, 4173245; 586958, 4173245; 
586982, 4173250; 587010, 4173255; 587033, 4173258; 587055, 4173264; 
587084, 4173269; 587108, 4173270;

[[Page 33]]

587132, 4173273; 587171, 4173274; 587188, 4173277; 587242, 4173279; 
587272, 4173281; 587285, 4173281; 587309, 4173280; 587326, 4173280; 
587357, 4173279; 587389, 4173275; 587406, 4173275; 587429, 4173275; 
587463, 4173275; 587475, 4173276; 587493, 4173279; 587508, 4173280; 
587535, 4173281; 587544, 4173282; 587559, 4173282; 587583, 4173283; 
587609, 4173283; 587628, 4173284; 587653, 4173284; 587673, 4173285; 
587696, 4173286; 587708, 4173286; 587735, 4173286; 587751, 4173285; 
587762, 4173286; 587781, 4173286; 587811, 4173283; 587821, 4173283; 
587842, 4173286; 587872, 4173287; 587888, 4173291; 587901, 4173293; 
587915, 4173296; 587934, 4173298; 587955, 4173301; 587974, 4173305; 
588016, 4173304; 588037, 4173304; 588050, 4173302; 588092, 4173292; 
588108, 4173288; 588135, 4173280; 588151, 4173269; 588170, 4173262; 
588185, 4173256; 588193, 4173250; 588220, 4173238; 588252, 4173225; 
588272, 4173218; 588275, 4173213; 588529, 4173138; 588702, 4173099; 
588854, 4173025; 588988, 4172966; 589160, 4172888; 589260, 4172878; 
589278, 4172870; 589288, 4172866; 589303, 4172859; 589320, 4172852; 
589334, 4172847; 589349, 4172841; 589372, 4172834; 589405, 4172822; 
589419, 4172820; 589429, 4172817; 589450, 4172811; 589470, 4172806; 
589483, 4172803; 589516, 4172796; 589557, 4172780; 589566, 4172777; 
589578, 4172773; 589617, 4172759; 589631, 4172757; 589647, 4172753; 
589657, 4172751; 589675, 4172749; 589701, 4172744; 589711, 4172741; 
589726, 4172737; 589746, 4172728; 589756, 4172718; 589769, 4172707; 
589780, 4172691; 589785, 4172669; 589794, 4172663; 589804, 4172654; 
589820, 4172647; 589834, 4172643; 589850, 4172644; 589858, 4172649; 
589859, 4172653; 589866, 4172649; 590046, 4172523; 590097, 4172410; 
590195, 4172296; 590238, 4172275; 590281, 4172276; 590362, 4172317; 
590344, 4172351; 590351, 4172402; 590391, 4172433; 590434, 4172457; 
590508, 4172445; 590579, 4172428; 590606, 4172421; 590681, 4172527; 
590734, 4172567; 590740, 4172568; 590754, 4172571; 590773, 4172574; 
590779, 4172574; 590806, 4172547; 590818, 4172492; 590830, 4172479; 
591370, 4172472; 592495, 4172468; 592495, 4172469; 592548, 4172468; 
592577, 4172462; 592597, 4172459; 592634, 4172451; 592649, 4172452; 
592664, 4172451; 592673, 4172450; 592640, 4172397; 592706, 4172349; 
592766, 4172440; 592771, 4172439; 592861, 4172439; 592862, 4172439; 
592864, 4172331; 592864, 4172326; 592865, 4172264; 592830, 4172268; 
592821, 4172262; 592821, 4172246; 592824, 4172235; 592833, 4172217; 
592837, 4172207; 592848, 4172192; 592856, 4172180; 592737, 4172211; 
592697, 4172225; 592685, 4172236; 592665, 4172235; 592663, 4172209; 
592685, 4172164; 592723, 4172119; 592772, 4172075; 592810, 4172048; 
592804, 4172039; 592794, 4172026; 592792, 4172006; 592802, 4171984; 
592833, 4171939; 592851, 4171927; 592785, 4171852; 592786, 4171803; 
592891, 4171806; 592891, 4171773; 592888, 4171769; 592891, 4171690; 
592895, 4171678; 592891, 4171647; 592893, 4171628; 592898, 4171586; 
592901, 4171567; 592915, 4171539; 592936, 4171510; 592951, 4171498; 
592960, 4171492; 592977, 4171490; 592996, 4171486; 593012, 4171482; 
593024, 4171479; 593034, 4171475; 593054, 4171474; 593080, 4171484; 
593120, 4171492; 593139, 4171493; 593173, 4171488; 593197, 4171482; 
593206, 4171484; 593206, 4171506; 593200, 4171531; 593191, 4171562; 
593174, 4171601; 593174, 4171602; 593177, 4171602; 593208, 4171640; 
593231, 4171711; 593231, 4171748; 593214, 4171764; 593199, 4171788; 
593197, 4171793; 593225, 4171790; 593275, 4171783; 593317, 4171778; 
593352, 4171771; 593391, 4171762; 593406, 4171759; 593443, 4171753; 
593473, 4171758; 593530, 4171760; 593571, 4171766; 593604, 4171765; 
593640, 4171766; 593695, 4171758; 593753, 4171746; 593797, 4171730; 
593834, 4171710; 593880, 4171688; 593919, 4171664; 593943, 4171648; 
593976, 4171622; 594006, 4171600; 594023, 4171581; 594026, 4171548; 
593988, 4171476; 593945, 4171435; 593856, 4171366; 593770, 4171299; 
593712, 4171213; 593704, 4171136; 593710, 4171038; 593747, 4170958; 
593796, 4170879; 593869, 4170821; 593951, 4170779; 594017, 4170765; 
594079, 4170782; 594081, 4170783; 594082, 4170783; 594083, 4170786; 
594115, 4170830; 594117, 4170833; 594140, 4170830; 594148, 4170813; 
594157, 4170768; 594181, 4170752; 594213, 4170763; 594231, 4170797; 
594239, 4170832; 594253, 4170843; 594280, 4170811; 594301, 4170784; 
594315, 4170747; 594336, 4170717; 594355, 4170714; 594390, 4170713; 
594412, 4170728; 594542, 4170730; 594644, 4170753; 594708, 4170777; 
594756, 4170803; 594769, 4170807; 594790, 4170820; 594807, 4170831; 
594833, 4170845; 594836, 4170848; 594870, 4170864; 594881, 4170870; 
594969, 4170703; 595378, 4169293; 595550, 4169164; 595777, 4168678; 
596053, 4168453; 595932, 4168389; 595956, 4168312; 595958, 4168285; 
595947, 4168270; 595940, 4168263; 595917, 4168244; 595908, 4168229; 
595906, 4168217; 595903, 4168183; 595908, 4168151; 595926, 4168100; 
595939, 4168079; 595949, 4168069; 595964, 4168048; 595992, 4168019; 
596003, 4168015; 596031, 4168000; 596051, 4167990; 596073, 4167977; 
596091, 4167970; 596115, 4167950; 596133, 4167933; 596097, 4167900; 
596072, 4167808; 596097, 4167764; 596081, 4167684; 596062, 4167618; 
596084, 4167557; 596123, 4167529; 596159, 4167521; 596172, 4167485; 
596189, 4167440; 596206, 4167390; 596222, 4167369; 596230, 4167341; 
596233, 4167299; 596236, 4167275; 596241, 4167240; 596250, 4167212; 
596265, 4167160; 596273, 4167144; 596279, 4167135; 596288, 4167130; 
596303, 4167130; 596315, 4167130; 596344, 4167131; 596379, 4167138; 
596402, 4167142; 596430, 4167152; 596449, 4167157; 596471, 4167164; 
596487, 4167169; 596497, 4167171; 596508, 4167174; 596529, 4167177; 
596547, 4167178; 596572, 4167177; 596586, 4167166; 596602, 4167148; 
596616, 4167120; 596612, 4167094; 596595, 4167085; 596585, 4167071; 
596552, 4167061; 596542, 4167058; 596511, 4167052; 596482, 4167047; 
596472, 4167045; 596426, 4167035; 596393, 4167024; 596379, 4167007; 
596367, 4166977; 596361, 4166963; 596354, 4166945; 596359, 4166928; 
596363, 4166907; 596371, 4166892; 596385, 4166869; 596393, 4166857; 
596403, 4166835; 596404, 4166820; 596410, 4166793; 596421, 4166782; 
596433, 4166755; 596446, 4166722; 596455, 4166700; 596470, 4166674; 
596482, 4166654; 596488, 4166641; 596496, 4166622; 596510, 4166602; 
596522, 4166582; 596529, 4166569; 596543, 4166546; 596549, 4166527; 
596552, 4166516; 596561, 4166488; 596571, 4166455; 596582, 4166427; 
596594, 4166395; 596611, 4166366; 596618, 4166354; 596627, 4166340; 
596649, 4166312; 596672, 4166279; 596683, 4166265; 596692, 4166256; 
596721, 4166237; 596740, 4166223; 596748, 4166215; 596760, 4166201; 
596779, 4166183; 596786, 4166172; 596791, 4166159; 596788, 4166127; 
596779, 4166095; 596764, 4166067; 596750, 4166044; 596743, 4166014; 
596741, 4166001; 596737, 4165952; 596743, 4165927; 596754, 4165905; 
596767, 4165888; 596785, 4165869; 596800, 4165854; 596816, 4165839; 
596845, 4165815; 596862, 4165797;

[[Page 34]]

596880, 4165769; 596888, 4165756; 596895, 4165731; 596904, 4165706; 
596911, 4165691; 596930, 4165657; 596942, 4165643; 596955, 4165629; 
596978, 4165597; 597001, 4165568; 597026, 4165541; 597037, 4165534; 
597050, 4165529; 597093, 4165508; 597105, 4165502; 597138, 4165479; 
597160, 4165463; 597178, 4165446; 597209, 4165422; 597220, 4165409; 
597243, 4165385; 597263, 4165362; 597275, 4165348; 597289, 4165326; 
597307, 4165295; 597322, 4165272; 597337, 4165251; 597353, 4165235; 
597377, 4165210; 597423, 4165180; 597442, 4165170; 597466, 4165157; 
597503, 4165136; 597541, 4165121; 597557, 4165115; 597593, 4165106; 
597612, 4165120; 597621, 4165126; 597632, 4165141; 597653, 4165161; 
597682, 4165182; 597698, 4165198; 597710, 4165209; 597728, 4165225; 
597753, 4165242; 597777, 4165254; 597797, 4165263; 597832, 4165279; 
597860, 4165292; 597886, 4165300; 597907, 4165281; 597928, 4165249; 
597939, 4165230; 597948, 4165208; 597957, 4165184; 597965, 4165174; 
597972, 4165166; 597994, 4165152; 598026, 4165151; 598052, 4165157; 
598104, 4165164; 598149, 4165154; 598170, 4165146; 598188, 4165136; 
598205, 4165121; 598226, 4165079; 598241, 4165068; 598255, 4165059; 
598275, 4165038; 598299, 4165013; 598316, 4164986; 598329, 4164959; 
598344, 4164932; 598357, 4164898; 598364, 4164869; 598369, 4164856; 
598377, 4164835; 598389, 4164808; 598401, 4164777; 598429, 4164725; 
598438, 4164716; 598448, 4164710; 598468, 4164691; 598478, 4164685; 
598497, 4164678; 598519, 4164672; 598546, 4164664; 598565, 4164657; 
598588, 4164644; 598637, 4164618; 598649, 4164613; 598665, 4164601; 
598698, 4164578; 598718, 4164562; 598727, 4164538; 598744, 4164497; 
598751, 4164455; 598758, 4164425; 598772, 4164378; 598780, 4164350; 
598790, 4164316; 598804, 4164272; 598820, 4164215; 598832, 4164180; 
598846, 4164141; 598858, 4164110; 598865, 4164093; 598873, 4164072; 
598882, 4164049; 598896, 4164020; 598912, 4163980; 598928, 4163941; 
598944, 4163907; 598964, 4163866; 598980, 4163838; 598999, 4163798; 
599030, 4163743; 599049, 4163697; 599076, 4163650; 599093, 4163620; 
598650, 4163199; 598162, 4163032; 597935, 4162556; 597447, 4162401; 
596649, 4162377; 596727, 4161559; 596679, 4161553; 596493, 4161501; 
596337, 4161460; 596182, 4161377; 595985, 4161325; 595978, 4161334; 
595835, 4161377; 595690, 4161418; 595607, 4161480; 595524, 4161563; 
595452, 4161646; 595369, 4161750; 595234, 4161812; 595130, 4161853; 
595006, 4161884; 594871, 4161874; 594799, 4161853; 594685, 4161791; 
594623, 4161729; 594550, 4161667; 594426, 4161553; 594374, 4161480; 
594312, 4161377; 594271, 4161253; 594229, 4161128; 594146, 4161066; 
594053, 4161035; 593991, 4161045; 593939, 4161087; 593898, 4161128; 
593836, 4161190; 593815, 4161253; 593815, 4161335; 593804, 4161418; 
593794, 4161543; 593784, 4161667; 593753, 4161781; 593670, 4161843; 
593597, 4161864; 593483, 4161833; 593359, 4161781; 593235, 4161729; 
593110, 4161698; 593028, 4161719; 592945, 4161750; 592841, 4161760; 
592655, 4161791; 592530, 4161750; 592489, 4161688; 592406, 4161605; 
592334, 4161501; 592261, 4161429; 592199, 4161335; 592095, 4161149; 
592033, 4161025; 591992, 4160880; 591950, 4160755; 591909, 4160704; 
591795, 4160610; 591775, 4160603; 591660, 4160559; 591567, 4160486; 
591464, 4160424; 591407, 4160360; 590912, 4160704; 589936, 4161024; 
589484, 4161385; 588893, 4161607; 588409, 4162058; 588155, 4162354; 
587761, 4162321; 587490, 4162378; 587244, 4162641; 586956, 4162846; 
586784, 4162879; 586784, 4162887; 586790, 4163066; 586792, 4163117; 
586769, 4163141; 586644, 4163273; 586431, 4163527; 586291, 4163766; 
586168, 4163954; 586029, 4164176; 585897, 4164233; 585807, 4164324; 
585717, 4164644; 585716, 4164653; 585712, 4164739; 585701, 4164972; 
585701, 4164986; 585712, 4165171; 585832, 4165497; 585658, 4165554; 
585646, 4165742; 585381, 4165840; returning to 585269, 4165999.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit 3 (Map 3) follows:

[[Page 35]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR02OC06.002

    (9) Unit 4: Mount Diablo-Black Hills, Contra Costa County, 
California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles Diablo, Tassajara, Walnut 
Creek, Clayton. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 
coordinates (E, N): 587469, 4194136; 587939, 4194568; 588429, 4194484; 
588517, 4194568; 588718, 4194677; 588869, 4194828; 588894, 4194853; 
588913, 4194953; 588927, 4195024; 588899, 4195658; 588832, 4195885; 
588601, 4196521; 588591, 4196523;

[[Page 36]]

588592, 4196524; 588541, 4196661; 588513, 4196736; 588530, 4196754; 
588603, 4196809; 588653, 4196812; 588711, 4196735; 588752, 4196709; 
588774, 4196773; 588822, 4196829; 588817, 4196858; 588874, 4196856; 
588923, 4196851; 588978, 4196874; 589014, 4196931; 589062, 4196960; 
589090, 4196976; 589125, 4197042; 589163, 4197117; 589092, 4197248; 
589049, 4197337; 588951, 4197415; 588878, 4197515; 588807, 4197513; 
588719, 4197544; 588683, 4197488; 588634, 4197493; 588606, 4197473; 
588481, 4197436; 588514, 4197345; 588387, 4197362; 588264, 4197341; 
588239, 4197371; 588153, 4197461; 588048, 4197462; 587967, 4197688; 
587998, 4197701; 588197, 4197775; 588208, 4197815; 588219, 4197874; 
588215, 4197923; 588179, 4197993; 588116, 4198041; 588057, 4198145; 
588027, 4198240; 588069, 4198275; 588049, 4198330; 587987, 4198461; 
587703, 4198447; 587617, 4198658; 587635, 4198690; 587734, 4198896; 
587828, 4199024; 587977, 4199159; 588113, 4199284; 588173, 4199495; 
588149, 4199683; 588155, 4199884; 588155, 4199906; 588211, 4200053; 
588236, 4200118; 588304, 4200203; 588318, 4200196; 588335, 4200186; 
588440, 4200119; 588492, 4199940; 588634, 4199995; 588719, 4199995; 
588818, 4199983; 588976, 4199963; 589017, 4199991; 589071, 4200049; 
589154, 4200075; 589213, 4200087; 589189, 4200499; 589188, 4200511; 
589337, 4200529; 589399, 4200536; 589557, 4200549; 589631, 4200554; 
589707, 4200525; 589737, 4200514; 589698, 4200337; 589687, 4199962; 
589926, 4199910; 590103, 4199986; 590148, 4200033; 590148, 4200067; 
590152, 4200123; 590162, 4200201; 590195, 4200260; 590211, 4200273; 
590238, 4200140; 590238, 4199868; 590238, 4199631; 590146, 4199425; 
590144, 4199402; 590129, 4199228; 590122, 4199141; 589488, 4199124; 
589423, 4199065; 589384, 4199049; 589399, 4198938; 589438, 4198871; 
589480, 4198804; 589452, 4198667; 589395, 4198502; 589397, 4198419; 
589504, 4198350; 589776, 4198339; 589897, 4198345; 589993, 4198339; 
590092, 4198309; 590129, 4198284; 590129, 4198131; 590238, 4197805; 
590509, 4197805; 590528, 4197805; 590889, 4197805; 591201, 4197805; 
591211, 4197738; 591216, 4197601; 591211, 4197496; 591268, 4197411; 
591415, 4197312; 591576, 4197402; 591596, 4197423; 591704, 4197099; 
591866, 4196983; 592467, 4197245; 593008, 4197752; 593012, 4198200; 
593037, 4198195; 593799, 4198194; 593804, 4198194; 593802, 4197973; 
593800, 4197665; 594249, 4197677; 594262, 4197408; 594618, 4197387; 
594647, 4196609; 595450, 4196605; 595458, 4195926; 595671, 4195936; 
595674, 4196109; 596111, 4196119; 596027, 4195950; 596184, 4195952; 
596281, 4196126; 597137, 4196128; 597151, 4194892; 598757, 4194910; 
598752, 4195293; 598936, 4195287; 598872, 4195917; 598742, 4196057; 
597972, 4196028; 597966, 4196498; 598436, 4196509; 598524, 4196362; 
598740, 4196238; 598741, 4196154; 598976, 4195997; 598984, 4195971; 
599024, 4195342; 599136, 4194911; 599038, 4194400; 599071, 4194357; 
599349, 4194091; 597975, 4194029; 597956, 4193671; 597159, 4193680; 
597159, 4193266; 596748, 4193261; 596778, 4192517; 597149, 4192513; 
597156, 4189977; 597242, 4189986; 597514, 4189551; 597894, 4189334; 
598165, 4189117; 598491, 4188791; 598709, 4188511; 598753, 4188511; 
598753, 4188455; 598871, 4188302; 599577, 4188411; 600012, 4188411; 
600446, 4187977; 600880, 4187651; 601695, 4186728; 602129, 4186456; 
602944, 4185370; 603324, 4185153; 603650, 4184936; 603779, 4184807; 
603542, 4184796; 601470, 4184564; 600272, 4184571; 600238, 4184570; 
600195, 4184570; 600147, 4184570; 599989, 4184567; 599977, 4184239; 
599550, 4184239; 599550, 4183913; 599340, 4184011; 598785, 4184138; 
598786, 4184147; 598772, 4184597; 598771, 4184647; 598763, 4185302; 
598761, 4185412; 598758, 4185541; 598755, 4185742; 598755, 4185749; 
598754, 4185765; 598750, 4186082; 598639, 4186080; 598470, 4186163; 
598367, 4186076; 598252, 4186058; 598249, 4186065; 598207, 4186074; 
598159, 4186018; 598117, 4186002; 598011, 4185918; 597984, 4185821; 
597924, 4185799; 597753, 4185622; 597719, 4185636; 597626, 4185685; 
597525, 4185702; 597426, 4185779; 597369, 4185868; 597416, 4185961; 
597493, 4186033; 597548, 4185942; 597641, 4185957; 597599, 4186043; 
597618, 4186093; 597687, 4186112; 597752, 4186146; 597745, 4186227; 
597804, 4186333; 597826, 4186358; 597805, 4186397; 597766, 4186378; 
597734, 4186380; 597646, 4186425; 597605, 4186411; 597553, 4186316; 
597463, 4186346; 597449, 4186405; 597478, 4186430; 597464, 4186469; 
597413, 4186463; 597382, 4186509; 597327, 4186508; 597309, 4186656; 
597316, 4186737; 597342, 4186783; 597337, 4186788; 597354, 4186834; 
597403, 4186877; 597481, 4186910; 597469, 4186984; 597351, 4186920; 
597272, 4186833; 597170, 4186823; 597163, 4186771; 597203, 4186697; 
597206, 4186686; 597204, 4186675; 597127, 4186611; 597023, 4186628; 
596933, 4186658; 596921, 4186625; 596959, 4186587; 596961, 4186540; 
597091, 4186479; 597095, 4186403; 597103, 4186386; 597151, 4186191; 
597107, 4186163; 596981, 4186073; 596847, 4186065; 596749, 4186139; 
596747, 4186198; 596669, 4186270; 596665, 4186338; 596691, 4186540; 
596643, 4186586; 596616, 4186654; 596575, 4186713; 596484, 4186784; 
596407, 4186701; 596360, 4186729; 596334, 4186756; 596317, 4186745; 
596281, 4186732; 596201, 4186675; 596157, 4186654; 596097, 4186656; 
596025, 4186654; 595957, 4186653; 595747, 4186647; 595746, 4186683; 
596008, 4186985; 596001, 4187244; 595730, 4187237; 595719, 4187540; 
595808, 4187704; 595759, 4187758; 595729, 4187774; 595703, 4187743; 
595667, 4187710; 595585, 4187614; 595558, 4187648; 595528, 4187667; 
595499, 4187679; 595487, 4187698; 595468, 4187800; 595447, 4187855; 
595413, 4187888; 595429, 4187967; 595434, 4188064; 595407, 4188098; 
595386, 4188085; 595340, 4188061; 595350, 4188041; 595347, 4187986; 
595324, 4187940; 595291, 4187920; 595266, 4187812; 595294, 4187742; 
595299, 4187714; 595293, 4187693; 595257, 4187654; 595225, 4187582; 
595197, 4187526; 595193, 4187381; 595173, 4187306; 595140, 4187260; 
595071, 4187230; 595069, 4187225; 595055, 4187217; 595022, 4187220; 
594918, 4187213; 594836, 4187242; 594742, 4187278; 594650, 4187314; 
594641, 4187318; 594544, 4187327; 594544, 4187327; 594443, 4187362; 
594349, 4187395; 594305, 4187448; 594282, 4187528; 594262, 4187601; 
594259, 4187610; 594243, 4187669; 594230, 4187682; 594226, 4187687; 
594226, 4187719; 594228, 4187774; 594222, 4187774; 593800, 4187766; 
593776, 4187904; 593715, 4187966; 593667, 4187969; 593636, 4187970; 
593366, 4187931; 593343, 4187957; 593320, 4187982; 593151, 4187981; 
593144, 4187981; 593142, 4187978; 593010, 4188098; 592921, 4188293; 
592931, 4188292; 592842, 4188494; 592804, 4188582; 592739, 4188729; 
592734, 4188740; 592670, 4188720; 592613, 4188713; 592610, 4188712; 
592607, 4188712; 592607, 4188718; 592608, 4188849; 592585, 4188842; 
592585, 4188842; 592563, 4188852; 592554, 4188879; 592548, 4188897; 
592581, 4188931; 592583, 4188954; 592400, 4189066; 592401, 4189071; 
592408, 4189112; 592415, 4189115;

[[Page 37]]

592460, 4189134; 592442, 4189198; 592436, 4189221; 592206, 4189212; 
592206, 4189328; 592216, 4189495; 592268, 4189579; 592267, 4189601; 
592258, 4189791; 592258, 4189799; 592373, 4189936; 592436, 4190030; 
592541, 4190082; 592625, 4190103; 592625, 4190449; 592531, 4190449; 
592436, 4190460; 592363, 4190481; 592300, 4190460; 592216, 4190491; 
592101, 4190533; 591996, 4190596; 591881, 4190690; 591839, 4190764; 
591797, 4190837; 591775, 4190852; 591734, 4190879; 591639, 4190932; 
591493, 4191047; 591445, 4191063; 591429, 4191068; 591304, 4191110; 
591241, 4191162; 591105, 4191267; 591010, 4191267; 590916, 4191298; 
590843, 4191246; 590843, 4191120; 590798, 4191044; 590769, 4190994; 
590692, 4191040; 590643, 4191068; 590570, 4191120; 590507, 4191141; 
590423, 4191246; 590339, 4191372; 590266, 4191382; 590245, 4191414; 
590235, 4191634; 590140, 4191917; 589899, 4191739; 589857, 4191686; 
589763, 4191487; 589648, 4191519; 589480, 4191529; 589333, 4191508; 
589092, 4191676; 589040, 4191644; 588977, 4191644; 588851, 4191686; 
588851, 4191704; 588851, 4191728; 588966, 4191969; 588977, 4192085; 
588966, 4192116; 588872, 4192158; 588809, 4192252; 588809, 4192305; 
588725, 4192483; 588788, 4192619; 588746, 4192630; 588694, 4192630; 
588536, 4192777; 588410, 4192861; 588295, 4192944; 588295, 4193007; 
588264, 4193154; 588159, 4193238; 588096, 4193353; 587700, 4193738; 
returning to 587469, 4194136.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit 4 (Map 4) follows:

[[Page 38]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR02OC06.003

    (10) Unit 5A: Cedar Mountain, Alameda and San Joaquin Counties, 
California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles Altamont, Midway, 
Mendenhall Springs, and Cedar Mtn. Land bounded by the following UTM 
Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 624962, 4170579; 625090, 4170515; 
625154, 4170515; 625282, 4170515; 625474, 4170515; 625645, 4170558; 
625731, 4170366; 625837, 4170216; 626179, 4170216; 626478, 4170066; 
626585, 4170066; 626607, 4170195;

[[Page 39]]

626586, 4170399; 626612, 4170390; 626615, 4170402; 626626, 4170412; 
626629, 4170422; 626647, 4170434; 626684, 4170436; 626707, 4170437; 
626747, 4170425; 626770, 4170407; 626790, 4170391; 626813, 4170378; 
626916, 4170347; 626952, 4170323; 626958, 4170301; 626972, 4170253; 
626979, 4170229; 626989, 4170208; 627014, 4170156; 627029, 4170132; 
627056, 4170089; 627067, 4170049; 627082, 4170002; 627104, 4169947; 
627139, 4169865; 627167, 4169809; 627195, 4169785; 627228, 4169767; 
627251, 4169785; 627304, 4169793; 627382, 4169802; 627397, 4169763; 
627414, 4169719; 627433, 4169669; 627458, 4169619; 627478, 4169587; 
627515, 4169552; 627558, 4169537; 627589, 4169507; 627605, 4169498; 
627635, 4169480; 627660, 4169479; 627680, 4169489; 627710, 4169497; 
627746, 4169507; 627774, 4169519; 627799, 4169530; 627821, 4169526; 
627879, 4169517; 627925, 4169510; 627973, 4169509; 628048, 4169503; 
628109, 4169500; 628174, 4169480; 628209, 4169464; 628262, 4169442; 
628292, 4169436; 628335, 4169426; 628368, 4169417; 628404, 4169394; 
628430, 4169357; 628450, 4169311; 628467, 4169264; 628487, 4169239; 
628505, 4169216; 628508, 4169199; 628522, 4169179; 628555, 4169134; 
628575, 4169119; 628598, 4169094; 628639, 4169047; 628666, 4169011; 
628750, 4168928; 628805, 4168875; 628842, 4168896; 628863, 4168894; 
628886, 4168893; 628938, 4168875; 628971, 4168851; 629006, 4168810; 
629023, 4168784; 629021, 4168755; 629020, 4168729; 629029, 4168691; 
629039, 4168653; 629035, 4168625; 629041, 4168604; 629049, 4168574; 
629076, 4168531; 629098, 4168485; 629141, 4168434; 629182, 4168396; 
629196, 4168394; 629218, 4168381; 629270, 4168352; 629286, 4168227; 
629286, 4168009; 629326, 4167870; 629564, 4167612; 629544, 4167413; 
629524, 4167116; 629504, 4166838; 629643, 4166600; 629683, 4166342; 
629584, 4166104; 629385, 4165985; 629167, 4166005; 628671, 4165925; 
628532, 4165786; 628314, 4165628; 628155, 4165370; 627897, 4165012; 
627738, 4164655; 627599, 4164358; 627183, 4164020; 626925, 4163643; 
626925, 4163246; 627024, 4162929; 627202, 4162770; 627163, 4162631; 
626845, 4162393; 626627, 4162175; 626250, 4161996; 625774, 4161798; 
625416, 4161758; 625297, 4161540; 625357, 4161341; 625615, 4161063; 
625952, 4160647; 626270, 4160389; 626309, 4160091; 626250, 4159575; 
626270, 4159377; 626409, 4159139; 626349, 4158781; 626369, 4158385; 
626239, 4157942; 626171, 4157710; 625893, 4157511; 625674, 4157492; 
625436, 4157630; 625278, 4157531; 624901, 4157571; 624762, 4157412; 
624524, 4157313; 624206, 4157293; 623809, 4157293; 623373, 4157273; 
623369, 4157265; 623273, 4157015; 622122, 4157293; 621011, 4157928; 
620436, 4158722; 619801, 4159258; 619761, 4159774; 619543, 4159754; 
619166, 4159694; 618888, 4159734; 618531, 4159774; 618293, 4159833; 
617896, 4159774; 617538, 4159694; 617360, 4159436; 616983, 4159337; 
616586, 4159218; 615732, 4159484; 615878, 4159699; 615819, 4160001; 
615780, 4160265; 615771, 4160548; 615878, 4160899; 615917, 4161191; 
615790, 4161328; 615771, 4161679; 615653, 4162020; 615897, 4162459; 
616170, 4162645; 616375, 4163064; 616328, 4163465; 616368, 4163901; 
616308, 4164397; 616658, 4164712; 616715, 4164704; 616865, 4164811; 
617057, 4164918; 617164, 4165025; 617207, 4165153; 617249, 4165196; 
617484, 4165260; 617698, 4165260; 617912, 4165260; 618061, 4165174; 
618296, 4165025; 618339, 4164896; 618446, 4164896; 618531, 4164854; 
618659, 4164768; 618745, 4164597; 618830, 4164533; 618873, 4164405; 
618980, 4164362; 619108, 4164362; 619236, 4164234; 619514, 4163999; 
619599, 4163978; 619792, 4163935; 619941, 4163871; 620048, 4163871; 
620133, 4163743; 620411, 4163743; 620603, 4163572; 620689, 4163572; 
620796, 4163529; 621137, 4163422; 621244, 4163444; 621437, 4163358; 
621543, 4163316; 621672, 4163294; 621800, 4163187; 621821, 4162995; 
621832, 4163004; 622206, 4163294; 622206, 4163465; 622206, 4163572; 
622248, 4163679; 622013, 4163935; 621928, 4163956; 621800, 4163999; 
621736, 4164085; 621714, 4164277; 621565, 4164341; 621415, 4164384; 
621372, 4164576; 621330, 4164640; 621266, 4164726; 621266, 4164832; 
621415, 4164961; 621522, 4165046; 621650, 4165131; 621714, 4165238; 
621693, 4165345; 621672, 4165473; 621714, 4165580; 621693, 4165815; 
621607, 4165965; 621586, 4166071; 621565, 4166232; 621565, 4166285; 
621650, 4166520; 621821, 4166712; 622013, 4166926; 622099, 4166947; 
622334, 4167140; 622547, 4167204; 622633, 4167289; 622590, 4167396; 
622526, 4167588; 622526, 4167866; 622526, 4167994; 622483, 4168144; 
622462, 4168315; 622676, 4168528; 622782, 4168742; 622782, 4168891; 
622654, 4169020; 622505, 4169126; 622355, 4169126; 622377, 4169233; 
622419, 4169426; 622419, 4169596; 622419, 4169767; 622312, 4169810; 
624150, 4169789; 624342, 4169874; 624492, 4170024; 624492, 4170152; 
624492, 4170323; 624534, 4170494; 624705, 4170601; 624833, 4170643; 
returning to 624962, 4170579.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit 5A is provided in paragraph (11)(ii) of this 
section.
    (11) Unit 5B; Alameda County and Santa Clara County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles Niles, La Costa Valley, 
Mendenhall Springs, Calaveras Reservoir, Mt. Day. Land bounded by the 
following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 602197, 4155953; 
602394, 4155892; 602698, 4155953; 602747, 4156027; 603122, 4156019; 
603577, 4155710; 603854, 4155726; 603919, 4155564; 604114, 4155499; 
604130, 4155353; 604634, 4155174; 604797, 4154979; 605138, 4155483; 
605561, 4155580; 605805, 4155743; 606943, 4154914; 607089, 4154702; 
607349, 4154670; 607658, 4154410; 607772, 4154166; 608146, 4153922; 
608309, 4153499; 608585, 4153402; 608666, 4153255; 608926, 4153255; 
609203, 4153125; 609284, 4152979; 609609, 4152995; 610195, 4152816; 
610634, 4152394; 610699, 4152198; 611398, 4152198; 611983, 4152475; 
612373, 4152475; 612650, 4152361; 613056, 4152540; 613446, 4152524; 
613593, 4152361; 614487, 4151955; 614617, 4151961; 614780, 4151820; 
614962, 4151397; 614905, 4151070; 615116, 4150964; 615241, 4150715; 
615366, 4150801; 615750, 4150782; 616019, 4150206; 616192, 4150109; 
616413, 4149812; 616499, 4149254; 616134, 4148909; 615641, 4148634; 
615372, 4147941; 614624, 4147768; 614579, 4147670; 614189, 4147648; 
613874, 4147530; 613683, 4147420; 613492, 4147170; 613184, 4147002; 
613007, 4146920; 612824, 4147011; 612733, 4146904; 612627, 4146904; 
612475, 4146920; 612323, 4147102; 611959, 4147102; 611701, 4147481; 
611337, 4147588; 611185, 4147542; 610866, 4148043; 610638, 4148134; 
610699, 4148241; 610623, 4148301; 610365, 4148286; 610365, 4148362; 
610092, 4148575; 609849, 4148575; 609257, 4148800; 609257, 4149227; 
609090, 4149379; 608771, 4149288; 608391, 4149531; 608057, 4149516; 
607693, 4149789; 607161, 4149470; 606645, 4149546; 606478, 4149956; 
606463, 4150457; 606387, 4150518; 605901, 4150472; 605795, 4150563; 
605750, 4150913; 605628, 4151034;

[[Page 40]]

605036, 4151186; 604763, 4151398; 604186, 4151429; 604292, 4151095; 
604277, 4150821; 604034, 4150791; 603973, 4150472; 603867, 4150609; 
603533, 4150746; 603396, 4151262; 603199, 4151565; 603108, 4151550; 
603047, 4151656; 602759, 4151778; 602425, 4151793; 602377, 4151646; 
602030, 4151353; 601817, 4151292; 601301, 4150943; 601438, 4150852; 
601377, 4150670; 600982, 4150624; 600724, 4150320; 600239, 4150290; 
600087, 4150487; 599829, 4150548; 599737, 4150700; 599707, 4151292; 
599586, 4151626; 598902, 4152355; 599039, 4152385; 599191, 4152552; 
599510, 4153372; 599540, 4153645; 599358, 4153827; 599555, 4153949; 
599662, 4154161; 599677, 4154526; 599798, 4154541; 600056, 4154860; 
600421, 4154936; 600922, 4154799; 601392, 4154966; 601514, 4155042; 
601575, 4155179; 601544, 4155437; 601711, 4155558; 601833, 4155877; 
602106, 4156074; returning to 602197, 4155953.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit 5A and Unit 5B (Map 5) follows:

[[Page 41]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR02OC06.004

    (12) Unit 6: Caldecott Tunnel, Alameda and Contra Costa Counties, 
California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles Briones Valley, and Oakland 
East. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates (E, 
N): 566273, 4191731; 566273, 4191775; 566276, 4191777; 566275, 4191780; 
566294, 4191824; 566332, 4191876; 566329, 4191875; 566330, 4191877; 
566390, 4191931; 566415, 4191935; 566458, 4191942; 566525, 4191942; 
566600, 4191940;

[[Page 42]]

566669, 4191935; 566750, 4191950; 566752, 4191952; 566839, 4191957; 
566944, 4191974; 567064, 4191950; 567124, 4191941; 567186, 4191988; 
567240, 4192047; 567227, 4192102; 567203, 4192172; 567156, 4192217; 
567079, 4192271; 567066, 4192295; 567040, 4192363; 567037, 4192422; 
567001, 4192463; 566959, 4192511; 566950, 4192542; 566937, 4192585; 
566909, 4192628; 566891, 4192658; 566845, 4192729; 566798, 4192772; 
566741, 4192832; 566727, 4192843; 566723, 4192842; 566687, 4192855; 
566647, 4192882; 566625, 4192904; 566624, 4192905; 566624, 4192906; 
566627, 4192907; 566650, 4192915; 566650, 4192915; 566776, 4192988; 
566895, 4193034; 567014, 4193041; 567193, 4193015; 567365, 4192955; 
567470, 4192915; 567596, 4192862; 567735, 4192796; 567874, 4192737; 
568059, 4192697; 568154, 4192688; 568198, 4192684; 568350, 4192684; 
568516, 4192684; 568668, 4192690; 568794, 4192710; 568816, 4192719; 
568885, 4192674; 569349, 4192659; 570105, 4192947; 570104, 4192949; 
570201, 4192984; 570206, 4192985; 570967, 4193256; 571027, 4193166; 
571060, 4193146; 571089, 4193100; 571085, 4193094; 571113, 4193087; 
571153, 4193067; 571189, 4193034; 571239, 4192998; 571292, 4192955; 
571345, 4192912; 571391, 4192879; 571440, 4192856; 571474, 4192826; 
571493, 4192770; 571507, 4192720; 571507, 4192677; 571509, 4192637; 
571500, 4192615; 571485, 4192563; 571471, 4192513; 571463, 4192468; 
571449, 4192419; 571443, 4192379; 571428, 4192347; 571426, 4192341; 
571396, 4192291; 571336, 4192158; 571335, 4192155; 571309, 4192084; 
571230, 4191987; 571131, 4191901; 571110, 4191870; 571063, 4191824; 
571036, 4191808; 571021, 4191784; 571000, 4191768; 570982, 4191756; 
570968, 4191741; 570953, 4191723; 570942, 4191705; 570924, 4191679; 
570902, 4191656; 570890, 4191641; 570876, 4191624; 570855, 4191599; 
570818, 4191574; 570789, 4191551; 570766, 4191532; 570748, 4191520; 
570730, 4191505; 570713, 4191489; 570696, 4191477; 570666, 4191470; 
570652, 4191472; 570642, 4191487; 570624, 4191517; 570623, 4191557; 
570610, 4191565; 570597, 4191564; 570569, 4191545; 570544, 4191533; 
570522, 4191522; 570481, 4191513; 570431, 4191507; 570377, 4191500; 
570335, 4191500; 570296, 4191493; 570271, 4191488; 570228, 4191474; 
570182, 4191457; 570131, 4191433; 570106, 4191422; 570052, 4191402; 
570011, 4191390; 569972, 4191372; 569929, 4191357; 569883, 4191341; 
569840, 4191327; 569800, 4191313; 569709, 4191263; 569680, 4191243; 
569662, 4191230; 569631, 4191209; 569607, 4191194; 569587, 4191178; 
569562, 4191158; 569542, 4191128; 569529, 4191089; 569518, 4191057; 
569512, 4191026; 569507, 4191000; 569503, 4190973; 569497, 4190945; 
569491, 4190916; 569480, 4190893; 569464, 4190866; 569458, 4190850; 
569450, 4190828; 569442, 4190801; 569422, 4190770; 569400, 4190748; 
569378, 4190719; 569367, 4190704; 569361, 4190680; 569366, 4190659; 
569394, 4190657; 569425, 4190659; 569453, 4190661; 569483, 4190662; 
569506, 4190650; 569526, 4190643; 569539, 4190637; 569548, 4190661; 
569558, 4190707; 569565, 4190747; 569575, 4190779; 569593, 4190830; 
569602, 4190856; 569612, 4190892; 569622, 4190907; 569630, 4190935; 
569639, 4190973; 569642, 4190993; 569647, 4191031; 569650, 4191055; 
569660, 4191091; 569666, 4191105; 569679, 4191137; 569688, 4191146; 
569718, 4191166; 569782, 4191200; 569814, 4191218; 569865, 4191241; 
569965, 4191276; 570008, 4191299; 570032, 4191310; 570064, 4191321; 
570101, 4191336; 570140, 4191343; 570186, 4191350; 570223, 4191351; 
570235, 4191352; 570263, 4191311; 570652, 4191238; 570706, 4191244; 
570724, 4191310; 570758, 4191385; 570802, 4191401; 570818, 4191407; 
570862, 4191409; 570947, 4191357; 571019, 4191288; 571101, 4191224; 
571197, 4191141; 571215, 4191127; 571062, 4190723; 571068, 4190712; 
571078, 4190695; 571080, 4190684; 571082, 4190675; 571089, 4190659; 
571103, 4190639; 571130, 4190610; 571154, 4190584; 571169, 4190573; 
571187, 4190563; 571187, 4190553; 571189, 4190539; 571201, 4190525; 
571209, 4190518; 571220, 4190521; 571233, 4190526; 571251, 4190537; 
571261, 4190535; 571280, 4190532; 571307, 4190531; 571329, 4190534; 
571338, 4190526; 571353, 4190516; 571363, 4190508; 571365, 4190503; 
571375, 4190488; 571395, 4190466; 571413, 4190452; 571434, 4190442; 
571446, 4190439; 571462, 4190438; 571501, 4190409; 571518, 4190382; 
571532, 4190368; 571530, 4190356; 571530, 4190350; 571532, 4190326; 
571543, 4190299; 571554, 4190284; 571569, 4190268; 571587, 4190253; 
571621, 4190240; 571650, 4190240; 571676, 4190245; 571711, 4190256; 
571727, 4190260; 571727, 4190257; 571728, 4190233; 571737, 4190205; 
571757, 4190178; 571799, 4190134; 571837, 4190109; 571864, 4190088; 
571906, 4190051; 571936, 4190024; 571957, 4190013; 572007, 4189996; 
572029, 4189908; 572044, 4189882; 572057, 4189869; 572066, 4189862; 
572094, 4189850; 572124, 4189847; 572160, 4189839; 572205, 4189832; 
572226, 4189836; 572263, 4189846; 572304, 4189859; 572342, 4189843; 
572359, 4189837; 572382, 4189835; 572400, 4189837; 572427, 4189846; 
572448, 4189859; 572461, 4189872; 572473, 4189859; 572490, 4189852; 
572538, 4189848; 572694, 4189850; 572729, 4189845; 572755, 4189840; 
572861, 4189793; 572876, 4189783; 572913, 4189747; 572989, 4189665; 
573044, 4189602; 573076, 4189564; 573078, 4189557; 573124, 4189412; 
573209, 4189380; 573237, 4189455; 573402, 4189420; 573445, 4189336; 
573625, 4188983; 573587, 4188867; 573568, 4188810; 573554, 4188767; 
574038, 4188607; 574070, 4188596; 574233, 4188195; 574259, 4188130; 
574257, 4188128; 574237, 4188122; 574149, 4188116; 574055, 4188110; 
573986, 4188110; 573898, 4188116; 573804, 4188122; 573710, 4188122; 
573597, 4188103; 573484, 4188097; 573371, 4188084; 573251, 4188072; 
573163, 4188053; 573050, 4188034; 572943, 4188003; 572824, 4187978; 
572686, 4187965; 572560, 4187984; 572447, 4188022; 572340, 4188072; 
572259, 4188110; 572146, 4188147; 572045, 4188160; 571970, 4188166; 
571888, 4188166; 571887, 4188166; 571887, 4188166; 571887, 4188165; 
571886, 4188165; 571886, 4188165; 571881, 4188161; 571877, 4188157; 
571873, 4188153; 571871, 4188149; 571870, 4188147; 571869, 4188144; 
571867, 4188142; 571864, 4188142; 571861, 4188142; 571853, 4188140; 
571840, 4188132; 571830, 4188124; 571820, 4188118; 571808, 4188115; 
571795, 4188114; 571786, 4188115; 571778, 4188116; 571765, 4188119; 
571749, 4188124; 571727, 4188134; 571718, 4188138; 571708, 4188144; 
571698, 4188159; 571692, 4188165; 571679, 4188165; 571670, 4188161; 
571655, 4188156; 571634, 4188158; 571592, 4188163; 571567, 4188176; 
571565, 4188179; 571512, 4188141; 571496, 4188145; 571484, 4188148; 
571473, 4188148; 571459, 4188148; 571450, 4188148; 571425, 4188145; 
571395, 4188147; 571362, 4188155; 571338, 4188158; 571339, 4188199; 
571336, 4188202; 571332, 4188206; 571316, 4188221; 571290, 4188247; 
571267, 4188268; 571159, 4188361; 571159, 4188361; 571152, 4188367; 
571152, 4188367; 571152, 4188369; 571147, 4188412; 571139, 4188431; 
571124, 4188447; 571110, 4188455;

[[Page 43]]

571092, 4188459; 571077, 4188458; 571059, 4188452; 571045, 4188442; 
571037, 4188430; 571036, 4188431; 570979, 4188447; 570979, 4188503; 
570910, 4188502; 570903, 4188514; 570896, 4188523; 570877, 4188533; 
570872, 4188536; 570858, 4188540; 570843, 4188543; 570813, 4188552; 
570797, 4188566; 570784, 4188581; 570763, 4188592; 570733, 4188594; 
570735, 4188667; 570745, 4188667; 570754, 4188667; 570787, 4188661; 
570788, 4188661; 570806, 4188660; 570819, 4188664; 570830, 4188660; 
570833, 4188677; 570824, 4188685; 570803, 4188734; 570801, 4188738; 
570730, 4188783; 570704, 4188807; 570690, 4188830; 570693, 4188851; 
570693, 4188866; 570696, 4188864; 570697, 4188875; 570701, 4188926; 
570692, 4188981; 570673, 4189023; 570620, 4189064; 570596, 4189097; 
570554, 4189137; 570547, 4189144; 570529, 4189180; 570491, 4189204; 
570482, 4189203; 570441, 4189197; 570400, 4189209; 570348, 4189212; 
570323, 4189220; 570316, 4189215; 570313, 4189213; 570304, 4189214; 
570277, 4189222; 570237, 4189275; 570227, 4189303; 570206, 4189322; 
570160, 4189358; 570140, 4189388; 570127, 4189406; 570119, 4189422; 
570108, 4189444; 570081, 4189442; 570074, 4189388; 570068, 4189365; 
570062, 4189348; 570055, 4189335; 570039, 4189356; 570011, 4189362; 
569994, 4189361; 569984, 4189360; 569972, 4189368; 569961, 4189370; 
569955, 4189354; 569962, 4189345; 569981, 4189335; 569988, 4189319; 
569980, 4189290; 569976, 4189256; 569979, 4189255; 569976, 4189241; 
569962, 4189230; 569954, 4189216; 569954, 4189193; 569947, 4189169; 
569934, 4189135; 569917, 4189099; 569908, 4189068; 569904, 4189038; 
569901, 4189010; 569887, 4188982; 569881, 4188962; 569876, 4188940; 
569869, 4188915; 569858, 4188902; 569837, 4188888; 569819, 4188877; 
569814, 4188860; 569809, 4188835; 569817, 4188807; 569833, 4188798; 
569830, 4188740; 569812, 4188737; 569797, 4188801; 569800, 4188803; 
569795, 4188810; 569711, 4189182; 569653, 4189441; 569641, 4189496; 
569636, 4189583; 569616, 4189631; 569598, 4189682; 569594, 4189688; 
569411, 4189917; 569406, 4189923; 569374, 4189924; 569274, 4189980; 
569225, 4190030; 569177, 4190078; 569155, 4190106; 569155, 4190106; 
569136, 4190157; 569081, 4190173; 569032, 4190167; 569002, 4190189; 
568998, 4190224; 568980, 4190269; 568946, 4190290; 568922, 4190323; 
568917, 4190364; 568874, 4190407; 568830, 4190433; 568805, 4190445; 
568769, 4190447; 568737, 4190460; 568752, 4190479; 568751, 4190531; 
568734, 4190563; 568709, 4190593; 568678, 4190593; 568668, 4190561; 
568653, 4190529; 568616, 4190528; 568591, 4190563; 568571, 4190602; 
568571, 4190642; 568572, 4190676; 568572, 4190713; 568544, 4190750; 
568497, 4190740; 568399, 4190730; 568348, 4190753; 568311, 4190797; 
568321, 4190846; 568286, 4190879; 568234, 4190900; 568189, 4190901; 
568159, 4190874; 568128, 4190840; 568090, 4190857; 568083, 4190876; 
568077, 4190892; 568039, 4190907; 568033, 4190907; 567986, 4190905; 
567958, 4190903; 567880, 4191055; 567753, 4191088; 567774, 4191141; 
567786, 4191184; 567793, 4191211; 567628, 4191208; 567585, 4191141; 
567544, 4191110; 567515, 4191105; 567484, 4191124; 567463, 4191153; 
567439, 4191163; 567405, 4191148; 567395, 4191124; 567395, 4191098; 
567398, 4191072; 567273, 4191000; 567225, 4190952; 567182, 4190935; 
566962, 4190894; 566820, 4190877; 566797, 4190871; 566794, 4190872; 
566746, 4190862; 566691, 4190848; 566634, 4190839; 566578, 4190827; 
566565, 4190839; 566538, 4190851; 566505, 4190864; 566476, 4190886; 
566455, 4190918; 566441, 4190942; 566440, 4190975; 566440, 4191017; 
566445, 4191065; 566448, 4191102; 566445, 4191121; 566437, 4191147; 
566426, 4191175; 566420, 4191219; 566417, 4191239; 566550, 4191256; 
566714, 4191328; 566840, 4191413; 566850, 4191422; 566864, 4191428; 
566894, 4191453; 566899, 4191506; 566850, 4191574; 566801, 4191623; 
566722, 4191661; 566642, 4191669; 566549, 4191647; 566476, 4191647; 
566431, 4191648; 566387, 4191648; 566317, 4191674; 566287, 4191694; 
returning to 566273, 4191731.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit 6 provided in paragraph (7)(ii) of this 
section.

    (d) Amphibians.

                Golden Coqui (Eleutherodactylus jasperi)

    Puerto Rico. Areas of land, water and airspace with the following 
components: (1) Cerro Avispa-elevation above 700 meters on the south and 
southeastern slope of the mountain: from the northern junction of 
Highway 715 and an unnumbered dirt road southeast and southwest along 
Highway 715 to the southern junction with the same unnumbered dirt road 
and Highway 715, north and northeast along the unnumbered dirt road just 
below the southeast facing crest of Cerro Avispa to its junction with 
Highway 715.
    (2) Monte el Gato-entire summit above 700 meters: from the junction 
of Highway 715 to the junction of Highway 715 and the 700 meter contour 
interval west along Highway 715 to the junction of Highway 715 and an 
unnumbered road, north and northeast along this road to where it crosses 
the 700 meter contour interval, and east along the 700 meter contour 
interval to where it crosses Highway 715.
    (3) Sierra de Cayey-elevations above 700 meters: southeast from the 
junction of Highways 738 and 15 along Highway 15 to point .5 kilometer 
south of Benchmark 684.5, northeast from this point in a line to a point 
on Highway 7741 two kilometers south of the junction of Highway 738 and 
7741, north and northwest along Highway 7741 to its junction with 
Highway 738, and northwest from the junction of Highways 7741 and 738 
along Highway 738 to its junction with Highway 15.
    Note: Map follows:

[[Page 44]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.080

    Refer to 7.5 minute U.S.G.S. Topographical Map, Cayey, Puerto Rico, 
1972.
    Note: Map follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.081
    
               California Red-legged Frog (Rana draytonii)

    (1) Critical habitat units are depicted for Alameda, Butte, 
Calaveras, Contra Costa, El Dorado, Kern, Kings, Los Angeles, Marin, 
Mendocino, Merced, Monterey, Napa, Nevada, Placer, Riverside, San 
Benito, San Joaquin, San Luis Obispo, San Mateo, Santa Barbara, Santa 
Clara, Santa Cruz, Solano, Sonoma, Stanislaus, Ventura, and Yuba 
Counties, California, on the maps below.
    (2) Within these areas, the primary constituent elements for the 
California red-legged frog consist of four components:
    (i) Aquatic Breeding Habitat. Standing bodies of fresh water (with 
salinities less than 4.5 ppt), including natural and manmade (e.g., 
stock) ponds, slow-moving streams or pools within streams, and other 
ephemeral or permanent water bodies that typically become inundated 
during winter rains and hold water for a minimum of 20 weeks in all but 
the driest of years.
    (ii) Aquatic Non-Breeding Habitat. Freshwater pond and stream 
habitats, as described in paragraph (2)(i) of this entry, that may not 
hold water long enough for the species to complete its aquatic life 
cycle but which provide for shelter, foraging, predator avoidance, and 
aquatic dispersal of juvenile and adult California red-legged frogs. 
Other wetland habitats considered to meet these criteria include, but 
are not limited to: plunge pools within intermittent creeks, seeps, 
quiet water refugia within streams during high water flows, and springs 
of sufficient flow to withstand short-term dry periods.
    (iii) Upland Habitat. Upland areas adjacent to or surrounding 
breeding and non-breeding aquatic and riparian habitat up to a distance 
of 1 mi (1.6 km) in most cases (i.e., depending on surrounding landscape 
and dispersal barriers) including various vegetational series such as 
grassland, woodland, forest, wetland, or riparian areas that provide 
shelter, forage, and predator avoidance for the California red-legged 
frog. Upland habitat should include structural features such as 
boulders, rocks and organic debris (e.g., downed trees, logs), small 
mammal burrows, or moist leaf litter. Upland features are also essential 
in that they are needed to maintain the hydrologic, geographic, 
topographic, ecological, and edaphic features that support and surround 
the aquatic, wetland, or riparian habitat. These upland features 
contribute to:
    (A) Filling of aquatic, wetland, or riparian habitats;
    (B) Maintaining suitable periods of pool inundation for larval frogs 
and their food sources; and
    (C) Providing non-breeding, feeding, and sheltering habitat for 
juvenile and adult frogs (e.g., shelter, shade, moisture, cooler 
temperatures, a prey base, foraging opportunities, and areas for 
predator avoidance).
    (iv) Dispersal Habitat. Accessible upland or riparian habitat within 
and between occupied locations within a minimum of 1 mi (1.6 km) of each 
other and that support movement between such sites. Dispersal habitat 
includes various natural habitats, and altered habitats such as 
agricultural fields, that do not contain barriers (e.g., heavily 
traveled roads without bridges or culverts) to dispersal. Dispersal 
habitat does not include moderate- to high-density urban or industrial 
developments with large expanses of asphalt or concrete, nor does it 
include large lakes or reservoirs over 50 ac (20 ha) in size, or other 
areas that do not contain those features identified in paragraphs 
(2)(i), (2)(ii), and (2)(iii) of this entry as essential to the 
conservation of the species.

[[Page 45]]

    (3) Critical habitat does not include manmade structures existing on 
the effective date of this rule and not containing one or more of the 
primary constituent elements, such as buildings, aqueducts, airports, 
and roads, and the land on which such structures are located.
    (4) Critical habitat map units. Data layers defining map units were 
created on a base of USGS 7.5[min] quadrangles using USDA National 
Agricultural Imagery Program (NAIP) county-wide MrSID compressed mosaics 
of 1 meter resolution and natural color aerial photography from summer 
2005. Critical habitat units were then mapped using Universal Transverse 
Mercator (UTM) zone 10 and zone 11, North American Datum (NAD) 1983 
coordinates.
    (5) Note: Index map for California red-legged frog critical habitat 
units in northern California follows:

[[Page 46]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17MR10.000

    (6) Note: Index map for California red-legged frog critical habitat 
units in southern California follows:

[[Page 47]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17MR10.001

    (7) Unit BUT-1: Butte County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangles Pulga, Berry Creek and Brush Creek.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 635284, 4400926; 635453, 4400907; 635539, 4400870; 635603, 
4400930; 635726, 4400934; 635749, 4400994; 635820,

[[Page 48]]

4401042; 635906, 4401042; 635992, 4400997; 636377, 4401020; 636414, 
4401012; 636415, 4400967; 636836, 4400961; 636840, 4400584; 636819, 
4400561; 636032, 4400541; 636000, 4400474; 635993, 4400141; 637654, 
4400205; 637658, 4400775; 637782, 4400748; 637961, 4400640; 638164, 
4400598; 638444, 4400303; 639062, 4400378; 639174, 4400326; 639318, 
4400212; 639414, 4400098; 639616, 4400002; 639664, 4399875; 639667, 
4399772; 639609, 4399578; 639492, 4399337; 639498, 4399218; 639397, 
4398995; 639477, 4398627; 639628, 4398345; 640086, 4398179; 640120, 
4398056; 640189, 4397932; 640243, 4397727; 640310, 4397601; 640281, 
4397365; 640293, 4397311; 640545, 4397124; 640596, 4397057; 640533, 
4396958; 639179, 4396957; 639206, 4395692; 639231, 4395681; 639236, 
4395406; 637864, 4395379; 637968, 4395351; 637962, 4395169; 637764, 
4395285; 637655, 4395303; 637710, 4395306; 637686, 4395325; 637232, 
4395428; 637143, 4395417; 636893, 4395251; 636845, 4395236; 636813, 
4395252; 636787, 4395300; 636787, 4395375; 636949, 4395589; 636995, 
4395733; 637000, 4396105; 636934, 4396262; 636952, 4396314; 636898, 
4396328; 636885, 4396372; 636786, 4396417; 636724, 4396549; 636677, 
4396526; 636439, 4396726; 636424, 4396791; 636347, 4396812; 636254, 
4396975; 636152, 4397085; 636057, 4397151; 635947, 4397190; 635885, 
4397279; 635630, 4397454; 635579, 4397526; 635070, 4397817; 634758, 
4397876; 634647, 4397940; 634514, 4397948; 634391, 4398277; 634290, 
4398434; 634290, 4398815; 634318, 4398953; 635222, 4398966; 635190, 
4399731; 634716, 4399737; 634701, 4399998; 634738, 4400050; 634701, 
4400050; 634614, 4400166; 634510, 4400417; 634517, 4400544; 634570, 
4400623; 634618, 4400645; 634629, 4400803; 634730, 4400889; 634843, 
4401080; 634817, 4401226; 634899, 4401218; 635086, 4401053; 635180, 
4401035; returning to 635284, 4400926.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit BUT-1 for the California red-legged frog 
follows:

[[Page 49]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17MR10.002

    (8) Unit YUB-1: Yuba County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Challenge.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N):
    656776,4370030; 656932,4369825; 657462,4368370; 657481,4367769; 
657672,4367445; 658105,4367098;

[[Page 50]]

658503,4366871; 658905,4366554; 659124,4366290; 659222,4366053; 
659528,4365883; 659624,4365706; 659383,4365704; 659384,4365583; 
659340,4365600; 659261,4365537; 659101,4365527; 659061,4365567; 
658998,4365584; 658985,4365687; 658888,4365790; 658764,4365830; 
658726,4365936; 658579,4365929; 658490,4365853; 658400,4365837; 
658396,4365782; 658421,4365733; 658465,4365719; 658581,4365826; 
658634,4365834; 658674,4365736; 658794,4365641; 658794,4365469; 
658552,4365295; 658524,4365193; 658427,4365180; 658431,4365157; 
658564,4365144; 658659,4365199; 658707,4365123; 658730,4365136; 
658747,4365240; 658809,4365247; 658850,4365176; 658882,4365226; 
658947,4365220; 658998,4365252; 659078,4365182; 659147,4365239; 
659181,4365235; 659238,4365207; 659273,4365132; 659332,4365140; 
659368,4365118; 659105,4365028; 659020,4364875; 658939,4364572; 
658531,4364168; 658410,4364131; 657788,4364103; 657792,4363648; 
658106,4363673; 657655,4363358; 657395,4363049; 657087,4362405; 
656227,4362436; 656051,4362735; 655683,4362963; 655558,4363109; 
655202,4363849; 655669,4364315; 655690,4364586; 655218,4365202; 
655027,4365526; 654779,4365758; 654445,4365837; 654319,4366013; 
654187,4366370; 654149,4366639; 653990,4366874; 653952,4367143; 
653883,4367381; 653710,4367531; 653696,4367950; 653744,4368109; 
653740,4369028; 653836,4369294; 653990,4369404; 654143,4369566; 
654687,4369794; 655104,4369939; 655245,4369920; 655453,4369987; 
655896,4370242; 656198,4370221; 656470,4370170; returning to 
656776,4370030.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit YUB-1 and NEV-1 for the California red-legged 
frog follows:

[[Page 51]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17MR10.003

    (9) Unit NEV-1: Nevada County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Nevada City and North Bloomfield.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 676906,4356394; 676962,4356305; 677130,4356317; 677131,4356238; 
677181,4356231; 677306,4356068;

[[Page 52]]

677485,4355987; 677670,4355985; 677882,4356056; 678051,4356296; 
678231,4356310; 678224,4356187; 678277,4355825; 678274,4355759; 
678217,4355664; 678229,4355623; 678444,4355409; 678448,4355341; 
678354,4355125; 678356,4355083; 678510,4354644; 678540,4354482; 
678642,4354231; 678650,4353980; 678734,4353879; 678852,4353796; 
679227,4353902; 679563,4353782; 680349,4353649; 680352,4353517; 
679422,4352362; 679148,4352080; 677270,4350680; 677199,4350636; 
676807,4350614; 676812,4350531; 676440,4350485; 676117,4350571; 
675995,4350556; 675686,4350459; 675457,4350453; 675325,4350412; 
675325,4350616; 675293,4350711; 675206,4350862; 675166,4350990; 
675063,4351133; 674920,4351180; 674673,4351196; 672710,4351546; 
672074,4351586; 671684,4351705; 671438,4351872; 670969,4352039; 
670738,4352158; 670668,4352774; 670633,4354099; 670847,4354102; 
670960,4354053; 671174,4353907; 671435,4353852; 671437,4353664; 
672180,4353672; 672287,4353562; 672450,4353566; 672716,4353754; 
672817,4353800; 672938,4353818; 672900,4353937; 673158,4353946; 
673148,4354137; 672855,4354130; 672783,4354295; 672757,4354434; 
672842,4354522; 672941,4354578; 673021,4354593; 673117,4354665; 
673119,4354745; 673191,4354837; 673253,4355088; 673175,4355379; 
673188,4355465; 673283,4355581; 673402,4355344; 673616,4355327; 
673903,4355380; 674072,4355387; 674378,4355543; 674440,4355612; 
674698,4355703; 674907,4355945; 675027,4355928; 675092,4355868; 
675414,4355681; 675647,4355612; 675763,4355477; 675773,4355263; 
675827,4355213; 676036,4355164; 676143,4355418; 676255,4355555; 
676269,4355603; 676400,4355681; 676445,4355779; 676405,4355981; 
676456,4356381; 676693,4356744; 676751,4356738; returning to 
676906,4356394.
    (ii) Note: Unit NEV-1 for California red-legged frog is depicted on 
the map in paragraph (8)(ii) of this entry.
    (10) Unit PLA-1: Placer County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangles Forest Hill and Michigan Bluff.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 696102,4324325; 696269,4324238; 696581,4324246; 696792,4324349; 
696895,4324349; 697034,4324294; 697148,4324059; 697227,4323980; 
697317,4323673; 697571,4323570; 697601,4323365; 697577,4323190; 
697456,4322900; 697239,4322683; 696979,4322484; 696678,4322393; 
696303,4322242; 695802,4322441; 695501,4322665; 695350,4322846; 
695229,4322942; 695006,4323045; 694933,4323220; 694909,4323498; 
694849,4323636; 694740,4323745; 694233,4323817; 694197,4323884; 
694209,4324180; 694577,4324391; 694831,4324626; 695096,4324795; 
695374,4324837; 695615,4324825; 695748,4324795; 695881,4324708; 
695908,4324628; 695996,4324611; 696033,4324574; returning to: 
696102,4324325. Excluding: 695636,4324153; 695563,4324116; 
695471,4324147; 695380,4324137; 695482,4323950; 695575,4323941; 
695636,4323824; 695782,4323867; 695815,4323840; 695885,4323710; 
695875,4323548; 695757,4323455; 695789,4323364; 695821,4323355; 
695847,4323389; 695974,4323437; 695975,4323571; 696121,4323615; 
696178,4323884; 696037,4323867; 695941,4323923; 695775,4324220; 
returning to 695636,4324153.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit PLA-1 for the California red-legged frog 
follows:

[[Page 53]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17MR10.004

    (11) Unit ELD-1: El Dorado County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 
scale quadrangles Camino, Pollock Pines and Sly Park.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 712042,4292979; 712243,4292856; 712419,4292796; 712540,4292683; 
712511,4292523; 712319,4292151;

[[Page 54]]

712259,4292082; 711866,4291905; 711680,4291585; 711650,4291319; 
711576,4291195; 711182,4290958; 710956,4290705; 710718,4290490; 
710400,4290528; 710054,4290648; 709815,4290648; 709523,4290568; 
708926,4289838; 708873,4289705; 708661,4289533; 708515,4289347; 
708143,4289015; 707771,4289015; 707493,4288896; 707400,4288789; 
707161,4288617; 707148,4288404; 706922,4288245; 706715,4288156; 
706471,4288294; 706007,4288251; 705507,4288398; 705231,4288234; 
704826,4288214; 704683,4288368; 704536,4288381; 704329,4288707; 
704126,4288577; 703960,4288838; 703439,4288864; 702684,4289323; 
702371,4289290; 702165,4289393; 702324,4289643; 702406,4289714; 
702744,4289897; 702829,4289991; 703050,4290362; 703106,4290570; 
703147,4290632; 703210,4290691; 703248,4290770; 703486,4290934; 
704423,4290921; 704732,4291034; 704878,4291038; 704899,4290959; 
705129,4290959; 705154,4290925; 705217,4290699; 705221,4290478; 
705267,4290369; 705355,4290336; 705497,4290340; 705522,4290361; 
705522,4290423; 705493,4290545; 705522,4290574; 705761,4290578; 
705798,4290616; 705811,4290733; 705911,4290733; 706007,4290942; 
706112,4291025; 706162,4291113; 706262,4291122; 706379,4291172; 
706634,4291402; 706902,4291506; 707291,4291531; 707379,4291577; 
707659,4291644; 708236,4291933; 708554,4292134; 708989,4292267; 
709302,4292489; 709674,4292706; 709766,4292736; 709775,4292665; 
709816,4292639; 710126,4292920; 710327,4293012; 711141,4293016; 
711258,4292972; 711367,4292964; 711830,4293033; returning to 
712042,4292979. Excluding: 708426, 4291544; 708412,4291176; 
709003,4291194; 709025,4291561; returning to 708426,4291544.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit ELD-1 for the California red-legged frog 
follows:

[[Page 55]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17MR10.005

    (12) Unit CAL-1: Calaveras County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 
scale quadrangles Jackson, Valley Springs and Mokelumne Hill.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N):
    695574,4232384; 695607,4232132; 695588,4232071; 695277,4232108; 
695111,4231955; 695024,4231930;

[[Page 56]]

694907,4231961; 694835,4231923; 694824,4231874; 694873,4231770; 
694707,4231700; 694580,4231609; 694379,4231528; 694281,4231528; 
694211,4231471; 694118,4231465; 694033,4231489; 694012,4231420; 
693863,4231366; 693739,4231289; 693654,4231174; 693651,4231132; 
693252,4230731; 693004,4230419; 692634,4230055; 692359,4229874; 
691998,4229785; 692018,4230045; 691947,4230296; 691889,4230367; 
691886,4230503; 691709,4230866; 691720,4230928; 691815,4231060; 
691913,4231097; 692029,4231237; 692120,4231471; 692443,4231627; 
692450,4231851; 692565,4231990; 692585,4232062; 692511,4232208; 
692327,4232231; 692290,4232293; 692259,4232435; 692310,4232683; 
692368,4232737; 692368,4232782; 692402,4232822; 692684,4232917; 
692752,4233002; 692752,4233057; 692596,4233165; 692596,4233216; 
692630,4233298; 692823,4233484; 692884,4233603; 692871,4233695; 
692959,4233892; 692959,4233939; 693010,4234004; 693129,4234041; 
693163,4234079; 693215,4234298; 693464,4234572; 693847,4234885; 
694412,4235538; 694500,4235538; 694564,4235506; 694660,4235397; 
694853,4234891; 695013,4234718; 695006,4234379; 695032,4234257; 
695153,4234123; 695281,4234110; 695397,4233969; 695531,4233649; 
695559,4233627; 695562,4233280; 695729,4233158; 695863,4233013; 
695875,4232870; 695807,4232615; 695598,4232462; returning to 
695574,4232384.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit CAL-1 for the California red-legged frog 
follows:

[[Page 57]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17MR10.006

    (13) Unit MEN-1: Mendocino County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 
scale quadrangles Cold Spring, Eureka Hill, Mallo Pass Creek, and Point 
Arena.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 447886,4320218; 447951,4320066; 447983,4319889; 447958,4319651; 
447916,4319542; 447922,4319483; 447971,4319445; 448196,4319365; 
448430,4319368;

[[Page 58]]

448547,4319333; 448853,4319365; 449490,4319517; 449733,4319755; 
449789,4319784; 450035,4319807; 450150,4319759; 450210,4319703; 
450420,4319414; 450504,4319347; 450635,4319305; 450810,4319130; 
451092,4318916; 451162,4318828; 451226,4318719; 451042,4318062; 
450935,4317981; 450714,4317937; 450597,4317880; 450510,4317818; 
450481,4317760; 450521,4317204; 450486,4317057; 450570,4316902; 
450786,4316828; 450855,4316749; 450925,4316588; 451352,4316246; 
451467,4316018; 451510,4315844; 451502,4315781; 451442,4315626; 
451328,4315533; 451284,4315450; 451251,4315220; 451407,4315001; 
451584,4314832; 451501,4314714; 451453,4314558; 451352,4314505; 
451151,4314476; 450897,4314504; 450723,4314445; 450591,4314336; 
450524,4314325; 450307,4314414; 450136,4314528; 450080,4314502; 
450050,4314395; 449837,4314281; 449646,4314320; 449478,4314469; 
449346,4314504; 449277,4314477; 449180,4314383; 448930,4314388; 
448748,4314292; 448552,4314343; 448395,4314250; 448291,4314293; 
448159,4314397; 448041,4314742; 447804,4315012; 447535,4315087; 
447379,4315047; 447121,4315049; 447112,4314819; 447229,4314525; 
447228,4314463; 447143,4314230; 447092,4314181; 446968,4313845; 
446785,4313679; 446746,4313591; 446742,4313514; 446885,4313345; 
447133,4313254; 447301,4313116; 447441,4312938; 447582,4312493; 
447147,4312559; 447023,4312509; 446876,4312524; 446701,4312427; 
446660,4312227; 446554,4312026; 446346,4311900; 446289,4311794; 
446259,4311663; 446182,4311580; 446019,4311506; 445891,4311224; 
445615,4310903; 445416,4310807; 445267,4310672; 445095,4310678; 
444754,4310641; 444565,4310659; 444408,4310515; 444184,4310425; 
444141,4310311; 444029,4310153; 443818,4309984; 443679,4309807; 
443673,4309764; 443988,4309404; 443936,4309239; 443919,4308998; 
443738,4308891; 443825,4308738; 444132,4308361; 444318,4308088; 
444424,4307816; 444304,4307845; 444112,4307837; 443601,4307714; 
443377,4307684; 442745,4307493; 442148,4307413; 441776,4307182; 
441681,4307145; 441575,4307166; 441248,4307317; 441024,4307329; 
440921,4307226; 440624,4307211; 440402,4307138; 440274,4307148; 
440225,4307257; 440122,4307360; 439886,4307499; 439886,4307571; 
439735,4307898; 439729,4308019; 439584,4308086; 439433,4308285; 
439251,4308467; 439221,4308667; 439166,4308818; 439100,4308909; 
438888,4309018; 438858,4309151; 438652,4309447; 438573,4309526; 
438513,4309641; 438410,4309732; 437964,4309936; 437707,4310146; 
437526,4310621; 437526,4310749; 437635,4310785; 437738,4310785; 
438041,4310567; 438022,4310240; 438228,4310016; 438585,4309938; 
438652,4309956; 438670,4310022; 439039,4310016; 439136,4310113; 
439469,4310113; 439796,4310174; 439838,4310204; 440032,4310204; 
440165,4310392; 440056,4310730; 440074,4310779; 440135,4310827; 
440159,4311027; 440147,4311366; 440237,4311505; 440244,4311699; 
440449,4312026; 440371,4312134; 440262,4312207; 440116,4312207; 
440038,4312231; 439989,4312310; 439983,4312419; 439947,4312498; 
439874,4312582; 439911,4312697; 439893,4312812; 439759,4313012; 
439741,4313115; 439790,4313121; 439941,4313066; 440086,4312915; 
440116,4312818; 440092,4312758; 440189,4312721; 440135,4312649; 
440153,4312576; 440213,4312498; 440310,4312552; 440546,4312479; 
440643,4312534; 440667,4312619; 440764,4312740; 440915,4312812; 
441218,4312818; 441648,4312927; 441775,4313042; 441884,4313224; 
441811,4313399; 441660,4313545; 441617,4313660; 441424,4313684; 
441381,4313847; 441290,4314029; 441363,4314125; 441369,4314392; 
441351,4314440; 441212,4314555; 441169,4314628; 441157,4314815; 
441054,4314973; 441054,4315154; 440885,4315336; 440824,4315499; 
440697,4315548; 440116,4315536; 439941,4315457; 439566,4315421; 
439215,4315481; 439172,4315838; 439318,4316238; 439414,4316365; 
439729,4316371; 440050,4316516; 440038,4316698; 439959,4316952; 
439826,4317127; 439820,4317315; 439771,4317424; 439971,4318374; 
440143,4319025; 440350,4318995; 440659,4319045; 441220,4318935; 
441393,4318859; 441630,4318649; 441938,4318577; 442062,4318514; 
442160,4318520; 442408,4318660; 442467,4318672; 442885,4318606; 
443037,4318624; 443458,4318958; 443570,4318994; 443736,4318986; 
443817,4318930; 443942,4318700; 444130,4318174; 444206,4318204; 
444488,4318702; 444560,4318739; 444613,4318738; 444781,4318655; 
444885,4318566; 445107,4318524; 445246,4318439; 445439,4318513; 
445542,4318514; 445685,4318482; 445803,4318417; 446226,4318336; 
446298,4318348; 446424,4318418; 446549,4318578; 446661,4319187; 
446707,4319293; 446880,4319476; 447042,4319552; 447098,4319734; 
447056,4319893; 447068,4320031; 447180,4320199; 447351,4320194; 
447394,4320214; 447485,4320382; 447722,4320332; returning to 
447886,4320218.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit MEN-1 for the California red-legged

[[Page 59]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17MR10.007

    (14) Unit SON-1: Sonoma County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangles Santa Rosa and Kenwood.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N):
    536171,4251731; 536307,4251324; 536231,4250750; 536103,4250388; 
535718,4250087; 535462,4250177;

[[Page 60]]

535251,4250336; 534851,4250494; 534579,4250705; 534389,4250676; 
534308,4250419; 534298,4250194; 534123,4250079; 533794,4250578; 
533501,4250593; 533472,4250583; 533452,4250531; 533276,4250470; 
533146,4250524; 532957,4250539; 532814,4250509; 532248,4250796; 
532309,4250962; 532316,4251120; 532497,4251422; 532905,4251407; 
533025,4251475; 533327,4251437; 533608,4251509; 533772,4252033; 
533885,4252267; 534180,4252501; 534602,4252689; 535068,4252700; 
535824,4252154; returning to 536171,4251731.
    (ii) Note: Map of Units SON-1, SON-2 and SON-3 for the California 
red-legged frog follows:

[[Page 61]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17MR10.008

    (15) Unit SON-2: Sonoma County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangles Cotati and Glen Ellen.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N):
    535134,4244142; 535187,4244062; 535622,4244348; 535838,4244353; 
535971,4244499; 536040,4244436;

[[Page 62]]

536393,4244436; 536655,4243995; 536702,4243674; 537129,4243407; 
537300,4242457; 537009,4242237; 537121,4241673; 537315,4241438; 
537510,4240808; 538274,4240465; 538488,4239638; 538778,4239243; 
538778,4238977; 538645,4238790; 538605,4238404; 538446,4238045; 
538180,4237686; 536152,4237939; 536037,4238617; 536157,4239291; 
536104,4239642; 535917,4240041; 535829,4240117; 535319,4240068; 
534653,4240161; 534496,4240364; 534786,4240840; 534813,4241186; 
533414,4242273; 533056,4242396; 532833,4242624; 532537,4242609; 
532391,4242756; 532418,4243049; 532604,4243222; 533841,4243454; 
534135,4243980; 534633,4244287; 534706,4244539; 534912,4244479; 
returning to 535134,4244142.
    (ii) Note: Unit SON-2 for California red-legged frog is depicted on 
the map in paragraph (14)(ii) of this entry.
    (16) Unit SON-3: Sonoma and Marin Counties, California. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangle Petaluma.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N):
    530959,4230115; 531149,4229843; 531149,4229781; 531041,4229699; 
530868,4229705; 530792,4229641; 530642,4229379; 529979,4228622; 
529625,4228730; 529454,4228860; 529138,4228447; 529190,4228085; 
529057,4227870; 529301,4227268; 529301,4226775; 528922,4226523; 
528796,4226223; 528732,4225860; 528463,4225746; 528322,4225545; 
528070,4225434; 527675,4225545; 527499,4225858; 526791,4226136; 
526503,4226700; 526618,4227501; 526791,4227912; 527227,4228272; 
527718,4228328; 528554,4228970; 528535,4229182; 528890,4229679; 
529111,4229695; 529317,4230021; 529918,4229965; 530079,4229860; 
530210,4230039; 530275,4230068; 530354,4230068; 530421,4230102; 
530542,4230070; 530681,4230122; returning to 530959,4230115.
    (ii) Note: Unit SON-3 for California red-legged frog is depicted on 
the map in paragraph (14)(ii) of this entry.
    (17) Unit NAP-1: Napa County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Capell Valley.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N):
    571668,4256238; 571744,4256065; 571928,4256108; 572003,4256097; 
572230,4255795; 572479,4255665; 572879,4255676; 573030,4255503; 
573063,4255384; 573495,4255265; 573603,4255200; 573798,4255395; 
573895,4255427; 573949,4255535; 574100,4255568; 574187,4255535; 
574327,4255427; 574468,4255395; 574835,4255535; 575278,4255406; 
575408,4255427; 575430,4255244; 575408,4255017; 575592,4254887; 
575765,4254649; 575808,4254465; 575581,4254195; 575408,4254033; 
575214,4253957; 575333,4253892; 575419,4253676; 575321,4253562; 
574972,4253480; 574899,4253535; 574781,4253445; 574508,4253381; 
574411,4253302; 574367,4253332; 574279,4253463; 574146,4253508; 
573831,4253776; 573715,4253702; 573552,4253734; 573386,4253663; 
573186,4253794; 573088,4253822; 572972,4253911; 572909,4253921; 
572820,4253898; 572740,4253845; 572582,4253833; 572328,4253749; 
572104,4253461; 572027,4253479; 572020,4253414; 571495,4253784; 
571420,4254011; 571420,4254184; 571204,4254368; 570339,4254400; 
570079,4254573; 569593,4254725; 569474,4254865; 569431,4255060; 
569290,4255416; 569344,4255525; 569463,4255568; 569669,4255568; 
569852,4255600; 570015,4255676; 570207,4255556; 570241,4255438; 
570458,4255211; 570641,4255200; 570804,4255060; 570966,4255049; 
571020,4255211; 571009,4255330; 571031,4255449; 571009,4255752; 
571031,4255870; 571085,4255968; 571117,4256141; 571301,4256141; 
571560,4256281; returning to 571668,4256238.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit NAP-1 for the California red-legged frog 
follows:

[[Page 63]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17MR10.009

    (18) Unit MRN-1: Marin County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangles Valley Ford and Tomales.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 503193,4241015; 503294,4241015; 503446,4240937; 503876,4240603; 
504256,4240551; 504408,4240473;

[[Page 64]]

504433,4240421; 504484,4240396; 504584,4240395; 504545,4240350; 
504587,4240298; 504674,4240281; 504733,4240225; 504875,4240159; 
504851,4240030; 504874,4239956; 504766,4239840; 504829,4239728; 
504862,4239600; 504835,4239306; 504896,4239139; 504977,4239052; 
505087,4238842; 505172,4238850; 505319,4238813; 505493,4238806; 
505516,4238668; 505626,4238434; 505673,4238392; 506091,4238339; 
506140,4238393; 506448,4238501; 506551,4238326; 506504,4237813; 
506618,4237620; 506517,4237109; 506625,4236375; 506329,4236129; 
506284,4235230; 506524,4234994; 506343,4234300; 506695,4233557; 
506620,4233316; 506090,4233083; 506024,4233103; 505937,4233091; 
505855,4233143; 505762,4233160; 505672,4233255; 505316,4233212; 
505140,4233280; 505088,4233359; 505061,4233502; 504853,4233737; 
504730,4233985; 504594,4234030; 504488,4234115; 504418,4234208; 
504373,4234221; 504244,4234161; 503885,4234079; 503816,4234126; 
503687,4234290; 503645,4234307; 503492,4234276; 503439,4234355; 
503308,4234448; 503306,4234629; 503108,4234736; 502977,4234755; 
502885,4234906; 502888,4235086; 502871,4235112; 502733,4235138; 
502717,4235160; 502784,4235437; 502764,4235462; 502661,4235385; 
502555,4235379; 502381,4235521; 502256,4235562; 502146,4235673; 
501997,4235752; 502182,4235744; 502251,4235776; 502356,4235907; 
502405,4236072; 502480,4236149; 502493,4236237; 502526,4236262; 
502696,4236169; 502907,4235905; 503090,4235814; 503103,4235727; 
503078,4235649; 503097,4235618; 503146,4235709; 503147,4235834; 
502966,4235913; 502896,4235997; 502848,4236145; 502693,4236274; 
502563,4236320; 502474,4236284; 502354,4236108; 502304,4235881; 
502188,4235785; 502104,4235813; 502031,4235871; 501753,4235794; 
501647,4235813; 501648,4235849; 501527,4235955; 501544,4236012; 
501498,4236014; 501409,4236114; 501183,4236116; 501128,4236244; 
501074,4236286; 501097,4236453; 501048,4236477; 500968,4236596; 
500991,4236836; 500972,4236920; 500902,4236997; 500660,4237080; 
500559,4237170; 500458,4237221; 500395,4237383; 500401,4237476; 
500279,4237575; 500302,4237634; 500287,4237695; 500227,4237771; 
500253,4237811; 500238,4237936; 500164,4238003; 499987,4238094; 
500014,4238175; 499962,4238343; 499796,4238588; 499601,4238795; 
499742,4238649; 499813,4238660; 499948,4238829; 500076,4238905; 
500483,4239029; 500560,4239079; 500586,4239129; 500587,4239256; 
500537,4239409; 500539,4239562; 500438,4239717; 500464,4239818; 
500541,4239843; 500642,4239816; 500768,4239714; 500871,4239788; 
500922,4239864; 501127,4240016; 501203,4240015; 501203,4239990; 
501254,4240014; 501406,4240013; 501458,4240090; 501484,4240267; 
501535,4240317; 501688,4240315; 501713,4240341; 501815,4240289; 
501916,4240288; 502120,4240363; 502298,4240388; 502349,4240335; 
502602,4240208; 502730,4240307; 502756,4240485; 502834,4240586; 
502867,4240891; 502964,4240992; returning to 503193,4241015.
    (ii) Note: Map of Units MRN-1, MRN-2 and MRN-3 for the California 
red-legged frog follows:

[[Page 65]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17MR10.010

    (19) Unit MRN-2: Marin County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangles Point Reyes NE, Inverness, and Petaluma.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 512634,4232438; 512942,4232244; 513098,4232298; 513362,4232450; 
513497,4232455; 513734,4232386;

[[Page 66]]

513918,4232251; 513953,4232187; 513939,4232023; 513849,4231832; 
513855,4231619; 513876,4231594; 513952,4231792; 514067,4231818; 
514387,4231769; 514431,4231744; 514482,4231533; 514514,4231516; 
514663,4231619; 514738,4231830; 514879,4231915; 514984,4231862; 
515164,4231822; 515265,4231703; 515413,4231696; 515480,4231654; 
515682,4231600; 515773,4231673; 515857,4231825; 515889,4231847; 
516011,4231747; 516087,4231574; 516258,4231510; 516369,4231437; 
516551,4231414; 516624,4231372; 516733,4231367; 517058,4231285; 
517107,4231304; 517391,4231679; 517463,4231696; 517588,4231597; 
517667,4231496; 517768,4231273; 517772,4231173; 517811,4231094; 
517939,4231058; 518083,4230966; 518200,4231014; 518308,4231014; 
518391,4230977; 518538,4230841; 518822,4230448; 518810,4230285; 
518942,4230355; 519137,4230506; 519237,4230507; 519320,4230466; 
519549,4230605; 519594,4230608; 519685,4230581; 519829,4230580; 
519999,4230511; 520091,4230394; 520239,4230269; 520162,4230139; 
519882,4229855; 519840,4229621; 519867,4229461; 519849,4229396; 
519739,4229280; 519592,4229059; 519476,4228998; 519454,4228924; 
519378,4228818; 519315,4228630; 519042,4228213; 518464,4227912; 
518370,4227840; 518322,4227831; 518197,4227891; 517943,4228049; 
517694,4228069; 517400,4227982; 517268,4227880; 517186,4227771; 
517199,4227646; 517250,4227548; 517224,4227253; 517185,4227094; 
517202,4227018; 517172,4226789; 517183,4226684; 517345,4226172; 
517540,4225917; 517664,4225822; 517996,4225774; 518119,4225599; 
518363,4225531; 518498,4225403; 518610,4225441; 518768,4225408; 
518968,4225411; 519092,4225528; 519190,4225560; 519233,4225531; 
519388,4225502; 519507,4225352; 519594,4225350; 519749,4225266; 
519810,4225258; 520064,4225362; 520184,4225514; 520277,4225592; 
520630,4225713; 520910,4225546; 520992,4225569; 521097,4225648; 
521150,4225647; 521266,4225514; 521483,4225374; 521560,4225362; 
521593,4225446; 521576,4225682; 521628,4225793; 521667,4225821; 
521971,4225822; 522029,4225860; 522041,4225912; 522179,4225963; 
522417,4225897; 522749,4226030; 523034,4226041; 523183,4225960; 
523305,4225859; 523473,4225826; 523554,4225753; 523698,4225705; 
523900,4225560; 523999,4225413; 524219,4225251; 524366,4225189; 
524417,4225181; 524508,4225322; 524595,4225339; 524810,4225202; 
524934,4225191; 525064,4225131; 525135,4225139; 525269,4225297; 
525386,4225307; 525742,4225446; 525981,4225301; 526083,4225122; 
526277,4225058; 526307,4225022; 526328,4224957; 526330,4224726; 
526452,4224537; 526214,4224486; 526042,4224410; 525929,4224415; 
525873,4224347; 525811,4224326; 525748,4224320; 525586,4224443; 
525534,4224449; 525296,4224366; 525206,4224371; 525133,4224279; 
525087,4224261; 524966,4224252; 524839,4224204; 524671,4224229; 
524546,4224086; 524230,4223937; 523845,4224016; 523743,4223997; 
523685,4223952; 523498,4223688; 523434,4223663; 523161,4223685; 
522965,4223495; 522819,4223448; 522613,4223424; 522407,4223176; 
522258,4223101; 522271,4222843; 522364,4222760; 522445,4222581; 
522555,4222444; 522613,4222102; 522588,4222018; 522343,4221918; 
522236,4221786; 522055,4221641; 521969,4221349; 521990,4221082; 
521763,4220864; 521855,4220541; 521793,4220391; 521774,4220127; 
521784,4220067; 521896,4219981; 521924,4219896; 521848,4219817; 
521755,4219800; 521656,4219700; 521494,4219662; 521368,4219377; 
521240,4219304; 521152,4219225; 521114,4219151; 520863,4218981; 
520678,4218787; 520578,4218796; 520378,4218869; 520247,4218872; 
520018,4218822; 519872,4218838; 519845,4218996; 519642,4219152; 
519519,4219421; 519233,4219697; 518902,4219651; 518634,4219717; 
518312,4219719; 518147,4219746; 517999,4219816; 517719,4219868; 
517653,4219916; 517287,4219900; 517225,4219917; 517183,4220084; 
517009,4220242; 516987,4220313; 517103,4220544; 517122,4220629; 
517253,4220802; 517367,4221065; 517182,4221254; 517129,4221341; 
517036,4221398; 516768,4221243; 516693,4221247; 516601,4221165; 
516444,4221115; 516150,4221102; 515956,4221049; 515673,4221081; 
515460,4221071; 515380,4221101; 515114,4221102; 515014,4220983; 
514867,4220920; 514780,4220772; 514755,4220678; 514594,4220665; 
514492,4220871; 514430,4221146; 514439,4221253; 514360,4221329; 
514351,4221370; 514397,4221492; 514268,4221673; 514071,4221758; 
513978,4221885; 513976,4222125; 513829,4222366; 513771,4222562; 
513695,4222672; 513628,4222855; 513572,4222850; 513466,4222715; 
513416,4222692; 513297,4222704; 513134,4222645; 512740,4222361; 
512600,4222391; 512449,4222344; 512292,4222366; 512112,4222334; 
512046,4222390; 511964,4222543; 511866,4222643; 511826,4222861; 
511675,4222929; 511527,4223048; 511437,4223216; 511547,4223360; 
511503,4223547; 511501,4223757; 511620,4224148; 511629,4224296; 
511786,4224456; 511844,4224569; 511874,4224719; 511854,4224868; 
511902,4224965; 511904,4225113; 512071,4225338; 512157,4225513; 
512204,4225552; 512337,4225573; 512368,4225726; 512356,4225792; 
512428,4225869; 512529,4226054; 512591,4226107; 512660,4226098; 
512756,4226159; 512859,4226140; 513037,4226157; 513287,4226362; 
513607,4226528; 513677,4226611; 513728,4226781; 513769,4226828; 
513982,4226839; 514078,4226893; 514253,4227043; 514392,4227258; 
514369,4227563; 514393,4227680; 514388,4227874; 514142,4227981; 
514068,4228051; 513987,4228072; 513829,4228182; 513610,4228246; 
513532,4228309; 513362,4228319; 513228,4228439; 512822,4228591; 
512709,4228749; 512692,4228880; 512618,4229002; 512598,4229082; 
512424,4229178; 512261,4229363; 512328,4229469; 512328,4229507; 
512245,4229751; 512645,4230037; 512816,4230363; 512774,4230537; 
512777,4230732; 512685,4231053; 512590,4231193; 512559,4231357; 
512387,4231685; 512254,4231827; 512208,4231918; 512249,4232203; 
512365,4232457; 512525,4232501; returning to 512634,4232438.
    (ii) Note: Unit MRN-2 for California red-legged frog is depicted on 
the map in paragraph (18)(ii) of this entry.
    (20) Unit MRN-3: Marin County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangles Drakes Bay and Inverness.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N):
    510133,4216765; 510270,4216372; 510239,4216321; 510281,4216124; 
510629,4215830; 510849,4215727; 510877,4215571; 510978,4215595; 
511057,4215680; 511122,4215630; 511147,4215593; 511161,4215478; 
511210,4215387; 511275,4215332; 511518,4214941; 511553,4214727; 
511602,4214667; 511785,4214601; 511919,4214612; 512054,4214589; 
512332,4214656; 512415,4214708; 512707,4214574; 512889,4214540;

[[Page 67]]

512963,4214501; 513029,4214420; 513116,4214029; 513217,4214012; 
513416,4214031; 513512,4213950; 513576,4213953; 513736,4214119; 
513846,4214332; 513925,4214400; 514141,4214492; 514240,4214562; 
514366,4214810; 514400,4214999; 514442,4215075; 514510,4215014; 
514513,4215057; 514413,4215323; 514255,4215636; 514267,4215701; 
514317,4215712; 514365,4215687; 514559,4215488; 514642,4215319; 
514725,4215282; 514603,4215579; 514621,4215694; 514779,4215441; 
515018,4215186; 515077,4215033; 515232,4214981; 515342,4214897; 
515288,4214710; 515275,4214564; 515381,4214375; 515711,4213988; 
515746,4213733; 515733,4213354; 515750,4213055; 515781,4212901; 
515830,4212870; 516367,4212892; 516503,4212932; 516644,4213042; 
516860,4212910; 516926,4212822; 517040,4212830; 517088,4212791; 
517172,4212791; 517374,4212518; 517264,4212465; 517339,4212311; 
517414,4212254; 517480,4212267; 517595,4212205; 517661,4212078; 
517787,4212085; 517933,4212205; 518079,4212282; 518260,4212635; 
518544,4212979; 518683,4213112; 518803,4213102; 518927,4212967; 
519118,4212921; 519159,4212887; 519291,4212649; 519280,4212589; 
519210,4212517; 519196,4212418; 519336,4212358; 519353,4212325; 
519335,4212205; 519349,4212132; 519401,4212089; 519504,4212103; 
519628,4212046; 520171,4211644; 520055,4211392; 520030,4211190; 
520097,4210910; 520586,4210785; 520815,4210783; 520850,4210769; 
520892,4210704; 520861,4210397; 520721,4210162; 520600,4210028; 
520590,4209949; 520646,4209898; 520887,4209871; 521006,4209793; 
521031,4209751; 521041,4209527; 521004,4209454; 521114,4209240; 
521104,4208959; 521141,4208913; 521339,4208949; 521419,4208921; 
521461,4208889; 521598,4208620; 521501,4208595; 521346,4208500; 
520950,4208483; 520727,4208354; 520374,4208079; 520220,4208045; 
519885,4207813; 519438,4207400; 519240,4207065; 519025,4206781; 
518852,4206795; 518859,4206992; 518825,4207242; 518779,4207341; 
518633,4207493; 518590,4207597; 518303,4207765; 518255,4207851; 
518165,4207884; 518049,4207875; 518013,4207892; 517908,4208057; 
517861,4208082; 517771,4208080; 517601,4207985; 517354,4207996; 
517125,4207882; 516970,4208017; 516925,4208111; 516780,4208118; 
516653,4208173; 516549,4208178; 516215,4207960; 516078,4207893; 
516028,4207896; 516070,4207700; 516038,4207514; 515826,4207401; 
515664,4207236; 515598,4207042; 515590,4206816; 515322,4206667; 
515113,4206403; 515080,4206186; 515096,4206019; 515065,4205839; 
514688,4206208; 514367,4206421; 514164,4206598; 514016,4206652; 
513803,4206859; 513688,4206894; 513604,4206970; 513520,4206990; 
513373,4207120; 513147,4207269; 513080,4207355; 512595,4207687; 
511835,4208055; 510313,4208639; 509246,4208876; 508651,4208951; 
507880,4209000; 507124,4208993; 506775,4209072; 506615,4209014; 
506389,4209039; 506185,4209217; 506100,4209325; 506026,4209510; 
506062,4209603; 506147,4209545; 506522,4209169; 506599,4209122; 
506704,4209127; 507025,4209067; 507050,4209081; 507021,4209143; 
507076,4209099; 507177,4209122; 507283,4209116; 507420,4209185; 
507483,4209182; 507616,4209126; 507643,4209139; 507686,4209105; 
507724,4209130; 507788,4209094; 507905,4209139; 507930,4209221; 
508127,4209185; 508246,4209094; 508475,4209068; 508605,4209086; 
508742,4209175; 509023,4209151; 509049,4209111; 509162,4209163; 
509287,4209156; 509499,4209071; 509720,4209108; 509812,4208918; 
509891,4208860; 509994,4208851; 510052,4208894; 510045,4208952; 
510136,4208954; 510157,4208984; 510131,4209303; 510153,4209435; 
510272,4209507; 510319,4209698; 510496,4209864; 510535,4210135; 
510476,4210146; 510415,4210004; 510296,4209863; 510147,4209602; 
510074,4209535; 509993,4209279; 509919,4209208; 509881,4209127; 
509880,4209033; 509912,4208981; 510016,4208932; 510001,4208886; 
509935,4208880; 509859,4208919; 509794,4209132; 509665,4209263; 
509602,4209288; 509535,4209402; 509522,4209605; 509542,4209833; 
509599,4209906; 509582,4209938; 509531,4209958; 509498,4210182; 
509497,4210378; 509530,4210514; 509481,4210581; 509421,4210611; 
509363,4210579; 509397,4210503; 509347,4210265; 509376,4209961; 
509337,4209815; 509262,4209739; 509322,4209688; 509335,4209619; 
509231,4209471; 509045,4209333; 508894,4209327; 508634,4209341; 
508147,4209491; 508043,4209600; 508011,4209679; 508173,4209875; 
508255,4210124; 508276,4210307; 508411,4210455; 508358,4210636; 
508157,4210758; 508218,4210924; 508310,4211016; 508308,4211083; 
508069,4211277; 507969,4211477; 507982,4211523; 507957,4211557; 
507908,4211517; 507891,4211365; 507858,4211301; 507856,4210821; 
507724,4210572; 507654,4210495; 507635,4210336; 507564,4210209; 
507584,4210056; 507624,4209986; 507623,4209788; 507582,4209630; 
507506,4209538; 507402,4209523; 507316,4209544; 507282,4209578; 
507243,4209663; 507223,4209841; 507189,4209938; 507155,4209926; 
507137,4209871; 507120,4209657; 507072,4209525; 506934,4209479; 
506640,4209505; 506585,4209679; 506405,4209809; 506374,4209808; 
506330,4209751; 506300,4209746; 505982,4209766; 505968,4209916; 
505932,4209915; 505904,4210075; 505989,4210384; 505975,4210478; 
505841,4210606; 505717,4210639; 505621,4210708; 505541,4210808; 
505483,4210945; 505662,4211260; 505803,4211801; 505861,4211906; 
506155,4212049; 506253,4212142; 506528,4212306; 506603,4212436; 
506660,4212449; 506814,4212424; 506833,4212520; 506806,4212654; 
506849,4212713; 506972,4212769; 507062,4212882; 506897,4212979; 
506875,4213038; 506870,4213078; 506970,4213237; 507091,4213310; 
507337,4213389; 507473,4213521; 507701,4213616; 507766,4213902; 
507762,4213958; 507701,4213945; 507619,4213805; 507498,4213731; 
507377,4213715; 507325,4213740; 507320,4213683; 507208,4213594; 
507194,4213554; 507141,4213533; 506822,4213739; 506815,4213782; 
506850,4213857; 506771,4214113; 506743,4214115; 506675,4214021; 
506726,4213828; 506726,4213696; 506678,4213492; 506493,4213195; 
506389,4212903; 506254,4212836; 506213,4212761; 506114,4212799; 
505874,4212950; 505835,4213134; 505797,4213179; 505897,4213364; 
505883,4213473; 505786,4213556; 505841,4213871; 505829,4213936; 
505714,4214048; 505700,4214146; 505822,4214442; 505999,4214691; 
505996,4214804; 505922,4214995; 505744,4215071; 505667,4215174; 
505682,4215213; 505800,4215221; 505869,4215291; 506047,4215394; 
506071,4215552; 506153,4215767; 506306,4215910; 506113,4215969; 
506033,4215923; 505970,4215915; 505940,4215851; 505734,4215768; 
505663,4215684; 505665,4215590; 505714,4215479; 505716,4215417; 
505473,4215046; 505480,4214996; 505551,4214971; 505562,4214934; 
505526,4214858; 505519,4214764; 505394,4214667; 505239,4214416; 
505308,4214248; 505286,4213725;

[[Page 68]]

505166,4213472; 505131,4213280; 505078,4213202; 505125,4212897; 
505079,4212810; 504900,4212697; 504875,4212624; 504885,4212573; 
504699,4212565; 504579,4212601; 504277,4212526; 504121,4212539; 
504025,4212680; 504012,4212738; 504102,4212844; 504120,4212904; 
504015,4213135; 504046,4213215; 504113,4213731; 503996,4213871; 
504034,4213972; 503978,4214093; 503977,4214204; 503830,4214257; 
503835,4214302; 503876,4214339; 503876,4214401; 503815,4214438; 
503738,4214410; 503736,4214280; 503812,4214133; 503817,4214085; 
503769,4213973; 503833,4213955; 503823,4213683; 503896,4213564; 
503833,4213478; 503729,4213414; 503716,4213377; 503716,4213290; 
503691,4213250; 503706,4213134; 503833,4212871; 503783,4212787; 
503653,4212683; 503653,4212655; 503848,4212534; 503974,4212395; 
504304,4212249; 504383,4212104; 504416,4211984; 504527,4211838; 
504502,4211391; 504441,4211246; 504386,4211242; 504228,4211389; 
503976,4211540; 503867,4211561; 503708,4211770; 503572,4211855; 
503491,4211936; 503412,4211941; 503199,4212071; 503161,4212073; 
503125,4212040; 503208,4211906; 503395,4211843; 503522,4211746; 
503496,4211685; 503407,4211715; 503382,4211680; 503447,4211617; 
503633,4211529; 503660,4211433; 503726,4211397; 503763,4211345; 
503792,4211211; 503904,4211249; 504028,4211206; 504185,4211117; 
504333,4210980; 504453,4210930; 504659,4210567; 504878,4210346; 
504957,4210209; 505062,4210144; 505202,4209880; 505237,4209682; 
505324,4209654; 505374,4209663; 505343,4209781; 505363,4209797; 
505547,4209768; 505624,4209689; 505611,4209581; 505577,4209548; 
505377,4209502; 505306,4209375; 505228,4209324; 504720,4209278; 
504495,4209232; 503790,4209003; 503381,4208827; 502952,4208525; 
502424,4208062; 502092,4207655; 501862,4207309; 501600,4206827; 
501470,4206438; 501401,4206059; 501407,4205930; 501463,4205808; 
501466,4205587; 501645,4205532; 501759,4205459; 501846,4205437; 
501883,4205393; 501964,4205388; 502079,4205256; 502351,4205134; 
502442,4205166; 502497,4205140; 502567,4205152; 502686,4205086; 
502750,4205080; 502867,4205113; 502873,4205060; 503019,4204813; 
503124,4204736; 503115,4204722; 502956,4204673; 502927,4204721; 
502810,4204750; 502632,4204765; 502492,4204737; 502373,4204742; 
502323,4204822; 502347,4204896; 502292,4204963; 502181,4204983; 
502112,4204967; 501888,4205031; 501683,4204983; 501563,4205013; 
501477,4204995; 501377,4205051; 501227,4205013; 501227,4204947; 
501192,4204936; 501123,4205000; 501156,4205033; 501127,4205088; 
501050,4205076; 500973,4205148; 500811,4205234; 500575,4205162; 
500552,4205058; 500420,4205028; 500409,4205116; 500293,4205180; 
500176,4205160; 500112,4205121; 500082,4205134; 500035,4205076; 
500014,4205138; 499960,4205144; 499933,4205132; 499908,4205069; 
499856,4205055; 499796,4205072; 499774,4205044; 499700,4205069; 
499499,4205076; 499452,4205234; 499347,4205261; 499348,4205303; 
499300,4205322; 499161,4205311; 499129,4205276; 499091,4205304; 
499077,4205280; 499042,4205321; 499001,4205306; 499005,4205265; 
499023,4205267; 498993,4205231; 498985,4205317; 498933,4205329; 
498893,4205265; 498794,4205213; 498766,4205151; 498712,4205145; 
498599,4205178; 498517,4205164; 498476,4205219; 498452,4205161; 
498348,4205198; 498327,4205256; 498173,4205288; 498083,4205254; 
498014,4205270; 497983,4205215; 497891,4205242; 497876,4205290; 
497903,4205377; 497979,4205447; 498051,4205586; 498106,4205613; 
498115,4205676; 498188,4205786; 498243,4205796; 498308,4205758; 
498360,4205764; 498497,4205674; 498587,4205715; 498578,4205773; 
498665,4205838; 498695,4205922; 498819,4205919; 498847,4205899; 
498954,4205918; 499075,4206064; 499253,4206407; 499399,4206801; 
499539,4207277; 499907,4208172; 500142,4208871; 500345,4209347; 
500720,4210420; 500986,4211087; 501012,4211233; 501361,4212122; 
501901,4213703; 502491,4215316; 503094,4217156; 503345,4217022; 
503679,4216629; 503730,4216579; 503799,4216555; 503958,4216581; 
504285,4216561; 504526,4216621; 504859,4216757; 505264,4217009; 
505550,4217104; 506541,4216757; 506604,4217067; 506525,4217161; 
506532,4217185; 506994,4217323; 507410,4217877; 508102,4217877; 
509072,4218155; 509626,4218155; 510135,4217982; 510344,4217819; 
510140,4217687; 510054,4217459; 509963,4217330; 509962,4217179; 
510098,4216973; 510136,4216841; returning to 510133,4216765.
    (ii) Note: Unit MRN-3 for California red-legged frog is depicted on 
the map in paragraph (18)(ii) of this entry.
    (21) Unit SOL-1: Solano and Napa Counties, California. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangles Cordelia, Benecia, Fairfield South and Vine 
Hill.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 573848,4228015; 573903,4227912; 573977,4227914; 574101,4228001; 
574144,4227996; 574168,4227924; 574108,4227756; 574045,4227438; 
574091,4227308; 574369,4227183; 574607,4226770; 574709,4226724; 
574710,4226757; 574752,4226739; 575176,4225375; 575367,4224934; 
575363,4224914; 575154,4224811; 575156,4224422; 575340,4224312; 
575272,4224261; 575277,4224221; 575430,4223998; 575543,4223916; 
575898,4223882; 575951,4223933; 575956,4224042; 576548,4224315; 
576613,4224309; 577094,4224080; 577185,4224072; 577294,4223874; 
577241,4223622; 577294,4223503; 577394,4223421; 577361,4223317; 
577276,4223227; 577093,4223198; 577026,4223148; 577088,4222761; 
577231,4222620; 577424,4222494; 577487,4222409; 577764,4222437; 
577901,4222389; 577908,4222309; 577823,4222231; 578000,4222065; 
577976,4222018; 577851,4221975; 577819,4221920; 577874,4221749; 
577847,4221604; 577479,4221571; 577347,4221465; 577347,4221267; 
577254,4221042; 577263,4220963; 577240,4220963; 577232,4220845; 
577157,4220753; 577148,4220519; 577207,4220260; 577340,4219959; 
577708,4219717; 577833,4219667; 578061,4219640; 578022,4219507; 
577850,4219230; 578141,4219044; 578141,4218548; 578071,4218516; 
577638,4218687; 576844,4218674; 576474,4218621; 576315,4218370; 
576130,4218317; 575892,4218145; 575693,4217814; 575535,4217616; 
575045,4217139; 574873,4216862; 574304,4217100; 574026,4217139; 
573391,4217351; 573100,4217311; 572730,4217510; 572550,4217698; 
572484,4217823; 572498,4218787; 572276,4219425; 572241,4219668; 
571809,4219995; 571486,4220345; 571285,4220358; 571097,4220460; 
570722,4220804; 570712,4220888; 570467,4221496; 569971,4222168; 
569322,4222661; 569141,4222871; 568932,4223029; 569100,4223446; 
569287,4223455; 569617,4223245; 569859,4223239; 569998,4223461; 
570161,4223803; 570212,4223793; 570589,4223923;

[[Page 69]]

570713,4223831; 570802,4223659; 570802,4223501; 570936,4223240; 
571008,4222761; 571145,4222466; 571240,4222370; 571367,4222173; 
571848,4221869; 571964,4221615; 572129,4221634; 572415,4221529; 
572618,4221361; 572912,4221346; 572919,4221484; 573182,4221670; 
573101,4221744; 573080,4222159; 572894,4222695; 572719,4223078; 
572686,4223384; 572555,4223800; 572555,4224434; 572609,4224828; 
572596,4225163; 572424,4225185; 572290,4225081; 572133,4225232; 
572065,4225225; 571881,4225001; 571574,4224781; 571484,4224773; 
571338,4224672; 571231,4224490; 570850,4224490; 570733,4224439; 
570602,4224420; 570585,4224503; 570453,4224690; 570576,4224852; 
570722,4224934; 570875,4225093; 570763,4225322; 570670,4225406; 
570879,4225740; 571040,4225925; 571358,4226168; 571485,4226295; 
571618,4226478; 571663,4226445; 571710,4226470; 571678,4226529; 
571802,4226631; 571975,4226718; 572345,4226851; 572506,4226954; 
572764,4227177; 573262,4227884; 573371,4227967; 573657,4228044; 
573766,4228055; returning to 573848,4228015.
    (ii) Note: Map of Units SOL-1, SOL-2 and SOL-3 for the California 
red-legged frog follows:

[[Page 70]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17MR10.011

    (22) Unit SOL-2: Solano and Napa Counties, California. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangle Cordelia.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N):
    570458,4232242; 570722,4232209; 571086,4232374; 571367,4232573; 
571880,4232606; 572552,4232394;

[[Page 71]]

572809,4232259; 572809,4232155; 572756,4231996; 572637,4231837; 
572637,4231639; 573009,4231625; 573192,4231413; 573390,4231275; 
573441,4231119; 573467,4230836; 573406,4230775; 573470,4230566; 
573705,4230214; 573992,4230187; 574036,4230088; 574120,4230009; 
574352,4229667; 574403,4229391; 574344,4229350; 573890,4229241; 
573760,4229329; 573519,4229412; 573113,4229431; 572770,4229520; 
572598,4229533; 572300,4229291; 571970,4229190; 571766,4229253; 
571606,4229514; 571658,4230168; 571639,4230536; 571519,4230834; 
571360,4230968; 571023,4230968; 570750,4231012; 570560,4230936; 
570294,4230699; 569918,4230136; 569626,4230110; 569334,4230180; 
568858,4230392; 568747,4230511; 568604,4230722; 568466,4230826; 
568420,4230947; 568427,4231151; 568370,4231153; 568241,4231036; 
568170,4231061; 568251,4231202; 568522,4231421; 568329,4231625; 
568273,4231618; 568199,4231461; 568133,4231392; 568051,4231386; 
567956,4231463; 567912,4231543; 567727,4231690; 567729,4231878; 
567994,4232292; 567944,4232639; 568093,4233152; 568821,4233152; 
569151,4233185; 569548,4233185; 569846,4233019; 570061,4232854; 
returning to 570458,4232242.
    (ii) Note: Unit SOL-2 for California red-legged frog is depicted on 
the map in paragraph (21)(ii) of this entry.
    (23) Unit SOL-3: Solano and Napa Counties, California. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangle Cordelia.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N):
    567740,4229171; 568267,4229171; 568477,4228910; 568712,4228853; 
568966,4228656; 569087,4228510; 569334,4228485; 569607,4228396; 
569918,4228237; 570276,4228164; 571071,4228258; 571556,4228946; 
572117,4228927; 572376,4228815; 572535,4228688; 572789,4228707; 
573052,4228841; 573309,4228751; 573595,4228530; 573591,4228489; 
572973,4227712; 572720,4227679; 572641,4227523; 572604,4227377; 
572604,4227200; 572266,4227009; 572043,4226973; 571747,4226787; 
571739,4226736; 571691,4226684; 571607,4226655; 571371,4226453; 
571252,4226308; 570965,4226045; 570780,4225806; 570606,4225519; 
570453,4225433; 570323,4225316; 570088,4225297; 569929,4225225; 
569754,4225196; 569569,4225199; 569376,4225109; 569270,4225000; 
569119,4224961; 569074,4224876; 568960,4224768; 568745,4224634; 
568523,4224574; 568380,4224504; 568010,4224527; 567864,4224622; 
567019,4224654; 566765,4224802; 566704,4225101; 566522,4225215; 
566353,4225363; 566462,4225788; 566610,4226015; 566604,4226126; 
566731,4226294; 566877,4226326; 567175,4226542; 567232,4226739; 
567105,4226948; 567076,4227307; 567417,4228231; 567664,4228428; 
567740,4228580; returning to 567740,4229171.
    (ii) Note: Unit SOL-3 for California red-legged frog is depicted on 
the map in paragraph (21)(ii) of this entry.
    (24) Unit CCS-1: Contra Costa County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 
scale quadrangles Richmond, Benecia, Briones Valley and Walnut Creek.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 572162,4205268; 572327,4205277; 572442,4205195; 572582,4205195; 
572788,4205283; 572909,4205274; 573122,4204829; 573298,4204638; 
573495,4204549; 573519,4204473; 573487,4204382; 573594,4204332; 
573672,4204255; 573639,4204185; 573520,4204083; 573424,4203726; 
573355,4203671; 573267,4203695; 573150,4203787; 572928,4203867; 
572737,4204064; 572574,4203972; 572526,4203835; 571765,4203776; 
571660,4203656; 571783,4202972; 571741,4202650; 571991,4202253; 
572214,4201968; 572486,4201677; 572471,4201544; 572497,4201511; 
572614,4201480; 572794,4201502; 572878,4201552; 573135,4201820; 
573168,4201827; 573218,4201660; 573237,4201425; 573292,4201268; 
573364,4201222; 573484,4200970; 573443,4201046; 573544,4201047; 
573651,4201342; 573748,4201343; 573742,4201477; 574217,4201456; 
574155,4201560; 574504,4201744; 574537,4201730; 574501,4201794; 
574535,4201949; 574691,4201984; 574719,4201926; 574749,4201918; 
574771,4201939; 574774,4202005; 574799,4202006; 574807,4201453; 
575241,4201597; 575195,4201668; 575198,4201759; 575232,4201791; 
575271,4201928; 575242,4201927; 575276,4202021; 575390,4202092; 
575386,4202303; 575527,4202304; 575672,4202256; 575687,4202126; 
575729,4202104; 575803,4202084; 575955,4202109; 575936,4202055; 
576042,4201903; 575989,4201793; 576046,4201771; 576025,4201654; 
576171,4201610; 576222,4201746; 576282,4201829; 576248,4201881; 
576272,4201920; 576235,4201988; 576381,4202154; 576452,4202128; 
576537,4202156; 576696,4201885; 576871,4201782; 576922,4201934; 
577022,4202086; 577036,4202077; 577059,4202163; 577129,4202252; 
577122,4202327; 577165,4202394; 577286,4202312; 577377,4202449; 
577553,4202269; 577370,4202080; 577433,4202019; 577181,4201778; 
577331,4201778; 577332,4201711; 577396,4201713; 577394,4201778; 
577538,4201779; 577538,4201608; 577375,4201499; 577180,4201413; 
577177,4201270; 577253,4201191; 577192,4200992; 577204,4200806; 
577331,4200562; 577350,4200480; 577311,4200435; 577192,4200372; 
577162,4200287; 577028,4200293; 576947,4200268; 576858,4200184; 
576906,4200083; 576929,4199888; 576926,4199829; 576851,4199719; 
576847,4199627; 576744,4199595; 576480,4199299; 576670,4199097; 
576790,4199053; 576934,4198944; 577000,4198816; 576998,4198671; 
576909,4198588; 576860,4198575; 576798,4198592; 576812,4198531; 
576357,4198119; 576106,4197955; 575987,4197664; 576046,4197240; 
576005,4197111; 575797,4196993; 575587,4196999; 575432,4196824; 
575436,4196897; 575386,4197011; 575161,4197151; 575066,4197298; 
574718,4197534; 574156,4197457; 574162,4197390; 573973,4197317; 
573757,4197318; 573683,4197437; 573738,4197634; 573750,4197950; 
573599,4197933; 573543,4198199; 573353,4198414; 573281,4198460; 
573166,4198456; 573063,4198504; 573022,4198458; 572836,4198432; 
572610,4198534; 572532,4198601; 572485,4198723; 572417,4198723; 
572221,4198785; 572141,4198998; 572010,4199081; 571881,4199118; 
571670,4199102; 571566,4199147; 571524,4199202; 571507,4199310; 
571533,4199362; 571350,4199393; 571009,4199625; 570836,4199835; 
570696,4199866; 570536,4199789; 570280,4199549; 569826,4199391; 
569478,4199475; 568851,4199841; 568699,4199671; 568627,4199387; 
568691,4199069; 568353,4199245; 567529,4198875; 566350,4199375; 
566284,4199599; 566341,4199604; 566737,4199831; 566760,4199874; 
566841,4199875; 566833,4199961; 566930,4200163; 566919,4200201; 
566776,4200022; 566657,4200001; 566562,4199885;

[[Page 72]]

566296,4199802; 566239,4199753; 566203,4199876; 565621,4200086; 
565429,4200430; 565511,4200537; 565521,4200525; 566258,4201186; 
566869,4201553; 566786,4201997; 566461,4202226; 566270,4202570; 
565402,4203167; 565751,4203676; 566022,4203755; 566817,4203589; 
567187,4203774; 567307,4204369; 567551,4204653; 567971,4204786; 
568162,4205016; 568316,4205601; 569243,4205726; 569500,4206028; 
569786,4206162; 571795,4205888; 571822,4205812; 572102,4205486; 
572129,4205309; returning to 572162,4205268.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit CCS-1 for the California red-legged frog 
follows:

[[Page 73]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17MR10.012

    (25) Unit CCS-2: Contra Costa and Alameda Counties, California.
    (i) Subunit CCS-2A. From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles Walnut 
Creek, Clayton, and Diablo. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, 
NAD83 coordinates (E,N): 590966,4195381; 591584,4195077; 591596,4194986; 
591659,4194914; 591743,4194903; 591896,4194623;

[[Page 74]]

592141,4194355; 592189,4194330; 592235,4194205; 592329,4194137; 
592442,4194139; 592470,4194106; 592527,4193846; 592688,4193638; 
592834,4193634; 592942,4193372; 593298,4193329; 593278,4193189; 
592898,4193026; 592464,4192592; 592410,4192158; 592410,4191723; 
592301,4191397; 591867,4191017; 591595,4190529; 591495,4190495; 
591457,4190511; 591447,4190592; 591142,4190699; 591124,4190836; 
590955,4190873; 590648,4191074; 589965,4191056; 589873,4191079; 
589807,4191148; 589751,4191159; 589656,4191120; 589656,4191026; 
589428,4191042; 589293,4190997; 588928,4190974; 588851,4191280; 
588891,4191357; 588857,4191474; 588834,4191480; 588831,4191683; 
588477,4191754; 588478,4191791; 588335,4191796; 588267,4191865; 
588296,4191958; 588224,4192037; 588213,4192087; 588248,4192180; 
588129,4192225; 588074,4192281; 588047,4192349; 588100,4192405; 
588063,4192545; 587986,4192680; 587925,4192733; 587796,4192729; 
587701,4192678; 587606,4192858; 587356,4193019; 587222,4193159; 
587396,4193281; 587505,4193429; 587711,4193321; 588016,4193393; 
588207,4193552; 588289,4193768; 588378,4193831; 588728,4193850; 
588804,4194250; 588982,4194638; 589026,4194983; 589108,4195198; 
589323,4195327; 589882,4195381; 590548,4195274; returning to 
590966,4195381.
    (ii) Subunit CCS-2B. From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles Diablo, 
Tassajara, Byron Hot Springs, Dublin, Livermore, Altamont, Midway, and 
Clifton Court Forebay. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 
coordinates (E,N): 599361,4176006; 599341,4176048; 599341,4176174; 
599284,4176237; 599339,4176375; 599328,4176394; 599351,4176409; 
599193,4176675; 599350,4177063; 599085,4177291; 598887,4177526; 
598831,4177784; 598883,4178009; 598893,4178237; 598946,4178300; 
598936,4178389; 599076,4178612; 599001,4178659; 598939,4178780; 
598982,4178937; 599256,4179309; 599170,4179461; 599348,4180125; 
599348,4180303; 599494,4180570; 599710,4180868; 599735,4181179; 
599932,4181459; 600465,4181344; 601189,4181433; 601265,4181573; 
601010,4181785; 601010,4182167; 601038,4182207; 601226,4182275; 
601305,4182383; 601321,4182514; 601408,4182609; 601544,4182684; 
601770,4182693; 602052,4182635; 601992,4183824; 601846,4184616; 
600555,4184616; 600399,4184565; 600269,4184571; 600243,4184637; 
600179,4184639; 600087,4184579; 599915,4184539; 599359,4184962; 
599227,4185769; 598974,4186032; 599082,4186368; 597914,4186452; 
597879,4186793; 597685,4186967; 597681,4187031; 597633,4187076; 
597562,4187077; 597525,4187112; 597176,4187118; 597174,4186906; 
597046,4186902; 596844,4187007; 596646,4187013; 596172,4187079; 
595987,4187174; 595752,4187566; 595813,4187685; 595746,4187785; 
595523,4187813; 595445,4188105; 595352,4188108; 595240,4188044; 
595240,4187971; 595198,4187857; 595210,4187761; 595151,4187633; 
595069,4187629; 594873,4187497; 594601,4187391; 594459,4187434; 
594459,4187518; 594309,4187529; 594261,4187722; 594233,4187736; 
594223,4187841; 594131,4187785; 593748,4187977; 593705,4188078; 
593606,4188042; 593474,4188081; 593410,4188204; 593240,4188182; 
593132,4188217; 593036,4188421; 592987,4188416; 592913,4188598; 
592625,4188865; 592566,4188841; 592547,4188887; 592579,4188947; 
592403,4189055; 592432,4189145; 592389,4189312; 592346,4189373; 
592327,4189556; 592289,4189590; 592283,4189782; 592464,4189714; 
593007,4189660; 593441,4189388; 594039,4189171; 594364,4189225; 
594907,4189225; 595342,4188900; 595722,4188520; 596211,4188465; 
596428,4188845; 596482,4189334; 596699,4189931; 597242,4189986; 
597514,4189551; 597894,4189334; 598165,4189117; 598491,4188791; 
598871,4188302; 599577,4188411; 600012,4188411; 600336,4188087; 
600351,4186962; 601470,4186982; 601695,4186728; 602129,4186456; 
602944,4185370; 603650,4184936; 603867,4184719; 604410,4184556; 
606690,4182112; 606690,4181081; 607776,4180266; 621397,4184549; 
621470,4184429; 621507,4184287; 621983,4184349; 621788,4184672; 
623318,4185153; 623256,4185109; 623331,4184969; 623311,4184795; 
623520,4184478; 623692,4184338; 623735,4184117; 623472,4184116; 
623479,4183966; 623791,4183970; 623813,4183913; 623940,4183799; 
623890,4183477; 623954,4183316; 624056,4183260; 624119,4183134; 
624022,4182579; 624054,4182471; 624181,4182344; 624213,4182236; 
624206,4182046; 624323,4181863; 624472,4181801; 624471,4181577; 
624777,4181462; 624962,4181261; 625001,4181120; 625034,4180699; 
624946,4180302; 624892,4180389; 624579,4180724; 624473,4180770; 
623882,4180767; 623692,4180833; 623559,4181043; 623364,4181183; 
623224,4181383; 623257,4181585; 623226,4181707; 623107,4181751; 
623051,4181839; 622963,4181907; 622678,4182332; 622560,4182376; 
622472,4182442; 622425,4182514; 622328,4182564; 621806,4182439; 
621645,4182584; 621674,4182640; 621703,4182642; 621709,4182689; 
621528,4182836; 621453,4182808; 621431,4182743; 621406,4182776; 
621381,4182923; 621490,4183263; 621445,4183403; 621342,4183538; 
621098,4183711; 621050,4183843; 621031,4184097; 621241,4184338; 
621139,4184357; 621006,4184237; 620949,4184103; 620949,4183835; 
620983,4183702; 621309,4183387; 621332,4183208; 621247,4183062; 
621234,4182871; 621347,4182624; 621380,4182609; 621400,4182556; 
621389,4182512; 621238,4182326; 621169,4182277; 621146,4182237; 
621203,4182212; 621140,4182070; 621049,4181958; 621071,4181920; 
621203,4181983; 621390,4182187; 621500,4182201; 621508,4182234; 
621462,4182320; 621555,4182405; 621608,4182406; 621772,4182312; 
622035,4182252; 622121,4182186; 622129,4182128; 622076,4182055; 
621966,4181995; 621990,4181963; 622087,4181953; 622193,4182005; 
622344,4182150; 622373,4182150; 622324,4181968; 622489,4182014; 
622512,4181967; 622438,4181807; 622507,4181784; 622607,4181864; 
622646,4181844; 622646,4181772; 622586,4181578; 622576,4181510; 
622593,4181479; 622690,4181578; 622756,4181595; 622746,4181709; 
622829,4181733; 622898,4181650; 623013,4181402; 622971,4181220; 
623021,4181194; 623122,4181313; 623190,4181189; 623441,4180906; 
623501,4180763; 623628,4180649; 624135,4180591; 624429,4180624; 
624619,4180516; 624856,4180172; 624907,4179859; 625025,4179696; 
625203,4179620; 625248,4179512; 625271,4179192; 625357,4179099; 
625221,4179013; 625094,4178683; 624999,4178137; 624186,4177959; 
623602,4177870; 623284,4177769; 622719,4177737; 621971,4177625; 
621163,4177429; 621071,4177365; 621001,4177389; 620839,4177350; 
620531,4177175; 620338,4176956; 620073,4176555; 619557,4176372; 
619398,4176387; 618445,4175921; 617741,4175699; 617214,4175661; 
616985,4175845; 616827,4175893; 616726,4176023; 616595,4176069;

[[Page 75]]

616465,4175916; 616300,4175916; 616199,4175967; 615952,4175987; 
615645,4175956; 615550,4175968; 615445,4176022; 615277,4176155; 
615204,4176187; 615014,4176190; 614869,4176077; 614818,4175888; 
614818,4175781; 614758,4175694; 614621,4175571; 614115,4175445; 
613667,4175272; 613613,4176416; 613543,4176702; 612845,4176702; 
612559,4176794; 612400,4176791; 612405,4176585; 612468,4176496; 
612180,4176347; 612010,4176352; 612010,4176485; 611878,4176498; 
611851,4176683; 611698,4176683; 611670,4176703; 611263,4176692; 
611257,4176915; 611178,4176961; 611109,4177229; 610888,4177229; 
610888,4177496; 611059,4177908; 611149,4177904; 611195,4177958; 
611343,4178037; 611193,4178156; 611193,4178602; 611068,4178930; 
610967,4179021; 610819,4179105; 610460,4179200; 610330,4179268; 
609942,4179653; 609884,4179675; 609747,4179649; 609678,4179584; 
609502,4179091; 609208,4179078; 609149,4178483; 608938,4178402; 
608889,4178405; 608832,4178467; 608803,4178607; 608865,4178832; 
608944,4178926; 609022,4179100; 609060,4179514; 608923,4179877; 
607783,4179877; 607783,4180239; 607592,4180175; 607605,4179870; 
607484,4179865; 607370,4179978; 606881,4179934; 606870,4179354; 
607316,4178848; 607596,4178386; 607665,4178177; 607653,4177923; 
607603,4177779; 607537,4177711; 607502,4177695; 607417,4177711; 
607172,4177871; 607079,4177880; 606952,4177811; 607119,4177617; 
607167,4177594; 607178,4177547; 607313,4177374; 607361,4177193; 
607383,4176794; 607422,4176549; 607376,4176262; 607269,4175975; 
607245,4175797; 607203,4175727; 607089,4175779; 606953,4175988; 
606888,4175970; 606501,4175670; 606083,4175437; 605976,4175309; 
605778,4174901; 605660,4174762; 605340,4174590; 605260,4174590; 
605062,4175042; 604508,4175020; 604524,4174007; 603715,4173996; 
603645,4173682; 603510,4173621; 603327,4173595; 603249,4173617; 
603170,4173716; 602842,4173817; 602840,4173677; 602595,4173680; 
602368,4173630; 602125,4173622; 601350,4173736; 601331,4173978; 
601403,4174098; 601431,4174282; 601370,4174292; 601409,4174480; 
601336,4174586; 601270,4174580; 601326,4174955; 601262,4175552; 
601290,4175975; 601215,4176027; 601041,4176273; 600792,4176312; 
600663,4176411; 600507,4176407; 600411,4176520; 600516,4176742; 
600494,4176951; 600239,4177033; 600094,4177043; 599730,4176899; 
599700,4176852; 599576,4176774; 599452,4176577; 599452,4176098; 
599402,4176098; returning to 599361,4176006. Excluding: 622742,4184043; 
622742,4183973; 623170,4183986; 623154,4184309; 622828,4184300; 
622828,4184064; returning to 622742,4184043.
    (iii) Note: Map of Unit CCS-2, subunits CCS-2A and CCS-2B, for the 
California red-legged frog follows:

[[Page 76]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17MR10.013

    (26) Unit ALA-1: Alameda and Contra Costa Counties, California.
    (i) Subunit ALA-1A. From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles Hayward and 
Dublin. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 589322,4176556; 589405,4176494; 589496,4176505; 589924,4176319; 
589935,4176295; 590430,4176229; 590671,4176222;

[[Page 77]]

591266,4175498; 591719,4174774; 591948,4174305; 591853,4174108; 
591642,4173986; 591604,4173865; 591542,4173820; 591545,4173707; 
591486,4173693; 591355,4173389; 591499,4173241; 591694,4173149; 
591840,4172933; 591448,4172833; 590725,4172829; 589688,4172994; 
589054,4173369; 588658,4173519; 588382,4173575; 588034,4173607; 
587897,4173519; 587616,4173529; 587503,4173596; 587361,4173580; 
587265,4173454; 587091,4173433; 586954,4173495; 586775,4173449; 
586544,4173495; 586531,4173449; 586293,4173369; 586242,4173425; 
586242,4173859; 586210,4173945; 586247,4174005; 586500,4174070; 
586630,4174164; 587008,4174540; 587167,4174927; 587446,4175244; 
587548,4175454; 587414,4175727; 587586,4176114; 587681,4176546; 
587654,4176671; 587794,4176717; 587912,4176814; 588009,4176960; 
588352,4177224; 588496,4177249; 588745,4177130; 588812,4177013; 
588827,4176886; 588916,4176782; 589103,4176705; returning to 
589322,4176556.
    (ii) Subunit ALA-1B. From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles Hayward, 
Newark, Dublin and Niles. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, 
NAD83 coordinates (E,N): 588321,4173181; 588639,4173092; 589000,4172905; 
589752,4172727; 589798,4172674; 589766,4172519; 590315,4172407; 
590489,4172393; 591221,4172426; 591396,4172458; 591606,4172445; 
592102,4172231; 592172,4172044; 592189,4171371; 592042,4171279; 
592151,4170380; 592223,4170274; 592266,4169980; 592295,4169974; 
592376,4169868; 592356,4169776; 592382,4169675; 592366,4169540; 
592758,4169210; 592904,4169127; 593012,4169114; 593047,4169002; 
592837,4168532; 592484,4168000; 592339,4168097; 592026,4168424; 
591967,4168457; 591926,4168450; 591490,4168898; 591583,4168715; 
591600,4168604; 591552,4168555; 591445,4168506; 591391,4168384; 
591375,4168229; 591314,4168047; 591180,4167755; 591302,4167480; 
591364,4167166; 591324,4167114; 590985,4166944; 590847,4166939; 
590568,4166990; 590483,4166904; 590440,4166758; 590366,4166722; 
590240,4166746; 590127,4166801; 590009,4166810; 589907,4166736; 
589879,4166634; 589923,4166536; 589913,4166354; 589951,4166210; 
589925,4166027; 589834,4165738; 589459,4165656; 589211,4165548; 
589046,4165281; 588824,4165281; 588533,4165134; 588437,4164907; 
588163,4164532; 587725,4164310; 587497,4164106; 587332,4163903; 
587131,4163906; 586555,4163647; 586163,4163992; 586062,4164145; 
585877,4164291; 585839,4164456; 585687,4164710; 585560,4165078; 
585538,4165286; 585395,4165510; 585247,4165573; 585201,4165782; 
585288,4165951; 585380,4166061; 585520,4166085; 585508,4166256; 
585528,4166374; 585693,4166513; 585897,4166640; 585970,4166766; 
586129,4166878; 586344,4166952; 586414,4167028; 587090,4167066; 
587119,4167029; 587158,4167029; 587452,4166869; 587732,4166767; 
587973,4166786; 588170,4166970; 588155,4167200; 587681,4167758; 
587459,4168183; 587133,4168507; 586360,4168839; 586047,4169778; 
586218,4170240; 586313,4170161; 586909,4170161; 587125,4170201; 
587109,4170285; 586997,4170377; 586969,4170461; 587015,4170485; 
587041,4170593; 586953,4170669; 586905,4170757; 586805,4170789; 
586701,4170933; 586613,4171125; 586609,4171265; 586467,4171532; 
586545,4171729; 586438,4172049; 586603,4172104; 586673,4172189; 
586317,4172358; 586229,4172533; 586556,4173120; 586809,4173225; 
587468,4173169; 587883,4173268; 588111,4173240; returning to 
588321,4173181.
    (iii) Note: Map of Unit ALA-1, subunits ALA-1A and ALA-1B, for the 
California red-legged frog follows:

[[Page 78]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17MR10.014

    (27) Unit ALA-2: Alameda, Santa Clara and San Joaquin Counties, 
California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles Niles, La Costa Valley, 
Calaveras Reservoir, Altamont, Mendenhall Springs, Mt. Day, Midway, 
Cedar Mtn., Tracy, Lone Tree Creek and Eylar Mountain.

[[Page 79]]

    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 612040,4142329; 612012,4142381; 611689,4142634; 611459,4142899; 
611408,4142925; 611372,4142893; 611151,4142845; 610999,4142707; 
610789,4142438; 610751,4142259; 610676,4142133; 610614,4142075; 
610415,4141989; 610315,4141978; 610194,4142032; 610088,4142027; 
610012,4142113; 609851,4142170; 609797,4142102; 609743,4141951; 
609564,4141864; 609511,4141864; 609375,4141928; 609329,4141976; 
609302,4142219; 609083,4142211; 608996,4142296; 608848,4142388; 
608741,4142579; 608679,4142620; 608587,4142636; 608300,4142611; 
607907,4142380; 607725,4142387; 607382,4142516; 607250,4142594; 
607141,4142701; 606927,4142780; 606795,4142870; 606679,4142882; 
606543,4142829; 606416,4142871; 606314,4142929; 606224,4143019; 
606057,4143065; 605791,4143243; 605701,4143423; 605554,4143520; 
605210,4143551; 605067,4143500; 604810,4143466; 604716,4143478; 
604622,4143530; 604624,4143653; 604557,4143790; 604374,4143877; 
604337,4143986; 604155,4144066; 603854,4144086; 603712,4144172; 
603514,4144160; 603469,4144204; 603430,4144299; 603248,4144436; 
603200,4144536; 603197,4144624; 603256,4144680; 603339,4144934; 
603197,4145061; 603314,4145117; 603550,4145109; 603669,4145241; 
603714,4145425; 603787,4145493; 603795,4145566; 603837,4145620; 
604148,4145841; 604353,4145949; 604472,4145956; 604495,4145903; 
604643,4145908; 604707,4145860; 604790,4145919; 605318,4145910; 
605495,4145971; 605524,4145952; 605593,4145960; 605658,4145913; 
605722,4145903; 605837,4146012; 605829,4146068; 605639,4146251; 
605594,4146337; 605663,4146343; 605738,4146225; 605845,4146183; 
605916,4146229; 605801,4146507; 605762,4146550; 605428,4146660; 
605483,4146707; 605416,4146780; 605464,4146836; 605387,4146944; 
605365,4147079; 605394,4147165; 605442,4147212; 605552,4147114; 
605551,4147218; 605593,4147302; 605336,4147373; 605322,4147431; 
605352,4147500; 605277,4147575; 605329,4147701; 605256,4147690; 
605245,4147738; 605214,4147753; 605096,4147703; 605044,4147733; 
605034,4147773; 605096,4147840; 605096,4147871; 604965,4147973; 
604914,4148051; 604845,4148083; 604885,4148277; 604991,4148413; 
605033,4148434; 605095,4148424; 605127,4148265; 605251,4148083; 
605431,4148129; 605537,4148188; 605655,4148273; 605818,4148448; 
606075,4148398; 606331,4148228; 606492,4148189; 606493,4148131; 
606428,4148018; 606466,4147818; 606599,4147772; 606755,4147834; 
606834,4147825; 606980,4147710; 607100,4147683; 607329,4147689; 
607345,4147608; 607317,4147567; 607349,4147443; 607255,4147276; 
607243,4147215; 607251,4147137; 607316,4147026; 607487,4147002; 
607524,4147018; 607557,4147061; 607569,4147349; 607611,4147397; 
607996,4147308; 608117,4147213; 608174,4147074; 608207,4147072; 
608169,4147104; 608103,4147246; 608026,4147319; 607940,4147361; 
607568,4147455; 607508,4147378; 607463,4147091; 607430,4147073; 
607361,4147095; 607345,4147122; 607361,4147285; 607416,4147398; 
607414,4147743; 607371,4147778; 607304,4147790; 607048,4147807; 
606761,4147977; 606612,4147924; 606576,4147974; 606641,4148036; 
606650,4148153; 606567,4148327; 606317,4148401; 606245,4148473; 
606127,4148523; 606022,4148618; 606011,4148697; 605972,4148760; 
605956,4148648; 605875,4148588; 605794,4148552; 605740,4148579; 
605677,4148566; 605645,4148530; 605425,4148449; 605302,4148488; 
605261,4148568; 605078,4148759; 604968,4148794; 604811,4148733; 
604743,4148753; 604626,4148724; 604618,4148800; 604509,4148765; 
604453,4148777; 604411,4148891; 604307,4148872; 604115,4148999; 
604035,4149085; 604024,4149133; 604042,4149326; 604139,4149315; 
604097,4149449; 604123,4149581; 604103,4149599; 604101,4149703; 
604131,4149764; 604225,4149775; 604253,4149801; 604388,4149988; 
604441,4150019; 604438,4150052; 604397,4150085; 604375,4150151; 
604142,4150150; 604089,4150109; 603999,4150169; 603908,4150143; 
603794,4150164; 603778,4150233; 603721,4150298; 603693,4150280; 
603707,4150191; 603646,4150211; 603615,4150238; 603609,4150314; 
603550,4150375; 603499,4150366; 603474,4150381; 603465,4150437; 
603404,4150447; 603348,4150592; 603203,4151558; 603140,4151552; 
603093,4151598; 602802,4151744; 602597,4151755; 602487,4151789; 
602423,4151775; 602339,4151609; 602165,4151495; 602039,4151369; 
601813,4151278; 601645,4151127; 601369,4151014; 601287,4150951; 
601305,4150919; 601463,4150837; 601460,4150773; 601374,4150664; 
600991,4150604; 600900,4150486; 600709,4150330; 600593,4150316; 
600405,4150249; 600286,4150258; 600228,4150285; 600135,4150455; 
599878,4150496; 599744,4150676; 599763,4150829; 599721,4150914; 
599715,4151215; 599571,4151627; 599425,4151760; 599256,4151991; 
598935,4152325; 598994,4152320; 599022,4152342; 599297,4152714; 
599395,4153026; 599416,4153204; 599523,4153331; 599517,4153429; 
599553,4153602; 599451,4153719; 599339,4153768; 599384,4153847; 
599517,4153896; 599586,4154036; 599657,4154112; 599674,4154219; 
599658,4154487; 599787,4154525; 599832,4154564; 599890,4154672; 
600055,4154874; 600151,4154920; 600292,4154897; 600382,4154931; 
600844,4154804; 600949,4154802; 601259,4154869; 601469,4154994; 
601548,4155076; 601597,4155224; 601511,4155405; 601693,4155514; 
601743,4155684; 601817,4155756; 601782,4155824; 601798,4155853; 
601877,4155865; 602072,4156065; 602136,4156056; 602233,4155908; 
602310,4155871; 602656,4155945; 602838,4156068; 602813,4156118; 
602652,4156215; 602583,4156379; 602431,4156538; 602419,4156664; 
602388,4156715; 602257,4156867; 601881,4157136; 601861,4157211; 
601941,4157456; 601943,4157586; 601992,4157658; 601991,4157850; 
601808,4158002; 601645,4158526; 601585,4158580; 601470,4158625; 
601408,4158719; 601423,4158781; 601512,4158831; 601622,4158758; 
601752,4158717; 601898,4158596; 602033,4158637; 602067,4158587; 
602086,4158475; 602142,4158584; 602282,4158604; 602297,4158635; 
602321,4158635; 602311,4158415; 602331,4158379; 602437,4158596; 
602558,4158545; 602650,4158451; 602706,4158308; 602805,4158219; 
602926,4158054; 603037,4158013; 602827,4158277; 602648,4158679; 
602798,4158650; 603040,4158674; 602776,4158754; 602703,4158797; 
602703,4158879; 602810,4158896; 602805,4158971; 602894,4158933; 
602923,4158841; 603015,4158899; 603083,4158860; 603129,4158889; 
603216,4158884; 603214,4158913; 603098,4158945; 602965,4159029; 
603073,4159117; 603168,4159046; 603185,4159071; 603250,4159068; 
603265,4159087; 603168,4159143; 603236,4159172; 603461,4159032; 
603492,4158860; 603538,4158766; 603550,4158928; 603741,4158838; 
603741,4158877; 603613,4158981; 603543,4159097; 603565,4159141;

[[Page 80]]

603678,4159218; 603732,4159221; 603751,4159250; 603659,4159274; 
603478,4159165; 603417,4159206; 603417,4159240; 603366,4159242; 
603282,4159308; 603475,4159334; 603487,4159361; 603676,4159424; 
603666,4159470; 603690,4159513; 603897,4159734; 603965,4159654; 
604021,4159650; 603961,4159728; 603949,4159767; 603970,4159788; 
604166,4159765; 604156,4159788; 604023,4159840; 603891,4159842; 
603843,4159867; 603860,4160059; 603916,4160117; 603934,4160229; 
604036,4160251; 604063,4160345; 604119,4160411; 604402,4160462; 
604532,4160438; 604539,4160396; 604611,4160425; 604785,4160307; 
604836,4160247; 604959,4160235; 604961,4160328; 604907,4160415; 
604799,4160508; 604896,4160510; 604990,4160481; 605025,4160446; 
605052,4160454; 605049,4160535; 605091,4160560; 605099,4160638; 
605188,4160556; 605161,4160369; 605207,4160208; 605432,4160204; 
605639,4160059; 605658,4160065; 605647,4160127; 605589,4160148; 
605664,4160156; 605668,4160177; 605558,4160196; 605517,4160266; 
605412,4160355; 605356,4160371; 605354,4160429; 605418,4160492; 
605416,4160574; 605383,4160611; 605329,4160769; 605097,4160903; 
604896,4160982; 604898,4161015; 605031,4161075; 605211,4161062; 
605250,4161083; 605354,4161052; 605393,4161125; 605321,4161083; 
605248,4161139; 605229,4161104; 605078,4161129; 605130,4161201; 
605116,4161213; 604965,4161110; 604882,4161098; 604849,4161211; 
604830,4161106; 604725,4161094; 604719,4161145; 604772,4161251; 
604743,4161387; 604836,4161458; 604840,4161588; 604785,4161648; 
604674,4161661; 604643,4161706; 604539,4161905; 604530,4162062; 
604477,4162055; 604402,4161896; 604331,4161865; 604293,4161816; 
604201,4161825; 604223,4162298; 604245,4162381; 604326,4162500; 
604256,4162686; 604287,4163126; 604402,4163244; 604489,4163238; 
604534,4163384; 604453,4163523; 604392,4163562; 604261,4163606; 
604110,4163595; 604048,4163634; 603989,4163770; 603966,4163928; 
604037,4164092; 604238,4164099; 604777,4164253; 604854,4164136; 
604916,4164096; 604969,4164096; 605148,4164169; 605350,4164352; 
605649,4164257; 605875,4164270; 606040,4164321; 606197,4164286; 
606378,4164305; 606748,4164218; 606807,4164177; 606956,4163861; 
607033,4163799; 607137,4163817; 607200,4163795; 607268,4163723; 
607406,4163317; 607437,4163070; 607399,4162974; 607509,4162882; 
607489,4162781; 607497,4162559; 607612,4162491; 607662,4162347; 
607884,4162241; 607987,4162290; 608041,4162397; 608293,4162412; 
608369,4162379; 608463,4162419; 608631,4162415; 608789,4162338; 
608939,4162358; 609035,4162342; 609251,4162174; 609303,4162095; 
609507,4162059; 609821,4161959; 609961,4161787; 610119,4161756; 
610377,4161516; 610474,4161581; 610495,4161639; 610408,4161802; 
610304,4161934; 610281,4162055; 610366,4162111; 610529,4162091; 
610616,4162113; 610662,4162180; 610689,4162326; 610174,4162444; 
610131,4162487; 610080,4162627; 609932,4162662; 609887,4162694; 
609833,4162853; 609836,4162929; 609999,4163118; 610132,4163212; 
610249,4163343; 610316,4163543; 610317,4163675; 610415,4163690; 
610523,4163664; 610579,4163673; 610592,4163705; 610595,4163608; 
610668,4163472; 610657,4163365; 610744,4163376; 610786,4163237; 
610819,4163245; 610831,4163322; 610873,4163365; 610965,4163326; 
611159,4163301; 611202,4163271; 611290,4163341; 611432,4163346; 
611461,4163328; 611474,4163252; 611534,4163149; 611593,4163114; 
611595,4162990; 611636,4162967; 611635,4162879; 611702,4162824; 
611806,4162617; 611790,4162515; 611874,4162493; 611875,4162422; 
611979,4162414; 612067,4162316; 612076,4162260; 612130,4162220; 
612151,4162172; 612272,4162060; 612422,4161996; 612454,4161956; 
612432,4161882; 612311,4161816; 612309,4161796; 612413,4161792; 
612514,4161819; 612591,4161744; 612678,4161700; 612661,4161344; 
612611,4161249; 612715,4161266; 612821,4161156; 612964,4161105; 
613031,4161029; 613138,4161026; 613391,4160895; 613523,4160757; 
613511,4160668; 613568,4160646; 613630,4160685; 613909,4160554; 
614053,4160437; 614094,4160428; 614139,4160301; 614169,4160307; 
614196,4160383; 614239,4160384; 614317,4160278; 614319,4160159; 
614374,4160203; 614410,4160204; 614588,4159980; 614786,4159869; 
614999,4159887; 615160,4159798; 615214,4159743; 615218,4159659; 
615277,4159609; 615382,4159585; 615451,4159520; 615506,4159445; 
615511,4159244; 615627,4159137; 615734,4159077; 615774,4158966; 
615883,4158975; 615967,4158961; 616016,4158926; 616001,4158756; 
616053,4158653; 616070,4158533; 615937,4158437; 615937,4158415; 
615976,4158395; 616031,4158406; 616342,4158535; 616404,4158655; 
616395,4158754; 616189,4158934; 615951,4159202; 615675,4159338; 
615628,4159393; 615652,4159505; 615754,4159626; 615705,4159877; 
615559,4159969; 615593,4160096; 615699,4160258; 615689,4160306; 
615558,4160205; 615507,4160217; 615249,4160467; 615111,4160529; 
615021,4160616; 614906,4160648; 614920,4160732; 614847,4160690; 
614743,4160701; 614584,4160803; 614304,4160664; 614064,4160734; 
613882,4160844; 613864,4160886; 613915,4161004; 613815,4160942; 
613708,4160968; 613663,4161051; 613668,4161227; 613605,4161238; 
613532,4161329; 613395,4161296; 613163,4161379; 613047,4161352; 
612998,4161367; 612939,4161432; 612944,4161612; 612978,4161702; 
613114,4161754; 613228,4161830; 613321,4161841; 613475,4161930; 
613497,4161981; 613561,4161990; 613692,4162073; 613696,4162098; 
613638,4162100; 613494,4162045; 613460,4162092; 613345,4161966; 
613160,4161935; 613159,4161989; 613267,4162112; 613258,4162204; 
613178,4162261; 613202,4162353; 613153,4162408; 613107,4162415; 
613065,4162384; 612971,4162367; 612965,4162405; 613007,4162469; 
612951,4162479; 612958,4162555; 613039,4162719; 612954,4162672; 
612887,4162714; 612906,4162615; 612858,4162607; 612862,4162536; 
612811,4162530; 612828,4162406; 612785,4162380; 612763,4162329; 
612755,4162219; 612699,4162213; 612556,4162267; 612445,4162380; 
612461,4162466; 612390,4162486; 612328,4162551; 612320,4162607; 
612395,4162681; 612401,4162753; 612378,4162757; 612331,4162701; 
612207,4162658; 611973,4162868; 611902,4162989; 611866,4163202; 
611963,4163186; 611988,4163229; 612087,4163253; 612086,4163284; 
611964,4163330; 611963,4163361; 612087,4163424; 612048,4163469; 
612045,4163509; 612058,4163647; 612090,4163723; 612163,4163755; 
612358,4163623; 612384,4163735; 612386,4163768; 612305,4163788; 
612327,4163851; 612240,4163863; 612260,4163916; 612234,4163959; 
612005,4163966; 611979,4163991; 612006,4164052; 612201,4164101; 
612211,4164122; 612096,4164150; 612075,4164211; 612052,4164216; 
612002,4164154; 611921,4164153; 611912,4164224; 611872,4164228; 
611848,4164271; 611877,4164368;

[[Page 81]]

611877,4164399; 611851,4164401; 611764,4164288; 611744,4164277; 
611685,4164322; 611655,4164291; 611673,4164238; 611745,4164188; 
611741,4164148; 611596,4164163; 611533,4164124; 611510,4164137; 
611475,4164248; 611474,4164324; 611419,4164405; 611369,4164404; 
611366,4164246; 611259,4164224; 611307,4164106; 611154,4163999; 
611074,4163841; 611001,4163839; 610927,4163872; 610880,4163980; 
611039,4164436; 611135,4164568; 611250,4164665; 611276,4164742; 
611299,4164750; 611417,4164686; 611517,4164715; 611877,4164958; 
612038,4164886; 612296,4164820; 612347,4164780; 612407,4164645; 
612647,4164556; 612875,4164171; 612995,4164092; 613061,4163899; 
613180,4163791; 613271,4163581; 613617,4163370; 613818,4163372; 
613863,4163331; 613895,4163203; 613918,4163188; 614088,4163210; 
614324,4163351; 614453,4163275; 614626,4163296; 614666,4163414; 
614856,4163572; 614869,4163807; 614964,4163865; 615129,4163865; 
615251,4163719; 615688,4163445; 616025,4163376; 616264,4163384; 
616374,4163496; 616273,4163596; 615872,4163712; 615829,4163887; 
615321,4164105; 614755,4164569; 614749,4164767; 614831,4164944; 
614654,4165026; 614436,4165689; 614437,4165903; 614928,4165903; 
615345,4165598; 615550,4165937; 615503,4166296; 615732,4166487; 
615913,4166505; 616346,4167008; 617079,4167466; 617161,4167694; 
617282,4167808; 617685,4167845; 617722,4167868; 617791,4167845; 
618542,4167827; 618910,4167557; 619378,4167402; 619738,4167192; 
620013,4167100; 620140,4167117; 620246,4167338; 620119,4167637; 
619714,4167794; 619300,4168266; 619052,4168672; 618735,4168989; 
618678,4169104; 618172,4169787; 617995,4170301; 617442,4170382; 
617100,4170624; 616950,4170652; 616831,4170719; 616555,4171289; 
616503,4171452; 616564,4171666; 616895,4171920; 616821,4172319; 
616570,4172325; 616497,4172427; 616466,4172568; 616555,4172634; 
616539,4172754; 616454,4172763; 616429,4172996; 616084,4173186; 
616089,4173209; 616012,4173321; 615823,4173370; 615795,4173413; 
615698,4173413; 615541,4173562; 615595,4173691; 615669,4173698; 
615657,4173836; 615759,4174079; 615732,4174234; 615848,4174335; 
615749,4174500; 615756,4174555; 615850,4174586; 615884,4174669; 
615890,4174767; 615741,4174884; 615691,4174984; 616109,4175483; 
616349,4175539; 617074,4175362; 617379,4175216; 617766,4175316; 
618401,4175381; 618446,4175547; 620310,4176319; 620776,4176912; 
621036,4177108; 621473,4177190; 622154,4177242; 622497,4177318; 
622691,4177393; 623360,4177451; 624015,4177665; 625449,4178004; 
625762,4177489; 626189,4177521; 626257,4177554; 626311,4177469; 
626437,4177148; 626561,4176510; 626532,4176306; 626438,4176248; 
626132,4176243; 625961,4176202; 625907,4176037; 626005,4175816; 
626053,4175640; 626277,4175140; 626234,4175070; 626115,4174713; 
626135,4174197; 626968,4173820; 627405,4173998; 628873,4173959; 
629548,4174058; 630024,4174058; 630461,4173998; 630850,4173810; 
631367,4173496; 631624,4173272; 631969,4172827; 632177,4172507; 
632469,4172176; 632866,4171580; 633332,4171086; 633589,4170893; 
634348,4169941; 634544,4169640; 634643,4169401; 634311,4169041; 
634104,4168872; 633965,4168813; 633458,4168704; 633211,4168586; 
633149,4168471; 633108,4168299; 633101,4167912; 633166,4167824; 
633425,4167943; 633525,4168027; 633556,4168078; 633627,4168434; 
633751,4168565; 634026,4168402; 634183,4168410; 634260,4168368; 
634339,4168285; 634380,4168195; 634404,4167792; 634441,4167676; 
634312,4167513; 634247,4167338; 634248,4167274; 634433,4166949; 
634491,4166914; 634591,4166641; 634651,4166578; 634775,4166559; 
634813,4166500; 634945,4166407; 634982,4166274; 635134,4166039; 
635193,4166018; 635339,4166026; 635436,4166172; 635755,4166100; 
635700,4165993; 635691,4165894; 635833,4165753; 636016,4165716; 
636064,4165670; 636114,4165539; 636258,4165403; 636260,4165303; 
636477,4165075; 636521,4164927; 636584,4164836; 636653,4164490; 
636339,4164170; 635862,4163958; 635734,4163921; 635562,4163936; 
635496,4163921; 635355,4163786; 635276,4163743; 635081,4163725; 
635051,4163743; 635046,4163613; 634982,4163466; 635041,4163309; 
634993,4163253; 634854,4163205; 634732,4163063; 634741,4163023; 
634840,4162913; 634801,4162849; 634805,4162736; 634718,4162574; 
634607,4162475; 634575,4162358; 634477,4162212; 634562,4162117; 
634646,4162069; 634842,4162053; 635096,4161977; 635302,4161943; 
635667,4161777; 635742,4161773; 636069,4161897; 636215,4161871; 
636391,4161768; 636343,4161499; 636488,4161367; 636505,4161281; 
636375,4161122; 636210,4160834; 636051,4160777; 635924,4160628; 
635808,4160589; 635644,4160626; 635525,4160703; 635390,4160729; 
635113,4160859; 634925,4160843; 634746,4160904; 634644,4160981; 
634582,4161068; 634259,4161244; 634069,4161303; 633923,4161417; 
633779,4161457; 633667,4161542; 633555,4161531; 633388,4161453; 
632937,4161306; 632800,4161371; 632713,4161385; 632487,4161344; 
632215,4161558; 632083,4161449; 631968,4161416; 631869,4161342; 
631799,4161100; 631807,4160972; 631788,4160935; 631345,4160821; 
631146,4160825; 630921,4160773; 630897,4160466; 630917,4160371; 
630973,4160314; 630956,4160241; 630838,4160218; 630643,4160290; 
630537,4160241; 630354,4160270; 630250,4160169; 630145,4160113; 
630088,4159996; 629833,4159832; 629707,4159689; 629552,4159394; 
629602,4159258; 629583,4159103; 629526,4159075; 629357,4159113; 
629298,4159097; 628603,4158708; 628420,4158526; 628172,4157726; 
628567,4155976; 628195,4155657; 627118,4155118; 626866,4154744; 
626072,4154665; 625607,4155084; 625524,4154995; 625513,4154941; 
625536,4154846; 625599,4154744; 625493,4154679; 625463,4154608; 
625490,4154496; 625541,4154421; 625550,4154238; 625740,4154018; 
625739,4153961; 625633,4153790; 625526,4153735; 625220,4153646; 
625204,4153582; 625139,4153501; 625159,4153319; 625017,4153337; 
624952,4153321; 624866,4153269; 624748,4153146; 624737,4153000; 
624671,4152882; 624377,4152543; 624319,4152300; 624290,4152255; 
624165,4152183; 624012,4152192; 623913,4152153; 623832,4152011; 
623618,4151858; 623541,4151842; 623448,4151871; 623269,4151759; 
623162,4151743; 623100,4151695; 622804,4151586; 622730,4151531; 
622674,4151396; 622665,4151241; 622583,4151034; 622587,4150819; 
622617,4150679; 622450,4150382; 622197,4150260; 622030,4150280; 
621804,4150082; 621625,4150040; 621396,4150024; 621330,4149996; 
621248,4149920; 621154,4149738; 620947,4149601; 620818,4149560; 
620754,4149493; 620636,4149276; 620256,4149217; 620137,4149231; 
620012,4149280; 619945,4149270; 619596,4149026; 619495,4148997; 
619459,4148942; 619254,4148825; 619118,4148793; 619087,4148700; 
618666,4148833; 617890,4148580;

[[Page 82]]

617797,4148216; 617361,4148176; 616645,4148456; 616250,4148335; 
616166,4148424; 616047,4148593; 616039,4148704; 615966,4148768; 
615968,4148808; 616331,4149065; 616490,4149268; 616506,4149456; 
616416,4149564; 616424,4149735; 616405,4149809; 616359,4149879; 
616255,4149959; 616202,4150114; 616048,4150176; 616006,4150223; 
615856,4150630; 615749,4150763; 615624,4150797; 615366,4150793; 
615278,4150702; 615254,4150704; 615114,4150959; 614994,4151014; 
614893,4151097; 614906,4151187; 614664,4151097; 614394,4151118; 
614196,4151102; 614139,4151111; 613932,4151244; 613819,4151240; 
613707,4151302; 613490,4151198; 613287,4150929; 613057,4150951; 
612955,4150900; 612878,4150824; 612817,4150663; 612550,4150498; 
612364,4150441; 612168,4150495; 612127,4150474; 611931,4150091; 
611765,4150016; 611693,4149948; 611663,4149850; 611696,4149683; 
611658,4149539; 611420,4149275; 611265,4149211; 611223,4149172; 
611197,4148882; 611156,4148715; 610957,4148293; 610880,4148036; 
610929,4147898; 611187,4147546; 611249,4147572; 611377,4147569; 
611584,4147462; 611676,4147475; 611780,4147420; 611979,4147091; 
612299,4147084; 612468,4146929; 612585,4146887; 612734,4146894; 
612815,4147009; 612914,4146974; 612996,4146904; 613008,4146804; 
613095,4146713; 613126,4146601; 613342,4146462; 613413,4146384; 
613500,4146065; 613687,4146076; 613806,4146015; 613904,4145888; 
613935,4145803; 614183,4145527; 614240,4145531; 614497,4145391; 
614524,4145292; 614580,4145250; 614664,4145233; 614893,4145270; 
615411,4145165; 615464,4144957; 615626,4144771; 615644,4144645; 
615490,4144251; 615387,4144182; 615268,4144252; 615163,4144353; 
615120,4144355; 614983,4144207; 614904,4144173; 614659,4144184; 
614240,4144101; 613823,4144161; 613678,4144033; 613402,4144076; 
613126,4143957; 613071,4143816; 613088,4143711; 613063,4143570; 
612942,4143405; 612758,4142885; 612658,4142813; 612574,4142655; 
612371,4142458; 612237,4142374; returning to 612040,4142329.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit ALA-2 for the California red-legged frog 
follows:

[[Page 83]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17MR10.015

    (28) Unit SNM-1: San Mateo County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 
scale quadrangles Montara Mountain, Half Moon Bay, San Mateo and 
Woodside.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 547630,4164045; 547744,4163977; 547818,4163983; 547963,4163840; 
548003,4163821; 548075,4163840;

[[Page 84]]

548154,4163787; 548153,4163732; 548244,4163618; 548399,4163493; 
548584,4163581; 548727,4163782; 549022,4163842; 549445,4163265; 
549662,4163019; 549773,4162861; 549895,4162605; 550021,4162446; 
550354,4162086; 550600,4161758; 551542,4160713; 551788,4160393; 
551799,4160319; 551944,4160134; 552084,4160038; 552243,4159834; 
552407,4159687; 552523,4159489; 552902,4158657; 553256,4158186; 
553696,4157816; 553834,4157670; 553823,4157626; 553845,4157594; 
553929,4157579; 554007,4157453; 554066,4157221; 554201,4157191; 
554220,4157113; 554166,4157054; 554193,4156993; 554257,4156937; 
554333,4156948; 554427,4156913; 554508,4156694; 554629,4156541; 
554593,4156418; 554660,4156373; 554607,4156236; 554715,4156157; 
554745,4156059; 554851,4155898; 554808,4155832; 554829,4155792; 
555118,4155748; 555222,4155647; 555357,4155646; 555636,4155305; 
555857,4154813; 555939,4154569; 556122,4154292; 556154,4154208; 
556143,4154129; 556320,4153982; 556461,4153761; 556574,4153469; 
557000,4152696; 557532,4152000; 557762,4151768; 558014,4151373; 
558318,4151148; 558897,4150855; 559085,4150704; 559381,4150587; 
559688,4150537; 559998,4150521; 560300,4150410; 560575,4150209; 
560919,4150048; 561406,4149886; 561583,4149791; 561726,4149680; 
561856,4149534; 561936,4149173; 561888,4148062; 561974,4147672; 
562316,4147299; 562358,4147124; 562178,4147011; 561549,4147169; 
561302,4147169; 561232,4147204; 561247,4147242; 561193,4147339; 
561284,4147458; 560695,4148054; 560281,4147651; 560384,4147185; 
559753,4147258; 559303,4147393; 558697,4147640; 558360,4147640; 
558023,4147797; 557844,4147955; 557394,4148044; 557058,4147865; 
556698,4147618; 556564,4147416; 556451,4147146; 556114,4147101; 
555239,4147303; 555059,4147236; 554967,4147015; 554570,4146922; 
554295,4146742; 554026,4146653; 553971,4146586; 553899,4146546; 
553653,4146575; 553443,4146740; 553174,4146834; 553149,4146836; 
553089,4146772; 553044,4146769; 552740,4146824; 552651,4146923; 
552646,4147040; 552620,4147093; 552355,4147149; 552211,4147123; 
552047,4146981; 551417,4146719; 551274,4146763; 551254,4146926; 
551347,4147012; 551556,4147431; 551552,4147528; 551759,4147743; 
551848,4147802; 551961,4147810; 552486,4147520; 552743,4147426; 
552803,4147446; 552402,4147733; 552226,4147814; 552595,4148011; 
552585,4148107; 552654,4148138; 552669,4148252; 552550,4148396; 
552397,4148405; 552340,4148333; 551865,4148180; 551654,4148525; 
551591,4148487; 551702,4148145; 551416,4147821; 551154,4147714; 
550940,4147904; 550797,4148071; 550380,4148643; 550071,4148666; 
549999,4148809; 549847,4148969; 549866,4149048; 549831,4149121; 
549625,4149308; 549541,4149485; 549541,4149729; 549429,4150056; 
549372,4150439; 549429,4150626; 549234,4151034; 549298,4151393; 
549249,4151982; 549344,4152076; 549223,4152356; 549082,4152487; 
548989,4152684; 548830,4152787; 548495,4152839; 548306,4153011; 
548231,4153170; 548091,4153207; 547957,4153207; 547895,4153165; 
547738,4152873; 547642,4152753; 547118,4152738; 546916,4152655; 
546749,4152524; 546689,4152345; 546511,4152286; 546177,4152298; 
545963,4152226; 545796,4152083; 545653,4152022; 545579,4152060; 
545411,4152060; 545297,4152030; 545261,4152121; 545258,4152236; 
545139,4152232; 545045,4152561; 545162,4152689; 545119,4152768; 
544967,4152686; 544829,4152669; 544547,4152746; 544512,4152830; 
544364,4152830; 544364,4152771; 544293,4152771; 544180,4152639; 
544038,4152704; 544142,4152930; 544311,4153185; 544156,4153287; 
544080,4153433; 544149,4153570; 544393,4153570; 544485,4153677; 
544565,4153700; 544588,4153753; 544580,4153841; 544630,4153967; 
544630,4154063; 544668,4154154; 544760,4154211; 544817,4154345; 
544905,4154437; 545086,4154774; 545071,4154828; 545164,4154983; 
545146,4155048; 545261,4155381; 545249,4155667; 545130,4155810; 
544987,4155882; 544677,4155762; 544475,4155762; 544106,4156084; 
543951,4156132; 543449,4156020; 543397,4156101; 543389,4156189; 
543523,4156318; 543599,4156456; 543459,4156534; 543420,4156658; 
543305,4156704; 542962,4156704; 542937,4156752; 542916,4156749; 
542930,4156782; 542895,4156795; 542819,4156894; 542817,4156948; 
542765,4156966; 542785,4157009; 542868,4157065; 542903,4157143; 
542893,4157348; 542802,4157399; 542907,4157513; 542895,4157739; 
542833,4157933; 542666,4157923; 542564,4157986; 542570,4158056; 
542722,4158161; 542709,4158196; 542634,4158227; 542677,4158332; 
542661,4158362; 542619,4158385; 542554,4158357; 542535,4158387; 
542584,4158454; 542525,4158478; 542517,4158502; 542617,4158584; 
542522,4158643; 542474,4158625; 542477,4158680; 542392,4158652; 
542380,4158689; 542350,4158682; 542340,4158701; 542351,4158845; 
542427,4158879; 542466,4158938; 542528,4158923; 542559,4158993; 
542565,4159509; 542600,4159566; 542610,4159675; 542625,4160419; 
543175,4160488; 543288,4160561; 543385,4160746; 543618,4160791; 
543850,4160573; 543745,4160235; 543745,4160032; 543716,4159858; 
543798,4159828; 543811,4159739; 543854,4159671; 543953,4159732; 
544051,4159575; 544184,4159501; 544422,4159640; 544782,4159616; 
544869,4159575; 544937,4159454; 544810,4159267; 544533,4159230; 
544551,4159139; 544673,4159021; 544833,4158951; 545266,4159425; 
545695,4159321; 545741,4159230; 545893,4159196; 545893,4159339; 
546104,4159339; 546181,4159276; 546227,4159148; 546295,4159089; 
546381,4159126; 546454,4159207; 546617,4159207; 546745,4159239; 
546844,4159380; 546863,4159466; 546953,4159553; 547132,4159639; 
547181,4159793; 547312,4159893; 547408,4160034; 547408,4160143; 
547567,4160257; 547750,4160161; 547962,4160161; 547962,4160279; 
547732,4160430; 547716,4160623; 547789,4160793; 547950,4161034; 
547912,4161138; 547848,4161197; 547690,4161187; 547530,4161309; 
547494,4161406; 547403,4161442; 547218,4161411; 547153,4161524; 
547153,4161794; 547107,4161793; 547035,4161868; 546901,4161937; 
546709,4161990; 546327,4162012; 546123,4162126; 545964,4162141; 
545828,4162318; 546062,4162522; 546609,4162507; 546722,4162661; 
546651,4162755; 546754,4163009; 546697,4163100; 546713,4163192; 
546237,4163180; 545987,4163216; 545963,4163442; 545987,4163656; 
546201,4163847; 546189,4164061; 545892,4164323; 545856,4164478; 
545906,4164585; 546013,4164594; 546091,4164660; 546047,4164860; 
546120,4164926; 546518,4165095; 546525,4165068; 546587,4165032; 
546657,4164893; 546713,4164880; 546767,4164808; 546781,4164735; 
546869,4164661; 546939,4164544; 547189,4164361; 547346,4164169; 
547399,4164131; 547515,4164114; returning to 547630,4164045. Excluding: 
549620,4162507; 549728,4162401; 549733,4162310; 549683,4162274; 
549645,4162279;

[[Page 85]]

549425,4162399; 549337,4162318; 549333,4162206; 549471,4161976; 
549525,4161940; 549606,4161951; 549662,4161921; 549738,4161921; 
549790,4161808; 549961,4161760; 549981,4161667; 549936,4161577; 
550072,4161454; 550273,4161361; 550401,4161273; 550411,4161245; 
550383,4161187; 550284,4161178; 550229,4161142; 550232,4161107; 
550278,4161061; 550265,4160978; 550296,4160957; 550492,4160966; 
550678,4160838; 550717,4160754; 550720,4160671; 550687,4160604; 
550718,4160544; 550642,4160424; 550503,4160326; 550549,4160316; 
550788,4160361; 550839,4160318; 550799,4160219; 550867,4160247; 
551032,4160256; 551116,4160229; 551150,4160166; 551254,4160120; 
551344,4159994; 551357,4159933; 551294,4159806; 551508,4159782; 
551595,4159711; 551646,4159623; 551441,4159474; 551439,4159451; 
551668,4159445; 551731,4159463; 551897,4159386; 552018,4159435; 
552054,4159463; 552045,4159580; 552096,4159641; 552077,4159681; 
551989,4159676; 551861,4159820; 551881,4159858; 551964,4159881; 
551967,4159927; 551829,4159929; 551816,4160002; 551722,4159971; 
551646,4160052; 551643,4160146; 551561,4160173; 551525,4160211; 
551412,4160393; 551447,4160589; 551385,4160624; 551415,4160711; 
551397,4160774; 551341,4160817; 551329,4160715; 551311,4160685; 
551266,4160674; 551055,4160965; 551009,4161066; 551003,4161183; 
550912,4161188; 550873,4161215; 550765,4161415; 550679,4161473; 
550553,4161622; 550578,4161686; 550432,4161883; 550432,4161911; 
550307,4162062; 550094,4162246; 549866,4162573; 549757,4162635; 
549715,4162724; 549544,4162890; 549421,4163070; 549362,4163128; 
549301,4163145; 549351,4162963; 549402,4162869; 549563,4162687; 
returning to 549620,4162507.
    Excluding: 549220,4157011; 549541,4156838; 549722,4156775; 
549735,4156697; 549801,4156710; 549883,4156632; 549886,4156573; 
549977,4156553; 550000,4156528; 550158,4156504; 550288,4156436; 
550357,4156345; 550347,4156266; 550457,4156277; 550492,4156234; 
550495,4156194; 550420,4156053; 550582,4156065; 550631,4156017; 
550684,4156004; 550738,4155941; 550809,4155916; 550841,4155787; 
550925,4155803; 551002,4155930; 551019,4156093; 551077,4156152; 
551073,4156327; 551032,4156400; 551040,4156464; 550998,4156603; 
550857,4156826; 550788,4156876; 550768,4156856; 550806,4156762; 
550914,4156646; 550936,4156369; 550988,4156222; 550986,4156177; 
550940,4156123; 550708,4156302; 550626,4156334; 550616,4156367; 
550384,4156493; 550300,4156553; 550297,4156578; 550218,4156578; 
550172,4156621; 550063,4156618; 549941,4156723; 549933,4156777; 
549876,4156814; 549576,4156911; 549550,4156944; 549555,4157013; 
549474,4156969; 549416,4156974; 549204,4157059; returning to 
549220,4157011. Excluding: 554142,4155908; 554257,4155782; 
554311,4155675; 554264,4155586; 554381,4155549; 554414,4155493; 
554518,4155471; 554527,4155397; 554641,4155337; 554746,4155191; 
554701,4155114; 554798,4155071; 554842,4154935; 554782,4154761; 
554914,4154795; 554950,4154775; 554920,4154722; 555022,4154651; 
555084,4154509; 555230,4154328; 555279,4154214; 555309,4154193; 
555413,4154197; 555439,4154108; 555369,4154054; 555329,4153947; 
555293,4153942; 555250,4153982; 555184,4153984; 555094,4154029; 
555056,4154088; 554883,4154165; 554832,4154145; 554702,4154172; 
554646,4154240; 554336,4154291; 554257,4154362; 554255,4154245; 
554318,4154248; 554555,4154173; 554586,4154107; 554652,4154090; 
554841,4153964; 555218,4153835; 555223,4153761; 555356,4153696; 
555397,4153653; 555420,4153577; 555501,4153590; 555526,4153695; 
555693,4153711; 555904,4153415; 556072,4153271; 556063,4153182; 
555943,4153217; 556034,4152959; 556026,4152910; 555996,4152895; 
555856,4152935; 555854,4152909; 555992,4152788; 556078,4152756; 
556331,4152585; 556318,4152547; 556184,4152574; 556174,4152538; 
556235,4152493; 556286,4152488; 556279,4152435; 556373,4152428; 
556444,4152362; 556450,4152283; 556488,4152197; 556382,4152194; 
556425,4152138; 556499,4152098; 556517,4152025; 556574,4151989; 
556576,4151956; 556513,4151890; 556555,4151751; 556608,4151715; 
556681,4151881; 556790,4151955; 556861,4151946; 557012,4151776; 
557051,4151695; 557125,4151632; 557070,4151495; 557095,4151457; 
557133,4151460; 557224,4151552; 557295,4151667; 557302,4151720; 
557154,4151833; 557154,4151861; 557253,4151844; 557347,4151878; 
557346,4151923; 557269,4152007; 557112,4152067; 557104,4152095; 
556976,4152193; 556775,4152285; 556790,4152321; 556871,4152332; 
556871,4152367; 556827,4152405; 556850,4152446; 556842,4152489; 
556777,4152679; 556721,4152755; 556657,4152793; 556697,4152889; 
556634,4152881; 556593,4152919; 556600,4152998; 556529,4153023; 
556475,4153091; 556480,4153132; 556543,4153186; 556459,4153213; 
556382,4153312; 556394,4153456; 556363,4153502; 556380,4153596; 
556313,4153684; 556277,4153796; 555971,4153969; 555935,4154093; 
555871,4154136; 555878,4154256; 555852,4154271; 555753,4154255; 
555674,4154320; 555540,4154299; 555476,4154324; 555445,4154453; 
555381,4154478; 555383,4154504; 555457,4154527; 555454,4154563; 
555322,4154552; 555322,4154582; 555393,4154608; 555479,4154713; 
555435,4154756; 555392,4154715; 555273,4154671; 555237,4154721; 
555260,4154780; 555249,4154889; 555195,4154889; 555160,4154924; 
555144,4154972; 555073,4155038; 555031,4155149; 554868,4155306; 
554798,4155473; 554757,4155485; 554678,4155589; 554581,4155647; 
554540,4155725; 554443,4155780; 554312,4156018; 554212,4156101; 
554216,4156203; 554150,4156246; 554073,4156436; 553940,4156567; 
553911,4156648; 553816,4156762; 553750,4156804; 553769,4156678; 
553739,4156596; 553800,4156508; 553829,4156414; 553870,4156363; 
553957,4156321; 553927,4156252; 553988,4156194; returning to 
554142,4155908. Excluding: 557286,4151491; 557284,4151443; 
557322,4151364; 557308,4151220; 557354,4151200; 557448,4151241; 
557468,4151231; 557519,4151124; 557482,4151012; 557579,4150995; 
557549,4150901; 557402,4150804; 557674,4150729; 557846,4150565; 
558016,4150559; 558080,4150479; 558080,4150410; 558119,4150362; 
558354,4150158; 558464,4150021; 558452,4150001; 558511,4149920; 
558501,4149798; 558327,4149700; 558320,4149637; 558498,4149539; 
558528,4149270; 558566,4149227; 558752,4149193; 558763,4149353; 
558908,4149377; 559299,4148970; 559307,4148937; 559274,4148929; 
559116,4148982; 559081,4148918; 559133,4148840; 559171,4148845; 
559170,4148903; 559198,4148914; 559270,4148863; 559369,4148854; 
559494,4148740; 559616,4148761; 559674,4148739; 559731,4148633; 
559955,4148581; 559947,4148665; 560032,4148830; 560049,4148917; 
560013,4148990; 560025,4149077; 559906,4149091; 559778,4149222;

[[Page 86]]

559737,4149169; 559702,4149166; 559664,4149201; 559510,4149358; 
559532,4149444; 559656,4149488; 559592,4149635; 559506,4149650; 
559480,4149680; 559397,4149898; 559341,4149908; 559250,4149879; 
559191,4149907; 559193,4150034; 559128,4150206; 559186,4150267; 
559296,4150283; 559287,4150377; 559074,4150340; 558886,4150433; 
558753,4150470; 558712,4150521; 558673,4150642; 558549,4150664; 
558505,4150712; 558492,4150857; 558580,4150870; 558595,4150946; 
558493,4150945; 558405,4150912; 558170,4151042; 558170,4151088; 
558119,4151123; 557994,4151156; 557767,4151360; 557737,4151586; 
557620,4151648; 557584,4151709; 557594,4151780; 557444,4151759; 
557409,4151647; returning to 557286,4151491. Excluding: 553227,4150371; 
553132,4150480; 553085,4150414; 553085,4150180; 552935,4150096; 
553085,4150049; 553319,4149834; 553553,4149834; 553646,4150049; 
553581,4150264; returning to 553227,4150371. Excluding: 552570,4150315; 
552477,4150517; 552589,4150966; 552563,4151254; 552664,4151452; 
552664,4151733; 552524,4151686; 552222,4151263; 551991,4151097; 
551766,4150854; 551617,4150480; 551617,4150115; 551813,4149956; 
552165,4149863; 552374,4149890; returning to 552570,4150315.
    (ii) Note: Map of Units SNM-1 and SNM-2 for the California red-
legged frog follows:

[[Page 87]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17MR10.016

    (29) Unit SNM-2: San Mateo and Santa Cruz Counties, California. From 
USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles Half Moon Bay, San Gregorio, Pigeon 
Point, Woodside, La Honda, Franklin Point, Mindego Hill and Big Basin.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N):

[[Page 88]]

569250,4119121; 569151,4119022; 568939,4118954; 568881,4118980; 
568788,4118975; 568652,4118929; 568430,4118898; 568274,4118928; 
568169,4118976; 567965,4119114; 567911,4119100; 567778,4119012; 
567704,4118933; 567699,4118870; 567746,4118785; 567733,4118731; 
567590,4118548; 567499,4118333; 567262,4118281; 567036,4118184; 
566576,4117892; 566404,4117833; 566304,4117724; 566110,4117736; 
566051,4117615; 565927,4117536; 565921,4117260; 565894,4117190; 
565809,4117126; 565671,4117091; 565425,4116788; 565262,4116712; 
565091,4116711; 564995,4116680; 564832,4116671; 564749,4116592; 
564742,4116504; 564701,4116455; 564644,4116464; 564501,4116430; 
564414,4116466; 564140,4116453; 564134,4116372; 564048,4116217; 
564045,4116048; 563964,4115960; 563895,4115727; 563887,4115633; 
563931,4115559; 563879,4115420; 563915,4115297; 563902,4115237; 
563662,4115064; 563528,4115090; 563379,4115163; 563229,4115336; 
562888,4115441; 562826,4115435; 562679,4115366; 562397,4115352; 
562330,4115200; 562221,4115057; 562104,4114979; 561913,4114940; 
561755,4114828; 561485,4114784; 561007,4114774; 560798,4114607; 
560609,4114539; 560544,4114492; 560488,4114385; 560326,4114249; 
560225,4114086; 560107,4114183; 559833,4114260; 559745,4114221; 
559598,4114235; 559271,4114217; 559009,4114112; 558716,4114159; 
558594,4114259; 558599,4114458; 558403,4114681; 558300,4114736; 
558149,4114739; 558094,4114697; 558106,4114557; 558082,4114344; 
558025,4114287; 557832,4114201; 557729,4114128; 557684,4114059; 
557589,4113776; 556967,4113271; 556775,4113655; 557058,4114173; 
556966,4114389; 556734,4114563; 556508,4114673; 556108,4114673; 
555114,4115309; 554795,4115423; 554201,4115487; 554056,4115554; 
553898,4115745; 553421,4116519; 553230,4116879; 553163,4117510; 
552770,4118575; 552692,4118856; 552686,4119049; 552832,4119084; 
552843,4119062; 552934,4119077; 552906,4119209; 552957,4119263; 
552954,4119299; 552855,4119422; 552873,4119468; 552810,4119530; 
552696,4119536; 552696,4119628; 552630,4119861; 552479,4120102; 
552601,4120216; 552562,4120269; 552710,4120441; 552710,4120493; 
552762,4120561; 552759,4120761; 552813,4120881; 552780,4120929; 
552814,4120967; 552875,4121197; 553185,4120764; 553520,4121135; 
553141,4121621; 553303,4121748; 553326,4122001; 553167,4122381; 
552662,4122597; 552549,4122814; 552292,4123114; 552336,4123768; 
552151,4123874; 552044,4123874; 552129,4124397; 552171,4124534; 
552222,4124393; 552346,4124238; 552548,4124260; 552634,4124232; 
552655,4124255; 552563,4124291; 552555,4124315; 552426,4124340; 
552418,4124377; 552477,4124422; 552393,4124431; 552273,4124577; 
552197,4124591; 552230,4124662; 552166,4124704; 552274,4125178; 
552291,4125455; 552347,4125621; 552317,4125675; 552319,4125751; 
552347,4125785; 552344,4125868; 552389,4125921; 552414,4126094; 
552390,4126152; 552436,4126284; 552412,4126394; 552462,4126623; 
552465,4126765; 554285,4127045; 554348,4127299; 554393,4127347; 
554399,4127474; 554358,4127620; 554461,4127656; 554507,4127806; 
554561,4127851; 554634,4127852; 554769,4127802; 554769,4128072; 
555061,4128697; 555034,4129157; 554813,4129488; 554804,4129463; 
554758,4129459; 554489,4129518; 554419,4129543; 554218,4129684; 
554167,4129676; 553952,4129729; 553868,4129881; 553395,4130479; 
553250,4130564; 552869,4130621; 552881,4130661; 552821,4130823; 
552825,4130999; 552804,4131010; 552796,4131079; 552845,4131083; 
552876,4131131; 552876,4131326; 552915,4131403; 552997,4132106; 
553190,4132082; 553362,4132089; 553494,4132144; 553537,4132262; 
553547,4132490; 553647,4132612; 553602,4132871; 553641,4133060; 
553621,4133192; 553434,4133496; 553384,4133735; 553267,4134023; 
553259,4134239; 553421,4134628; 553399,4134765; 553360,4134855; 
553190,4135011; 552963,4135283; 553379,4135635; 553442,4135811; 
553540,4135865; 553572,4135910; 553583,4136045; 553659,4136295; 
553889,4136534; 553914,4136623; 553914,4136854; 553762,4136980; 
553783,4137262; 553803,4137293; 553858,4137341; 554197,4137481; 
554417,4137731; 554603,4137783; 554759,4137744; 554784,4137762; 
554822,4137868; 554817,4137996; 554676,4138273; 554618,4138521; 
554636,4138646; 554717,4138801; 554780,4138839; 554925,4138871; 
555392,4138909; 555441,4138984; 555413,4139214; 555601,4139415; 
555714,4139649; 555744,4139820; 555921,4139916; 556166,4139926; 
556259,4139976; 556361,4140244; 556432,4140290; 556490,4140404; 
556856,4140727; 556896,4140845; 556853,4140964; 556852,4141399; 
556768,4141545; 556803,4141754; 556775,4141867; 556791,4141902; 
557144,4142056; 557240,4142041; 557359,4142059; 557599,4142185; 
557662,4142195; 558052,4142061; 558192,4142080; 558311,4142057; 
558434,4142091; 558662,4141842; 559030,4141562; 559213,4141470; 
559357,4141505; 559519,4141690; 559601,4141712; 559697,4141693; 
559766,4141724; 559998,4141459; 560077,4141441; 560242,4141513; 
560283,4141428; 560430,4141372; 560668,4141190; 560841,4141136; 
560869,4141081; 560978,4140989; 561055,4140964; 561208,4141005; 
561240,4140993; 561287,4140875; 561213,4140727; 561244,4140388; 
561324,4140282; 561345,4140196; 561455,4140206; 561695,4140081; 
561800,4140000; 561921,4139872; 561966,4139724; 562132,4139625; 
562164,4139517; 562468,4139413; 562912,4139086; 563107,4139105; 
563367,4139057; 563389,4138904; 563426,4138850; 563543,4138782; 
563559,4138677; 563847,4138571; 563930,4138480; 564034,4138484; 
564190,4138558; 564420,4138510; 564471,4138435; 564901,4138198; 
564978,4138127; 565013,4137931; 565235,4137747; 565269,4137444; 
565376,4137337; 565423,4137076; 565479,4136982; 565649,4136858; 
565801,4136865; 565810,4136784; 565953,4136476; 566058,4136416; 
566222,4136370; 566306,4136066; 566457,4135889; 566638,4135815; 
566713,4135637; 566857,4135522; 566842,4135456; 566741,4135376; 
566689,4135303; 566712,4135121; 566695,4135021; 566730,4134874; 
566801,4134760; 566870,4134722; 567001,4134715; 567090,4134510; 
567085,4134394; 567120,4134277; 567218,4134215; 567352,4134023; 
567433,4133959; 567578,4133984; 567748,4133928; 567839,4133927; 
567848,4133880; 568085,4133744; 568241,4133501; 568306,4133355; 
568496,4133250; 568613,4133142; 568963,4132987; 569153,4132711; 
569145,4132474; 569183,4132325; 569280,4132219; 569383,4132175; 
569480,4131969; 569567,4131884; 569635,4131677; 569844,4131459; 
570128,4131314; 570217,4131198; 570529,4131030; 570685,4130832; 
570866,4130710; 571044,4130504; 571335,4130445; 571467,4130457; 
571512,4130484; 571705,4130457; 571800,4130420; 571950,4130253; 
572075,4130192; 572123,4130068; 572093,4129988; 572138,4129919; 
572137,4129832; 572182,4129734;

[[Page 89]]

572316,4129589; 572452,4129532; 572524,4129539; 572584,4129577; 
572687,4129727; 572903,4129865; 572960,4129877; 573189,4129891; 
573454,4129828; 573485,4129803; 573503,4129720; 573636,4129595; 
573679,4129407; 573842,4129125; 573907,4129100; 574000,4129102; 
574103,4129013; 574243,4128966; 574194,4128773; 574114,4128638; 
574207,4128564; 574090,4128354; 573981,4128215; 573971,4128066; 
573918,4128005; 573856,4127980; 573848,4127937; 573886,4127912; 
574082,4127916; 574174,4127800; 574360,4127750; 574473,4127756; 
574692,4127659; 574793,4127594; 574830,4127526; 575061,4127322; 
575108,4127212; 575118,4127007; 575136,4126998; 575179,4126705; 
575255,4126597; 575437,4126460; 575410,4126387; 575467,4126339; 
575475,4126295; 575404,4126223; 575393,4126180; 575407,4126024; 
575303,4125865; 575177,4125877; 575058,4126064; 574924,4126121; 
574868,4126079; 574396,4126151; 574316,4126210; 574241,4126336; 
574044,4126373; 573947,4126434; 573732,4126487; 573644,4126490; 
573453,4126448; 573399,4126414; 573365,4126319; 573310,4126282; 
573287,4126109; 573175,4126039; 573138,4125924; 573135,4125795; 
572745,4125424; 572663,4125396; 572596,4125240; 572556,4125206; 
572351,4125107; 572303,4125058; 572184,4125058; 572123,4125147; 
571999,4125201; 571796,4125373; 571688,4125399; 571660,4125374; 
571748,4124914; 571680,4124564; 571765,4124348; 571751,4124191; 
571517,4123697; 571295,4123494; 571261,4123425; 571173,4123391; 
570995,4123440; 570760,4123730; 570610,4123819; 570489,4123795; 
570363,4123620; 570048,4123496; 569605,4123239; 569361,4123062; 
569273,4122870; 569112,4122852; 569032,4122818; 568975,4122734; 
568938,4122606; 568845,4122510; 568674,4122381; 568330,4122199; 
568183,4122041; 568089,4121844; 567929,4121625; 567853,4121468; 
567753,4121359; 567886,4121202; 568114,4121033; 568268,4120983; 
568404,4120859; 568458,4120654; 568574,4120546; 568633,4120370; 
568729,4120202; 568777,4120032; 568801,4119737; 568882,4119643; 
568910,4119534; 568991,4119382; returning to 569250,4119121; Excluding: 
555483,4121713; 555388,4121749; 555388,4121320; 555235,4121428; 
555083,4121390; 554981,4121263; 554873,4121256; 554937,4121205; 
555387,4121177; 556034,4121027; 556340,4120843; 556518,4120862; 
556658,4120996; 556400,4121122; 556169,4121332; 556086,4121497; 
555687,4121566; 555584,4121675; returning to 555483,4121713.
Excluding: 556092,4122063; 556218,4122107; 556645,4122069; 
556727,4122152; 556746,4122317; 556816,4122418; 557032,4122456; 
557089,4122533; 556873,4122695; 556861,4122837; 556467,4122821; 
556281,4123125; 556289,4123256; 556226,4123422; 555497,4123687; 
555358,4123614; 555261,4123663; 555032,4123593; 554691,4123369; 
554690,4123310; 554656,4123262; 554596,4123352; 554359,4123364; 
554270,4123180; 553600,4123504; 553555,4123410; 553375,4123390; 
553635,4122920; 553644,4122708; 553715,4122548; 553839,4122460; 
554062,4122505; 554165,4122407; 554289,4122418; 554447,4122645; 
555312,4122656; 555578,4122761; 555705,4122761; 555756,4122507; 
556003,4122317; returning to 556092,4122063.
    (ii) Note: Unit SNM-2 for California red-legged frog is depicted on 
the map in paragraph (28)(ii) of this entry.
    (30) Unit STC-1: Santa Clara County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 
scale quadrangles Calaveras Reservoir, San Jose East, Mt. Day, Lick 
Observatory, Morgan Hill, Isabel Valley and Mt. Sizer.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N):
    612040,4142329; 612059,4142174; 612136,4142137; 612243,4141962; 
612198,4141726; 612203,4141589; 612088,4141439; 612041,4141311; 
612049,4141259; 611960,4141119; 611893,4140940; 611969,4140675; 
611942,4140491; 611944,4140135; 611962,4140096; 612052,4140065; 
612152,4139946; 612275,4139957; 612334,4139915; 612459,4139974; 
612507,4139882; 612554,4139865; 612630,4139772; 612695,4139756; 
612795,4139794; 613168,4139551; 613274,4139569; 613392,4139510; 
613498,4139495; 613570,4139450; 613586,4139411; 613566,4139244; 
613666,4139098; 613611,4138948; 613591,4138643; 613645,4138499; 
613605,4138264; 613625,4138154; 613708,4137981; 613803,4137917; 
614063,4137873; 614140,4138041; 614249,4138124; 614319,4138132; 
614354,4138114; 614382,4137991; 614504,4137865; 614553,4137838; 
614650,4137844; 614894,4137745; 614981,4137741; 614951,4137541; 
614963,4137477; 615053,4137385; 615187,4137120; 615536,4136826; 
615623,4136654; 615694,4136571; 615811,4136523; 615823,4136452; 
615764,4136335; 615810,4136000; 615822,4135962; 615914,4135902; 
615928,4135865; 615873,4135230; 615957,4135094; 616080,4134655; 
616156,4134516; 616247,4134483; 616360,4134378; 616464,4134099; 
616515,4133842; 616638,4133676; 616670,4133559; 616644,4133379; 
616652,4133124; 616668,4133048; 616729,4132973; 616798,4132770; 
616852,4132690; 616866,4132313; 616973,4132054; 617051,4131999; 
617114,4131990; 617158,4131944; 617172,4131872; 617143,4131780; 
617178,4131687; 617302,4131573; 617591,4131501; 617635,4131459; 
617692,4131243; 617760,4131146; 617872,4131197; 618059,4131081; 
618145,4130995; 618281,4131037; 618511,4131004; 618693,4131033; 
618729,4130991; 618729,4130940; 618624,4130736; 618668,4130675; 
618718,4130655; 618787,4130644; 618878,4130668; 619015,4130511; 
618895,4130412; 618867,4130338; 618871,4130263; 618965,4130041; 
618965,4129916; 619031,4129801; 619135,4129762; 619298,4129777; 
619591,4129713; 619800,4129796; 619819,4129775; 619824,4129621; 
619925,4129584; 619976,4129526; 619994,4129332; 620075,4129282; 
620163,4129300; 620342,4129194; 620451,4129228; 620734,4129474; 
620830,4129720; 620871,4129653; 620969,4129299; 621072,4129096; 
621167,4129040; 621462,4129008; 621485,4128960; 621419,4128672; 
621449,4128541; 621515,4128408; 621545,4128096; 621521,4127932; 
621824,4127708; 621825,4127609; 621904,4127423; 622072,4127349; 
622113,4127288; 622112,4127201; 621723,4127166; 621691,4127088; 
621697,4126941; 621650,4126898; 621435,4126877; 621355,4126773; 
621352,4126717; 621480,4126534; 621560,4126366; 621611,4126292; 
621701,4126238; 621758,4126104; 621817,4126034; 621915,4125991; 
622028,4125979; 622113,4125901; 622192,4125876; 622370,4125910; 
622527,4125851; 622683,4125916; 622744,4125886; 622816,4125749; 
622945,4125721; 622982,4125621; 623173,4125332; 623145,4125105; 
623239,4125034; 623411,4124996; 623593,4124887; 623692,4124722; 
623802,4124609; 623880,4124572; 623985,4124559; 624046,4124365;

[[Page 90]]

624145,4124286; 624195,4124252; 624361,4124256; 624411,4124190; 
624452,4124030; 624562,4123896; 624594,4123769; 624742,4123605; 
624913,4123629; 624957,4123577; 625087,4123189; 625229,4123134; 
625306,4123035; 625227,4122866; 625180,4122564; 625202,4122504; 
625275,4122421; 625222,4122293; 625234,4122248; 625342,4122141; 
625364,4122036; 625346,4121976; 625367,4121815; 625296,4121673; 
625258,4121446; 625303,4121426; 625441,4121465; 625627,4121383; 
625769,4121370; 625971,4121269; 626170,4121031; 626405,4120805; 
626471,4120684; 626472,4120551; 626503,4120491; 626566,4120430; 
626791,4120430; 626832,4120387; 626874,4120188; 626849,4120116; 
626881,4120000; 626870,4119926; 626904,4119873; 627034,4119828; 
626989,4119737; 626974,4119631; 626831,4119564; 626781,4119494; 
626758,4119371; 626672,4119312; 626641,4119261; 626651,4119139; 
626716,4119059; 626751,4118956; 626941,4118796; 627043,4118585; 
627179,4118618; 627214,4118603; 627419,4118344; 627643,4118155; 
627808,4118083; 628001,4118038; 628093,4117865; 628134,4117680; 
628466,4117591; 628550,4117534; 628588,4117465; 628623,4117388; 
628615,4117346; 628459,4117262; 628356,4117170; 628395,4116980; 
628325,4116853; 628335,4116718; 628278,4116490; 628286,4116352; 
628103,4116255; 628031,4116109; 627889,4115942; 627682,4115852; 
627576,4115719; 627167,4115669; 627060,4115683; 626925,4115642; 
626870,4115565; 626869,4115368; 626923,4115263; 626960,4115056; 
626726,4114762; 626787,4114534; 626784,4114467; 626690,4114262; 
626423,4114125; 626434,4114068; 626578,4113887; 626623,4113725; 
626719,4113599; 626903,4113417; 627132,4113270; 627201,4113193; 
627261,4113097; 627291,4112961; 627358,4112811; 627557,4112743; 
627638,4112652; 627614,4112518; 627418,4112146; 627426,4111910; 
627385,4111753; 627480,4111507; 627394,4111334; 627391,4111261; 
627490,4111114; 627388,4110977; 627171,4111318; 627031,4111456; 
626862,4111748; 626633,4111951; 626547,4112092; 626333,4112335; 
626231,4112677; 626140,4112823; 625896,4112885; 625823,4112986; 
625726,4113043; 625560,4113050; 625410,4112881; 625270,4112901; 
624926,4113024; 624677,4113152; 624253,4113507; 624165,4113648; 
624216,4113793; 624195,4113833; 624061,4113788; 623966,4113838; 
623809,4113800; 623432,4113932; 623410,4113985; 623286,4113958; 
623227,4114020; 623221,4114114; 623177,4114172; 623162,4114299; 
623085,4114351; 622877,4114704; 622841,4114749; 622695,4114830; 
622668,4114942; 622581,4114938; 622535,4114970; 622431,4114946; 
622362,4114981; 622307,4115087; 622170,4115245; 622128,4115351; 
621954,4115628; 621964,4115651; 622248,4115647; 622368,4115618; 
622492,4115468; 622660,4115452; 622703,4115339; 622733,4115324; 
622753,4115332; 622724,4115461; 622756,4115515; 622735,4115580; 
622592,4115619; 622471,4115691; 622440,4115767; 622227,4115914; 
622180,4115994; 622111,4116019; 621959,4115986; 621770,4115884; 
621746,4115952; 621676,4116028; 621642,4116139; 621565,4116506; 
621607,4116593; 621533,4116615; 621477,4116672; 621501,4116205; 
621482,4116098; 621429,4116065; 621240,4116163; 621210,4116295; 
621169,4116348; 620911,4116453; 620819,4116645; 620818,4116696; 
620868,4116747; 620858,4116775; 620523,4116740; 620411,4116761; 
620380,4116984; 620270,4117039; 620133,4117214; 620181,4117375; 
620082,4117343; 620051,4117391; 620060,4117643; 620034,4117731; 
619920,4117869; 619919,4117897; 619855,4117932; 619923,4118019; 
619879,4118047; 619809,4117977; 619758,4117971; 619314,4118146; 
619080,4118189; 618997,4118316; 618794,4118278; 618707,4118371; 
618474,4118228; 618333,4118177; 618125,4118214; 617725,4118186; 
617578,4118212; 617492,4118311; 617333,4118207; 617237,4118176; 
617157,4118173; 617020,4118231; 616900,4118344; 616704,4118473; 
616652,4118594; 616528,4118721; 616301,4118690; 616109,4118847; 
615968,4119042; 615888,4119292; 615772,4119462; 615774,4119551; 
615497,4119806; 614886,4120144; 614835,4120223; 614849,4120390; 
614588,4120669; 614537,4120787; 614438,4120860; 614312,4120876; 
614093,4121043; 614103,4121315; 614181,4121415; 614309,4121481; 
614351,4121596; 614085,4121709; 613916,4121616; 613664,4121942; 
613577,4122207; 613738,4122279; 613758,4122421; 613798,4122514; 
613961,4122796; 613897,4122862; 613777,4122898; 613651,4122988; 
613589,4123089; 613606,4123223; 613756,4123389; 613900,4123394; 
613985,4123425; 614086,4123514; 614631,4123658; 614745,4123606; 
614794,4123628; 614874,4123785; 614706,4123888; 614703,4123913; 
614758,4123972; 614881,4123990; 615122,4123950; 615217,4123983; 
615371,4123965; 615542,4124082; 615597,4124166; 615590,4124203; 
615498,4124290; 615254,4124371; 615230,4124425; 615180,4124432; 
615125,4124496; 615112,4124679; 614993,4124738; 614872,4124894; 
614862,4124944; 614702,4125047; 614649,4125163; 614675,4125373; 
614584,4125586; 614620,4125652; 614694,4125654; 614749,4125701; 
614905,4126019; 614911,4126099; 614684,4126506; 614799,4126785; 
614809,4127047; 614798,4127098; 614657,4127186; 614631,4127335; 
614662,4127620; 614585,4127828; 614658,4128059; 614642,4128130; 
614542,4128151; 614464,4128227; 614391,4128346; 614203,4128535; 
614191,4128589; 614189,4128617; 614287,4128701; 614313,4128775; 
614295,4128959; 614225,4129047; 614367,4129352; 614175,4129502; 
614106,4129473; 613942,4129667; 613739,4129766; 613576,4130060; 
613498,4130094; 613472,4130071; 613441,4130080; 613508,4130573; 
613389,4130813; 613398,4130924; 613344,4131136; 613084,4131480; 
613020,4131548; 612886,4131629; 612798,4131727; 612715,4131842; 
612621,4132064; 612557,4132133; 612358,4132261; 612278,4132385; 
612259,4132633; 612067,4132743; 611994,4132736; 611912,4132787; 
611946,4132924; 611824,4133110; 611802,4133324; 611734,4133426; 
611635,4133479; 611655,4133578; 611647,4133759; 611623,4133842; 
611522,4133915; 611509,4133949; 611485,4134037; 611509,4134193; 
611493,4134315; 611388,4134536; 611342,4134597; 611161,4134610; 
611121,4134719; 610969,4134719; 610777,4134766; 610728,4134837; 
610731,4134969; 610564,4135011; 610426,4135080; 610356,4135221; 
610256,4135311; 610146,4135640; 610042,4135853; 609929,4135939; 
609729,4136000; 609508,4136147; 609270,4136458; 609113,4136872; 
609025,4136993; 608928,4137055; 608816,4137274; 608787,4137441; 
608638,4137595; 608537,4137760; 608444,4137816; 608346,4137829; 
608182,4137930; 607779,4137907; 607593,4137951; 607413,4138082; 
607351,4138218; 607210,4138322; 607157,4138501; 607091,4138579; 
606846,4138652; 606681,4138605; 606357,4138606; 606040,4138540; 
606025,4138608; 606045,4138787; 606102,4138827; 606098,4138947; 
605923,4138995; 605932,4139155;

[[Page 91]]

605426,4138980; 605234,4138972; 605121,4139012; 605059,4138971; 
604638,4139103; 604471,4139194; 604343,4139170; 604302,4139246; 
604183,4139305; 604159,4139363; 604133,4139467; 604133,4139623; 
604367,4139882; 604382,4140096; 604429,4140118; 604574,4140118; 
604608,4140376; 604783,4140578; 604789,4140721; 605055,4141023; 
605226,4141041; 605536,4141023; 605648,4141059; 605764,4141137; 
605993,4141092; 606071,4140988; 606145,4140955; 606317,4140970; 
606545,4141045; 606686,4141124; 606832,4141464; 606985,4141659; 
607076,4141722; 607213,4141750; 607541,4141680; 607785,4141734; 
608014,4141870; 608137,4142008; 608199,4142141; 608199,4142276; 
608300,4142611; 608587,4142636; 608715,4142602; 608815,4142474; 
608848,4142388; 608996,4142296; 609083,4142211; 609302,4142219; 
609329,4141976; 609375,4141928; 609532,4141860; 609743,4141951; 
609797,4142102; 609851,4142170; 610012,4142113; 610088,4142027; 
610194,4142032; 610315,4141978; 610415,4141989; 610614,4142075; 
610676,4142133; 610751,4142259; 610789,4142438; 610999,4142707; 
611151,4142845; 611372,4142893; 611408,4142925; 611459,4142899; 
611689,4142634; 612012,4142381; returning to 612040,4142329.
    (ii) Note: Map of Units STC-1 and STC-2 for the California red-
legged frog follows:

[[Page 92]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17MR10.017

    (31) Unit STC-2: Santa Clara, Merced, Stanislaus and San Benito 
Counties, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles Mt. Sizer, 
Gilroy, Mt. Stakes, Mississippi Creek, Gilroy Hot Springs, San Felipe, 
Mustang Peak, Pacheco Peak, Three Sisters, Crevision Peak, Pacheco Pass 
and Mariposa Peak.

[[Page 93]]

    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 639546,4129203; 639759,4129165; 639715,4128997; 639730,4128920; 
639814,4128811; 639800,4128684; 640076,4128375; 640247,4128258; 
640263,4128178; 640404,4128055; 640398,4127894; 640352,4127793; 
640370,4127736; 640463,4127644; 640411,4127495; 640289,4127468; 
640187,4127396; 640115,4127138; 640124,4127070; 639872,4126828; 
639790,4126628; 639781,4126566; 639822,4126533; 639919,4126303; 
639913,4126193; 639952,4126120; 639995,4125882; 639899,4125877; 
639810,4125750; 639783,4125652; 639802,4125436; 639768,4125214; 
639801,4125194; 639938,4124903; 639862,4124823; 639908,4124715; 
640051,4124535; 640220,4124484; 640333,4124420; 640499,4124474; 
640725,4124443; 640792,4124455; 640856,4124419; 641092,4124427; 
641107,4124382; 641204,4124290; 641271,4124249; 641408,4124238; 
641528,4124098; 641601,4124055; 641721,4124007; 641859,4123990; 
642059,4123895; 642176,4123971; 642274,4124076; 642566,4124008; 
642555,4123944; 642576,4123896; 642678,4123832; 642719,4123708; 
642680,4123551; 642686,4123409; 642648,4123264; 642642,4123085; 
642659,4123024; 642855,4122810; 642935,4122612; 642852,4122462; 
642884,4122239; 642820,4122061; 642893,4121918; 643093,4121832; 
643145,4121777; 643238,4121663; 643304,4121372; 643482,4121318; 
643548,4121154; 643678,4121113; 643862,4120987; 643921,4120981; 
644067,4120714; 644130,4120656; 644208,4120619; 644302,4120637; 
644410,4120599; 644480,4120486; 644537,4120446; 644635,4120385; 
644798,4120337; 644928,4120161; 644785,4120082; 644735,4120009; 
644726,4119911; 644795,4119762; 644836,4119420; 644880,4119304; 
644819,4119024; 644731,4118907; 644614,4118818; 644597,4118746; 
644648,4118649; 644641,4118531; 644550,4118402; 644558,4118249; 
644671,4117859; 644817,4117669; 644845,4117469; 644830,4117384; 
644876,4117249; 644956,4117124; 644952,4116804; 645148,4116560; 
645251,4116554; 645459,4116653; 645589,4116638; 645629,4116612; 
645799,4116608; 646002,4116517; 646166,4116524; 646293,4116492; 
646513,4116343; 646614,4116175; 646819,4116004; 646877,4115890; 
646889,4115713; 646919,4115684; 647208,4115629; 647422,4115554; 
647567,4115404; 647743,4115280; 647895,4115311; 648096,4114850; 
648258,4114782; 648364,4114854; 648580,4114885; 648835,4114838; 
648907,4114848; 649102,4114906; 649148,4114957; 649317,4115041; 
649445,4115055; 649600,4115024; 649712,4115229; 649802,4115255; 
649842,4115247; 649965,4115124; 650026,4115004; 650225,4114906; 
650350,4114898; 650629,4114954; 650823,4114894; 650934,4114829; 
651130,4114887; 651390,4115111; 651418,4115179; 651536,4115308; 
651527,4115465; 651578,4115571; 651613,4115751; 651700,4115871; 
651837,4115947; 651905,4116122; 651999,4116243; 652104,4116446; 
652150,4116487; 652432,4116421; 652471,4116398; 652549,4116264; 
652772,4116134; 652916,4115926; 653129,4115700; 653239,4115464; 
653358,4115358; 653467,4115352; 653559,4115286; 653611,4115148; 
653854,4114719; 653904,4114492; 654076,4114354; 654154,4114176; 
654498,4114115; 654633,4114034; 654774,4114004; 654857,4114008; 
655084,4114077; 655313,4114095; 655350,4114084; 655410,4114016; 
655586,4113953; 655747,4114002; 655880,4113975; 656082,4113974; 
656238,4113932; 656261,4113878; 656227,4113738; 656237,4113694; 
656363,4113595; 656305,4113148; 656421,4112966; 656392,4112785; 
656408,4112685; 656467,4112649; 656553,4112512; 656647,4112455; 
656740,4112343; 656876,4112101; 656914,4111862; 657185,4111802; 
657347,4111649; 657481,4111581; 657438,4111410; 657466,4111281; 
657559,4111199; 657606,4111077; 657692,4111074; 657875,4110902; 
657875,4110795; 657822,4110684; 657943,4110519; 657956,4110410; 
658016,4110268; 658158,4110036; 658368,4109930; 658406,4109872; 
658456,4109856; 658675,4109867; 658784,4109812; 658830,4109758; 
658990,4109732; 659167,4109587; 659388,4109614; 659587,4109591; 
659800,4109501; 659869,4109644; 660043,4109710; 660096,4109764; 
660156,4109860; 660175,4110005; 660288,4110181; 660766,4110612; 
660839,4110744; 661182,4110999; 661438,4111148; 661548,4111124; 
661912,4111114; 662158,4111025; 662368,4111018; 662571,4110956; 
662702,4110886; 662805,4110782; 662997,4110666; 663135,4110548; 
663321,4110581; 663608,4110676; 663674,4110679; 663893,4110602; 
664202,4110318; 664236,4110242; 664404,4110042; 664461,4109741; 
664747,4109472; 664495,4109500; 664457,4109479; 664779,4109388; 
664916,4109298; 664972,4109201; 665017,4109218; 665133,4109177; 
665254,4109012; 665237,4108973; 665281,4108933; 665272,4108874; 
665347,4108815; 665257,4108753; 665352,4108727; 665337,4108600; 
665390,4108670; 665487,4108605; 665456,4108510; 665525,4108499; 
665525,4108436; 665581,4108391; 665624,4108286; 665613,4108263; 
665498,4108249; 665404,4108151; 665526,4108142; 665554,4108055; 
665647,4108062; 665680,4107934; 665577,4107863; 665424,4107821; 
665414,4107793; 665594,4107720; 665617,4107690; 665499,4107645; 
665366,4107665; 665216,4107636; 665184,4107590; 665262,4107584; 
665401,4107511; 665365,4107483; 665344,4107412; 665270,4107413; 
665223,4107358; 665172,4107371; 665127,4107420; 665043,4107405; 
664992,4107451; 664935,4107435; 664849,4107472; 664651,4107386; 
664809,4107285; 664812,4107229; 664962,4107231; 665013,4107195; 
665005,4107162; 664957,4107156; 664943,4107132; 665007,4107033; 
664999,4106988; 664947,4106982; 664901,4107065; 664833,4107080; 
664762,4106963; 664721,4106985; 664702,4107057; 664647,4107123; 
664595,4107081; 664542,4107086; 664523,4107057; 664529,4106947; 
664499,4106928; 664279,4107090; 664235,4107095; 664272,4106985; 
664160,4106935; 664173,4106881; 664068,4106863; 663981,4106778; 
663949,4106696; 663982,4106682; 664020,4106706; 664058,4106683; 
664101,4106714; 664198,4106695; 664216,4106572; 664268,4106637; 
664332,4106672; 664379,4106641; 664377,4106536; 664478,4106609; 
664608,4106638; 664642,4106620; 664659,4106583; 664503,4106517; 
664478,4106401; 664528,4106317; 664342,4106323; 664319,4106211; 
664210,4106245; 664183,4106203; 664117,4106188; 664110,4106148; 
664028,4106043; 663964,4106025; 663931,4106037; 663916,4106100; 
663813,4106108; 663864,4106244; 663783,4106232; 663722,4106292; 
663697,4106153; 663545,4106164; 663549,4106101; 663620,4106067; 
663513,4105861; 663513,4105809; 663550,4105752; 663535,4105727; 
663452,4105750; 663306,4105713; 663248,4105728; 663170,4105782; 
663119,4105892; 663095,4105732; 663012,4105662; 662888,4105748; 
662862,4105912; 662764,4105833; 662716,4105830; 662453,4105932; 
662453,4105961; 662401,4105940; 662270,4105987; 662200,4105960;

[[Page 94]]

662201,4105855; 662013,4105669; 662047,4105655; 662142,4105697; 
662342,4105669; 662482,4105617; 662541,4105568; 662592,4105572; 
662711,4105452; 662662,4105420; 662547,4105456; 662338,4105357; 
662238,4105344; 662130,4105244; 662009,4105247; 662066,4105171; 
662189,4105157; 662389,4105242; 662414,4105136; 662565,4105124; 
662683,4105177; 662796,4105179; 662816,4105152; 662723,4105055; 
662745,4104994; 662709,4104895; 662752,4104909; 662790,4104888; 
662852,4105023; 662917,4105007; 663044,4105197; 663045,4105230; 
663101,4105226; 663106,4105175; 663052,4105068; 663074,4104940; 
663168,4104980; 663211,4105030; 663327,4104919; 663367,4104918; 
663367,4104826; 663391,4104807; 663484,4104813; 663558,4104884; 
663608,4104811; 663664,4104811; 663761,4104766; 663852,4104771; 
663873,4104707; 663780,4104713; 663682,4104668; 663579,4104722; 
663441,4104687; 663349,4104708; 663330,4104748; 663226,4104798; 
663096,4104761; 662992,4104689; 662938,4104689; 662986,4104615; 
663124,4104676; 663237,4104624; 663418,4104447; 663346,4104380; 
663256,4104392; 662986,4104264; 662933,4104365; 662873,4104422; 
662832,4104425; 662768,4104378; 662606,4104510; 662593,4104558; 
662617,4104696; 662589,4104719; 662585,4104656; 662436,4104465; 
662481,4104247; 662444,4104227; 662366,4104266; 662399,4104377; 
662308,4104563; 662245,4104582; 662154,4104690; 662156,4104784; 
662059,4104770; 662035,4104802; 662004,4104905; 662040,4104941; 
662040,4105008; 661981,4105023; 661923,4104960; 661877,4104955; 
661672,4105035; 661496,4105065; 661429,4105117; 661419,4105070; 
661675,4104881; 661706,4104901; 661778,4104863; 661815,4104803; 
661816,4104736; 661875,4104680; 661866,4104579; 661983,4104499; 
662068,4104326; 662045,4104279; 661980,4104281; 661844,4104389; 
661873,4104279; 662085,4104161; 662069,4104129; 661884,4104095; 
661904,4104044; 661812,4103974; 661678,4103983; 661452,4104119; 
661348,4104203; 661331,4104257; 661286,4104213; 661154,4104209; 
661090,4104245; 661063,4104304; 660930,4104342; 660830,4104407; 
660631,4104460; 660872,4104326; 660926,4104258; 661016,4104230; 
660980,4104164; 661085,4104163; 661091,4104076; 661287,4104100; 
661371,4103978; 661411,4104027; 661518,4104007; 661576,4103932; 
661586,4103871; 661627,4103850; 661792,4103810; 661900,4103876; 
661945,4103876; 661967,4103808; 662027,4103893; 662129,4103943; 
662197,4103967; 662259,4103948; 662309,4103845; 662272,4103798; 
662312,4103767; 662315,4103649; 662352,4103660; 662387,4103732; 
662431,4103719; 662438,4103781; 662496,4103839; 662565,4103788; 
662902,4103841; 662991,4103820; 662997,4103763; 662950,4103713; 
662858,4103642; 662705,4103581; 662771,4103535; 662766,4103459; 
662755,4103442; 662653,4103462; 662617,4103422; 662613,4103349; 
662527,4103308; 662441,4103320; 662377,4103359; 662338,4103298; 
662164,4103304; 662075,4103266; 661910,4103262; 661924,4103236; 
661862,4103211; 662158,4103214; 662243,4103176; 662489,4103160; 
662519,4103097; 662372,4102996; 662374,4102975; 662520,4102986; 
662562,4102935; 662573,4102844; 662598,4102822; 662585,4102914; 
662620,4103011; 662663,4103029; 662660,4103110; 662704,4103156; 
662780,4103181; 662772,4103243; 662884,4103297; 662972,4103446; 
663040,4103465; 663143,4103410; 663159,4103486; 663117,4103575; 
663196,4103672; 663272,4103668; 663330,4103719; 663430,4103756; 
663528,4103774; 663588,4103750; 663676,4103796; 663735,4103700; 
663833,4103647; 663876,4103717; 663969,4103740; 663996,4103603; 
664079,4103590; 664140,4103642; 664151,4103492; 664395,4103184; 
664441,4103167; 664452,4103104; 664556,4103058; 664585,4102963; 
664581,4102736; 664523,4102552; 664454,4102487; 664601,4102421; 
664668,4102260; 664665,4102125; 664637,4102103; 664499,4102094; 
664625,4102033; 664745,4101930; 664754,4101895; 664659,4101863; 
664780,4101696; 664753,4101613; 664687,4101558; 664725,4101497; 
664698,4101461; 664636,4101434; 664586,4101443; 664516,4101341; 
664566,4101315; 664550,4101260; 664433,4101126; 664326,4101094; 
664216,4100939; 664344,4100957; 664387,4100928; 664404,4100966; 
664477,4100986; 664582,4100935; 664659,4100999; 664679,4100864; 
664747,4100840; 664848,4100720; 664663,4100710; 664613,4100663; 
664622,4100600; 664730,4100556; 664756,4100522; 664640,4100471; 
664691,4100390; 664599,4100268; 664569,4100037; 664598,4099951; 
664539,4099835; 664447,4099733; 664564,4099744; 664603,4099811; 
664719,4099914; 664774,4099939; 664817,4099896; 664935,4099996; 
665152,4099790; 665279,4100228; 665329,4100111; 665340,4099968; 
665366,4099938; 665474,4099980; 665548,4099917; 665537,4099810; 
665591,4099794; 665661,4099817; 665720,4099778; 665738,4099738; 
665683,4099612; 665789,4099585; 665811,4099445; 665886,4099466; 
665913,4099408; 666077,4099344; 666107,4099156; 665937,4099044; 
665913,4098986; 666029,4099035; 666072,4099031; 666085,4098989; 
666129,4099003; 666214,4099070; 666251,4099177; 666321,4099211; 
666385,4099172; 666399,4099088; 666461,4099043; 666482,4098810; 
666387,4098683; 666538,4098676; 666570,4098651; 666629,4098564; 
666621,4098502; 666579,4098478; 666625,4098384; 666507,4098305; 
666400,4098283; 666382,4098252; 666407,4098219; 666543,4098195; 
666692,4098200; 666760,4098135; 666811,4098223; 666893,4098240; 
666950,4098153; 666951,4098026; 667019,4098055; 667165,4097991; 
667164,4097968; 666966,4097881; 666922,4097835; 666986,4097799; 
667003,4097688; 667048,4097702; 667168,4097684; 667129,4097631; 
667116,4097561; 667020,4097558; 667008,4097537; 667099,4097487; 
667055,4097423; 667159,4097407; 667208,4097375; 667217,4097336; 
667188,4097304; 667079,4097302; 667121,4097256; 667108,4097215; 
667216,4097219; 667237,4097176; 667177,4096987; 667122,4096950; 
667138,4096910; 667123,4096867; 667055,4096761; 667019,4096757; 
666810,4096850; 666773,4096843; 666916,4096729; 666883,4096642; 
667035,4096604; 666974,4096532; 667032,4096458; 667002,4096421; 
667025,4096243; 667013,4096066; 666920,4096010; 666991,4095957; 
667008,4095843; 666942,4095750; 666914,4095640; 666804,4095656; 
666817,4095616; 666871,4095585; 666842,4095462; 666757,4095316; 
666703,4095057; 666629,4094973; 666476,4094963; 666151,4095087; 
666010,4095201; 665864,4095242; 665680,4095409; 665560,4095423; 
665646,4095354; 665628,4095281; 665133,4094656; 664629,4094273; 
664336,4094181; 663579,4094126; 662903,4094024; 662627,4093892; 
662114,4093272; 662002,4093094; 661985,4092928; 662017,4092804; 
661861,4092709; 661698,4092500; 661439,4092428; 661173,4092479; 
660937,4092480; 660867,4092456; 660778,4092369; 660653,4092059; 
660641,4091925; 660251,4091760;

[[Page 95]]

660162,4091782; 660033,4091877; 659967,4092014; 659578,4091748; 
659359,4091688; 659281,4091628; 659225,4091618; 659081,4091462; 
659012,4091243; 658823,4091051; 658811,4091000; 658834,4090938; 
658652,4090568; 658536,4090484; 658327,4090267; 658238,4090241; 
658097,4090251; 658003,4090204; 657809,4089947; 657778,4089851; 
657686,4089782; 657568,4089485; 657568,4089346; 657601,4089299; 
657587,4089210; 657511,4089045; 657334,4088785; 657337,4088609; 
656887,4088671; 656620,4088788; 656450,4088810; 656195,4088944; 
656116,4089065; 655798,4089159; 655705,4089250; 655627,4089232; 
655441,4089279; 655345,4089260; 655315,4089403; 655230,4089528; 
655106,4089558; 654939,4089501; 654853,4089597; 654740,4089673; 
654735,4089732; 654811,4089882; 654746,4090139; 654513,4090406; 
654546,4090496; 654519,4090556; 654368,4090555; 654207,4090684; 
654221,4090874; 654190,4091086; 654097,4091175; 654017,4091351; 
653970,4091584; 653873,4091763; 653690,4091867; 653524,4092207; 
653518,4092389; 653271,4092529; 653234,4092609; 653141,4092649; 
653024,4092881; 652991,4092920; 652907,4092947; 652783,4093103; 
652808,4093336; 652795,4093795; 652681,4093930; 652387,4094024; 
652281,4094100; 652277,4094330; 652176,4094616; 651578,4094413; 
651457,4094399; 651335,4094442; 651294,4094433; 651255,4094406; 
651200,4094306; 651041,4094194; 651004,4094103; 651021,4094006; 
650935,4093717; 650820,4093498; 650856,4093402; 650834,4093186; 
650770,4093055; 650719,4093016; 650679,4093015; 650618,4093083; 
650437,4093063; 650351,4093098; 650294,4093186; 650233,4093234; 
650039,4093208; 649927,4093137; 649797,4093136; 649758,4093257; 
649600,4093531; 649500,4093612; 649281,4093710; 649182,4093907; 
648947,4094034; 648767,4094350; 648648,4094405; 648465,4094423; 
648360,4094556; 648287,4094611; 648256,4094848; 648270,4095011; 
648182,4095217; 647955,4095237; 647499,4095104; 647399,4095096; 
647330,4095013; 647163,4094988; 647047,4094899; 647028,4094802; 
646891,4094825; 646858,4094755; 646811,4094723; 646791,4094618; 
646647,4094535; 646404,4094494; 646329,4094408; 646077,4094318; 
646043,4094286; 646032,4094221; 646117,4094190; 646315,4093942; 
646451,4093853; 646414,4093639; 646328,4093581; 646369,4093496; 
646469,4093433; 646498,4093347; 646509,4093052; 646435,4092908; 
646488,4092740; 646467,4092637; 646480,4092484; 646431,4092418; 
646345,4092375; 646012,4092339; 645936,4092310; 645651,4091987; 
645619,4091861; 645494,4091762; 645459,4091523; 645436,4091524; 
645381,4091594; 645227,4091970; 644956,4092226; 644889,4092333; 
644865,4092425; 644900,4092639; 645061,4092813; 645090,4092892; 
645133,4093347; 645063,4093671; 644895,4094099; 644836,4094483; 
644816,4095023; 644770,4095291; 644852,4095537; 644692,4095730; 
644622,4095672; 644540,4095771; 644385,4095788; 644150,4095515; 
643759,4094905; 643681,4094923; 643804,4094673; 643863,4094207; 
643947,4094039; 644036,4093946; 644082,4093749; 644036,4093485; 
643894,4093161; 643947,4092835; 643943,4092735; 643763,4092502; 
643778,4092414; 643858,4092250; 643907,4092011; 643904,4091716; 
643864,4091630; 643738,4091561; 643704,4091517; 643902,4091318; 
643926,4091254; 643919,4091216; 643876,4091197; 643682,4091200; 
643633,4091169; 643636,4091144; 643768,4091091; 643823,4090973; 
643903,4090941; 643992,4090806; 644009,4090683; 643980,4090610; 
643928,4090568; 643740,4090548; 643593,4090566; 643417,4090608; 
643221,4090701; 643062,4090726; 642950,4090790; 642814,4090752; 
642714,4090758; 642535,4090824; 642377,4090934; 642293,4091095; 
642036,4091324; 641838,4091579; 641651,4091653; 641587,4091704; 
641518,4091805; 641374,4091904; 641216,4091951; 641183,4091982; 
641176,4092144; 641094,4092352; 641090,4092438; 641157,4092493; 
641350,4092414; 641267,4092622; 641057,4092687; 641018,4092746; 
641017,4092811; 641180,4093187; 641149,4093270; 641050,4093294; 
640939,4093172; 640801,4093088; 640674,4093099; 640520,4093221; 
640465,4093228; 640439,4093188; 640438,4093107; 640365,4093044; 
640027,4093016; 639702,4092949; 639512,4092976; 639712,4093226; 
639850,4093586; 639939,4093906; 639973,4094495; 639965,4094799; 
640079,4095069; 640242,4095348; 640309,4095610; 640286,4095886; 
640254,4095996; 640262,4096145; 640232,4096219; 640073,4096388; 
639856,4096470; 639736,4096573; 639387,4096626; 639344,4096722; 
639215,4096834; 639155,4096827; 639083,4096737; 638998,4096692; 
638692,4096748; 638645,4096807; 638641,4096872; 638840,4097137; 
638618,4097256; 638400,4097265; 638146,4097414; 638111,4097528; 
637947,4097647; 637830,4097864; 637775,4098050; 637786,4098085; 
637902,4098238; 638059,4098263; 638111,4098409; 638007,4098366; 
637863,4098416; 637802,4098534; 637761,4098693; 637679,4098771; 
637605,4098767; 637237,4098867; 636845,4099033; 636776,4099040; 
636581,4099001; 636390,4099025; 636221,4099088; 636011,4099096; 
635725,4099252; 635680,4099316; 635619,4099720; 635663,4099862; 
635587,4099960; 635546,4100125; 635453,4100204; 635388,4100212; 
635302,4100179; 635251,4100208; 635125,4100421; 635087,4100546; 
634956,4100712; 634884,4100857; 634726,4100913; 634608,4101021; 
634551,4101110; 634485,4101292; 634392,4101417; 634028,4101603; 
633905,4101812; 633797,4101901; 633726,4102017; 633722,4102251; 
633521,4102565; 632829,4102548; 632606,4102597; 632783,4103163; 
632399,4104333; 632239,4104397; 631719,4104456; 631546,4104625; 
631213,4104741; 631161,4104817; 631157,4104921; 631069,4105021; 
630977,4105063; 630964,4105109; 630778,4105330; 630643,4105544; 
630607,4105579; 630482,4105607; 630435,4105645; 630468,4105831; 
630383,4105962; 630318,4106184; 630241,4106257; 630237,4106356; 
630165,4106449; 630003,4106545; 629870,4106820; 629714,4107029; 
629557,4107390; 629544,4107573; 629498,4107755; 629458,4107886; 
629394,4107941; 629373,4107994; 629353,4108126; 629308,4108227; 
629233,4108310; 629141,4108357; 629108,4108410; 629052,4108947; 
629083,4109024; 629149,4109061; 629183,4109142; 629062,4109075; 
628948,4109076; 628796,4108906; 628782,4108817; 628625,4108893; 
628568,4108994; 628416,4109039; 628402,4109420; 628321,4109540; 
628314,4109750; 628251,4109890; 628105,4109947; 628022,4110080; 
628010,4110233; 627933,4110391; 627469,4110933; 627423,4110926; 
627388,4110977; 627490,4111114; 627391,4111261; 627394,4111334; 
627480,4111507; 627385,4111753; 627426,4111910; 627418,4112146; 
627614,4112518; 627638,4112652; 627557,4112743; 627358,4112811; 
627291,4112961; 627261,4113097; 627201,4113193; 627132,4113270; 
626903,4113417; 626719,4113599; 626623,4113725; 626578,4113887; 
626434,4114068; 626423,4114125;

[[Page 96]]

626690,4114262; 626784,4114467; 626787,4114534; 626726,4114762; 
626960,4115056; 626923,4115263; 626869,4115368; 626870,4115565; 
626925,4115642; 627060,4115683; 627167,4115669; 627576,4115719; 
627682,4115852; 627889,4115942; 628031,4116109; 628103,4116255; 
628286,4116352; 628278,4116490; 628335,4116718; 628325,4116853; 
628395,4116980; 628356,4117170; 628459,4117262; 628615,4117346; 
628623,4117388; 628522,4117558; 628134,4117680; 628093,4117865; 
628001,4118038; 627808,4118083; 627643,4118155; 627419,4118344; 
627214,4118603; 627179,4118618; 627043,4118585; 626941,4118796; 
626751,4118956; 626716,4119059; 626651,4119139; 626641,4119261; 
626672,4119312; 626758,4119371; 626781,4119494; 626877,4119598; 
626974,4119631; 626989,4119737; 627034,4119828; 627247,4119851; 
627320,4119803; 627472,4119822; 627655,4119787; 627818,4119904; 
627861,4119981; 627933,4120021; 628181,4120054; 628259,4119984; 
628392,4120115; 628483,4120293; 628489,4120390; 628754,4120575; 
628774,4120652; 629144,4121010; 629269,4121094; 629803,4121223; 
629856,4121184; 629910,4121041; 629987,4120938; 630087,4120937; 
630186,4120882; 630395,4120831; 630565,4120699; 630924,4120570; 
630985,4120528; 631157,4120347; 631185,4120270; 631319,4120093; 
631417,4120048; 631500,4119910; 631714,4119996; 631853,4120126; 
631975,4120552; 632218,4120977; 632441,4121188; 632522,4121351; 
632708,4121430; 632859,4121567; 632993,4121415; 633176,4121419; 
633266,4121504; 633231,4121662; 633303,4121820; 633279,4121940; 
633319,4121985; 633314,4122039; 633253,4122087; 633190,4122214; 
633392,4122505; 633547,4122539; 633467,4122678; 633529,4122783; 
633641,4123102; 633616,4123188; 633489,4123308; 633465,4123374; 
633599,4123619; 633612,4123689; 633909,4123712; 634007,4123766; 
634079,4123760; 634185,4123709; 634520,4123699; 634693,4123562; 
634864,4123521; 634934,4123479; 635026,4123302; 635148,4123158; 
635412,4123050; 635511,4122886; 635585,4122811; 635688,4122750; 
635829,4122770; 635886,4122679; 635952,4122623; 636163,4122601; 
636333,4122655; 636481,4122645; 636610,4122687; 636711,4122672; 
636775,4122711; 636866,4122976; 636912,4123044; 637267,4123340; 
637206,4123572; 637205,4123665; 637101,4123719; 636988,4123848; 
636927,4123873; 636897,4123954; 636926,4124017; 637015,4124087; 
636986,4124222; 637063,4124300; 637122,4124411; 637054,4124511; 
637073,4124589; 637048,4124670; 636967,4124824; 636922,4124850; 
636878,4124925; 636899,4125004; 636960,4125046; 637017,4125045; 
637031,4125169; 637095,4125265; 637064,4125306; 637048,4125431; 
637005,4125514; 637040,4125617; 636963,4125702; 636959,4125785; 
637023,4125924; 637147,4125951; 637074,4126120; 637048,4126273; 
637002,4126331; 636998,4126418; 637063,4126493; 636964,4126727; 
636964,4126800; 636984,4126889; 637031,4126953; 637016,4127032; 
636944,4127069; 636843,4127169; 636793,4127268; 636643,4127421; 
636622,4127496; 636570,4127550; 636566,4127614; 636601,4127723; 
636638,4127786; 636721,4127842; 636831,4127793; 636864,4127754; 
636936,4127766; 637048,4127882; 637058,4128046; 637121,4128192; 
637273,4128338; 637371,4128367; 637439,4128360; 637491,4128395; 
637504,4128431; 637475,4128612; 637398,4128865; 637490,4128976; 
637616,4129021; 637667,4129080; 637899,4129178; 637943,4129175; 
638111,4129126; 638206,4129043; 638279,4129045; 638355,4128931; 
638612,4128834; 638846,4128930; 638909,4128934; 639057,4129011; 
639199,4129040; 639431,4129195; returning to 639546,4129203.
    (ii) Note: Unit STC-2 for California red-legged frog is depicted on 
the map in paragraph (30)(ii) of this entry.
    (32) Unit SCZ-1: Santa Cruz and San Mateo Counties, California. From 
USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles Franklin Point, Ano Nuevo, Big Basin, 
Davenport, Felton and Santa Cruz.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 563662,4115064; 563902,4115237; 563915,4115297; 563879,4115420; 
563931,4115559; 563887,4115633; 563895,4115727; 563964,4115960; 
564045,4116048; 564048,4116217; 564134,4116372; 564140,4116453; 
564414,4116466; 564501,4116430; 564644,4116464; 564701,4116455; 
564742,4116504; 564749,4116592; 564832,4116671; 564995,4116680; 
565091,4116711; 565262,4116712; 565425,4116788; 565671,4117091; 
565809,4117126; 565894,4117190; 565921,4117260; 565927,4117536; 
566051,4117615; 566110,4117736; 566304,4117724; 566404,4117833; 
566576,4117892; 567036,4118184; 567262,4118281; 567499,4118333; 
567590,4118548; 567733,4118731; 567746,4118785; 567699,4118870; 
567704,4118933; 567778,4119012; 567942,4119114; 568006,4119097; 
568067,4119030; 568274,4118928; 568430,4118898; 568652,4118929; 
568788,4118975; 568881,4118980; 568939,4118954; 569151,4119022; 
569218,4119108; 569260,4119124; 569422,4119083; 569476,4119040; 
569571,4118885; 569845,4118763; 569977,4118646; 570191,4118236; 
570505,4118044; 570662,4117740; 570849,4117476; 570922,4117312; 
571458,4117009; 571527,4116831; 571510,4116573; 571552,4116437; 
571546,4116349; 571667,4116105; 571672,4115971; 571624,4115844; 
571834,4115456; 572014,4114800; 571999,4114663; 571958,4114557; 
571724,4114348; 571686,4114278; 571692,4114244; 571770,4114100; 
571872,4114050; 571891,4113944; 571928,4113887; 572145,4113691; 
572238,4113541; 572410,4113497; 572422,4113471; 572383,4113428; 
572275,4113380; 572190,4113291; 571991,4112934; 571986,4112755; 
572028,4112600; 571938,4112494; 571948,4112437; 572018,4112345; 
572159,4112277; 572180,4112230; 572014,4112052; 571788,4111956; 
571722,4111803; 571522,4111664; 571456,4111512; 571426,4111382; 
571432,4111298; 571556,4111218; 571831,4111207; 571945,4111012; 
572126,4110986; 572296,4110916; 572355,4110861; 572400,4110669; 
572449,4110629; 572665,4110563; 573032,4110522; 573210,4110425; 
573396,4110412; 573515,4110339; 573552,4110252; 573551,4110105; 
573581,4110001; 574046,4109512; 574309,4109172; 574432,4109053; 
574685,4108907; 574846,4108732; 574881,4108547; 574995,4108383; 
575066,4107912; 575127,4107794; 575247,4107709; 575542,4107691; 
575616,4107666; 576142,4107244; 576342,4106833; 576364,4106472; 
576456,4106126; 576449,4106015; 576491,4105706; 576374,4105368; 
576464,4105110; 576710,4104644; 576898,4104558; 577006,4104480; 
577078,4104398; 577093,4104337; 577074,4104056; 576991,4103801; 
576995,4103644; 577561,4103149; 577688,4103089; 578028,4102717; 
578146,4102420; 578061,4102291; 578030,4102169; 578091,4102066; 
578087,4101987; 577874,4101885; 577887,4101790;

[[Page 97]]

578067,4101506; 578161,4101440; 578273,4101407; 578410,4101243; 
578482,4101025; 578546,4100957; 578637,4100917; 578682,4100701; 
578804,4100569; 578865,4100465; 579150,4100310; 579322,4100254; 
579434,4100153; 579480,4100023; 579488,4099773; 579469,4099660; 
579410,4099528; 579426,4099493; 579516,4099446; 579530,4099383; 
579486,4099239; 579486,4099152; 579561,4099035; 579589,4098829; 
579762,4098630; 579871,4098566; 579957,4098355; 580193,4098159; 
580330,4098160; 580426,4098102; 580669,4098106; 580861,4098168; 
581010,4098149; 581168,4098063; 581422,4097753; 581616,4097576; 
582018,4097337; 582277,4097203; 582555,4097250; 582592,4097218; 
582711,4096974; 582847,4096872; 582932,4096650; 583059,4096480; 
583210,4096352; 583304,4096109; 583288,4095861; 583390,4095602; 
583352,4095509; 583512,4095165; 583460,4094954; 583478,4094782; 
583513,4094670; 583568,4094655; 583615,4094582; 583597,4094481; 
583611,4094312; 583761,4093780; 583795,4093387; 583779,4093252; 
583722,4093092; 583703,4092859; 583747,4092502; 583832,4092321; 
583859,4091876; 583916,4091657; 584008,4091471; 583895,4091228; 
583898,4090922; 583863,4090799; 583829,4090470; 583901,4089880; 
583964,4089669; 583925,4089666; 583895,4089633; 583886,4089659; 
583936,4089703; 583760,4089751; 583724,4089721; 583649,4089715; 
583547,4089648; 583358,4089623; 583180,4089516; 583081,4089615; 
583042,4089610; 583007,4089546; 582975,4089594; 582813,4089599; 
582671,4089703; 582604,4089693; 582582,4089761; 582530,4089751; 
582479,4089676; 582440,4089713; 582427,4089770; 582389,4089724; 
582281,4089766; 582234,4090003; 582145,4090053; 581928,4090091; 
581851,4090055; 581845,4090012; 581791,4090029; 581786,4089986; 
581695,4089926; 581592,4089965; 581607,4090024; 581575,4090049; 
581529,4090027; 581471,4090045; 581411,4090017; 581401,4089979; 
581335,4089979; 581264,4090087; 581261,4090236; 581229,4090134; 
581105,4090195; 581133,4090145; 581084,4090138; 580919,4090222; 
580871,4090193; 580848,4090130; 580748,4090235; 580664,4090239; 
580628,4090279; 580569,4090242; 580550,4090291; 580521,4090303; 
580418,4090308; 580362,4090260; 580336,4090300; 580299,4090307; 
580259,4090269; 580230,4090305; 580123,4090237; 579966,4090344; 
579953,4090384; 579820,4090341; 579700,4090402; 579589,4090382; 
579486,4090486; 579316,4090558; 579273,4090666; 579000,4090846; 
578981,4090865; 579007,4090901; 578990,4090938; 578828,4091033; 
578781,4091096; 578675,4091097; 578500,4091040; 578416,4091089; 
578375,4091037; 578354,4091059; 578381,4091100; 578365,4091197; 
578228,4091379; 578098,4091453; 577985,4091489; 577834,4091436; 
577738,4091268; 577686,4091341; 577612,4091340; 577556,4091388; 
577512,4091517; 577440,4091551; 577421,4091538; 577371,4091579; 
577335,4091586; 577317,4091551; 577175,4091642; 577077,4091648; 
577020,4091551; 576976,4091638; 577014,4091727; 576938,4091669; 
576894,4091716; 576945,4091863; 576700,4092252; 576596,4092354; 
576574,4092349; 576563,4092394; 576457,4092499; 576277,4092618; 
576216,4092627; 576184,4092669; 576160,4092620; 576121,4092625; 
576115,4092672; 576060,4092706; 575884,4092731; 575837,4092713; 
575840,4092666; 575809,4092631; 575673,4092602; 575660,4092559; 
575626,4092611; 575584,4092625; 575572,4092591; 575563,4092631; 
575504,4092560; 575453,4092591; 575374,4092572; 575335,4092638; 
575329,4092757; 575274,4092795; 575283,4092861; 575188,4092917; 
575185,4093065; 575226,4093094; 575173,4093192; 575074,4093326; 
574933,4093458; 574867,4093473; 574882,4093428; 574850,4093425; 
574844,4093517; 574818,4093560; 574752,4093569; 574741,4093607; 
574666,4093619; 574626,4093760; 574596,4093767; 574561,4093847; 
574389,4093921; 574349,4093875; 574241,4093844; 574172,4093869; 
574138,4093844; 574136,4093908; 574075,4093876; 574064,4093933; 
573990,4093903; 573942,4093912; 573928,4093952; 573975,4093985; 
573984,4094021; 573964,4094025; 573975,4094061; 573927,4094092; 
573972,4094140; 573859,4094342; 573825,4094349; 573840,4094376; 
573789,4094445; 573731,4094460; 573683,4094403; 573661,4094522; 
573621,4094555; 573612,4094601; 573558,4094492; 573540,4094542; 
573510,4094544; 573493,4094515; 573426,4094611; 573409,4094570; 
573392,4094622; 573339,4094631; 573299,4094696; 573268,4094678; 
573240,4094853; 573077,4094856; 573053,4094831; 572925,4094895; 
572861,4094877; 572834,4094958; 572797,4094928; 572750,4094966; 
572749,4094931; 572641,4095014; 572697,4095147; 572810,4095121; 
572802,4095154; 572830,4095204; 572796,4095282; 572731,4095277; 
572748,4095311; 572733,4095321; 572626,4095287; 572617,4095351; 
572576,4095331; 572454,4095346; 572437,4095328; 572443,4095451; 
572503,4095519; 572491,4095591; 572418,4095635; 572356,4095569; 
572261,4095667; 572195,4095659; 572155,4095718; 572113,4095680; 
572096,4095708; 572111,4095761; 572055,4095848; 571897,4095903; 
571858,4095895; 571862,4096058; 571833,4096108; 571735,4096194; 
571603,4096258; 571538,4096257; 571484,4096218; 571458,4096323; 
571346,4096386; 571205,4096559; 570968,4096661; 570751,4096651; 
570681,4096720; 570624,4096707; 570527,4096949; 570465,4097003; 
570454,4097092; 570380,4097245; 570167,4097461; 570034,4097491; 
569849,4097588; 569789,4097746; 569698,4097893; 569649,4097909; 
569547,4097894; 569342,4097956; 569292,4097954; 569264,4097897; 
569117,4097936; 569039,4098135; 568968,4098244; 568946,4098368; 
568796,4098518; 568782,4098688; 568723,4098803; 568671,4098825; 
568612,4098978; 568622,4099028; 568559,4099178; 568553,4099243; 
568524,4099262; 568520,4099369; 568440,4099480; 568442,4099519; 
568406,4099530; 568395,4099594; 568420,4099626; 568367,4099718; 
568216,4099838; 568204,4099880; 568173,4099888; 568189,4099915; 
568101,4100032; 567885,4100202; 567744,4100433; 567607,4100545; 
567537,4100657; 567361,4100812; 567299,4100932; 567147,4101134; 
567057,4101210; 566910,4101434; 566611,4101575; 566544,4101699; 
566433,4101745; 566392,4101793; 566356,4101789; 566388,4101993; 
566333,4102062; 566275,4102212; 566136,4102401; 566118,4102589; 
566072,4102662; 565991,4102697; 565972,4102674; 565930,4102680; 
565946,4102626; 565924,4102615; 565900,4102670; 565929,4102740; 
565911,4102816; 565882,4102840; 565874,4102804; 565907,4102762; 
565887,4102715; 565825,4102792; 565801,4102878; 565810,4102908; 
565848,4102915; 565824,4102952; 565848,4102989; 565842,4103042; 
565791,4103033; 565738,4103204; 565680,4103206; 565625,4103159; 
565616,4103233; 565543,4103296; 565578,4103439; 565539,4103436; 
565501,4103492; 565401,4103720; 565199,4103831; 565126,4103806; 
565100,4103713; 565070,4103707;

[[Page 98]]

565066,4103772; 565155,4103883; 565098,4103970; 565096,4104075; 
564994,4104369; 564892,4104548; 564763,4104629; 564710,4104693; 
564574,4104758; 564473,4104867; 564416,4105008; 564358,4105381; 
564240,4105406; 564184,4105612; 563942,4105843; 563669,4106165; 
563521,4106429; 563361,4106551; 563285,4106671; 563211,4106722; 
563138,4106701; 562925,4106878; 562480,4107410; 562306,4107540; 
562271,4107521; 562216,4107548; 562083,4107641; 562077,4107679; 
561911,4107769; 561821,4107864; 561722,4107894; 561645,4108008; 
561537,4108019; 561445,4108083; 561130,4108181; 561017,4108187; 
560928,4108176; 560923,4108124; 560879,4108135; 560867,4108044; 
560816,4107990; 560796,4108002; 560827,4108043; 560791,4108076; 
560749,4108062; 560607,4108089; 560563,4108046; 560544,4108073; 
560449,4107983; 560460,4107949; 560283,4107949; 560184,4107924; 
560078,4107843; 560065,4107803; 560027,4107820; 559947,4107797; 
559821,4107696; 559712,4107652; 559614,4107545; 559570,4107533; 
559573,4107610; 559497,4107836; 559369,4108023; 559286,4108097; 
559097,4108143; 558914,4108084; 558854,4108125; 558777,4108324; 
558760,4108439; 558717,4108487; 558673,4108495; 558736,4108557; 
558824,4108945; 558881,4109532; 558866,4109698; 559083,4109688; 
559289,4109712; 559568,4109783; 559896,4109954; 560221,4110181; 
560498,4110229; 560995,4110456; 561449,4110728; 561786,4110867; 
561870,4111057; 561856,4111183; 561878,4111290; 561988,4111391; 
562032,4111463; 562215,4111525; 562363,4111535; 562547,4111655; 
562782,4111665; 562843,4111708; 562891,4111931; 562858,4112520; 
562897,4112658; 562880,4112848; 562925,4112913; 563028,4112916; 
563082,4112944; 563162,4113061; 563187,4113347; 563322,4113654; 
563392,4113759; 563426,4113985; 563507,4114141; 563510,4114309; 
563666,4114460; 563710,4114883; returning to 563662,4115064. Excluding: 
573194,4098886; 573212,4098861; 573233,4098878; 573215,4098903; 
returning to 573194,4098886. Excluding: 573580,4098341; 573624,4098338; 
573660,4098454; 573623,4098464; returning to 573580,4098341. Excluding: 
574941,4098271; 574925,4098209; 575067,4098224; returning to 
574941,4098271. Excluding: 573381,4098107; 573397,4098073; 
573480,4098118; 573464,4098150; returning to 573381,4098107. Excluding: 
575347,4097747; 575349,4097646; 575448,4097670; 575379,4097752; 
returning to 575347,4097747. Excluding: 575388,4097590; 575394,4097549; 
575456,4097559; 575440,4097610; returning to 575388,4097590. Excluding: 
574744,4097505; 574777,4097483; 574803,4097522; 574771,4097541; 
returning to 574744,4097505.
    (ii) Note: Map of Units SCZ-1 and SCZ-2 for the California red-
legged frog follows:

[[Page 99]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17MR10.018

    (33) Unit SCZ-2: Santa Cruz County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 
scale quadrangle Watsonville West.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 607874,4086411; 608701,4084860; 608605,4084937; 608520,4084844; 
608271,4084560; 608221,4084334;

[[Page 100]]

607164,4083847; 606471,4082967; 606324,4083005; 605956,4083724; 
605973,4084135; 606148,4084358; 606145,4084654; 605804,4085090; 
605562,4085868; 605307,4086095; 604763,4086054; 604698,4086167; 
604132,4086258; 603520,4086848; 603133,4087000; 602103,4087771; 
601519,4088060; 601570,4088484; 602074,4088759; 602064,4088910; 
602395,4089247; 602360,4089344; 602512,4089607; 603336,4088906; 
604761,4088286; 606286,4087760; 607611,4086748; returning to 
607874,4086411.
    (ii) Note: Unit SCZ-2 for California red-legged frog is depicted on 
the map in paragraph (32)(iii) of this entry.
    (34) Unit MNT-1: Monterey County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 
scale quadrangle Prunedale.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N):
    613002,4076673; 613380,4076378; 613142,4076444; 613147,4076371; 
613064,4076368; 613366,4076130; 613249,4075818; 613416,4075763; 
613219,4075623; 613496,4075230; 613600,4075201; 613180,4074959; 
612571,4074924; 612260,4075009; 612080,4075185; 612505,4076777; 
612513,4077290; 612970,4077581; 613035,4077429; 612824,4076812; 
returning to 613002,4076673.
    (ii) Note: Map of Units MNT-1, MNT-2, and MNT-3 for the California 
red-legged frog follows:

[[Page 101]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17MR10.019

    (35) Unit MNT-2: Monterey County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 
scale quadrangles Monterey, Soberanes Point, Seaside, Mt. Carmel, Big 
Sur, Spreckles, Carmel Valley, Ventana Cones, Rana Creek, Chews Ridge, 
Palo Escrito Peak and Sycamore Flat.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N):

[[Page 102]]

603442,4046923; 603634,4046726; 603827,4046640; 604472,4046893; 
604714,4046944; 605564,4046793; 605712,4046847; 605926,4046833; 
606069,4046665; 606157,4046466; 606345,4046146; 606452,4045750; 
606540,4045608; 606636,4045570; 606841,4045661; 607122,4045606; 
607261,4045631; 607468,4045737; 608030,4045720; 608776,4045973; 
609217,4046057; 609446,4046061; 609863,4046205; 610192,4046221; 
610407,4046185; 610485,4045965; 610423,4045760; 610412,4045576; 
610466,4045473; 611386,4045442; 611541,4045144; 611589,4044840; 
611518,4044364; 611959,4043678; 611994,4043566; 612003,4043265; 
612175,4043133; 612308,4043088; 612387,4042971; 612478,4042972; 
612536,4042934; 612508,4042779; 612596,4042586; 612760,4042422; 
612861,4042201; 612877,4042127; 612845,4042022; 612944,4041748; 
613081,4041815; 613348,4041756; 613487,4041676; 613625,4041668; 
613673,4041573; 613676,4041527; 613631,4041448; 613654,4041417; 
613773,4041356; 614082,4041366; 614257,4041330; 614298,4041299; 
614340,4041165; 614382,4041122; 614460,4041143; 614615,4041129; 
614653,4041057; 614608,4040970; 614716,4040830; 614844,4040739; 
615002,4040742; 615036,4040710; 615041,4040639; 615102,4040569; 
615163,4040569; 615284,4040647; 615344,4040596; 615413,4040347; 
615451,4040326; 616150,4040222; 616494,4040253; 616619,4040237; 
616706,4040177; 616870,4039959; 617177,4039761; 617246,4039782; 
617424,4039744; 617840,4039742; 618201,4039619; 618329,4039619; 
618508,4039714; 618668,4039905; 618722,4039906; 618758,4039902; 
619018,4039723; 619077,4039603; 619164,4039232; 619154,4039095; 
619090,4038964; 619029,4038906; 618864,4038851; 618726,4038618; 
618633,4038522; 618078,4038260; 618036,4038179; 618028,4038060; 
617998,4038000; 617586,4037827; 617334,4037641; 617132,4037387; 
616875,4037268; 616722,4037104; 616657,4036932; 616646,4036839; 
616856,4036613; 616918,4036460; 616859,4036232; 616878,4035933; 
616842,4035706; 616910,4035453; 616908,4035384; 616811,4034976; 
616709,4034737; 616665,4034280; 616712,4034004; 616891,4033622; 
616990,4033512; 617122,4033488; 617166,4033289; 617269,4033210; 
617342,4033209; 617494,4033258; 617598,4033106; 617681,4033062; 
617788,4033074; 617992,4033159; 618133,4033154; 618242,4033111; 
618341,4032792; 618408,4032738; 618585,4032665; 618691,4032391; 
618807,4032296; 619088,4032263; 619188,4032222; 619402,4032075; 
620095,4031886; 620229,4031783; 620465,4031658; 620518,4031654; 
620607,4031728; 620670,4031748; 620723,4031720; 620976,4031408; 
621208,4031299; 621259,4031289; 621331,4031316; 621430,4031421; 
621494,4031436; 621717,4031345; 622296,4031237; 622576,4031104; 
622852,4031014; 623171,4030831; 623221,4030722; 623398,4030535; 
623647,4030483; 623727,4030382; 623871,4030361; 623977,4030313; 
624380,4029981; 624430,4029990; 624457,4030027; 624520,4030231; 
624563,4030294; 624836,4030390; 625105,4030204; 625241,4029931; 
625424,4029846; 625459,4029793; 625485,4029615; 625529,4029587; 
625648,4029601; 625713,4029571; 625757,4029527; 625770,4029379; 
625816,4029330; 626161,4029238; 626225,4029345; 626422,4029516; 
626682,4029363; 626838,4029340; 626895,4029365; 626932,4029398; 
626951,4029471; 627197,4029695; 627279,4029824; 627278,4030080; 
627338,4030345; 627517,4030590; 627589,4030621; 627610,4030873; 
627666,4030985; 627771,4031084; 627879,4031068; 627921,4031084; 
628088,4031349; 628146,4031545; 628225,4031711; 628271,4031928; 
628342,4032031; 628643,4031999; 628741,4032100; 628792,4032123; 
628889,4032075; 629016,4031914; 629169,4031888; 629241,4031714; 
629786,4031660; 629889,4031683; 629978,4031828; 630029,4031864; 
630144,4031849; 630324,4031755; 630588,4031759; 630721,4031738; 
630873,4031783; 631037,4031935; 631103,4031969; 631187,4031969; 
631362,4031912; 631545,4031962; 631666,4031904; 631719,4031914; 
631824,4031971; 631988,4032135; 632333,4032266; 632436,4032280; 
632598,4032351; 632670,4032348; 632785,4032292; 632854,4032296; 
632999,4032401; 633161,4032698; 633203,4032904; 633305,4032747; 
633509,4032610; 633687,4032444; 633881,4032390; 633989,4032248; 
634176,4032162; 634238,4032107; 634371,4031889; 634449,4031824; 
634543,4031796; 634558,4031759; 634494,4031543; 634451,4031243; 
634777,4030901; 634786,4030866; 634707,4030670; 634723,4030500; 
634819,4030403; 635022,4030362; 635161,4030254; 635219,4030033; 
635380,4029868; 635391,4029771; 635367,4029626; 635507,4029368; 
635465,4029053; 635661,4028916; 635648,4028792; 635669,4028717; 
635628,4028410; 635704,4028076; 635661,4027903; 635645,4027680; 
635748,4027507; 635692,4027467; 635638,4027332; 635403,4027164; 
635327,4026784; 635209,4026720; 635153,4026605; 634935,4026365; 
634885,4026164; 634746,4026073; 634605,4025864; 634485,4025791; 
634314,4025609; 634137,4025576; 633961,4025508; 633803,4025351; 
633621,4025077; 633470,4024906; 633334,4024914; 633176,4024967; 
633100,4024946; 632947,4024982; 632656,4024913; 632376,4024790; 
632215,4024814; 632074,4024880; 632014,4024835; 631753,4024759; 
631588,4024812; 631388,4024924; 631186,4024929; 630863,4025141; 
630665,4025370; 630579,4025657; 630412,4025822; 630273,4025894; 
630032,4025962; 629846,4026111; 629730,4026172; 629445,4026240; 
629344,4026288; 629225,4026418; 629164,4026536; 629059,4026632; 
628888,4026886; 628747,4026741; 628675,4026605; 628643,4026187; 
628584,4025963; 628358,4025689; 628307,4025393; 628174,4025284; 
627998,4025199; 628029,4025111; 628026,4025024; 628140,4024783; 
628335,4024251; 628389,4023998; 628377,4023895; 628309,4023719; 
628101,4023443; 627887,4023248; 627725,4023146; 627633,4023016; 
627439,4022876; 627360,4022673; 627353,4022568; 627551,4022184; 
627645,4021935; 627588,4021694; 627588,4021602; 627644,4021271; 
627704,4021126; 627710,4020952; 627610,4020464; 627916,4019856; 
628015,4019764; 628098,4019620; 628414,4019415; 628524,4019377; 
628502,4019214; 628717,4018734; 628740,4018389; 628952,4018059; 
628948,4017989; 628809,4017716; 628702,4017635; 628622,4017516; 
628485,4017411; 628424,4017216; 628362,4017145; 628326,4017121; 
628275,4017130; 628194,4017232; 627991,4017342; 627829,4017481; 
627510,4017600; 627141,4017542; 626957,4017470; 626809,4017530; 
626208,4017534; 625892,4017716; 625820,4017733; 625596,4017728; 
625422,4017673; 625272,4017705; 625011,4018004; 624594,4018209; 
624501,4018462; 624370,4018688; 624143,4018882; 623947,4018959; 
623879,4019028; 623806,4019159; 623771,4019378; 623723,4019428; 
623335,4019450; 623190,4019397; 623113,4019411; 622897,4019551; 
622689,4019616; 622637,4019685; 622529,4019960; 622511,4020068; 
622280,4020117; 622014,4020120;

[[Page 103]]

621730,4020211; 621487,4020203; 621220,4020307; 620852,4020491; 
620440,4020541; 620255,4020500; 619864,4020642; 619558,4020690; 
619384,4020557; 619283,4020377; 618994,4020006; 618831,4019912; 
618452,4019804; 618262,4019677; 618175,4019691; 618011,4019667; 
617679,4019776; 617373,4019761; 617216,4019781; 617074,4019836; 
616927,4019996; 616712,4020069; 616584,4020161; 616524,4020153; 
616235,4020012; 616054,4020023; 615975,4020098; 615989,4020342; 
615968,4020439; 615912,4020528; 615839,4020572; 615614,4020619; 
615313,4020801; 615226,4020943; 615181,4021141; 615211,4021292; 
615340,4021492; 615378,4021666; 615716,4022234; 615868,4022438; 
616001,4022564; 615801,4022657; 615597,4022916; 615394,4023003; 
615011,4023268; 614758,4023392; 614492,4023578; 614346,4023799; 
614310,4023900; 614317,4024126; 614374,4024416; 614334,4024517; 
614283,4024557; 614115,4024594; 613982,4024719; 613776,4024812; 
613599,4025040; 613422,4025119; 613211,4025118; 613067,4025145; 
612979,4025131; 612641,4025030; 612463,4024877; 612363,4024948; 
612200,4024978; 612089,4024964; 611995,4024905; 611919,4024908; 
611750,4025038; 611669,4025235; 611427,4025539; 611195,4025651; 
610983,4025897; 610929,4025669; 610424,4025385; 609907,4025483; 
609861,4025531; 609755,4025743; 609518,4025859; 609331,4026006; 
609184,4026198; 608969,4026365; 608893,4026398; 608847,4027084; 
608781,4027218; 608655,4027332; 608691,4027442; 608591,4027629; 
608281,4027733; 607966,4028005; 607618,4028204; 607510,4028334; 
607410,4028507; 607348,4028553; 607041,4028534; 606965,4028573; 
606860,4028711; 606704,4028792; 606758,4028980; 606751,4029076; 
606697,4029275; 606622,4029420; 606586,4029580; 606601,4029897; 
606680,4030050; 606594,4030249; 606669,4030768; 606634,4030873; 
606555,4030916; 606409,4030916; 606346,4030941; 606134,4031115; 
605817,4031192; 605669,4031149; 605598,4031155; 605127,4031328; 
604955,4031445; 604869,4031534; 604796,4031662; 604766,4031875; 
604723,4031941; 604415,4032092; 604215,4032159; 604092,4032249; 
603955,4032221; 603767,4032244; 603363,4032526; 603205,4032571; 
603022,4032501; 602795,4032606; 602672,4032823; 602510,4032949; 
602608,4033063; 602616,4033255; 602683,4033401; 602750,4033661; 
602724,4033743; 602512,4033882; 602118,4034068; 601896,4034124; 
601700,4034112; 601556,4034329; 601369,4034418; 601232,4034611; 
601197,4035070; 601245,4035219; 601077,4035491; 601059,4035611; 
601168,4035752; 601185,4035813; 601206,4035964; 601181,4036068; 
601070,4036175; 600949,4036231; 600889,4036286; 600788,4036505; 
600672,4036675; 600429,4036795; 600160,4036993; 600082,4037119; 
600049,4037287; 599998,4037408; 599832,4037611; 599653,4037701; 
599529,4037728; 599442,4037802; 599471,4038184; 599464,4038233; 
599401,4038320; 599247,4038399; 599163,4038508; 599021,4038578; 
598986,4038663; 598904,4038731; 598573,4038761; 598492,4038813; 
598423,4038921; 598328,4038926; 598311,4039055; 598151,4039111; 
598160,4039243; 598250,4039388; 598249,4039431; 598173,4039551; 
598102,4039970; 597770,4040819; 597253,4041444; 596744,4041800; 
596252,4042301; 595916,4042481; 595975,4042509; 596125,4042675; 
596197,4042793; 596225,4042892; 596185,4042943; 596208,4042961; 
596173,4043038; 596113,4043052; 596153,4043238; 596139,4043326; 
596101,4043399; 596051,4043440; 596048,4043526; 595956,4043705; 
595922,4043841; 595913,4044017; 595803,4044251; 595980,4044472; 
596641,4044556; 597625,4043868; 598316,4044030; 598771,4043986; 
599109,4044228; 599364,4044256; 599492,4044450; 599412,4044472; 
599400,4044703; 598784,4044876; 598904,4045023; 598904,4045172; 
598777,4045395; 598977,4046334; 599354,4046979; 599608,4047352; 
599754,4047193; 600359,4046861; 600490,4046893; 600728,4047051; 
600829,4047075; 601344,4047023; 601618,4047106; 601836,4047123; 
601992,4046990; 602578,4046917; 602830,4047224; 603037,4047321; 
603207,4047358; 603370,4047112; returning to 603442,4046923.
    (ii) Note: Unit MNT-2 for California red-legged frog is depicted on 
the map in paragraph (34)(ii) of this entry.
    (36) Unit MNT-3: Monterey County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 
scale quadrangles Point Sur, Big Sur, Pfeiffer Point, Ventana Cones and 
Partington Ridge.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 599824,4020540; 600160,4020013; 600076,4019744; 600415,4019570; 
600658,4019298; 601003,4019253; 601097,4019279; 601189,4019357; 
601271,4019618; 601335,4019536; 601395,4019503; 601491,4019514; 
601773,4019469; 601816,4019444; 601850,4019407; 601902,4019246; 
602079,4019037; 602174,4019087; 602354,4019075; 602498,4019123; 
602702,4019137; 602825,4019084; 602973,4018931; 603092,4018962; 
603245,4019046; 603482,4019006; 603567,4018867; 603840,4018617; 
604071,4018329; 604181,4018122; 604235,4018085; 604468,4018037; 
604574,4017974; 604688,4017843; 604803,4017638; 604926,4017503; 
605196,4017452; 605294,4017407; 605379,4017319; 605744,4017255; 
605813,4017227; 605965,4017095; 606124,4017066; 606155,4017030; 
606166,4016909; 606220,4016829; 606378,4016938; 606473,4016954; 
606596,4017019; 606806,4016941; 607037,4016541; 607312,4016334; 
607422,4016280; 607466,4016273; 607542,4016318; 607672,4016600; 
607730,4016676; 607972,4016737; 608190,4016668; 608333,4016691; 
608446,4016682; 608613,4016563; 608672,4016546; 608817,4016537; 
609038,4016561; 609237,4016506; 609444,4016311; 609763,4016093; 
610060,4016011; 610232,4015866; 610291,4015914; 610533,4015955; 
610580,4015993; 610629,4016131; 610706,4016228; 611088,4016419; 
611215,4016453; 611713,4016508; 611928,4016439; 612229,4016515; 
612755,4016386; 612872,4016555; 612904,4016695; 613198,4016801; 
613349,4016887; 613426,4016961; 613551,4017247; 613574,4017598; 
613666,4017774; 613921,4017893; 614131,4018132; 614441,4018132; 
614554,4018208; 614737,4018259; 615012,4018206; 615190,4018072; 
615310,4018040; 615329,4017912; 615409,4017705; 615429,4017664; 
615508,4017610; 615985,4017571; 616026,4017571; 616123,4017631; 
616153,4017610; 616300,4017463; 616340,4017345; 616421,4017224; 
616429,4017144; 616304,4016940; 616254,4016812; 616135,4016696; 
616044,4016297; 615879,4016083; 615857,4015992; 615876,4015718; 
615853,4015622; 615696,4015504; 615510,4015239; 615494,4015109; 
615414,4014960; 615376,4014673; 615249,4014662; 615109,4014616; 
615036,4014560; 614950,4014399; 614781,4014347; 614752,4014291; 
614655,4014099; 614739,4014004; 614855,4013821; 614855,4013785; 
614785,4013714; 614438,4013524; 614323,4013384;

[[Page 104]]

614280,4013093; 614364,4012831; 614367,4012711; 614313,4012537; 
614173,4012413; 614090,4012181; 613737,4012003; 613631,4011981; 
613515,4012007; 613412,4011991; 613333,4011935; 613200,4011762; 
613020,4011699; 612955,4011506; 613025,4011319; 613058,4011125; 
613048,4011032; 613006,4010944; 613003,4010847; 613064,4010768; 
613313,4010708; 613515,4010494; 613581,4010470; 613645,4010394; 
613773,4010303; 613876,4010036; 613994,4009961; 614008,4009841; 
614125,4009767; 614153,4009680; 614331,4009440; 614483,4009353; 
614679,4009165; 614794,4009131; 614980,4009138; 615170,4009058; 
615209,4008838; 615240,4008803; 615637,4008698; 615852,4008576; 
615905,4008576; 615988,4008633; 616065,4008647; 616366,4008569; 
616490,4008477; 616550,4008474; 616643,4008518; 616821,4008290; 
617052,4008258; 617288,4008123; 618016,4008020; 618187,4007907; 
618327,4007851; 618375,4007850; 618482,4007931; 618583,4007951; 
618694,4007933; 619021,4007813; 619251,4007637; 619473,4007351; 
619646,4007177; 619758,4007001; 620061,4006831; 620156,4006669; 
620338,4006512; 620413,4006400; 620486,4006172; 620633,4005989; 
620556,4005825; 620401,4005636; 620082,4005388; 619827,4005255; 
619673,4005143; 619492,4005073; 619408,4004977; 619192,4004812; 
619116,4004691; 619165,4004312; 619270,4004107; 619333,4003893; 
619480,4003708; 619612,4003605; 619604,4003535; 619498,4003282; 
619617,4003037; 619574,4002927; 619548,4002555; 619466,4002366; 
619346,4002426; 619301,4002388; 619256,4002458; 619199,4002467; 
619208,4002531; 619282,4002593; 619267,4002635; 619217,4002647; 
619198,4002739; 619109,4002901; 618952,4002935; 618919,4002976; 
618923,4003038; 618883,4003081; 618585,4003204; 618524,4003175; 
618473,4003204; 618458,4003164; 618419,4003171; 618409,4003273; 
618358,4003318; 618351,4003365; 618312,4003369; 618278,4003329; 
618130,4003391; 618119,4003452; 618077,4003432; 618052,4003445; 
618039,4003506; 617967,4003578; 617892,4003603; 617837,4003691; 
617799,4003657; 617746,4003672; 617684,4003813; 617650,4003825; 
617569,4003753; 617528,4003753; 617488,4003792; 617476,4003879; 
617440,4003914; 617481,4003970; 617400,4004012; 617351,4004091; 
617297,4004096; 617274,4004180; 617244,4004160; 617263,4004053; 
617209,4004022; 617118,4004104; 617154,4004182; 617036,4004132; 
616954,4004221; 616910,4004342; 616933,4004372; 616934,4004461; 
616899,4004509; 616801,4004553; 616757,4004834; 616613,4004966; 
616572,4004981; 616539,4004948; 616521,4004987; 616543,4005024; 
616395,4005136; 616313,4005236; 616250,4005262; 616164,4005252; 
616219,4005329; 616183,4005349; 616175,4005470; 616117,4005578; 
616031,4005680; 615882,4005765; 615807,4005864; 615646,4005878; 
615577,4005977; 615499,4005993; 615495,4006036; 615528,4006041; 
615527,4006111; 615397,4006326; 615291,4006407; 615094,4006495; 
614997,4006583; 614689,4006742; 614392,4006843; 614356,4006848; 
614339,4006820; 614287,4006839; 614153,4006939; 614079,4007089; 
613956,4007187; 613801,4007223; 613765,4007211; 613596,4007282; 
613563,4007255; 613516,4007290; 613408,4007318; 613414,4007343; 
613314,4007439; 613323,4007520; 613248,4007644; 613160,4007717; 
612929,4007815; 612830,4007917; 612699,4008005; 612517,4008037; 
612471,4008066; 612410,4008024; 612385,4008031; 612390,4008062; 
612230,4008014; 612140,4008043; 612046,4008042; 612044,4008081; 
611984,4008101; 611910,4008207; 611844,4008224; 611858,4008256; 
611804,4008355; 611700,4008471; 611484,4008596; 611348,4008752; 
611225,4008800; 611166,4008891; 611047,4008924; 610973,4009055; 
610717,4009215; 610670,4009206; 610683,4009244; 610504,4009385; 
610321,4009432; 610175,4009532; 610133,4009493; 610081,4009514; 
610057,4009484; 610050,4009526; 610102,4009568; 610088,4009618; 
610031,4009671;609575,4009924; 609424,4009932; 609408,4009906; 
609370,4009902; 609297,4009953; 609174,4009944; 609118,4009982; 
609022,4009959; 609029,4010046; 608990,4010126; 608885,4010197; 
608720,4010216; 608718,4010302; 608597,4010401; 608480,4010412; 
608380,4010458; 608252,4010459; 608265,4010532; 608101,4010614; 
607847,4010675; 607718,4010660; 607324,4010462; 607203,4010448; 
607076,4010466; 607001,4010533; 606910,4010549; 606842,4010488; 
606830,4010541; 606818,4010510; 606792,4010571; 606722,4010574; 
606686,4010620; 606610,4010595; 606485,4010708; 606497,4010798; 
606473,4010807; 606463,4010861; 606491,4010869; 606512,4010925; 
606483,4011019; 606336,4011026; 606310,4011126; 606271,4011168; 
606185,4011210; 606122,4011205; 606073,4011354; 605882,4011402; 
605820,4011442; 605628,4011387; 605435,4011426; 605453,4011474; 
605308,4011669; 605314,4011753; 605282,4011836; 605138,4011994; 
604977,4012059; 604872,4012049; 604837,4012022; 604804,4012051; 
604809,4012107; 604683,4012161; 604635,4012238; 604589,4012266; 
604482,4012247; 604451,4012216; 604398,4012246; 604391,4012276; 
604584,4012327; 604612,4012386; 604570,4012775; 604476,4013033; 
604357,4013279; 604286,4013350; 604304,4013387; 604258,4013483; 
604156,4013597; 604133,4013722; 604086,4013832; 603972,4013977; 
603903,4014203; 603864,4014228; 603754,4014433; 603707,4014460; 
603698,4014498; 603666,4014502; 603687,4014552; 603673,4014633; 
603499,4014836; 603468,4014932; 603397,4015021; 603248,4015117; 
603138,4015361; 602995,4015419; 602937,4015544; 602866,4015567; 
602853,4015600; 602674,4015694; 602465,4015733; 602395,4015703; 
602420,4015744; 602545,4015778; 602566,4015839; 602507,4015784; 
602394,4015763; 602368,4015684; 602435,4015640; 602408,4015582; 
602283,4015671; 602108,4015686; 602012,4015882; 601790,4016158; 
601455,4016413; 601264,4016523; 601061,4016582; 600966,4016727; 
600883,4016754; 600876,4016914; 600764,4017075; 600694,4017047; 
600675,4017077; 600546,4017115; 600450,4017280; 600435,4017240; 
600335,4017393; 600370,4017419; 600340,4017482; 600110,4017821; 
600058,4017958; 599977,4018034; 599745,4018155; 599436,4018220; 
599387,4018198; 599233,4018251; 599165,4018322; 599049,4018370; 
599010,4018359; 598950,4018198; 598797,4018110; 598779,4018158; 
598743,4018168; 598738,4018239; 598674,4018299; 598660,4018350; 
598611,4018343; 598596,4018387; 598527,4018449; 598527,4018598; 
598574,4018594; 598600,4018560; 598612,4018579; 598630,4018560; 
598664,4018576; 598793,4018542; 599175,4019469; 599234,4019748; 
599232,4019918; 599208,4019976; 599211,4020120; 599161,4020249; 
599161,4020348; 599099,4020396; 599148,4020437; 599194,4020626; 
599110,4020756; 599034,4020793; 599033,4020829; 599130,4020915; 
599188,4021043; 599275,4021431; 599569,4021331;

[[Page 105]]

599671,4021054; 599706,4020790; returning to 599824,4020540.
    (ii) Note: Unit MNT-3 for California red-legged frog is depicted on 
the map in paragraph (34)(ii) of this entry.
    (37) Unit SNB-1: San Benito County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 
scale quadrangles San Juan Bautista, Hollister, Mt. Harlan, Tres Pinos 
and Pacines.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 635964,4075794; 636333,4075764; 636809,4075566; 637368,4075520; 
637770,4075623; 638436,4075288; 639151,4074594; 639270,4074217; 
639547,4073979; 640024,4073740; 640877,4073582; 641790,4073621; 
642345,4072947; 642286,4072173; 642484,4071954; 642762,4071855; 
643099,4071915; 643635,4071756; 644786,4072133; 645168,4072165; 
645182,4072089; 645215,4072050; 645297,4072025; 645689,4072165; 
645970,4072109; 646564,4072409; 646718,4072467; 646868,4072460; 
646951,4072481; 647085,4072584; 647187,4072702; 647313,4072739; 
648149,4072394; 648592,4072283; 648891,4072233; 649177,4072132; 
649265,4072094; 649320,4072027; 649574,4072372; 649804,4072538; 
649950,4072309; 650247,4072695; 650886,4072656; 651305,4072378; 
651525,4072011; 651845,4071771; 652028,4071278; 652022,4070800; 
651786,4070356; 651865,4070144; 651782,4070129; 652109,4069671; 
652194,4069177; 652486,4069355; 652823,4069355; 653041,4069196; 
652962,4068740; 653765,4068035; 653589,4067442; 653597,4067238; 
653815,4066736; 653668,4066229; 653679,4065476; 653994,4063632; 
652942,4063283; 653031,4062765; 653530,4062965; 653541,4062532; 
653207,4062386; 653110,4062128; 653103,4061717; 652942,4061338; 
653312,4061251; 653249,4060324; 653353,4060150; 653604,4060053; 
653896,4059774; 654593,4058960; 654628,4058800; 654725,4058716; 
655240,4058549; 655507,4058397; 655372,4058208; 655192,4058144; 
654903,4058122; 654808,4058074; 654771,4058036; 654773,4057912; 
654719,4057732; 654495,4057373; 654408,4057408; 654191,4057584; 
654109,4057612; 653950,4057808; 653623,4057838; 653469,4057893; 
653343,4057879; 652921,4058001; 652855,4058037; 652805,4058100; 
652756,4058251; 652559,4058403; 652489,4058406; 652398,4058455; 
652215,4058434; 652118,4058516; 652009,4058520; 651772,4058471; 
651708,4058559; 651512,4058709; 651442,4058801; 651354,4058847; 
651244,4058860; 651121,4058794; 650965,4058759; 650906,4058835; 
650871,4058956; 650779,4058975; 650548,4058948; 650439,4058814; 
650333,4058793; 650227,4058820; 649962,4058666; 649849,4058672; 
649713,4058741; 649644,4058825; 649655,4058975; 649636,4059012; 
649490,4059171; 649577,4059272; 649600,4059590; 649670,4059721; 
649688,4059816; 649698,4060285; 649822,4060420; 649874,4060527; 
649860,4060682; 649961,4060946; 649961,4061111; 650024,4061281; 
649952,4061533; 650024,4061641; 650089,4061931; 649996,4062080; 
649966,4062184; 649831,4062318; 649807,4062398; 649832,4062527; 
649811,4062612; 649655,4062746; 649590,4062864; 649599,4062910; 
649922,4063061; 649992,4063123; 649750,4063250; 649827,4063402; 
649827,4063977; 649132,4064573; 648418,4064893; 648368,4065024; 
648317,4065022; 648117,4065116; 648001,4065215; 647583,4065483; 
647454,4065430; 647394,4065447; 647285,4065554; 647116,4065618; 
646912,4065745; 646608,4065846; 646285,4066090; 645890,4066269; 
645802,4066404; 645728,4066467; 645205,4066564; 645059,4066674; 
644800,4066725; 644714,4066864; 644542,4066904; 644324,4067042; 
644165,4067088; 644110,4067045; 643674,4067190; 643421,4067144; 
643165,4067133; 642961,4067068; 642635,4067037; 642422,4066906; 
642330,4066899; 642247,4066922; 642010,4067039; 641735,4067265; 
641420,4067377; 641253,4067521; 641226,4067664; 640958,4067776; 
640877,4067786; 640729,4067743; 640417,4067543; 640304,4067596; 
640247,4067603; 640191,4067576; 640033,4067428; 639981,4067234; 
639935,4067174; 639865,4067138; 639778,4067110; 639705,4067121; 
639549,4067218; 639471,4067237; 639342,4067194; 639081,4067022; 
638984,4066910; 638921,4066756; 638947,4066568; 638881,4066391; 
638891,4066275; 638850,4066215; 638511,4066154; 638256,4066043; 
638012,4066018; 637966,4066036; 637979,4066180; 637766,4066284; 
637719,4066357; 637576,4066468; 637525,4066563; 637527,4066631; 
637723,4066757; 637471,4066841; 637448,4066886; 637469,4067042; 
637440,4067180; 637470,4067249; 637302,4067389; 637268,4067461; 
637261,4067559; 637113,4067596; 637001,4067532; 636959,4067533; 
636925,4067569; 636870,4067747; 636753,4067684; 636659,4067737; 
636425,4067735; 636317,4067811; 636291,4067957; 636197,4068139; 
636158,4068159; 636073,4068136; 635961,4068564; 635992,4068667; 
636093,4068804; 636145,4068950; 636128,4069061; 636102,4069118; 
636022,4069185; 635904,4069401; 635755,4069435; 635690,4069477; 
635678,4069594; 635583,4069708; 635592,4069830; 635531,4069880; 
635662,4070360; 635762,4070572; 635979,4070786; 635805,4070815; 
635638,4070940; 635518,4071208; 635534,4071479; 635648,4071712; 
635628,4072017; 635727,4072560; 635705,4073010; 635815,4073223; 
635999,4073422; 636117,4073620; 636042,4073785; 635831,4073954; 
635602,4074066; 635336,4074121; 634457,4074523; 633815,4074869; 
633538,4074975; 633367,4075131; 633270,4075185; 633260,4075316; 
633189,4075401; 633021,4075473; 632885,4075595; 632764,4075650; 
632775,4075748; 632735,4075795; 633860,4075970; 634467,4075645; 
634857,4075991; returning to 635964,4075794.
    (ii) Note: Map of Units SNB-1, SNB-2, and SNB-3 for the California 
red-legged frog follows:

[[Page 106]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17MR10.020

    (38) Unit SNB-2: San Benito County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 
scale quadrangles Cherry Peak, Panoche Pass, San Benito and Cerro 
Colorado.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 676029,4062601; 676230,4062578; 676483,4062490; 676510,4062448; 
676554,4062204; 676704,4061886;

[[Page 107]]

676692,4061546; 676790,4061442; 676820,4061061; 676804,4060981; 
676862,4060922; 676974,4060952; 677119,4061055; 677323,4061004; 
677447,4061014; 677774,4061125; 677852,4061182; 678022,4061438; 
678008,4061572; 677919,4061760; 677918,4061809; 677972,4061873; 
678139,4061952; 678262,4061930; 678408,4061970; 678512,4061969; 
678766,4061884; 679155,4061826; 679258,4061780; 679420,4061646; 
679485,4061625; 679889,4061630; 680240,4061551; 680325,4061484; 
680444,4061474; 680422,4061242; 680338,4061037; 680335,4060777; 
680268,4060568; 680276,4060473; 680347,4060282; 680344,4060098; 
680278,4059853; 680117,4059594; 680160,4059059; 680016,4058815; 
679949,4058582; 679944,4058267; 679972,4058198; 680064,4058089; 
679986,4057901; 679769,4057775; 679691,4057687; 679627,4057447; 
679640,4057235; 679455,4056952; 679404,4056741; 679241,4056434; 
679254,4056369; 679417,4056236; 679456,4056006; 679273,4055833; 
679122,4055575; 679023,4055587; 678850,4055678; 678685,4055607; 
678587,4055601; 678445,4055503; 678383,4055500; 678173,4055561; 
678035,4055573; 677873,4055670; 677800,4055642; 677692,4055517; 
677375,4055399; 677213,4055301; 677058,4055273; 677034,4055411; 
677123,4055589; 677082,4055816; 677080,4055937; 677128,4056087; 
677110,4056228; 677021,4056448; 676918,4056569; 676645,4056729; 
676541,4056588; 676603,4056341; 676570,4056235; 676487,4056162; 
676356,4056126; 676047,4055850; 675931,4055727; 675857,4055548; 
675714,4055436; 675690,4055386; 675698,4055277; 675758,4055161; 
675723,4054930; 675770,4054773; 675766,4054697; 675169,4054557; 
675036,4054641; 674682,4054689; 674510,4054761; 674416,4054839; 
674252,4054834; 674085,4054870; 673922,4054945; 673772,4054946; 
673664,4054828; 673621,4054810; 673503,4054822; 673276,4054751; 
673053,4054732; 673005,4054709; 672759,4054349; 672728,4054251; 
672763,4053963; 672594,4054069; 672241,4054145; 672092,4054148; 
671925,4054184; 671643,4054153; 671402,4054228; 671332,4054433; 
671105,4054658; 671026,4054901; 670928,4055057; 670847,4055121; 
670721,4055533; 670663,4055653; 670482,4055860; 670445,4056154; 
670393,4056277; 670502,4056463; 670493,4056600; 670462,4056643; 
670249,4056743; 670126,4056907; 670109,4056970; 670131,4057085; 
670107,4057225; 670068,4057295; 670019,4057322; 669844,4057338; 
669602,4057302; 669506,4057253; 669459,4057264; 669389,4057380; 
669177,4057496; 668976,4057461; 668834,4057516; 668659,4057467; 
668447,4057459; 668086,4057206; 667912,4057169; 667789,4057106; 
667618,4057125; 667416,4057334; 667469,4057389; 667516,4057510; 
667542,4057751; 667499,4057953; 667312,4058286; 667287,4058459; 
667323,4058648; 667507,4058762; 667531,4058809; 667486,4058914; 
667298,4059118; 667285,4059361; 667327,4059662; 667320,4059715; 
667248,4059838; 667276,4060161; 667420,4060361; 667588,4059980; 
667749,4059922; 667984,4059900; 668141,4059803; 668305,4059585; 
668442,4059453; 668427,4059331; 668450,4059302; 668559,4059267; 
668726,4059286; 669161,4059410; 669258,4059375; 669320,4059286; 
669377,4059247; 669746,4059144; 670294,4059563; 670453,4059748; 
670531,4059889; 670773,4060050; 670815,4060223; 670881,4060249; 
670961,4060245; 671185,4060195; 671331,4060210; 671460,4060163; 
671547,4060207; 671576,4060307; 671940,4060616; 671995,4060719; 
672085,4060743; 672152,4060888; 672221,4060958; 672258,4061070; 
672099,4061294; 672094,4061394; 672125,4061545; 672046,4061649; 
671976,4061960; 672066,4062276; 672210,4062447; 672317,4062472; 
672421,4062400; 672612,4062462; 672694,4062576; 672743,4062612; 
672792,4062606; 672999,4062387; 673187,4062313; 673395,4062325; 
673460,4062242; 673677,4062114; 673786,4062217; 673794,4062345; 
673763,4062494; 673843,4062570; 674152,4062720; 674205,4062627; 
674437,4062581; 674638,4062578; 674766,4062660; 675068,4063046; 
675164,4063105; 675321,4063155; 675373,4063154; 675452,4062990; 
675541,4062940; 675616,4062860; 675844,4062782; 675926,4062673; 
returning to 676029,4062601.
    (ii) Note: Unit SNB-2 for California red-legged frog is depicted on 
the map in paragraph (37)(ii) of this entry.
    (39) Unit SNB-3: San Benito and Monterey Counties, California. From 
USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles Mount Johnson, Bickmore Canyon, North 
Chalone Peak, San Benito and Topo Valley.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 667961,4051790; 668106,4051812; 668286,4051788; 668405,4051734; 
668529,4051611; 668730,4051545; 668794,4051501; 668881,4051383; 
669289,4051134; 669464,4050957; 669575,4050880; 669623,4050812; 
669742,4050747; 670106,4050415; 670363,4050329; 670573,4050143; 
670845,4050005; 670906,4049872; 670752,4049571; 670742,4049485; 
670673,4049309; 670676,4049267; 670761,4049165; 670856,4048941; 
670931,4048872; 671080,4048830; 671193,4048831; 671345,4048914; 
671408,4048916; 671785,4048650; 671892,4048493; 671889,4048376; 
671989,4048203; 671980,4048026; 672031,4047891; 672069,4047870; 
672119,4047880; 672582,4048045; 672695,4048107; 672752,4048122; 
672795,4048106; 672960,4047995; 673123,4047927; 673288,4047775; 
673445,4047669; 674242,4047306; 674399,4047188; 674466,4047097; 
675044,4046732; 675311,4046480; 675502,4046420; 675673,4046166; 
675794,4046074; 675874,4045960; 676119,4045781; 676078,4045736; 
676029,4045554; 675891,4045303; 675802,4045226; 675588,4045108; 
675460,4044844; 675366,4044549; 675429,4044427; 675420,4044259; 
675510,4044072; 675702,4043860; 675873,4043724; 676022,4043469; 
676125,4043365; 676186,4042894; 676150,4042557; 676179,4042466; 
676326,4042244; 676460,4042121; 676516,4041635; 676478,4041577; 
676340,4041478; 676285,4041379; 676314,4041108; 676367,4040942; 
676327,4040655; 676328,4040487; 676353,4040393; 676427,4040314; 
676424,4040257; 676276,4040145; 676166,4040095; 676151,4040034; 
676153,4039774; 676245,4039545; 676371,4039361; 676379,4039310; 
676343,4039253; 676176,4039111; 675991,4038844; 675900,4038970; 
675749,4039119; 675660,4039176; 675588,4039194; 675558,4039176; 
675289,4038881; 675003,4038721; 674969,4038682; 674974,4038537; 
675065,4038307; 675059,4038204; 675025,4038154; 674866,4038054; 
674741,4037929; 674550,4037791; 674388,4037719; 674240,4037693; 
673997,4037470; 673695,4037422; 673521,4037324; 673336,4037169; 
673138,4037115; 673030,4037113; 672780,4037264; 672552,4037674; 
672401,4037820; 672208,4038098; 672058,4038263; 671998,4038293; 
671947,4038274; 671879,4038120; 671724,4038008; 671635,4038205; 
671507,4038385;

[[Page 108]]

671357,4038342; 671187,4038241; 671074,4038139; 670967,4037982; 
670793,4037860; 670598,4037653; 670434,4037429; 670240,4037291; 
669864,4036914; 669527,4036650; 669388,4036434; 669214,4036273; 
669160,4036025; 669126,4035957; 669075,4035923; 668981,4035746; 
668756,4035520; 668595,4035459; 668527,4034981; 668439,4034908; 
668297,4034707; 668190,4034629; 668124,4034500; 668278,4034256; 
668253,4034044; 668222,4034002; 668061,4033952; 667958,4033874; 
667828,4033860; 667711,4033876; 667681,4033845; 667654,4033718; 
667713,4033572; 667720,4033441; 667556,4033219; 667480,4032952; 
667442,4032910; 667271,4032863; 666975,4032619; 666832,4032603; 
666753,4032494; 666585,4032485; 666436,4032574; 666092,4032562; 
665986,4032580; 665680,4032536; 665616,4032553; 665554,4032611; 
665469,4032750; 665427,4032772; 665393,4032867; 665368,4033081; 
665321,4033199; 665298,4033401; 665178,4033485; 665064,4033647; 
665003,4033697; 664800,4033749; 664632,4033710; 664319,4033689; 
664236,4033713; 664161,4033806; 664107,4033810; 663652,4033789; 
663442,4033723; 663280,4033713; 662986,4033790; 662763,4033807; 
662623,4033932; 662588,4034146; 662267,4034294; 662008,4034306; 
661907,4034272; 661793,4034199; 661746,4034200; 661709,4034260; 
661635,4034658; 661707,4035056; 661690,4035158; 661489,4035541; 
661526,4035890; 661410,4036077; 661231,4036171; 661106,4036282; 
661052,4036373; 660950,4036471; 660867,4036645; 660789,4036744; 
660478,4036933; 660395,4037013; 660261,4037211; 660210,4037355; 
660078,4037516; 659899,4037938; 659754,4038008; 659614,4037855; 
659565,4037841; 659456,4037977; 659296,4037977; 659230,4037948; 
659203,4037845; 659161,4037789; 659105,4037775; 659061,4037796; 
658987,4037768; 658814,4037927; 658769,4038012; 658630,4038115; 
658571,4038395; 658530,4038479; 658551,4038517; 658629,4038552; 
658747,4038697; 658748,4038725; 658654,4038859; 658706,4038991; 
658729,4039162; 658517,4039362; 658454,4039570; 658338,4039634; 
658341,4039702; 658468,4039922; 658467,4039964; 658286,4040094; 
658266,4040188; 658156,4040398; 657990,4040522; 657915,4040617; 
657806,4040906; 657749,4040980; 657659,4041366; 657498,4041432; 
657311,4041415; 657159,4041562; 657073,4041538; 656954,4041583; 
656933,4041519; 656788,4041430; 656756,4041317; 656595,4041436; 
656536,4041444; 656265,4041221; 656119,4041302; 655915,4041325; 
655751,4041245; 655570,4041203; 655490,4041252; 655421,4041245; 
655350,4041209; 655279,4041109; 655204,4041057; 655129,4041067; 
655042,4041034; 654801,4041055; 654747,4041137; 654588,4041162; 
654420,4041156; 654326,4041093; 654140,4041047; 653783,4041106; 
653659,4041227; 653588,4041406; 653456,4041371; 653389,4041304; 
653238,4041382; 653052,4041368; 652959,4041442; 652759,4041452; 
652563,4041309; 652515,4041200; 652379,4041252; 652239,4041389; 
652098,4041367; 652045,4041307; 652007,4041186; 651862,4041108; 
651839,4041009; 651675,4040963; 651545,4040697; 651499,4040667; 
651424,4040706; 651386,4040820; 651287,4040863; 651262,4040899; 
651194,4041019; 651161,4041252; 651205,4041323; 651353,4041394; 
651348,4041464; 651267,4041680; 651299,4041804; 651392,4041812; 
651482,4041906; 651498,4041967; 651608,4042074; 651602,4042262; 
651554,4042334; 651548,4042498; 651580,4042610; 651823,4042693; 
651912,4042762; 651924,4042796; 651879,4042853; 651950,4043006; 
652047,4043116; 652160,4043159; 652147,4043248; 652167,4043283; 
652328,4043355; 652421,4043430; 652463,4043510; 652463,4043625; 
652504,4043690; 652593,4043756; 652540,4044007; 652443,4044098; 
652501,4044186; 652448,4044367; 652864,4044432; 653134,4044389; 
653613,4044440; 653910,4044555; 654260,4044754; 654396,4044748; 
654472,4044774; 654568,4044864; 654632,4044871; 654666,4044900; 
654692,4045074; 654774,4045161; 655117,4045283; 655019,4045442; 
655012,4045625; 654950,4045852; 655027,4046199; 655145,4046256; 
655177,4046306; 655164,4046576; 655277,4046794; 655223,4047256; 
655236,4047279; 655479,4047444; 655594,4047473; 655745,4047425; 
655941,4047572; 656406,4047728; 656477,4047732; 656585,4047830; 
656675,4047974; 656781,4048017; 656933,4048176; 657046,4048165; 
657124,4048205; 657266,4048487; 657297,4048510; 657605,4048503; 
657703,4048554; 657707,4048650; 657791,4048739; 657956,4048770; 
658173,4048741; 658299,4048822; 658374,4048847; 658461,4048840; 
658653,4048961; 658762,4049086; 659023,4049113; 659286,4049021; 
659600,4049040; 659677,4048990; 659823,4049043; 660116,4048831; 
660244,4048828; 660318,4048878; 660427,4048890; 660688,4048763; 
660742,4048645; 660913,4048582; 661149,4048433; 661265,4048292; 
661560,4048228; 661690,4048291; 661863,4048334; 662393,4048927; 
662507,4049019; 662618,4049053; 662957,4048782; 663147,4048419; 
663401,4048230; 663534,4048164; 663696,4048213; 663818,4048193; 
663858,4048175; 664064,4047958; 664212,4048004; 664340,4048005; 
664593,4047746; 664625,4047777; 664762,4047778; 664912,4047853; 
664944,4047844; 665193,4047538; 665285,4047462; 665348,4047445; 
666403,4046360; 666738,4046119; 666885,4045932; 667099,4045921; 
667285,4046172; 667291,4046459; 667382,4046613; 667424,4046795; 
667398,4046955; 667437,4047135; 667424,4047203; 667362,4047288; 
667241,4047378; 667202,4047480; 667108,4047580; 667078,4047635; 
667081,4047810; 666953,4047917; 666899,4048099; 666774,4048291; 
666864,4048549; 666830,4048677; 666846,4048727; 667077,4049080; 
666957,4049470; 666936,4049730; 666331,4050181; 666286,4050223; 
666217,4050378; 665899,4050557; 665885,4050586; 666238,4050687; 
666655,4050936; 666764,4051033; 666857,4051048; 666893,4051082; 
666963,4051260; 667016,4051308; 667105,4051351; 667240,4051372; 
667340,4051578; 667492,4051738; 667615,4051971; 667711,4051907; 
667868,4051881; returning to 667961,4051790.
    (ii) Note: Unit SNB-3 for California red-legged frog is depicted on 
the map in paragraph (37)(ii) of this entry.
    (40) Unit SLO-1: San Luis Obispo, Kings and Kern Counties, 
California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles Cholame Valley, Tent 
Hills, Cholame and Orchard Peak.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 752130,3963634; 752268,3963595; 752394,3963470; 752407,3963405; 
752337,3963122; 752346,3963062; 752406,3962984; 752361,3962832; 
752393,3962782; 752588,3962626; 752678,3962626; 752775,3962577; 
752826,3962473; 753072,3962276; 753155,3962031; 753511,3961661; 
753685,3961512; 753754,3961493; 753848,3961519; 753876,3961497; 
753898,3961262; 753879,3961211; 753853,3961149; 753726,3961118;

[[Page 109]]

753700,3960932; 753593,3960808; 753587,3960682; 753454,3960429; 
753346,3960103; 753157,3960041; 753037,3960096; 752873,3959964; 
752717,3959922; 752584,3959853; 752489,3959848; 752439,3959886; 
752549,3959740; 752561,3959656; 752616,3959569; 752602,3959458; 
752635,3959370; 752581,3959240; 752629,3959088; 752625,3959024; 
752693,3958918; 752698,3958821; 752928,3958591; 753081,3958496; 
753277,3958434; 753384,3958236; 753360,3958091; 753139,3957977; 
753211,3957846; 753347,3957726; 753383,3957376; 753949,3957107; 
755936,3955917; 756434,3955534; 756685,3955378; 756712,3955383; 
756860,3954963; 756937,3954849; 757346,3954534; 757615,3954384; 
757806,3954309; 757985,3954183; 758132,3953974; 758226,3953688; 
758154,3953752; 758023,3953773; 757146,3954055; 757020,3954142; 
756930,3954253; 756863,3954257; 756530,3954175; 756254,3954059; 
755887,3954387; 755715,3954502; 755657,3954494; 755540,3954425; 
755295,3954246; 755281,3954215; 755299,3954110; 755212,3953999; 
755084,3953943; 755014,3953871; 755256,3953644; 755340,3953499; 
755434,3953418; 755534,3953372; 755679,3953185; 755837,3953057; 
755884,3952815; 755772,3952588; 755918,3952622; 756007,3952600; 
756033,3952551; 756006,3952390; 755863,3952018; 755696,3951981; 
755458,3951873; 755424,3951773; 755432,3951733; 755511,3951644; 
755507,3951608; 755206,3951465; 755086,3951288; 754952,3951245; 
754878,3951181; 754722,3950867; 754612,3950785; 754424,3950851; 
754358,3950847; 754245,3950810; 754180,3950747; 754222,3950590; 
754207,3950531; 754044,3950337; 753934,3950258; 753718,3949714; 
753969,3949413; 753904,3949255; 753850,3949020; 753846,3948668; 
753755,3948743; 753685,3949000; 753637,3949080; 753377,3949285; 
753232,3949478; 753036,3949656; 752666,3949923; 752612,3950029; 
752412,3950170; 752330,3950365; 752195,3950371; 751985,3950664; 
751801,3950759; 751769,3950792; 751748,3950875; 751675,3950945; 
751532,3951019; 751423,3951002; 751375,3951021; 751199,3951131; 
750972,3951432; 750879,3951603; 750606,3951894; 750465,3952104; 
750385,3952171; 750314,3952193; 750202,3952182; 750202,3952580; 
750094,3953028; 750327,3954015; 750668,3954626; 750740,3954967; 
750709,3955975; 750585,3956208; 750547,3956245; 750410,3956292; 
750382,3956351; 750422,3956497; 750315,3956542; 750164,3956674; 
749890,3956809; 749604,3957047; 749026,3957063; 748897,3957025; 
748668,3957036; 748483,3957205; 748346,3957421; 748265,3957501; 
748201,3957526; 748118,3957507; 748014,3957446; 747903,3957443; 
747729,3957588; 747410,3957621; 747147,3957833; 746949,3957941; 
746986,3958051; 746980,3958196; 746943,3958354; 746766,3958660; 
746756,3958787; 746857,3959111; 746903,3959687; 746844,3959774; 
746602,3959975; 746502,3960162; 746447,3960491; 746249,3960832; 
746115,3960992; 746275,3961146; 746729,3961287; 746987,3961257; 
747111,3961191; 747168,3961212; 747252,3961334; 747283,3961583; 
747374,3961734; 747443,3961733; 747595,3961650; 747697,3961709; 
747736,3961849; 747796,3961925; 747782,3962015; 747859,3962354; 
747907,3962505; 747966,3962593; 748060,3962654; 748175,3962794; 
748290,3962869; 748518,3963103; 748689,3963150; 748922,3963160; 
749031,3963210; 749087,3963366; 749147,3963426; 749271,3963424; 
749423,3963311; 749527,3963293; 749691,3963318; 749781,3963239; 
749819,3963084; 749862,3963037; 750137,3963026; 750160,3963114; 
750272,3963206; 750339,3963349; 750548,3963470; 750677,3963620; 
750913,3963709; 751032,3963973; 751112,3964028; 751238,3964071; 
751349,3964178; 751589,3964225; 751636,3964226; 751799,3964132; 
751942,3964094; 752044,3963957; 752125,3963905; 752170,3963839; 
752158,3963766; 752089,3963653; returning to 752130,3963634.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit SLO-1 for the California red-legged frog 
follows:

[[Page 110]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17MR10.021

    (41) Unit SLO-2: San Luis Obispo County, California. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangles San Simeon, Pico Creek, Pebblestone Shut-In, 
Cambria, Cypress Mountain and Cayucos.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N):

[[Page 111]]

667646,3942846; 667780,3942944; 667819,3942909; 667893,3942946; 
667863,3943128; 668006,3943148; 668053,3943117; 668518,3942425; 
668370,3942341; 669215,3941495; 669881,3942053; 669872,3943315; 
669526,3944081; 669634,3944182; 669652,3944280; 669742,3944335; 
669742,3944420; 669809,3944552; 669930,3944597; 669960,3944696; 
670083,3944774; 670218,3944786; 670393,3944860; 670453,3944967; 
670457,3944943; 670864,3944950; 670962,3944935; 671010,3944900; 
671119,3944931; 671156,3944924; 671248,3944833; 671398,3944889; 
671471,3944841; 671517,3944846; 671585,3944915; 671564,3944989; 
671863,3944992; 671926,3945102; 671935,3945574; 671795,3945579; 
671863,3945651; 671914,3945929; 671994,3946030; 672170,3946174; 
672407,3946184; 672634,3946417; 672754,3946748; 672983,3946940; 
673302,3947046; 673390,3947116; 674383,3947130; 674368,3947933; 
674770,3947939; 674755,3948747; 675161,3948754; 675154,3949156; 
675557,3949162; 675547,3949793; 675716,3949733; 675929,3949731; 
676107,3949680; 676264,3949546; 676384,3949387; 676641,3949239; 
676920,3949105; 677085,3949101; 677246,3949054; 677774,3948548; 
678045,3948421; 678198,3948303; 678424,3948060; 678776,3947744; 
679198,3947097; 679425,3946821; 679719,3946541; 679998,3946410; 
680162,3946414; 680440,3946355; 680848,3946366; 681036,3946274; 
681110,3946171; 681176,3946148; 681255,3946047; 681483,3945941; 
681617,3945812; 681774,3945712; 682301,3945669; 682404,3945544; 
682485,3945352; 682594,3945305; 682741,3945347; 682828,3945335; 
682925,3945202; 683053,3945148; 683095,3945105; 683234,3944890; 
683445,3944697; 683489,3944598; 683500,3944452; 683567,3944323; 
683585,3944107; 683800,3943846; 683934,3943771; 684122,3943864; 
684202,3943874; 684274,3943851; 684457,3943743; 684701,3943500; 
684801,3943497; 685090,3943246; 685088,3943113; 685046,3942988; 
684948,3942884; 684956,3942767; 684848,3942549; 684840,3942395; 
684873,3942269; 685216,3941891; 685287,3941688; 685471,3941484; 
685587,3941422; 685733,3941399; 685853,3941434; 685969,3941512; 
686151,3941583; 686223,3941529; 686533,3941409; 686636,3941331; 
686802,3941090; 687236,3940889; 687315,3940894; 687428,3940823; 
687576,3940777; 687624,3940682; 687613,3940492; 687772,3940210; 
687840,3939947; 688070,3939786; 688189,3939735; 688285,3939635; 
688507,3939593; 688798,3939579; 688909,3939512; 689130,3939463; 
689331,3939296; 689208,3939134; 689189,3938977; 689225,3938928; 
689500,3938800; 689593,3938724; 689632,3938551; 689727,3938412; 
689679,3938240; 689716,3938046; 689827,3937892; 689706,3937633; 
689618,3937503; 689608,3937407; 689459,3937318; 689358,3937136; 
689358,3937054; 689634,3936745; 689809,3936437; 690208,3935936; 
690246,3935844; 690498,3935624; 690590,3935513; 690748,3935450; 
690948,3935227; 690947,3934851; 690985,3934692; 691313,3934474; 
691375,3934470; 691512,3934531; 691637,3934527; 691696,3934422; 
691884,3934354; 691932,3934311; 691953,3934259; 691930,3934132; 
691959,3933965; 691989,3933928; 692105,3933917; 691911,3933481; 
691869,3933230; 691823,3933155; 691748,3933120; 691725,3933014; 
691543,3933011; 691149,3932867; 691002,3932752; 690868,3932586; 
690608,3932500; 690497,3932435; 690507,3932365; 690470,3932235; 
690493,3932016; 690433,3931813; 690433,3931677; 690399,3931557; 
690417,3931132; 690398,3931034; 690589,3930791; 690597,3930735; 
690595,3930398; 690626,3930270; 690571,3930159; 690613,3930029; 
690903,3929721; 691001,3929525; 691001,3929385; 691063,3929251; 
691105,3929212; 691363,3929098; 691606,3928512; 691844,3928446; 
691932,3928389; 691966,3928305; 692014,3927978; 692239,3927802; 
692395,3927729; 692486,3927572; 692486,3926967; 692399,3926751; 
692383,3926553; 692259,3926451; 692060,3926416; 691982,3926360; 
691807,3926130; 691720,3925873; 691681,3925827; 691537,3925756; 
691491,3925684; 691390,3924961; 691332,3924856; 691374,3924594; 
691381,3924344; 691143,3924531; 690940,3924652; 690790,3924810; 
690458,3925284; 690323,3925359; 690022,3925367; 689691,3925239; 
689375,3925036; 689097,3924974; 689126,3924791; 689019,3924733; 
688888,3924725; 688853,3924693; 688863,3924655; 688826,3924610; 
688839,3924639; 688707,3924698; 688652,3924632; 688627,3924691; 
688591,3924693; 688470,3924653; 688437,3924678; 688344,3924674; 
688317,3924624; 688020,3924640; 687910,3924700; 687792,3924675; 
687755,3924635; 687504,3924631; 687512,3924662; 687469,3924670; 
687408,3924631; 687275,3924616; 687266,3924575; 687062,3924547; 
686928,3924461; 686830,3924563; 686793,3924552; 686803,3924603; 
686729,3924638; 686651,3924629; 686504,3924534; 686433,3924524; 
686262,3924559; 686114,3924639; 686082,3924626; 685979,3924655; 
685966,3924750; 685882,3924809; 685927,3924817; 685962,3924916; 
685944,3924982; 685913,3925004; 685936,3925049; 685874,3925129; 
685627,3925195; 685549,3925271; 685435,3925294; 685357,3925382; 
685298,3925413; 685255,3925408; 685254,3925383; 685127,3925389; 
685092,3925477; 685002,3925567; 684847,3925535; 684740,3925627; 
684724,3925682; 684649,3925703; 684596,3925751; 684568,3925817; 
684439,3925919; 684329,3925959; 684189,3925969; 684151,3925900; 
684080,3925921; 684023,3925867; 683971,3925896; 683753,3925894; 
683658,3925840; 683508,3925826; 683480,3925861; 683385,3925844; 
683368,3925933; 683329,3925972; 683202,3925966; 683173,3925945; 
683146,3925967; 683105,3925936; 683078,3925956; 683005,3925927; 
682926,3925935; 682757,3926019; 682701,3926082; 682593,3926134; 
682574,3926106; 682556,3926166; 682525,3926183; 682494,3926190; 
682447,3926158; 682443,3926201; 682388,3926185; 682339,3926212; 
682333,3926184; 682308,3926184; 682256,3926270; 682164,3926322; 
682048,3926300; 681961,3926211; 681922,3926128; 681729,3925966; 
681618,3925945; 681619,3925976; 681589,3925951; 681586,3926005; 
681550,3925992; 681545,3925962; 681524,3925983; 681441,3925955; 
681344,3926007; 681333,3925965; 681277,3925943; 681250,3925961; 
681212,3925935; 681160,3925985; 681137,3925968; 681081,3926018; 
681080,3926049; 681059,3926032; 681057,3926064; 681004,3926084; 
680949,3926189; 680899,3926206; 680886,3926187; 680874,3926228; 
680823,3926263; 680823,3926304; 680732,3926383; 680742,3926442; 
680699,3926463; 680664,3926604; 680614,3926648; 680608,3926728; 
680582,3926742; 680568,3926714; 680468,3926860; 680427,3926862; 
680440,3926921; 680347,3926986; 680329,3927058; 680348,3927085; 
680312,3927087; 680324,3927103; 680278,3927123; 680217,3927246; 
680164,3927280; 680139,3927256; 680118,3927291; 680068,3927306; 
680053,3927406; 679951,3927471; 679958,3927499; 679815,3927652; 
679790,3927731; 679768,3927746;

[[Page 112]]

679736,3927723; 679719,3927794; 679689,3927798; 679599,3927918; 
679574,3927871; 679561,3927889; 679547,3927871; 679499,3927986; 
679423,3928069; 679358,3928089; 679343,3928165; 679293,3928177; 
679264,3928230; 679289,3928261; 679268,3928343; 679297,3928351; 
679349,3928432; 679335,3928504; 679268,3928514; 679261,3928539; 
679195,3928546; 679139,3928584; 679095,3928576; 679072,3928541; 
679026,3928541; 678937,3928638; 678870,3928592; 678783,3928709; 
678804,3928724; 678793,3928791; 678688,3928860; 678671,3928847; 
678611,3929026; 678486,3929044; 678477,3929065; 678501,3929076; 
678494,3929103; 678462,3929107; 678465,3929157; 678421,3929167; 
678342,3929138; 678308,3929087; 678171,3929047; 678135,3929085; 
678108,3929061; 678081,3929142; 678027,3929164; 678032,3929236; 
677976,3929253; 677927,3929222; 677914,3929262; 677962,3929344; 
677947,3929336; 677934,3929423; 677966,3929495; 677951,3929541; 
677864,3929607; 677805,3929544; 677732,3929673; 677661,3929694; 
677656,3929717; 677593,3929708; 677582,3929750; 677539,3929739; 
677566,3929848; 677517,3929923; 677555,3929943; 677572,3929994; 
677533,3930042; 677484,3930015; 677485,3930082; 677426,3930027; 
677393,3930049; 677390,3930076; 677351,3930082; 677340,3930196; 
677297,3930183; 677275,3930246; 677159,3930291; 677164,3930449; 
677124,3930487; 677130,3930610; 677049,3930658; 676969,3930809; 
676780,3930823; 676733,3930897; 676666,3930890; 676603,3931056; 
676369,3931151; 676273,3931120; 676226,3931133; 676139,3931214; 
676074,3931235; 676014,3931303; 675912,3931345; 675893,3931401; 
675789,3931473; 675748,3931613; 675701,3931641; 675677,3931699; 
675656,3931801; 675597,3931859; 675502,3931880; 675480,3931931; 
675363,3932014; 675360,3932046; 675246,3932191; 675214,3932192; 
675196,3932230; 675127,3932235; 675021,3932380; 675047,3932452; 
674992,3932523; 674774,3932670; 674741,3932739; 674614,3932849; 
674557,3932941; 674556,3933068; 674426,3933140; 674388,3933222; 
674312,3933300; 674252,3933325; 674215,3933415; 674074,3933470; 
674017,3933643; 673973,3933674; 673887,3933684; 673772,3933870; 
673524,3933940; 673426,3934125; 673415,3934300; 673256,3934367; 
673210,3934426; 673092,3934461; 673037,3934503; 673002,3934608; 
672914,3934625; 672901,3934724; 672780,3934823; 672766,3934929; 
672668,3935079; 672502,3935173; 672436,3935455; 672359,3935521; 
672145,3935533; 672094,3935583; 672072,3935687; 671982,3935774; 
671968,3935833; 671866,3935941; 671881,3936108; 671754,3936229; 
671768,3936279; 671853,3936282; 671904,3936337; 671918,3936422; 
671895,3936500; 671863,3936515; 671887,3936545; 671867,3936600; 
671751,3936665; 671664,3936811; 671554,3936872; 671515,3936948; 
671527,3936969; 671491,3936996; 671505,3937047; 671443,3937112; 
671439,3937181; 671366,3937229; 671365,3937305; 671312,3937446; 
671173,3937620; 671105,3937942; 670971,3938146; 670989,3938188; 
670979,3938295; 670856,3938570; 670801,3938643; 670687,3938696; 
670634,3938799; 670573,3938781; 670528,3938853; 670535,3938897; 
670500,3938993; 670418,3939122; 670364,3939134; 670302,3939112; 
670284,3939140; 670245,3939120; 670198,3939180; 670164,3939368; 
670092,3939477; 670048,3939779; 669987,3939914; 669934,3939974; 
669930,3940082; 669798,3940427; 669537,3940805; 669275,3941045; 
669151,3941212; 669002,3941308; 668918,3941287; 668728,3941358; 
668632,3941415; 668524,3941591; 668291,3941647; 668210,3941770; 
668141,3941956; 668086,3942007; 668058,3942124; 667959,3942264; 
667883,3942458; returning to 667646,3942846.
    (ii) Note: Map of Units SLO-2, SLO-3, and SLO-4 for the California 
red-legged frog follows:

[[Page 113]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17MR10.022

    (42) Unit SLO-3: San Luis Obispo County, California. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangles Cayucos, York Mountain, Morro Bay North, 
Morro Bay South, Atascadero, San Luis Obispo, Santa Margarita, Lopez 
Mtn., Arroyo Grande NE, Santa Margarita Lake and Tar Spring Ridge.

[[Page 114]]

    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N):
    708480,3909559; 708441,3910955; 708953,3910998; 708951,3911126; 
709014,3911173; 709031,3911248; 709149,3911331; 709196,3911523; 
709379,3911869; 709720,3911825; 709690,3911905; 709706,3912082; 
709833,3912190; 709970,3912204; 710064,3912127; 710369,3911710; 
710470,3911835; 710784,3911745; 711191,3913933; 711878,3913934; 
711797,3914739; 712191,3914739; 712179,3915142; 711735,3915125; 
711736,3915563; 711304,3915547; 711301,3916366; 710414,3916357; 
710425,3915951; 710147,3915940; 710047,3915494; 710036,3916362; 
709640,3916335; 709639,3916723; 708842,3916668; 708873,3915470; 
708430,3915467; 708224,3914469; 708040,3914512; 706756,3911363; 
706360,3911808; 706227,3911922; 706084,3911995; 705844,3912068; 
705722,3911621; 705700,3911440; 705722,3911307; 705134,3911225; 
705096,3911346; 705495,3911457; 705535,3911575; 704722,3911846; 
704376,3911393; 704274,3911458; 703953,3910861; 703639,3911003; 
703480,3911034; 703382,3911091; 703163,3911297; 703032,3911484; 
702959,3911529; 702676,3911598; 702245,3911808; 702081,3911796; 
701929,3911752; 701839,3911772; 701727,3911897; 701655,3912079; 
701528,3912248; 701357,3912809; 701276,3912913; 701072,3912981; 
701034,3913017; 700904,3913017; 700792,3913073; 700488,3913155; 
700314,3913091; 700217,3913101; 700116,3913173; 699882,3913217; 
699835,3913247; 699721,3913403; 699336,3913304; 699129,3913322; 
699054,3913306; 699021,3913245; 699016,3913056; 698990,3912989; 
698913,3912885; 698739,3912799; 698225,3912640; 697879,3912645; 
697856,3912906; 697714,3913241; 697639,3913667; 697463,3914010; 
697354,3914345; 697145,3914487; 696811,3914604; 696660,3914964; 
696760,3915332; 696986,3915834; 696505,3915981; 696019,3916362; 
695814,3916551; 695600,3916847; 695394,3917201; 695295,3917588; 
695312,3917736; 695411,3917835; 695279,3919493; 694899,3919905; 
694734,3920136; 694668,3920318; 694420,3920565; 694255,3920582; 
694156,3920631; 693760,3920747; 693694,3920846; 693694,3921192; 
693595,3921324; 693397,3921423; 693034,3921704; 692886,3922084; 
692886,3922331; 692556,3922744; 692452,3922808; 692220,3923081; 
691953,3923266; 691735,3923774; 691714,3924444; 691730,3924609; 
691796,3924741; 692374,3924774; 692836,3924642; 693018,3924559; 
693133,3924757; 693265,3924873; 693265,3925087; 693496,3925467; 
693595,3925747; 693859,3926110; 693859,3926193; 693744,3926193; 
693678,3926077; 693414,3926143; 693414,3926342; 693562,3926540; 
693562,3926705; 693661,3926903; 693793,3927084; 693826,3927216; 
694056,3927463; 694099,3927483; 694020,3927619; 694019,3927738; 
694067,3927896; 694053,3927946; 693969,3928099; 693780,3928333; 
693734,3928506; 693843,3928738; 693802,3928968; 693816,3929091; 
693927,3929258; 694114,3929368; 694194,3929576; 694322,3929750; 
694327,3929777; 694266,3929869; 694296,3930070; 694246,3930584; 
694159,3930640; 694177,3930826; 694217,3931041; 694341,3931111; 
694484,3931101; 694554,3931166; 694482,3931458; 694589,3931548; 
694603,3931722; 694703,3931707; 694747,3931720; 694798,3931779; 
694834,3931782; 694942,3931688; 695135,3931627; 695402,3931814; 
695523,3931825; 695633,3931876; 695844,3932143; 695936,3932170; 
696026,3932152; 696092,3932066; 696135,3932049; 696282,3932083; 
696424,3932075; 696615,3931953; 696817,3931891; 696900,3932011; 
696918,3932132; 697057,3932241; 697387,3932375; 697480,3932369; 
697526,3932309; 697551,3932140; 697615,3932074; 697845,3931961; 
698044,3931962; 698191,3931901; 698375,3931774; 698514,3931744; 
698574,3931664; 698670,3931604; 698799,3931559; 698876,3931437; 
698884,3931292; 698962,3931265; 699068,3931089; 699170,3931010; 
699831,3930696; 699943,3930599; 700371,3930482; 700919,3930221; 
701143,3930162; 701600,3929922; 701747,3929883; 701884,3929680; 
701983,3929597; 701971,3929382; 702013,3929333; 702178,3929238; 
702242,3929124; 702361,3929011; 702467,3928991; 702571,3929001; 
702597,3928980; 702602,3928827; 702647,3928808; 702742,3928831; 
702831,3928812; 703038,3928640; 703191,3928594; 703283,3928632; 
703354,3928721; 703528,3928803; 703668,3928749; 703768,3928783; 
703842,3928751; 703959,3928631; 704182,3928558; 704620,3928592; 
704750,3928582; 705170,3928253; 705438,3928113; 705649,3927941; 
705804,3927729; 705971,3927586; 706777,3927329; 707148,3927150; 
707223,3927200; 707472,3927202; 707635,3926909; 707766,3926532; 
708005,3926362; 708346,3926329; 708628,3926423; 708831,3926689; 
709025,3926659; 709477,3926386; 709682,3926379; 709839,3926309; 
709890,3926133; 709871,3925716; 709903,3925585; 709960,3925472; 
710028,3925415; 710313,3925264; 710515,3925258; 710633,3925194; 
710877,3924934; 711040,3924873; 711223,3924880; 711562,3924974; 
711555,3922474; 711863,3922131; 711966,3922080; 712271,3922302; 
712493,3922380; 712815,3922394; 713109,3922340; 713722,3922339; 
714153,3922599; 714639,3922995; 714733,3923111; 714988,3922722; 
715536,3921353; 715565,3921060; 715643,3920678; 715927,3920248; 
715849,3919544; 716641,3917931; 718619,3919042; 718562,3919124; 
718547,3919198; 718681,3919575; 718668,3919654; 718624,3919708; 
718405,3919854; 718351,3920042; 718285,3919990; 718256,3919912; 
718218,3919883; 718135,3919906; 718091,3919972; 718098,3920082; 
718250,3920365; 718297,3920544; 718151,3920650; 718055,3920780; 
717989,3921009; 717841,3921343; 717700,3921810; 717618,3922169; 
717595,3922983; 717632,3923237; 717635,3923514; 717583,3923647; 
717426,3923886; 717304,3924311; 717151,3924640; 717307,3924635; 
717579,3924544; 717671,3924465; 717745,3924318; 717788,3924299; 
717966,3924252; 718153,3924236; 718271,3924345; 718521,3924211; 
718777,3923954; 718800,3923757; 718846,3923623; 719026,3923516; 
719142,3923488; 719132,3923307; 719500,3923114; 719591,3922829; 
719677,3922676; 719912,3922547; 719788,3922437; 719772,3922191; 
719517,3922138; 719184,3922112; 719146,3922046; 719145,3921917; 
719103,3921816; 719112,3921752; 719161,3921607; 719212,3921533; 
719290,3921182; 719428,3920885; 719817,3920442; 719938,3920210; 
720191,3919850; 720452,3919357; 720758,3918546; 720847,3918381; 
721019,3918136; 721329,3917763; 721851,3917236; 722148,3917189; 
722224,3917247; 722262,3917250; 722342,3917152; 722335,3917026; 
722469,3916881; 722639,3916799; 722746,3916774; 722908,3916673; 
722976,3916671; 723022,3916593; 722804,3916430; 722684,3916378; 
722296,3916403; 722210,3916383; 722157,3916329; 722004,3915966; 
722104,3915729; 722110,3915663; 722050,3915601; 721807,3915496; 
721609,3915336; 721768,3915128; 721889,3914914; 721932,3914745;

[[Page 115]]

721909,3914676; 721663,3914435; 721564,3914439; 721123,3914576; 
721075,3914497; 721068,3914361; 721169,3914080; 721170,3913922; 
721132,3913866; 720922,3913687; 720905,3913519; 720873,3913508; 
720586,3913645; 720534,3913636; 720417,3913512; 720345,3913368; 
720339,3913253; 720612,3913133; 720803,3912974; 720817,3912693; 
720846,3912657; 721158,3912460; 721225,3912369; 721189,3912299; 
720950,3912080; 720949,3911988; 720894,3911854; 720914,3911595; 
720830,3911364; 720927,3911342; 721047,3911351; 721178,3911099; 
721446,3911152; 721547,3911083; 721662,3911049; 721743,3910974; 
721802,3910823; 721896,3910698; 722203,3910574; 722603,3910321; 
722741,3910285; 723030,3910279; 723323,3910148; 723453,3910118; 
723661,3909983; 723804,3909975; 723919,3909931; 723993,3909885; 
724072,3909758; 724137,3909705; 724747,3909383; 725022,3909160; 
725074,3909140; 725326,3909138; 725430,3909040; 725505,3909010; 
725521,3908890; 725612,3908716; 725739,3908625; 725796,3908610; 
725904,3908770; 726129,3908837; 726277,3908677; 726457,3908556; 
726636,3908485; 726752,3908473; 726776,3908439; 726770,3908379; 
726708,3908145; 726648,3908048; 726648,3907910; 726696,3907824; 
726846,3907637; 726978,3907543; 727119,3907388; 727291,3907275; 
727425,3907223; 727640,3907040; 728374,3906795; 728489,3906794; 
728747,3906676; 728929,3906658; 728980,3906707; 729220,3907106; 
729314,3907079; 729467,3906881; 729503,3906858; 729674,3906855; 
729690,3906761; 729799,3906629; 730192,3906601; 730252,3906579; 
730431,3906423; 730510,3906299; 730769,3906227; 730871,3906096; 
731107,3905963; 731184,3905811; 731272,3905724; 731275,3905667; 
731156,3905397; 731047,3905296; 730794,3905215; 730606,3905082; 
730477,3904953; 730389,3904836; 730345,3904654; 730187,3904566; 
730153,3904516; 730134,3904423; 730021,3904202; 730162,3904059; 
730211,3903689; 730287,3903584; 730373,3903547; 730490,3903451; 
730539,3903274; 730597,3903164; 730610,3902884; 730543,3902705; 
730614,3902488; 730519,3902257; 730607,3902164; 730736,3901941; 
730765,3901763; 730699,3901689; 730478,3901593; 730379,3901601; 
730106,3901761; 729942,3901801; 729671,3901529; 729513,3901489; 
729400,3901579; 729276,3901770; 729156,3901881; 728841,3902051; 
728632,3902215; 728151,3902353; 727909,3902454; 727699,3902448; 
727523,3902583; 727399,3902582; 727229,3902525; 727108,3902547; 
726920,3902753; 726836,3902809; 726694,3902846; 726553,3902967; 
726426,3903012; 726094,3903062; 726005,3903099; 725732,3903388; 
725572,3903455; 725338,3903481; 724914,3903672; 724599,3903956; 
724555,3903984; 724428,3903995; 724295,3904068; 724185,3904176; 
724168,3904269; 724114,3904351; 723963,3904441; 723808,3904453; 
723797,3904679; 723624,3904870; 723562,3905071; 723551,3905135; 
723603,3905281; 723587,3905347; 723422,3905488; 723353,3905647; 
723284,3905714; 723134,3905742; 722948,3905662; 722906,3905652; 
722878,3905672; 722909,3905898; 722896,3906018; 722730,3906197; 
722616,3906427; 722554,3906476; 722373,3906541; 722333,3906527; 
722300,3906455; 722258,3906454; 722142,3906512; 721851,3906600; 
721764,3906592; 721611,3906629; 721534,3906774; 721311,3906977; 
721053,3907127; 720798,3907154; 720644,3907275; 720433,3907271; 
720237,3907346; 720169,3907336; 720027,3907209; 719827,3907099; 
719756,3906930; 719431,3906655; 719240,3906353; 719187,3906323; 
718920,3906286; 718724,3906291; 718631,3906271; 718587,3906229; 
718494,3906042; 718379,3905952; 718293,3905926; 718060,3906026; 
717993,3906029; 717766,3905967; 717546,3906007; 717397,3905986; 
717197,3905906; 717124,3905714; 716745,3905915; 716386,3905988; 
716172,3906099; 715943,3906264; 715852,3906428; 715633,3906476; 
715562,3906525; 715397,3906710; 715185,3906910; 715105,3906956; 
714760,3906971; 714467,3907048; 714135,3906821; 713349,3906677; 
712859,3906469; 712615,3906420; 712022,3906204; 711763,3906258; 
711574,3906375; 711350,3906610; 711235,3906824; 711031,3906871; 
710829,3906866; 710786,3906899; 710726,3907030; 710597,3907564; 
710591,3907823; 710629,3908101; 710599,3908139; 710063,3908380; 
709730,3908654; 709640,3908770; 709536,3908835; 709428,3908982; 
709183,3909029; 709087,3909114; 708906,3909193; 708654,3909438; 
returning to 708480,3909559.
    (ii) Note: Unit SLO-3 for California red-legged frog is depicted on 
the map in paragraph (41)(ii) of this entry.
    (43) Unit SLO-4: San Luis Obispo County, California. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangles Santa Margarita Lake, Pozo Summit, Caldwell 
Mesa, La Panza and Los Machos Hills.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 749907,3913538; 750002,3913543; 750128,3913449; 750319,3913415; 
750490,3913308; 750641,3913287; 750712,3913239; 750794,3913147; 
750835,3913058; 750922,3912754; 751060,3912628; 751101,3912530; 
751221,3912434; 751273,3912405; 751444,3912377; 751664,3912250; 
751802,3912230; 751957,3912259; 751996,3912205; 752062,3911964; 
752230,3911722; 752364,3911453; 752356,3911404; 752251,3911305; 
752262,3911239; 752358,3911103; 752442,3910835; 752446,3910382; 
752573,3910109; 752526,3909867; 752560,3909649; 752605,3909602; 
752790,3909551; 753037,3909383; 753180,3909384; 753255,3909454; 
753407,3909398; 753470,3909334; 753311,3909007; 753069,3908811; 
752884,3908789; 752810,3908758; 752572,3908334; 752562,3908291; 
752675,3908051; 752782,3907694; 752823,3907652; 752921,3907655; 
753101,3907721; 753320,3907685; 753530,3907732; 753702,3907727; 
753920,3907683; 754044,3907566; 754247,3907555; 754484,3907365; 
754482,3907173; 754569,3907001; 754615,3906821; 754725,3906553; 
754701,3906327; 754614,3906193; 754667,3905923; 754588,3905557; 
754619,3905438; 754610,3905350; 754549,3905235; 754369,3905270; 
754182,3905177; 754112,3904920; 753979,3904798; 753954,3904740; 
753956,3904595; 754119,3904319; 754060,3904215; 753994,3903997; 
754040,3903708; 753956,3903558; 753871,3903284; 753829,3903239; 
753826,3902991; 753763,3902926; 753600,3902856; 753536,3902799; 
753435,3902578; 753506,3902482; 753528,3902392; 753394,3902280; 
753250,3902082; 753203,3902052; 753108,3902044; 753057,3902009; 
752996,3901873; 752981,3901741; 752924,3901603; 752920,3901473; 
753012,3901277; 753148,3901091; 753360,3900956; 753429,3900857; 
753444,3900768; 753352,3900652; 753160,3900670; 752897,3900587; 
752822,3900504; 752775,3900352; 752686,3900236; 752533,3900243; 
752480,3900225; 752337,3900019; 752208,3899942; 752182,3899738; 
752132,3899578; 752105,3899557;

[[Page 116]]

751924,3899589; 751610,3899752; 751389,3899731; 751189,3899746; 
751065,3899718; 750964,3899769; 750934,3899819; 750857,3900160; 
750665,3900271; 750626,3900350; 750471,3900376; 750382,3900434; 
750349,3900500; 750282,3900543; 750209,3900688; 750124,3900728; 
750000,3900718; 749877,3900774; 749682,3901061; 749382,3901213; 
749260,3901313; 749177,3901338; 748884,3901682; 748920,3901927; 
748877,3902111; 748835,3902149; 748687,3902166; 748448,3902277; 
748180,3902541; 748108,3902533; 747951,3902442; 747864,3902438; 
747663,3902536; 747627,3902669; 747516,3902788; 747152,3902956; 
747070,3902986; 746746,3902918; 746574,3902921; 746410,3902963; 
746251,3903088; 746081,3903296; 745991,3903320; 745896,3903308; 
745712,3903361; 745569,3903443; 745413,3903584; 745219,3903524; 
745169,3903525; 745107,3903563; 744979,3903744; 744861,3903832; 
744798,3903936; 744795,3904065; 744720,3904350; 744497,3904711; 
744449,3904751; 744375,3904777; 744063,3904723; 743688,3904760; 
743419,3904715; 743243,3904822; 743013,3904854; 742926,3904904; 
742803,3904918; 742676,3904893; 742711,3904973; 742673,3905196; 
742626,3905286; 742596,3905294; 742476,3905218; 742409,3905213; 
742343,3905238; 742182,3905238; 742114,3905274; 741988,3905239; 
741878,3905244; 741849,3905256; 741711,3905511; 741608,3905563; 
741497,3905662; 741283,3905727; 741120,3905669; 740989,3905505; 
740897,3905505; 740794,3905414; 740744,3905420; 740294,3905673; 
740118,3905737; 739997,3905754; 739685,3905901; 739602,3906049; 
739520,3906103; 739255,3906082; 739220,3906050; 739169,3906044; 
739077,3906055; 738965,3905991; 738784,3906000; 738673,3905949; 
738595,3905952; 738363,3906104; 738033,3906224; 737757,3906404; 
737383,3906506; 737241,3906485; 736986,3906510; 736802,3906437; 
736607,3906298; 736545,3906220; 736491,3906087; 736367,3906001; 
736263,3905828; 736195,3905762; 735997,3905718; 735767,3905603; 
735702,3905595; 735598,3905643; 735549,3905609; 735370,3905578; 
734922,3905593; 734659,3905354; 734433,3905034; 734196,3904906; 
734095,3904890; 733902,3904938; 733829,3904986; 733604,3905013; 
733343,3905169; 733401,3905374; 733478,3905494; 733763,3905679; 
733801,3905725; 733813,3905774; 733793,3905806; 733594,3905863; 
733554,3905901; 733542,3905992; 733679,3906178; 733707,3906287; 
733774,3906383; 733967,3906496; 734130,3906652; 734154,3906705; 
734065,3906902; 734057,3907080; 734071,3907152; 734192,3907341; 
734205,3907548; 734288,3907668; 734620,3907865; 734770,3908026; 
734933,3908282; 735187,3908977; 735513,3909188; 735579,3909254; 
735841,3909818; 736009,3909934; 736085,3910027; 736233,3910096; 
736259,3910138; 736248,3910221; 736296,3910263; 736401,3910275; 
736454,3910235; 736576,3910253; 736687,3910234; 736865,3910310; 
736967,3910281; 737076,3910217; 737122,3910218; 737142,3910241; 
737170,3910485; 737221,3910584; 737512,3910812; 737809,3910554; 
737867,3910471; 737880,3910367; 737839,3909987; 737860,3909731; 
737793,3909596; 737718,3909518; 737640,3909341; 737300,3908933; 
737303,3908909; 737373,3908891; 737487,3908803; 738037,3908768; 
738113,3908799; 738236,3908932; 738389,3908985; 738534,3909120; 
738597,3909125; 738706,3909077; 738768,3908903; 738802,3908864; 
739136,3908784; 739303,3908616; 739463,3908625; 739597,3908667; 
739820,3908802; 739812,3908974; 739831,3909034; 740090,3909098; 
740192,3909165; 740220,3909196; 740236,3909371; 740264,3909401; 
740424,3909492; 740561,3909461; 740682,3909500; 740740,3909546; 
740795,3909637; 740811,3909852; 740928,3909862; 741190,3910104; 
741281,3910150; 741351,3910302; 741407,3910358; 741670,3910357; 
741959,3910441; 742199,3910443; 742306,3910395; 742377,3910329; 
742528,3910268; 742672,3910122; 742859,3910036; 742896,3909995; 
742970,3910001; 743092,3910090; 743153,3910228; 743318,3910376; 
743394,3910551; 743835,3910776; 744032,3910815; 744050,3910885; 
744009,3911070; 744070,3911249; 744166,3911293; 744245,3911252; 
744345,3911264; 744407,3911307; 744507,3911289; 744587,3911245; 
744689,3911315; 744954,3911234; 745095,3911242; 745158,3911200; 
745181,3911213; 745284,3911320; 745273,3911537; 745306,3911578; 
745449,3911665; 745708,3911877; 745889,3911958; 746028,3912124; 
746184,3912386; 746363,3912491; 746552,3912551; 746747,3912476; 
746855,3912400; 747016,3912347; 747185,3912330; 747337,3912369; 
747613,3912532; 747712,3912640; 747890,3912758; 748104,3913019; 
748410,3913078; 748671,3913080; 748921,3913126; 748964,3913154; 
749120,3913374; 749162,3913394; 749336,3913362; 749471,3913395; 
749607,3913604; 749649,3913628; 749718,3913621; returning to 
749907,3913538.
    (ii) Note: Unit SLO-4 for California red-legged frog is depicted on 
the map in paragraph (41)(ii) of this entry.
    (44) Unit STB-1: Santa Barbara County, California. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangles Tepusquet Canyon, Foxen Canyon, Manzanita 
Mountain and Zaca Lake.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 760562,3876097; 760672,3876042; 761005,3876093; 761287,3875929; 
761484,3875882; 761676,3875762; 761783,3875634; 761915,3875540; 
762011,3875342; 762187,3875292; 762339,3875178; 762395,3875163; 
762518,3874997; 762670,3874870; 763079,3874758; 763145,3874919; 
763311,3875038; 763422,3875236; 763812,3875437; 764027,3875382; 
764181,3875309; 764363,3875306; 764567,3875164; 764684,3875040; 
764762,3875023; 764832,3875188; 764845,3875462; 764895,3875633; 
765728,3875247; 766130,3874926; 766773,3874765; 767375,3874303; 
767317,3874268; 767147,3874084; 767009,3874063; 766889,3873933; 
766692,3873794; 766680,3873615; 766866,3873352; 766878,3873053; 
766932,3872882; 767102,3872733; 767518,3872546; 767828,3872501; 
768022,3872422; 768333,3872362; 768617,3872174; 768753,3872050; 
768872,3871869; 768833,3871652; 768789,3871555; 768302,3871371; 
768233,3871304; 768179,3871202; 768119,3871167; 767914,3871161; 
767761,3871077; 767577,3871017; 767443,3871051; 767275,3871037; 
767170,3870973; 767012,3870794; 766969,3870783; 766959,3870591; 
767103,3870378; 767134,3870165; 767123,3870109; 766974,3870022; 
766841,3869893; 766810,3869721; 766702,3869630; 766590,3869471; 
766520,3869233; 766555,3869103; 766558,3868884; 766939,3868674; 
767035,3868506; 767084,3868355; 767080,3868253; 766843,3867945; 
766763,3867725; 766766,3867689; 766887,3867637; 766960,3867566; 
767061,3867318; 767038,3866988; 767083,3866672; 767053,3866343; 
766926,3866262; 766871,3866166; 766901,3865924; 766875,3865716; 
766912,3865624;

[[Page 117]]

766960,3865587; 766919,3865529; 766872,3865365; 766724,3865095; 
766449,3864834; 766178,3864457; 766115,3864280; 766071,3863939; 
765862,3863616; 765794,3863346; 765692,3863267; 765391,3863258; 
765364,3863228; 765331,3862966; 765225,3862803; 765140,3862612; 
764983,3862406; 764868,3862136; 764617,3862365; 764482,3862406; 
764224,3862343; 764032,3862342; 763590,3862178; 763547,3862176; 
763295,3862281; 762879,3862024; 762827,3861912; 762570,3861741; 
762469,3861631; 762204,3861602; 762136,3861666; 762105,3861666; 
761931,3861582; 761845,3861487; 761788,3861358; 761781,3861243; 
761844,3861084; 761850,3860994; 761785,3860737; 761750,3860680; 
761705,3860676; 761440,3860732; 761112,3860913; 760959,3860945; 
760807,3861013; 760636,3861043; 760598,3861036; 760566,3860969; 
760433,3861135; 759600,3861135; 758845,3862084; 758767,3862569; 
758748,3862937; 759290,3863518; 759639,3863731; 759813,3864060; 
759852,3864486; 760046,3865087; 759717,3865648; 759717,3866047; 
759659,3866170; 759601,3866415; 759655,3866528; 759581,3866701; 
759449,3866785; 759438,3866819; 759430,3867144; 759385,3867286; 
759402,3867508; 759383,3867543; 759254,3867630; 759240,3867665; 
759221,3867942; 759171,3868113; 759197,3868274; 759173,3868453; 
758987,3868651; 758941,3868990; 758822,3869188; 758919,3869389; 
759088,3869432; 759139,3869528; 759310,3869599; 759411,3869690; 
759610,3869788; 759707,3869963; 759731,3870118; 759685,3870224; 
759615,3870533; 759591,3870865; 759493,3871043; 759348,3871149; 
759266,3871363; 759205,3871457; 758906,3871763; 758719,3871858; 
758736,3872008; 758710,3872086; 758485,3872299; 758330,3872577; 
758384,3872761; 758541,3873023; 758697,3873177; 758755,3873396; 
758824,3873459; 759046,3873498; 759241,3873456; 759706,3873605; 
759884,3873711; 759924,3873760; 759967,3873943; 759864,3874007; 
759819,3874091; 760002,3874342; 760181,3874444; 760210,3874639; 
760333,3875007; 760311,3875096; 760185,3875250; 760134,3875544; 
760198,3875800; 760198,3876182; 760214,3876232; returning to 
760562,3876097.
    (ii) Note: Map of Units STB-1, STB-3, STB-6, and STB-7 for the 
California red-legged frog follows:

[[Page 118]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17MR10.023

    (45) Unit STB-2: Santa Barbara County, California. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangles Guadalupe, Casmalia, Santa Maria and Orcutt.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 731166,3856983; 731162,3857181; 730322,3857168; 730135,3857420; 
729967,3857473; 729819,3857459;

[[Page 119]]

729578,3857568; 729443,3857667; 729376,3857635; 729296,3857555; 
729247,3857354; 729250,3857154; 726368,3857120; 726362,3857815; 
726173,3857740; 725905,3857679; 725880,3857563; 725691,3857512; 
725605,3857586; 725443,3857497; 725173,3857271; 724731,3857082; 
724478,3856821; 724238,3856699; 723676,3856260; 724048,3856812; 
722984,3858902; 720821,3862104; 720937,3862161; 721420,3862089; 
721742,3861874; 722117,3861535; 722510,3861123; 723011,3861088; 
723387,3861266; 723583,3861535; 723619,3861713; 723619,3862035; 
723780,3862429; 724352,3863055; 724444,3863044; 724504,3862997; 
724541,3862994; 724593,3863032; 724728,3863019; 724960,3862894; 
725461,3862876; 726659,3863663; 727070,3863359; 727589,3863037; 
728111,3862721; 728294,3862654; 728819,3862272; 729012,3862198; 
729234,3862071; 729404,3862017; 729132,3861318; 730520,3860854; 
730596,3861595; 731659,3861185; 732097,3860989; 732221,3860925; 
732166,3860903; 732254,3860823; 732289,3860843; 732494,3860743; 
732565,3860659; 732618,3860544; 732651,3860145; 732777,3859761; 
732883,3859161; 733046,3858083; 733169,3856993; 733069,3857088; 
732897,3857362; 732777,3857459; 732591,3857466; 732186,3857578; 
732036,3857709; 731830,3857930; 731144,3858960; 730876,3859226; 
730556,3859033; 730572,3858841; 730613,3858694; 730754,3858570; 
730770,3858404; 730861,3858147; 730876,3857961; 730938,3857800; 
730944,3857692; 731044,3857527; 731168,3857431; 731264,3857288; 
731268,3857183; 731237,3857088; returning to 731166,3856983.
    (ii) Note: Map of Units STB-2, STB-4, and STB-5 for the California 
red-legged frog follows:

[[Page 120]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17MR10.024

    (46) Unit STB-3: Santa Barbara County, California. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangle Zaca Lake.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 11, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 230921,3859474; 231976,3855997; 231890,3855313; 232588,3855068; 
233102,3854919; 233630,3854805;

[[Page 121]]

234514,3854539; 235496,3854163; 236301,3853942; 236842,3853657; 
236927,3853500; 237181,3853315; 237201,3853245; 237165,3853055; 
237180,3853032; 237447,3852825; 237675,3852714; 237864,3852491; 
237792,3852298; 237820,3852284; 237420,3852151; 237364,3852097; 
237247,3851871; 237123,3851728; 237048,3851596; 236938,3851521; 
236777,3851481; 236707,3851497; 236552,3851576; 235953,3851788; 
235563,3851863; 234961,3851815; 234714,3851674; 234496,3851477; 
234358,3851045; 234322,3850773; 234404,3850093; 234486,3849740; 
234556,3849573; 234559,3849286; 234768,3848835; 234772,3848698; 
234832,3848438; 235000,3848176; 234956,3847963; 234849,3847731; 
234761,3847417; 234633,3847210; 234523,3846800; 234405,3846556; 
234430,3846444; 234496,3846274; 234641,3846127; 234655,3845801; 
234694,3845582; 235214,3845602; 235321,3845537; 235464,3845334; 
235486,3845216; 235556,3845096; 235837,3844795; 236063,3844620; 
236278,3844306; 236410,3844198; 236413,3844054; 236394,3843995; 
236297,3843925; 235968,3843843; 235779,3843622; 235745,3843441; 
235662,3843307; 235280,3843043; 235160,3842881; 235067,3842855; 
234986,3842797; 235124,3842405; 235154,3842214; 235095,3842078; 
235086,3841955; 235289,3841603; 235375,3841313; 235270,3841241; 
235220,3841130; 235208,3841018; 235232,3840799; 235099,3840596; 
235079,3840429; 234816,3840179; 234758,3840083; 234870,3839682; 
234863,3839626; 234569,3839466; 234548,3839402; 234596,3839216; 
234551,3839186; 234505,3839194; 234319,3839348; 234176,3839378; 
234045,3839362; 233722,3839230; 233594,3839090; 233445,3839043; 
233229,3838675; 233234,3838621; 233359,3838487; 233279,3838346; 
233241,3838166; 233011,3837900; 232617,3837779; 232545,3837783; 
232272,3837921; 232288,3837973; 232254,3838087; 231994,3838249; 
231644,3838529; 231401,3838550; 231311,3838536; 231264,3838496; 
231181,3838751; 230923,3838980; 229978,3839158; 229754,3839349; 
229620,3839728; 229455,3839945; 228963,3840302; 228573,3840711; 
228264,3841264; 228105,3841830; 227395,3841831; 227431,3841887; 
227464,3842078; 227693,3842420; 227853,3842961; 228003,3843254; 
228078,3843376; 228423,3843705; 228529,3843869; 228504,3843950; 
228575,3844048; 228576,3844116; 228495,3844458; 228496,3844558; 
228524,3844593; 228626,3844603; 228766,3844658; 228930,3844819; 
229008,3844936; 229104,3845002; 229142,3845053; 229223,3845301; 
229404,3845439; 229513,3845695; 229648,3845815; 229698,3845994; 
229487,3845995; 229240,3845960; 229184,3845966; 229017,3846048; 
228868,3846057; 228502,3846298; 228407,3846415; 228239,3846540; 
228076,3846793; 228032,3846948; 227986,3846998; 227964,3847211; 
227904,3847345; 227790,3847460; 227540,3847621; 227318,3847978; 
227223,3848077; 227052,3848344; 226763,3848565; 226719,3848644; 
226741,3848761; 226924,3849108; 226976,3849159; 226861,3849365; 
226919,3849445; 227014,3849486; 227022,3849580; 226902,3849798; 
226782,3849984; 225971,3850915; 225899,3851125; 225509,3851345; 
225373,3851455; 225113,3851261; 225053,3851329; 224898,3851410; 
224882,3851506; 224747,3851713; 224508,3852251; 224488,3852394; 
224552,3852530; 224542,3852640; 224016,3852942; 223678,3853077; 
223632,3853116; 223570,3853232; 223025,3853418; 222679,3853633; 
222574,3853728; 222305,3853820; 222120,3853982; 221910,3854075; 
221824,3854155; 221746,3854386; 221657,3854523; 221570,3854603; 
221584,3854837; 221549,3855036; 221605,3855355; 221598,3855473; 
221463,3855699; 221341,3855832; 221328,3855884; 221409,3856080; 
221396,3856343; 221472,3856459; 221578,3856531; 221619,3856596; 
221676,3856942; 221714,3857033; 222169,3857284; 222220,3857340; 
222216,3857368; 222066,3857560; 222045,3857682; 221936,3857856; 
221835,3857935; 221784,3858013; 221627,3858121; 221367,3858161; 
221040,3858136; 220936,3858215; 220841,3858253; 220491,3858351; 
220462,3858387; 220461,3858452; 220502,3858725; 220458,3858838; 
220301,3859033; 220205,3859317; 220278,3859409; 220331,3859562; 
220347,3859940; 220317,3860168; 220433,3860222; 220607,3860696; 
221104,3860908; 221424,3861398; 222280,3861540; 222792,3861831; 
222833,3861741; 223015,3861554; 223152,3861298; 223285,3861237; 
223409,3861128; 223602,3860830; 223799,3860733; 223824,3860428; 
223983,3860276; 223987,3860123; 223929,3859962; 223985,3859737; 
223955,3859619; 224001,3859242; 223893,3858913; 224209,3859091; 
224432,3859173; 224575,3859285; 224875,3859378; 225068,3859394; 
225363,3859267; 225438,3859274; 225607,3859382; 225709,3859505; 
225969,3859543; 226191,3859671; 226446,3859945; 226565,3860298; 
226779,3861260; 226929,3861740; 227069,3862025; 227271,3862117; 
227901,3862297; 228180,3862460; 228177,3862385; 228049,3862165; 
227859,3861928; 227736,3861694; 227674,3861404; 227811,3861121; 
228015,3860908; 228360,3860784; 228771,3860676; 229717,3860243; 
230217,3859946; 230582,3859682; returning to 230921,3859474.
    (ii) Note: Unit STB-3 for California red-legged frog is depicted on 
the map in paragraph (44)(ii) of this entry.
    (47) Unit STB-4: Santa Barbara County, California. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangles Tranquillon Mountain. and Lompoc Hills.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 729283,3821732; 729615,3821828; 729936,3821744; 729938,3821604; 
730174,3821644; 730245,3821754; 730255,3822019; 730366,3822066; 
730259,3822142; 730341,3824270; 730715,3824569; 730770,3824723; 
730794,3824914; 730779,3825134; 730844,3825381; 730814,3825588; 
730736,3825725; 730616,3825809; 730522,3825823; 730396,3825890; 
730447,3827602; 729977,3827620; 729742,3827441; 729579,3827448; 
729425,3827598; 729439,3827714; 729508,3827830; 729376,3827830; 
729116,3827765; 729064,3827885; 729135,3827930; 729256,3828084; 
729386,3828164; 729518,3828204; 729771,3828199; 730093,3828281; 
730162,3828390; 730232,3828426; 730845,3828360; 730910,3828407; 
730961,3828526; 731006,3828783; 731042,3828827; 731183,3828800; 
731631,3828340; 731725,3828302; 731970,3828271; 732151,3828210; 
732482,3828211; 733060,3827929; 733182,3827777; 733316,3827677; 
733373,3827572; 733460,3827544; 733774,3827615; 733955,3827496; 
734461,3827273; 734507,3827177; 734524,3827005; 734567,3826941; 
734659,3826858; 734799,3826810; 734874,3826750; 735013,3826386; 
735126,3825805; 735374,3825521; 735892,3825308; 736056,3825108; 
736068,3824966; 736047,3824895; 735860,3824725; 735579,3824624; 
735520,3824562; 735490,3824485; 735467,3824220; 735423,3824057; 
735383,3823999; 735307,3823965;

[[Page 122]]

735198,3823985; 735083,3824069; 735011,3824092; 734911,3823997; 
734837,3823821; 734439,3823681; 734370,3823633; 734340,3823582; 
734322,3823311; 734241,3823031; 734162,3822886; 733960,3822628; 
733859,3822409; 733764,3822290; 733592,3822135; 733620,3822078; 
733633,3821873; 733672,3821769; 733760,3821640; 734138,3821389; 
734241,3821294; 734349,3821148; 734434,3820848; 734439,3820745; 
734395,3820592; 734325,3820574; 734055,3820617; 733705,3820588; 
733328,3820601; 733075,3820689; 732779,3820930; 732606,3821109; 
732500,3821165; 732200,3821183; 731910,3821231; 731567,3821184; 
731053,3821259; 730834,3821228; 730572,3821371; 730442,3821394; 
730148,3821386; 730039,3821421; 729978,3821470; 729841,3821675; 
729724,3821725; 729488,3821739; 729344,3821701; 729276,3821629; 
returning to 729283,3821732.
    (ii) Note: Unit STB-4 for California red-legged frog is depicted on 
the map in paragraph (45)(ii) of this entry.
    (48) Unit STB-5: Santa Barbara County, California. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangles Santa Rosa Hills, Solvang and Gaviota.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 754082,3828621; 754220,3828624; 754353,3828538; 754484,3828518; 
754931,3828518; 755206,3828493; 755300,3828431; 755414,3828288; 
755575,3828212; 755742,3828169; 755779,3828121; 755879,3827637; 
755821,3827482; 755964,3827406; 756196,3827234; 756293,3827116; 
756595,3827008; 756601,3826836; 756743,3826460; 756612,3826255; 
756591,3826150; 756657,3826032; 756701,3825778; 756846,3825651; 
756876,3825582; 756798,3825268; 756716,3825102; 756670,3824819; 
756583,3824656; 756924,3824697; 757105,3824442; 757173,3824401; 
757409,3824289; 757802,3824191; 758062,3824046; 758418,3824147; 
758483,3824146; 758654,3824109; 758956,3824097; 759185,3823989; 
759313,3823888; 759356,3823826; 759476,3823527; 759563,3823388; 
759548,3823115; 759577,3822909; 759786,3822680; 759614,3822411; 
759491,3822264; 758838,3822045; 758378,3821985; 758063,3821887; 
757890,3821808; 757632,3821751; 757411,3821638; 757090,3821271; 
756817,3821205; 756808,3821052; 756686,3820890; 756722,3820735; 
756716,3820604; 756657,3820451; 756510,3820230; 756394,3820122; 
756216,3820140; 756146,3820057; 755960,3819953; 755931,3819925; 
755906,3819802; 755807,3819648; 755619,3819539; 755309,3819235; 
755176,3819185; 755084,3818876; 755126,3818560; 754978,3818336; 
754815,3817931; 754712,3817826; 754545,3817914; 754353,3818081; 
753795,3818299; 753620,3818490; 753474,3818553; 753200,3818625; 
753158,3818667; 753147,3818770; 753015,3819109; 753013,3819157; 
753096,3819346; 753342,3819518; 753385,3819620; 753341,3819734; 
753176,3819898; 753175,3819997; 753236,3820136; 752987,3820348; 
752979,3820397; 753010,3820486; 752957,3820648; 752961,3820749; 
753074,3820999; 753329,3821454; 753393,3821515; 753567,3821609; 
753614,3821664; 753589,3821730; 753478,3821799; 753341,3821827; 
753191,3822091; 753039,3822189; 752961,3822212; 752604,3822156; 
752336,3822171; 752121,3822276; 752044,3822295; 751885,3822284; 
751740,3822395; 751571,3822432; 751345,3822432; 750965,3822371; 
750711,3822281; 750371,3822319; 750231,3822360; 750179,3822461; 
750007,3822667; 750066,3822856; 750213,3822944; 750268,3823084; 
750434,3823080; 750652,3823110; 750716,3823220; 750690,3823335; 
750439,3823592; 750348,3823715; 750335,3823770; 750456,3823947; 
750488,3824163; 750596,3824256; 750780,3824259; 750839,3824376; 
750807,3824796; 750948,3825215; 750926,3825433; 750875,3825585; 
750875,3825695; 750964,3825912; 750994,3826175; 751047,3826363; 
751162,3826568; 751167,3826702; 751257,3826992; 751377,3827152; 
751406,3827294; 751444,3827363; 751566,3827409; 751732,3827410; 
752145,3827504; 752493,3827446; 752553,3827613; 752627,3827679; 
752750,3827870; 752841,3827943; 753043,3828218; 753153,3828494; 
753196,3828533; 753588,3828705; 753846,3828746; 753902,3828744; 
753974,3828673; returning to 754082,3828621.
    (ii) Note: Unit STB-5 for California red-legged frog is depicted on 
the map in paragraph (45)(ii) of this entry.
    (49) Unit STB-6: Santa Barbara County, California. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangles Solvang, Gaviota, Santa Ynez and Tajiguas.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 770986,3825640; 771043,3825632; 771193,3825688; 771256,3825673; 
771613,3825452; 771858,3825355; 772104,3825203; 772038,3825075; 
771949,3824690; 771903,3824212; 771816,3824079; 771803,3823865; 
771692,3823753; 771692,3823706; 771632,3823581; 771652,3823204; 
771634,3823189; 771498,3823201; 771432,3823131; 771416,3822976; 
771341,3822894; 771241,3822586; 771136,3822552; 771008,3822571; 
770470,3822451; 770117,3822424; 770036,3822398; 769943,3822327; 
769948,3822289; 769999,3822245; 770022,3822094; 769939,3821829; 
770006,3821600; 769983,3821464; 770018,3820930; 769923,3820628; 
769971,3820303; 769911,3819814; 769993,3819678; 769983,3819612; 
769914,3819513; 769905,3819442; 769937,3819047; 769841,3818859; 
769822,3818655; 769729,3818476; 769776,3818105; 769624,3817885; 
769489,3817584; 769432,3817327; 769196,3817362; 769024,3817339; 
768821,3817242; 768814,3817204; 768841,3817147; 768738,3817108; 
768318,3817114; 767420,3817064; 766933,3817129; 766615,3817225; 
766263,3817429; 766217,3817432; 766161,3817398; 765917,3817529; 
765458,3817701; 765210,3817835; 764630,3818046; 764517,3818290; 
764347,3818877; 764207,3819094; 764111,3819628; 764032,3819796; 
763843,3819932; 763796,3820002; 763812,3820203; 763842,3820301; 
763838,3820456; 763604,3820619; 763553,3820667; 763531,3820731; 
763521,3820920; 763552,3821048; 763543,3821167; 763457,3821666; 
763548,3822045; 763452,3822372; 763447,3822459; 763519,3822629; 
763520,3822703; 763477,3822787; 763483,3822952; 763419,3823170; 
763460,3823351; 763410,3823628; 763849,3823641; 763990,3823602; 
764116,3823604; 764292,3823570; 764509,3823694; 764801,3823690; 
765027,3823718; 765650,3823931; 765792,3824005; 765966,3824135; 
766073,3824246; 766151,3824399; 766447,3824529; 766867,3824880; 
767108,3824934; 767278,3824884; 767313,3824958; 767394,3825330; 
767455,3825392; 767578,3825449; 767631,3825444; 767759,3825329; 
767841,3825153; 767882,3825112; 768167,3825010; 768209,3824974; 
768351,3824764; 768477,3824724; 768565,3824722; 768601,3824751; 
768596,3825042; 768631,3825100;

[[Page 123]]

768811,3825096; 769143,3824997; 769415,3825077; 769466,3825106; 
769584,3825243; 769700,3825210; 769833,3825128; 769903,3825144; 
770088,3825284; 770373,3825234; 770433,3825262; 770546,3825386; 
770688,3825762; 770837,3825767; returning to 770986,3825640.
    (ii) Note: Unit STB-6 for California red-legged frog is depicted on 
the map in paragraph (44)(ii) of this entry.
    (50) Unit STB-7: Santa Barbara and Ventura Counties, California. 
From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles Lake Cachuma, San Marcos Pass, Big 
Pine Mtn., Little Pine Mtn., Santa Barbara, Madulce Peak, Hildreth Peak, 
Carpinteria, Old Man Mountain, White Ledge Peak, Wheeler Springs and 
Matilija.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 11, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N):
    254540,3837294; 254540,3837180; 254497,3837043; 254566,3836882; 
254581,3836738; 254782,3836768; 254873,3836753; 255119,3836601; 
255360,3836359; 255521,3836301; 255735,3836335; 255863,3836260; 
256174,3836436; 256296,3836531; 256438,3836538; 256491,3836507; 
256651,3836220; 256783,3836123; 256986,3835539; 257062,3835412; 
257089,3835374; 257253,3835359; 257309,3835319; 257387,3835238; 
257467,3835040; 257498,3835014; 257807,3835121; 257960,3835201; 
258010,3835198; 258024,3835173; 257996,3835061; 258053,3834932; 
258162,3834873; 258448,3834797; 258539,3834749; 258861,3834733; 
259140,3834782; 259464,3834910; 259623,3834923; 259715,3834972; 
259953,3835033; 260149,3835181; 260132,3835316; 260041,3835526; 
259880,3835721; 259854,3835844; 259772,3836021; 259853,3836267; 
259973,3836356; 260061,3836464; 260154,3836600; 260153,3836656; 
260571,3836498; 260883,3836462; 260926,3836446; 260984,3836352; 
261169,3836308; 261637,3836132; 261861,3835973; 261913,3835903; 
262036,3835614; 262101,3835385; 262252,3835290; 262379,3835171; 
262570,3835081; 262695,3834896; 262877,3834761; 263015,3834497; 
264086,3833813; 263942,3833612; 264011,3833435; 264042,3832876; 
264078,3832574; 264132,3832341; 264249,3832177; 264742,3831921; 
265047,3831721; 265159,3831737; 265707,3831674; 265937,3831581; 
266204,3831435; 266531,3831326; 266775,3831317; 267067,3831370; 
267284,3831475; 267432,3831620; 267715,3832013; 267906,3832157; 
268164,3832275; 268519,3832354; 268852,3832357; 269237,3832302; 
269816,3832166; 270132,3832189; 270699,3832099; 270796,3832147; 
270832,3832198; 270851,3832409; 270904,3832506; 271090,3832468; 
271225,3832410; 271347,3832401; 271538,3832296; 271612,3832200; 
271936,3832055; 272049,3832057; 272165,3832022; 272249,3832055; 
272343,3832167; 272468,3832155; 272803,3832025; 272886,3832020; 
272981,3832049; 273075,3832171; 273219,3832165; 273402,3832109; 
273691,3832133; 273786,3832161; 273841,3832151; 274145,3831930; 
274175,3831888; 274145,3831689; 274180,3831573; 274312,3831385; 
274495,3831313; 274472,3830803; 274735,3830604; 274923,3830509; 
274950,3830475; 275000,3830237; 275215,3829931; 275189,3829829; 
275022,3829639; 274884,3829593; 274732,3829496; 274514,3829480; 
274440,3829449; 274423,3829178; 274379,3829071; 274297,3829026; 
274076,3828968; 273924,3828817; 273928,3828779; 274026,3828715; 
274051,3828648; 274044,3828592; 273938,3828395; 273996,3828246; 
274086,3828111; 274124,3827961; 274204,3827810; 274189,3827776; 
274064,3827636; 274016,3827613; 273925,3827601; 273679,3827650; 
273568,3827578; 273465,3827558; 273309,3827578; 273175,3827533; 
273073,3827415; 273006,3827206; 273091,3826952; 273086,3826756; 
273055,3826698; 273062,3826558; 273122,3826408; 273286,3826390; 
273350,3826268; 273341,3826201; 273290,3826111; 273172,3826015; 
273142,3825760; 273226,3825584; 273405,3825435; 273576,3825350; 
273514,3825048; 273597,3824908; 273622,3824739; 273750,3824610; 
273950,3824613; 274071,3824571; 274399,3824322; 274474,3824221; 
274509,3824108; 274582,3824035; 274584,3823977; 274643,3823874; 
274642,3823813; 274565,3823647; 274562,3823391; 274524,3823253; 
274605,3823149; 274615,3823082; 274547,3822626; 274557,3822492; 
274533,3822311; 274570,3822222; 274649,3822184; 274891,3822164; 
275081,3822065; 275293,3822012; 275485,3821718; 275604,3821597; 
275756,3821502; 275840,3821481; 275996,3821521; 276142,3821520; 
276294,3821556; 276448,3821632; 276496,3821629; 276614,3821567; 
276686,3821556; 276788,3821424; 276974,3821303; 277234,3821282; 
277295,3821294; 277399,3821365; 277463,3821369; 277579,3821245; 
277631,3821224; 277957,3821265; 278134,3821231; 278284,3821250; 
278450,3821183; 278640,3820996; 278737,3820951; 279054,3820960; 
279277,3820931; 279357,3820940; 279433,3820982; 279540,3821079; 
279838,3821001; 280021,3821005; 280358,3821105; 280590,3821114; 
280836,3821172; 281343,3821213; 281559,3821306; 281763,3821360; 
281947,3821339; 282381,3821364; 282505,3821328; 282730,3821394; 
283119,3821455; 283320,3821615; 283376,3821632; 283771,3821627; 
284018,3821714; 284180,3821740; 284412,3821742; 284496,3821722; 
284830,3821570; 285082,3821552; 285216,3821502; 285434,3821504; 
285899,3821655; 286232,3821724; 286360,3821854; 286706,3822022; 
286736,3821889; 286745,3821494; 286798,3821405; 287000,3821226; 
287051,3821146; 287227,3821072; 287462,3821038; 287541,3820987; 
287656,3820733; 287660,3820524; 287683,3820483; 288081,3820234; 
288388,3820156; 288797,3819538; 289000,3819452; 289251,3819184; 
289681,3819065; 289848,3818992; 290238,3819105; 290385,3819028; 
290382,3818716; 290168,3818372; 289870,3818346; 289637,3817929; 
289617,3817336; 289730,3817002; 289419,3817006; 288934,3816842; 
288224,3816394; 287682,3816263; 287327,3816284; 287120,3816311; 
287012,3816496; 286768,3816629; 286380,3816607; 286341,3816936; 
286253,3816956; 286201,3817346; 286083,3817565; 285933,3817566; 
285618,3817694; 285261,3817655; 285106,3817671; 284668,3817915; 
284422,3817980; 284278,3817982; 284140,3818014; 283910,3817995; 
283708,3818098; 283570,3818117; 283424,3818062; 283229,3817896; 
282887,3817826; 282649,3817924; 282348,3817967; 282156,3817950; 
281929,3817838; 281874,3817832; 281706,3817868; 281526,3817856; 
281326,3817920; 281004,3817877; 280720,3817888; 280560,3817798; 
280101,3817710; 280011,3817658; 279748,3817416; 279464,3817570; 
279336,3817683; 279139,3817772; 278811,3817804; 278774,3817834; 
278704,3818030; 278568,3818099; 278478,3818096; 278376,3818000; 
278271,3817965; 277896,3818033; 277692,3818099; 277599,3818067; 
277313,3817879; 276989,3817794; 276849,3817824; 276679,3817905; 
276590,3818024;

[[Page 124]]

276531,3818028; 276318,3817972; 276171,3818135; 276016,3818039; 
275752,3817932; 275580,3817788; 275329,3817640; 275239,3817630; 
275033,3817696; 274672,3817765; 274361,3817785; 274177,3817748; 
273988,3817673; 273545,3817589; 273411,3817528; 273187,3817495; 
273082,3817503; 273017,3817448; 272814,3817057; 272730,3817005; 
272317,3817226; 272170,3817255; 272029,3817238; 271875,3817140; 
271764,3816994; 271767,3816670; 271736,3816646; 271471,3816630; 
271373,3816718; 271322,3816729; 270955,3816682; 270836,3816608; 
270548,3816633; 270351,3816594; 270259,3816681; 269908,3816794; 
269860,3816848; 269847,3817005; 269810,3817045; 269623,3817067; 
269187,3816972; 269067,3817076; 268936,3817144; 268898,3817143; 
268667,3816998; 268296,3816967; 267993,3816808; 267926,3816794; 
267819,3816849; 267466,3816959; 267332,3816970; 267212,3817022; 
266991,3817057; 266804,3817188; 266686,3817211; 266204,3817117; 
265863,3817006; 265825,3816977; 265776,3816853; 265811,3816615; 
265791,3816574; 265718,3816541; 265391,3816504; 265143,3816578; 
264835,3816581; 264574,3816674; 264406,3816799; 264238,3816829; 
264113,3816795; 264000,3816684; 263915,3816735; 263672,3816815; 
263457,3816823; 263337,3816857; 263134,3816853; 263079,3816905; 
263000,3817099; 263026,3817167; 263002,3817248; 263285,3817578; 
263293,3817628; 263262,3817696; 263237,3817744; 263190,3817770; 
263019,3817791; 262831,3817918; 262766,3817938; 262605,3817886; 
262451,3817874; 262337,3817947; 262249,3817939; 262215,3817955; 
262140,3818112; 262109,3818129; 261728,3818068; 261509,3817921; 
261334,3817842; 260950,3817918; 260876,3817961; 260815,3818136; 
260726,3818125; 260553,3818175; 260253,3818198; 260205,3818330; 
260098,3818305; 259936,3818370; 259858,3818493; 259531,3818714; 
259252,3818760; 259069,3818865; 258941,3818975; 258637,3819093; 
258540,3819090; 258368,3819021; 258272,3819019; 258101,3818939; 
257883,3818924; 257687,3819003; 257599,3819150; 257561,3819171; 
257423,3819179; 257230,3819280; 257088,3819310; 256977,3819391; 
256824,3819408; 256692,3819544; 256598,3819597; 256297,3819570; 
255871,3819586; 255750,3819629; 255526,3819650; 255285,3819731; 
254994,3819636; 254890,3819552; 254815,3819539; 254625,3819650; 
254496,3819787; 254356,3819826; 254059,3819976; 253697,3819985; 
253483,3820096; 253375,3820109; 253217,3820059; 253159,3820081; 
253063,3820162; 253090,3820326; 253047,3820414; 252961,3820418; 
252822,3820380; 252700,3820476; 252538,3820536; 252358,3820656; 
252297,3820667; 252196,3820643; 251992,3820449; 251722,3820286; 
251467,3820305; 251358,3820351; 251031,3820328; 250811,3820417; 
250713,3820585; 250561,3820724; 250485,3820859; 250320,3820945; 
250275,3820992; 249695,3821192; 249350,3821203; 249252,3821248; 
249166,3821338; 249091,3821617; 249023,3821758; 248720,3821831; 
248673,3821887; 248470,3821987; 248386,3822075; 248098,3822072; 
248023,3822013; 247958,3822010; 247889,3821942; 247768,3821921; 
247486,3821688; 247392,3821673; 247137,3821543; 247027,3821538; 
246986,3821551; 246904,3821651; 246799,3821673; 246686,3821760; 
246322,3821875; 245959,3821944; 245821,3822088; 245250,3822371; 
245177,3822481; 245065,3822564; 244920,3822851; 244797,3823012; 
244638,3823100; 244485,3823234; 244271,3823374; 243850,3823411; 
243668,3823320; 243599,3823229; 243464,3823136; 243465,3823063; 
243546,3822920; 243387,3822706; 243315,3822708; 243133,3822635; 
242986,3822717; 242833,3822681; 242700,3822758; 242612,3822771; 
242532,3822621; 242470,3822576; 242303,3822499; 242115,3822456; 
242050,3822399; 241886,3822357; 241772,3822278; 241670,3822316; 
241588,3822283; 241503,3822282; 241106,3822472; 240900,3822525; 
240457,3822494; 240372,3822504; 240165,3822597; 239997,3822610; 
239850,3822328; 239716,3822200; 239561,3822095; 239407,3822068; 
239240,3821999; 239154,3822034; 239005,3822198; 238444,3822170; 
237897,3822336; 237707,3822253; 237627,3822288; 237563,3822215; 
237449,3822159; 237263,3822135; 236948,3822019; 236835,3822039; 
236710,3822022; 236568,3822108; 236433,3822132; 236293,3822229; 
236200,3822247; 236138,3822331; 235983,3822328; 235776,3822468; 
235758,3822542; 235734,3822556; 235619,3822569; 235373,3822654; 
235297,3822741; 235218,3822899; 235106,3822889; 235052,3822908; 
234778,3823114; 234715,3823138; 234427,3823161; 234374,3823214; 
234298,3823472; 234147,3823601; 233915,3823565; 233755,3823642; 
233796,3823724; 233804,3823858; 233882,3823951; 234125,3824588; 
234206,3824685; 234342,3824947; 234393,3825120; 234385,3825208; 
234440,3825270; 234591,3825297; 234698,3825350; 234729,3825502; 
234789,3825611; 234859,3825997; 234827,3826189; 234659,3826365; 
234454,3826695; 234614,3826729; 234826,3826855; 235010,3827006; 
235118,3827131; 235119,3827330; 235036,3827911; 235082,3827996; 
235208,3828040; 235432,3828051; 235487,3828017; 235577,3827770; 
235625,3827765; 235725,3827817; 235783,3827815; 235943,3827959; 
235964,3828022; 235950,3828104; 235999,3828293; 235934,3828410; 
235816,3828518; 235853,3828550; 236001,3828574; 236111,3828562; 
236190,3828662; 236399,3828640; 236500,3828697; 236568,3828783; 
236692,3828825; 236817,3828826; 236957,3828794; 237099,3828810; 
237204,3828851; 237348,3828821; 237484,3828900; 237622,3829061; 
237662,3829062; 237770,3828960; 237843,3828941; 237881,3828975; 
237871,3829095; 237891,3829142; 238041,3829186; 238137,3829347; 
238282,3829440; 238267,3829680; 238308,3829762; 238310,3829906; 
238339,3829942; 238410,3829963; 238430,3830001; 238452,3830094; 
238499,3830156; 238520,3830301; 238597,3830307; 238764,3830408; 
238908,3830303; 239109,3830332; 239540,3830156; 239820,3830097; 
239988,3830132; 240198,3830138; 240411,3830212; 240439,3830243; 
240529,3830512; 240525,3830607; 240462,3830684; 240220,3830862; 
240034,3831068; 240049,3831110; 240282,3831207; 240008,3831458; 
239861,3831499; 239765,3831553; 239704,3831505; 239627,3831543; 
239575,3831705; 239611,3832096; 239735,3832199; 239861,3832391; 
239952,3832438; 240065,3832438; 240225,3832516; 240347,3832541; 
240476,3832763; 240723,3832920; 240836,3833060; 240937,3833243; 
241077,3833345; 241267,3833558; 241293,3833609; 241285,3833749; 
241327,3833813; 241559,3833911; 241731,3833897; 241849,3833939; 
242029,3833865; 242172,3833689; 242340,3833721; 242603,3833817; 
242702,3833818; 242874,3833678; 242970,3833655; 243089,3833479; 
243196,3833424; 243263,3833340; 243395,3833400; 243473,3833403; 
243509,3833380; 243562,3833233; 243625,3833156; 243744,3833095; 
244106,3833139; 244375,3833294; 244432,3833301; 244836,3833083; 
244947,3833000; 245139,3832953;

[[Page 125]]

245633,3832723; 245954,3832464; 246265,3832288; 246459,3832206; 
246603,3832073; 246901,3832087; 247075,3832003; 247264,3832004; 
247622,3832061; 247701,3832115; 247882,3832146; 248107,3832381; 
248227,3832416; 248362,3832377; 248691,3832174; 248834,3832167; 
248998,3832554; 249248,3832965; 249351,3833197; 249456,3833366; 
249522,3833581; 249557,3833616; 249673,3833656; 249932,3833622; 
250155,3833705; 250332,3833696; 250358,3834067; 250426,3834158; 
250462,3834305; 250428,3834435; 250458,3834745; 250520,3834837; 
250616,3834897; 250679,3835022; 250628,3835232; 250669,3835620; 
250711,3835667; 250848,3835722; 250902,3835771; 250969,3836076; 
250998,3836117; 251075,3836124; 251169,3835966; 251201,3835939; 
251226,3835953; 251278,3836099; 251351,3836170; 251381,3836254; 
251547,3836372; 251638,3836614; 251747,3836715; 251824,3836696; 
251875,3836712; 251924,3836866; 251939,3837038; 252086,3837351; 
252110,3837364; 252314,3837278; 252537,3837120; 252624,3837151; 
252747,3837270; 252925,3837331; 253269,3837357; 253466,3837333; 
253634,3837280; 253781,3837297; 254336,3837592; 254390,3837486; 
254516,3837387; and return 254540,3837294.
    (ii) Note: Unit STB-7 for California red-legged frog is depicted on 
the map in paragraph (44)(ii) of this entry.
    (51) Unit VEN-1: Ventura County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 
scale quadrangles Matilija, Ventura and Ojai.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 11, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 292389,3808989; 292269,3808813; 292067,3808838; 292001,3808540; 
291744,3808513; 291660,3808360; 291309,3808445; 291346,3808110; 
291188,3807970; 290857,3808078; 290683,3807876; 290516,3807881; 
290022,3807626; 289938,3807423; 289743,3807351; 289693,3807054; 
289556,3806919; 289357,3806257; 288924,3806106; 288596,3805768; 
288535,3805756; 288169,3806170; 288139,3806566; 288022,3806679; 
287922,3806605; 287842,3806111; 287702,3806086; 287770,3806708; 
287997,3806862; 288226,3806724; 288210,3807181; 288352,3807324; 
288495,3807334; 288507,3807633; 288897,3808046; 289299,3808143; 
289254,3808351; 289400,3808575; 289665,3808668; 289771,3808791; 
290075,3808823; 290121,3809125; 290398,3809519; 290426,3809709; 
290786,3809928; 291436,3811102; 291817,3811326; 291749,3811476; 
291788,3811585; 292474,3811706; 292581,3812127; 293112,3812393; 
293210,3812196; 293840,3812153; 294048,3811973; 294135,3811749; 
293856,3811194; 293598,3811103; 293155,3810614; 292790,3810406; 
292674,3810144; 292894,3809713; 292746,3809412; 292765,3809204; 
292611,3808985; returning to 292389,3808989.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit VEN-1 for the California red-legged frog 
follows:

[[Page 126]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17MR10.025

    (52) Unit VEN-2: Ventura and Los Angeles Counties, California. From 
USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles Cobblestone Mountain and Whitaker Peak.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 11, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 339291,3827835; 339299,3827739; 339766,3827357; 340374,3827063; 
340544,3826712; 341072,3826348;

[[Page 127]]

340944,3826090; 340929,3825836; 341091,3825360; 340852,3824908; 
340799,3824021; 340501,3823636; 340142,3823657; 339877,3823482; 
339839,3822849; 339931,3822610; 340226,3822571; 340007,3822097; 
339952,3821528; 339632,3821505; 339211,3820830; 339197,3820598; 
338832,3820187; 338664,3820291; 338411,3820813; 338027,3821260; 
337668,3821358; 336304,3822097; 336529,3822597; 336713,3822708; 
336854,3823475; 335722,3824114; 335636,3824514; 335416,3824690; 
334902,3824748; 334557,3824905; 334507,3825194; 334331,3825218; 
334164,3825391; 334109,3825598; 333690,3825882; 333242,3826358; 
333195,3826701; 333300,3826871; 333037,3827486; 332830,3827662; 
333176,3827981; 333533,3828042; 335562,3827839; 336504,3827892; 
336890,3827733; 337083,3827558; 337171,3827662; 337429,3827646; 
337638,3827729; 337852,3827893; 338100,3827946; 338394,3827861; 
339081,3828201; 339230,3828192; 339304,3828065; returning to 
339291,3827835.
    (ii) Note: Map of Units VEN-2 and VEN-3 for the California red-
legged frog follows:

[[Page 128]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17MR10.026

    (53) Unit VEN-3: Ventura County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 
scale quadrangle Calabasas.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 11, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N):
    341537,3788481; 341736,3788470; 341842,3788432; 341858,3788081; 
341901,3788038; 342052,3787988;

[[Page 129]]

342080,3787895; 342176,3787747; 342210,3787526; 342325,3787446; 
342313,3787400; 342378,3787252; 342363,3787000; 342383,3786937; 
342492,3786911; 342545,3786875; 342597,3786770; 342634,3786746; 
342707,3786761; 342888,3786729; 343046,3786812; 343143,3786802; 
343161,3786758; 343130,3786655; 343278,3786596; 343251,3786524; 
343000,3786409; 342966,3786345; 342975,3786301; 343006,3786284; 
343296,3786247; 343305,3786222; 343292,3786149; 343145,3786005; 
343137,3785867; 343075,3785758; 343017,3785458; 343022,3785370; 
343124,3785088; 343244,3785168; 343304,3785185; 343392,3785170; 
343545,3785240; 343902,3785199; 344046,3785251; 344362,3785450; 
344562,3785482; 344787,3785460; 345043,3785358; 345089,3785258; 
345088,3785192; 344991,3784960; 345067,3784928; 345213,3784807; 
345208,3784726; 345176,3784657; 345249,3784489; 345264,3784398; 
345436,3784371; 345443,3784242; 345485,3784237; 345615,3784301; 
345599,3784303; 345716,3784275; 345839,3784282; 345873,3784138; 
346114,3784037; 346167,3783879; 346139,3783739; 346236,3783615; 
346099,3783517; 346152,3783412; 346150,3783308; 346063,3783276; 
345893,3783321; 345819,3783163; 345605,3783068; 345245,3782745; 
345220,3782695; 345104,3782702; 344801,3782582; 344572,3782299; 
344257,3782149; 344007,3782227; 343959,3782314; 343835,3782353; 
343698,3782181; 343356,3782138; 342181,3782163; 342057,3782712; 
341965,3782823; 341986,3782835; 341836,3783224; 341806,3783464; 
341772,3783516; 341641,3783607; 341546,3783735; 341607,3783877; 
341570,3784109; 341607,3784403; 341593,3784510; 341540,3784612; 
341531,3784885; 341515,3784912; 341368,3784968; 341259,3785132; 
341152,3785246; 341070,3785275; 341005,3785362; 340989,3785425; 
341057,3785526; 341057,3785566; 340954,3785696; 340957,3785780; 
340780,3785859; 340677,3785955; 340594,3785969; 340410,3786065; 
340264,3786081; 340188,3786114; 340193,3786151; 340268,3786202; 
340309,3786268; 340212,3786516; 340138,3786536; 340081,3786597; 
340083,3786637; 340162,3786710; 340120,3786789; 339978,3786784; 
339833,3786860; 339561,3786931; 339264,3787091; 339199,3787176; 
338893,3787232; 338790,3787269; 338763,3787300; 338786,3787386; 
339019,3787565; 338966,3787714; 338890,3787787; 338789,3787984; 
338806,3788053; 338960,3788068; 339268,3788041; 339472,3788234; 
339521,3788249; 339968,3788206; 340122,3788237; 340306,3788353; 
340467,3788246; 340497,3788252; 340578,3788369; 340849,3788263; 
341244,3788275; 341326,3788322; 341389,3788507; returning to 
341537,3788481.
    (ii) Note: Unit VEN-3 for California red-legged frog is depicted on 
the map in paragraph (52)(ii) of this entry.
    (54) Unit LOS-1: Los Angeles County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 
scale quadrangles Warm Springs Mountain and Green Valley.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 11, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 359031,3819227; 358730,3819226; 357682,3819421; 357694,3819619; 
357819,3819717; 357871,3819926; 358218,3820421; 358455,3821056; 
358466,3821241; 358352,3821327; 358424,3821653; 358610,3821669; 
358704,3821902; 358598,3822345; 358987,3823103; 359060,3823442; 
359387,3823820; 359806,3824854; 360096,3825062; 361616,3825686; 
362356,3825881; 363057,3825879; 363330,3825796; 363930,3825191; 
363867,3824811; 363724,3824621; 361885,3823314; 361706,3822967; 
361437,3822679; 361231,3822109; 360167,3820914; 359852,3820073; 
359475,3819513; 359153,3819227; returning to 359031,3819227.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit LOS-1 for the California red-legged frog 
follows:

[[Page 130]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17MR10.027


[[Page 131]]



   Mountain Yellow-legged Frog (Rana muscosa), Southern California DPS

    (1) Critical habitat units are depicted for Los Angeles, San 
Bernardino, and Riverside Counties, California, on the maps below.
    (2) The primary constituent elements of critical habitat for the 
mountain yellow-legged frog are:
    (i) Water source(s) found between 1,214 to 7,546 ft (370 to 2,300 m) 
in elevation that are permanent. Water sources include, but are not 
limited to, streams, rivers, perennial creeks (or permanent plunge pools 
within intermittent creeks), pools (i.e., a body of impounded water that 
is contained above a natural dam), and other forms of aquatic habitat. 
The water source should maintain a natural flow pattern including 
periodic natural flooding. Aquatic habitats that are used by mountain 
yellow-legged frog for breeding purposes must maintain water during the 
entire tadpole growth phase, which can be up to 2 years duration. During 
periods of drought, or less than average rainfall, these breeding sites 
may not hold water long enough for individuals to complete 
metamorphosis, but they would still be considered essential breeding 
habitat in wetter years. Further, the aquatic habitat includes:
    (A) Bank and pool substrates consisting of varying percentages of 
soil or silt, sand, gravel cobble, rock, and boulders;
    (B) Open gravel banks and rocks projecting above or just beneath the 
surface of the water for sunning posts;
    (C) Aquatic refugia, including pools with bank overhangs, downfall 
logs or branches, and/or rocks to provide cover from predators; and
    (D) Streams or stream reaches between known occupied sites that can 
function as corridors for adults and frogs for movement between aquatic 
habitats used as breeding and/or foraging sites.
    (ii) Riparian habitat and upland vegetation (e.g., ponderosa pine, 
montane hardwood-conifer, montane riparian woodlands, and chaparral) 
extending 262 feet (80 m) from each side of the centerline of each 
identified stream and its tributaries, that provides areas for feeding 
and movement of mountain yellow-legged frog, with a canopy overstory not 
exceeding 85 percent that allows sunlight to reach the stream and 
thereby provides basking areas for the species.
    (3) Critical habitat does not include manmade structures existing on 
the effective date of this rule and not containing one or more of the 
primary constituent elements, such as buildings, aqueducts, airports, 
and roads, and the land on which such structures are located.
    (4) Critical Habitat Map Units. Data layers defining map units were 
created on a base of USGS 7.5' quadrangles, and critical habitat units 
were then mapped using Universal Transverse Mercator (UTM) coordinates. 
Note: Index map of critical habitat units for the southern California 
DPS of the mountain yellow-legged frog (Map 1) follows:

[[Page 132]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14SE06.000

    (5) Unit 1: San Gabriel Mountains Unit, Los Angeles and San 
Bernardino Counties, California. From USGS 1:24,000 quadrangle maps 
Crystal Lake, Cucamonga Peak, Mount San Antonio Valyermo, and Waterman 
Mountain, California.
    (i) Subunit 1A: San Gabriel River, East Fork Angeles National 
Forest, Los Angeles County, California.
    (A) Land bounded by the following UTM North American Datum of 1927 
(NAD27) coordinates (E, N): 434100, 3803300; 434400, 3803300; 434400, 
3803100; 434300, 3803100; 434300,

[[Page 133]]

3802900; 434200, 3802900; 434200, 3802800; 434100, 3802800; 434100, 
3802600; 434000, 3802600; 434000, 3802500; 433800, 3802500; 433800, 
3802200; 433700, 3802200; 433700, 3801900; 433600, 3801900; 433600, 
3801800; 433800, 3801800; 433800, 3801900; 434200, 3801900; 434200, 
3802000; 434400, 3802000; 434400, 3802100; 434500, 3802100; 434500, 
3802300; 434600, 3802300; 434600, 3802500; 434700, 3802500; 434700, 
3802800; 434800, 3802800; 434800, 3802900; 434900, 3802900; 434900, 
3803000; 435100, 3803000; 435100, 3802700; 435000, 3802700; 435000, 
3802600; 434900, 3802600; 434900, 3802200; 434800, 3802200; 434800, 
3802100; 434700, 3802100; 434700, 3801900; 434600, 3801900; 434600, 
3801800; 434400, 3801800; 434400, 3801700; 434000, 3801700; 434000, 
3801600; 433400, 3801600; 433400, 3801500; 433300, 3801500; 433300, 
3801400; 433400, 3801400; 433400, 3801300; 433500, 3801300; 433500, 
3800400; 433900, 3800400; 433900, 3800500; 434000, 3800500; 434000, 
3800600; 434200, 3800600; 434200, 3800500; 434300, 3800500; 434300, 
3800600; 434500, 3800600; 434500, 3800900; 434600, 3800900; 434600, 
3801200; 434700, 3801200; 434700, 3801500; 434800, 3801500; 434800, 
3801600; 434900, 3801600; 434900, 3801800; 435000, 3801800; 435000, 
3801900; 435100, 3801900; 435100, 3802000; 435200, 3802000; 435200, 
3802100; 435300, 3802100; 435300, 3802200; 435400, 3802200; 435400, 
3802300; 435500, 3802300; 435500, 3802400; 435800, 3802400; 435800, 
3802200; 435700, 3802200; 435700, 3802100; 435600, 3802100; 435600, 
3802000; 435500, 3802000; 435500, 3801900; 435400, 3801900; 435400, 
3801800; 435300, 3801800; 435300, 3801700; 435200, 3801700; 435200, 
3801600; 435100, 3801600; 435100, 3801500; 435000, 3801500; 435000, 
3801100; 434900, 3801100; 434900, 3800900; 435000, 3800900; 435000, 
3800800; 435100, 3800800; 435100, 3800700; 435200, 3800700; 435200, 
3800400; 435500, 3800400; 435500, 3800600; 435600, 3800600; 435600, 
3800800; 435700, 3800800; 435700, 3800900; 435900, 3800900; 435900, 
3801200; 436000, 3801200; 436000, 3801300; 436100, 3801300; 436100, 
3801600; 436400, 3801600; 436400, 3801700; 436800, 3801700; 436800, 
3801400; 436300, 3801400; 436300, 3801100; 436200, 3801100; 436200, 
3801000; 436100, 3801000; 436100, 3800900; 436200, 3800900; 436200, 
3800700; 436100, 3800700; 436100, 3800600; 435800, 3800600; 435800, 
3800300; 435900, 3800300; 435900, 3800200; 436100, 3800200; 436100, 
3800100; 436300, 3800100; 436300, 3800000; 436200, 3800000; 436200, 
3799800; 436100, 3799800; 436100, 3799900; 435900, 3799900; 435900, 
3800000; 435800, 3800000; 435800, 3800100; 435100, 3800100; 435100, 
3800200; 435000, 3800200; 435000, 3800300; 434900, 3800300; 434900, 
3800600; 434800, 3800600; 434800, 3800400; 434600, 3800400; 434600, 
3800300; 434100, 3800300; 434100, 3800100; 433200, 3800100; 433200, 
3800000; 433300, 3800000; 433300, 3799800; 433400, 3799800; 433400, 
3799200; 433600, 3799200; 433600, 3798800; 433500, 3798800; 433500, 
3798700; 433400, 3798700; 433400, 3798600; 433300, 3798600; 433300, 
3798500; 433200, 3798500; 433200, 3797600; 433100, 3797600; 433100, 
3797400; 433000, 3797400; 433000, 3797300; 432800, 3797300; 432800, 
3797200; 432900, 3797200; 432900, 3797000; 432800, 3797000; 432800, 
3796400; 433000, 3796400; 433000, 3796500; 433100, 3796500; 433100, 
3796600; 433200, 3796600; 433200, 3796700; 433400, 3796700; 433400, 
3796600; 433600, 3796600; 433600, 3796700; 433700, 3796700; 433700, 
3796800; 433800, 3796800; 433800, 3796900; 434200, 3796900; 434200, 
3797000; 434500, 3797000; 434500, 3796900; 434600, 3796900; 434600, 
3796700; 434000, 3796700; 434000, 3796500; 433800, 3796500; 433800, 
3796400; 434000, 3796400; 434000, 3796300; 434100, 3796300; 434100, 
3796200; 434300, 3796200; 434300, 3796100; 434400, 3796100; 434400, 
3796000; 434600, 3796000; 434600, 3795600; 434500, 3795600; 434500, 
3795800; 434300, 3795800; 434300, 3795900; 434100, 3795900; 434100, 
3796000; 433900, 3796000; 433900, 3796100; 433600, 3796100; 433600, 
3796200; 433500, 3796200; 433500, 3796300; 433200, 3796300; 433200, 
3796200; 433000, 3796200; 433000, 3796100; 432900, 3796100; 432900, 
3796000; 432800, 3796000; 432800, 3795900; 433000, 3795900; 433000, 
3795800; 433200, 3795800; 433200, 3795700; 433300, 3795700; 433300, 
3795600; 433600, 3795600; 433600, 3795500; 433800, 3795500; 433800, 
3795400; 433900, 3795400; 433900, 3795300; 434000, 3795300; 434000, 
3795200; 434100, 3795200; 434100, 3795100; 434200, 3795100; 434200, 
3795000; 434100, 3795000; 434100, 3794900; 434000, 3794900; 434000, 
3795000; 433800, 3795000; 433800, 3795100; 433700, 3795100; 433700, 
3795200; 433600, 3795200; 433600, 3795300; 433400, 3795300; 433400, 
3795400; 433100, 3795400; 433100, 3795500; 433000, 3795500; 433000, 
3795600; 432800, 3795600; 432800, 3795700; 432500, 3795700; 432500, 
3795500; 432400, 3795500; 432400, 3795400; 432500, 3795400; 432500, 
3795300; 432700, 3795300; 432700, 3795200; 432800, 3795200; 432800, 
3795100; 433100, 3795100; 433100, 3795000; 433200, 3795000; 433200, 
3794800; 433400, 3794800; 433400, 3794700; 433600, 3794700; 433600, 
3794600; 433500, 3794600; 433500, 3794400; 433400, 3794400; 433400, 
3794500; 433200, 3794500; 433200, 3794600; 433000, 3794600; 433000, 
3794800; 432900, 3794800; 432900, 3794900; 432600, 3794900; 432600, 
3795000; 432500, 3795000; 432500, 3795100; 432300, 3795100; 432300, 
3795200; 432000, 3795200; 432000, 3795100; 432100, 3795100; 432100, 
3795000; 432000, 3795000; 432000, 3794900; 431900, 3794900; 431900, 
3794800; 431800, 3794800; 431800, 3794500; 431600, 3794500; 431600, 
3794400; 431500, 3794400; 431500, 3794100; 431600, 3794100; 431600, 
3794000; 431700, 3794000; 431700, 3793600; 431600, 3793600; 431600, 
3793400; 431400, 3793400; 431400, 3793900; 431300, 3793900; 431300, 
3794600; 431400, 3794600; 431400, 3794700; 431500, 3794700; 431500, 
3795000; 431600, 3795000; 431600, 3795300; 431100, 3795300; 431100, 
3795100; 430600, 3795100; 430600, 3795200; 430200, 3795200; 430200, 
3795400; 430100, 3795400; 430100, 3795500; 430200, 3795500; 430200, 
3795600; 430400, 3795600; 430400, 3795500; 430700, 3795500; 430700, 
3795400; 430800, 3795400; 430800, 3795300; 430900, 3795300; 430900, 
3795600; 431100, 3795600; 431100, 3795900; 431000, 3795900; 431000, 
3796600; 431100, 3796600; 431100, 3796900; 431000, 3796900; 431000, 
3797000; 431100, 3797000; 431100, 3797200; 431200, 3797200; 431200, 
3797000; 431300, 3797000; 431300, 3796500; 431200, 3796500; 431200, 
3796100; 431300, 3796100; 431300, 3795700; 431400, 3795700; 431400, 
3795600; 431600, 3795600; 431600, 3795500; 431800, 3795500; 431800, 
3795300; 431900, 3795300; 431900, 3795400; 432000, 3795400; 432000, 
3795500; 432100, 3795500; 432100, 3795600; 432200, 3795600; 432200, 
3795700; 432300, 3795700; 432300, 3796000; 432500, 3796000; 432500, 
3796100; 432400, 3796100; 432400, 3796300; 432500, 3796300; 432500, 
3796400; 432600, 3796400; 432600,

[[Page 134]]

3796600; 432500, 3796600; 432500, 3796900; 432600, 3796900; 432600, 
3797100; 432500, 3797100; 432500, 3797400; 432600, 3797400; 432600, 
3797500; 432800, 3797500; 432800, 3797700; 432700, 3797700; 432700, 
3797800; 432300, 3797800; 432300, 3797900; 432200, 3797900; 432200, 
3798000; 432100, 3798000; 432100, 3798100; 432000, 3798100; 432000, 
3798200; 431700, 3798200; 431700, 3798300; 431600, 3798300; 431600, 
3798400; 431400, 3798400; 431400, 3798500; 431300, 3798500; 431300, 
3798600; 431200, 3798600; 431200, 3798900; 431400, 3798900; 431400, 
3798800; 431500, 3798800; 431500, 3798700; 431600, 3798700; 431600, 
3798600; 431800, 3798600; 431800, 3798500; 431900, 3798500; 431900, 
3798400; 432100, 3798400; 432100, 3798300; 432200, 3798300; 432200, 
3798200; 432300, 3798200; 432300, 3798100; 432400, 3798100; 432400, 
3798000; 432800, 3798000; 432800, 3797900; 432900, 3797900; 432900, 
3798200; 433000, 3798200; 433000, 3798700; 433100, 3798700; 433100, 
3798900; 433300, 3798900; 433300, 3799100; 433200, 3799100; 433200, 
3799300; 433100, 3799300; 433100, 3799900; 432900, 3799900; 432900, 
3800300; 433000, 3800300; 433000, 3800400; 432900, 3800400; 432900, 
3800500; 432600, 3800500; 432600, 3800600; 432400, 3800600; 432400, 
3800700; 432200, 3800700; 432200, 3800800; 431600, 3800800; 431600, 
3801000; 431700, 3801000; 431700, 3801100; 432000, 3801100; 432000, 
3801000; 432400, 3801000; 432400, 3800900; 432600, 3800900; 432600, 
3800800; 432700, 3800800; 432700, 3800700; 433100, 3800700; 433100, 
3800600; 433200, 3800600; 433200, 3800800; 433300, 3800800; 433300, 
3801200; 433100, 3801200; 433100, 3801300; 433000, 3801300; 433000, 
3801600; 433100, 3801600; 433100, 3802000; 433000, 3802000; 433000, 
3802100; 432800, 3802100; 432800, 3802200; 432600, 3802200; 432600, 
3802300; 432400, 3802300; 432400, 3802400; 432200, 3802400; 432200, 
3802500; 431900, 3802500; 431900, 3802700; 432200, 3802700; 432200, 
3803000; 432400, 3803000; 432400, 3802900; 432500, 3802900; 432500, 
3802800; 432600, 3802800; 432600, 3802700; 432700, 3802700; 432700, 
3802500; 432800, 3802500; 432800, 3802400; 433000, 3802400; 433000, 
3802300; 433200, 3802300; 433200, 3802100; 433300, 3802100; 433300, 
3802000; 433400, 3802000; 433400, 3802100; 433500, 3802100; 433500, 
3802500; 433600, 3802500; 433600, 3802700; 433800, 3802700; 433800, 
3802800; 433900, 3802800; 433900, 3802900; 434000, 3802900; 434000, 
3803100; 434100, 3803100; returning to 434100, 3803300.
    (B) Map depicting subunit 1A is located at paragraph (5)(vi)(B) of 
this section.
    (ii) Subunit 1B: Big Rock Creek, South Fork, Angeles National 
Forest, Los Angeles County, California.
    (A) Land bounded by the following UTM NAD27 coordinates (E, N): 
424400, 3805700; 424600, 3805700; 424600, 3805400; 424500, 3805400; 
424500, 3805300; 424300, 3805300; 424300, 3805200; 424400, 3805200; 
424400, 3805000; 424300, 3805000; 424300, 3804900; 424100, 3804900; 
424100, 3804800; 424000, 3804800; 424000, 3804700; 423900, 3804700; 
423900, 3804500; 423800, 3804500; 423800, 3804400; 423700, 3804400; 
423700, 3804300; 424000, 3804300; 424000, 3804100; 424100, 3804100; 
424100, 3804000; 424200, 3804000; 424200, 3803900; 424300, 3803900; 
424300, 3803800; 425200, 3803800; 425200, 3803700; 425700, 3803700; 
425700, 3803400; 425400, 3803400; 425400, 3803500; 424400, 3803500; 
424400, 3803000; 424500, 3803000; 424500, 3802900; 425100, 3802900; 
425100, 3802800; 425300, 3802800; 425300, 3802600; 424500, 3802600; 
424500, 3802700; 424300, 3802700; 424300, 3802800; 424200, 3802800; 
424200, 3803000; 424100, 3803000; 424100, 3803700; 423900, 3803700; 
423900, 3803800; 423800, 3803800; 423800, 3804000; 423700, 3804000; 
423700, 3803700; 423500, 3803700; 423500, 3803600; 423400, 3803600; 
423400, 3803400; 423300, 3803400; 423300, 3803200; 423500, 3803200; 
423500, 3803000; 423600, 3803000; 423600, 3802600; 423700, 3802600; 
423700, 3802500; 423800, 3802500; 423800, 3802400; 424000, 3802400; 
424000, 3802300; 423500, 3802300; 423500, 3802400; 423400, 3802400; 
423400, 3802800; 423300, 3802800; 423300, 3802900; 423200, 3802900; 
423200, 3803000; 423100, 3803000; 423100, 3803100; 423000, 3803100; 
423000, 3803000; 422900, 3803000; 422900, 3802800; 422800, 3802800; 
422800, 3802700; 422700, 3802700; 422700, 3802800; 422600, 3802800; 
422600, 3803100; 422700, 3803100; 422700, 3803200; 422800, 3803200; 
422800, 3803300; 422900, 3803300; 422900, 3803400; 423000, 3803400; 
423000, 3803500; 423100, 3803500; 423100, 3803600; 423200, 3803600; 
423200, 3803900; 423400, 3803900; 423400, 3804500; 423500, 3804500; 
423500, 3804600; 423600, 3804600; 423600, 3804700; 423700, 3804700; 
423700, 3804900; 423800, 3804900; 423800, 3805000; 423900, 3805000; 
423900, 3805100; 424000, 3805100; 424000, 3805400; 424100, 3805400; 
424100, 3805500; 424200, 3805500; 424200, 3805600; 424400, 3805600; 
returning to 424400, 3805700.
    (B) Map depicting subunit 1B is located at paragraph (5)(vi)(B) of 
this entry.
    (iii) Subunit 1C: Little Rock Creek, Angeles National Forest, Los 
Angeles County, California.
    (A) Land bounded by the following UTM NAD27 coordinates (E, N): 
419500, 3803800; 420000, 3803800; 420000, 3803600; 419700, 3803600; 
419700, 3803500; 419600, 3803500; 419600, 3803400; 419500, 3803400; 
419500, 3803300; 419600, 3803300; 419600, 3803200; 419700, 3803200; 
419700, 3802900; 420000, 3802900; 420000, 3803000; 420200, 3803000; 
420200, 3803100; 420400, 3803100; 420400, 3803200; 420500, 3803200; 
420500, 3803300; 420600, 3803300; 420600, 3803400; 420900, 3803400; 
420900, 3803200; 420800, 3803200; 420800, 3803100; 420700, 3803100; 
420700, 3803000; 420600, 3803000; 420600, 3802900; 420500, 3802900; 
420500, 3802800; 420100, 3802800; 420100, 3802700; 419900, 3802700; 
419900, 3802600; 419800, 3802600; 419800, 3802400; 419700, 3802400; 
419700, 3802300; 419500, 3802300; 419500, 3802400; 419400, 3802400; 
419400, 3802300; 419300, 3802300; 419300, 3802100; 419200, 3802100; 
419200, 3802000; 419100, 3802000; 419100, 3801900; 419000, 3801900; 
419000, 3801800; 418800, 3801800; 418800, 3801900; 418500, 3801900; 
418500, 3801800; 417900, 3801800; 417900, 3801900; 417800, 3801900; 
417800, 3802000; 417700, 3802000; 417700, 3802100; 417600, 3802100; 
417600, 3802300; 417500, 3802300; 417500, 3802400; 417300, 3802400; 
417300, 3802300; 417200, 3802300; 417200, 3802200; 417000, 3802200; 
417000, 3801400; 416900, 3801400; 416900, 3801300; 416800, 3801300; 
416800, 3801200; 416700, 3801200; 416700, 3801100; 416600, 3801100; 
416600, 3801200; 416500, 3801200; 416500, 3801400; 416700, 3801400; 
416700, 3802100; 416500, 3802100; 416500, 3802000; 416200, 3802000; 
416200, 3802100; 416100, 3802100; 416100, 3802200;

[[Page 135]]

416000, 3802200; 416000, 3802500; 416300, 3802500; 416300, 3802300; 
416500, 3802300; 416500, 3802400; 416900, 3802400; 416900, 3802500; 
417100, 3802500; 417100, 3802600; 417800, 3802600; 417800, 3802400; 
417900, 3802400; 417900, 3802300; 418000, 3802300; 418000, 3802100; 
418300, 3802100; 418300, 3802400; 418600, 3802400; 418600, 3802200; 
419000, 3802200; 419000, 3802400; 419100, 3802400; 419100, 3802500; 
419200, 3802500; 419200, 3802700; 419400, 3802700; 419400, 3803100; 
419300, 3803100; 419300, 3803600; 419400, 3803600; 419400, 3803700; 
419500, 3803700; returning to 419500, 3803800.
    (B) Map depicting subunit 1C is located at paragraph (5)(vi)(B) of 
this entry.
    (iv) Subunit 1D: Devil's Canyon, Angeles National Forest, Los 
Angeles County, California.
    (A) Land bounded by the following UTM NAD27 coordinates (E, N): 
414500, 3799300; 414700, 3799300; 414700, 3798600; 414600, 3798600; 
414600, 3798500; 414500, 3798500; 414500, 3798400; 414300, 3798400; 
414300, 3798300; 413900, 3798300; 413900, 3798200; 413600, 3798200; 
413600, 3798100; 413400, 3798100; 413400, 3798000; 413000, 3798000; 
413000, 3797800; 412600, 3797800; 412600, 3797700; 412500, 3797700; 
412500, 3797600; 412300, 3797600; 412300, 3797700; 412100, 3797700; 
412100, 3797800; 411800, 3797800; 411800, 3797700; 411400, 3797700; 
411400, 3797800; 411300, 3797800; 411300, 3798100; 411500, 3798100; 
411500, 3798000; 411800, 3798000; 411800, 3798100; 412200, 3798100; 
412200, 3798000; 412300, 3798000; 412300, 3797900; 412400, 3797900; 
412400, 3798000; 412700, 3798000; 412700, 3798100; 412800, 3798100; 
412800, 3798200; 413100, 3798200; 413100, 3798300; 413400, 3798300; 
413400, 3798400; 413700, 3798400; 413700, 3798500; 414100, 3798500; 
414100, 3798600; 414200, 3798600; 414200, 3798700; 414400, 3798700; 
414400, 3798800; 414500, 3798800; returning to 414500, 3799300.
    (B) Map depicting subunit 1D is located at paragraph (5)(vi)(B) of 
this entry.
    (v) Subunit 1F: San Gabriel River, East Fork, Iron Fork, Los Angeles 
County, California.
    (A) Land bounded by the following UTM NAD27 coordinates (E, N): 
429100, 3798400; 429400, 3798400; 429400, 3798000; 429500, 3798000; 
429500, 3797400; 429700, 3797400; 429700, 3797100; 429600, 3797100; 
429600, 3797000; 429700, 3797000; 429700, 3796800; 429800, 3796800; 
429800, 3796700; 429900, 3796700; 429900, 3796500; 430000, 3796500; 
430000, 3796000; 430100, 3796000; 430100, 3795800; 430200, 3795800; 
430200, 3795500; 430100, 3795500; 430100, 3795400; 430000, 3795400; 
430000, 3795600; 429600, 3795600; 429600, 3795500; 429300, 3795500; 
429300, 3795600; 429000, 3795600; 429000, 3795700; 428700, 3795700; 
428700, 3795800; 428600, 3795800; 428600, 3795700; 428300, 3795700; 
428300, 3795800; 428000, 3795800; 428000, 3796100; 428700, 3796100; 
428700, 3796000; 428900, 3796000; 428900, 3795900; 429400, 3795900; 
429400, 3795800; 429800, 3795800; 429800, 3796000; 429700, 3796000; 
429700, 3796400; 429600, 3796400; 429600, 3796600; 429500, 3796600; 
429500, 3796800; 429400, 3796800; 429400, 3797200; 429300, 3797200; 
429300, 3797300; 429200, 3797300; 429200, 3798000; 429000, 3798000; 
429000, 3798300; 429100, 3798300; returning to 429100, 3798400.
    (B) Map depicting subunit 1F is located at paragraph (5)(vi)(B) of 
this entry.
    (vi) Subunit 1G: Bear Creek, Angeles National Forest, Los Angeles 
County, California.
    (A) Land bounded by the following UTM NAD27 coordinates (E, N): 
417500, 3797700; 417800, 3797700; 417800, 3797500; 417900, 3797500; 
417900, 3797300; 418000, 3797300; 418000, 3796800; 417900, 3796800; 
417900, 3796700; 418000, 3796700; 418000, 3796600; 418200, 3796600; 
418200, 3796500; 418300, 3796500; 418300, 3796300; 417900, 3796300; 
417900, 3796400; 417800, 3796400; 417800, 3796500; 417700, 3796500; 
417700, 3797200; 417600, 3797200; 417600, 3797500; 417500, 3797500; 
returning to 417500, 3797700.
    (B) Map of Unit 1, with subunits 1A, 1B, 1C, 1D, 1F, and 1G (Map 2), 
follows:

[[Page 136]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14SE06.001

    (vii) Subunit 1E: Day Canyon, San Bernardino National Forest, San 
Bernardino County, California.
    (A) Land bounded by the following UTM NAD27 coordinates (E, N): 
446400, 3786900; 446700, 3786900; 446700, 3786800; 446900, 3786800; 
446900, 3786700; 447100, 3786700; 447100, 3786600; 447200, 3786600; 
447200, 3786500; 447300, 3786500; 447300, 3786400; 447400, 3786400; 
447400, 3786200; 447500, 3786200; 447500, 3786100; 447600, 3786100; 
447600, 3786000; 447700, 3786000; 447700, 3785900; 447900, 3785900; 
447900, 3785800; 448100, 3785800; 448100, 3785700; 448400, 3785700; 
448400, 3785600; 448600, 3785600; 448600, 3785500; 448800, 3785500;

[[Page 137]]

448800, 3785400; 448900, 3785400; 448900, 3785000; 449000, 3785000; 
449000, 3784900; 449200, 3784900; 449200, 3784800; 449300, 3784800; 
449300, 3784600; 449400, 3784600; 449400, 3784300; 449500, 3784300; 
449500, 3784400; 449700, 3784400; 449700, 3785100; 449800, 3785100; 
449800, 3785800; 450000, 3785800; 450000, 3784800; 449900, 3784800; 
449900, 3784700; 450000, 3784700; 450000, 3784500; 449900, 3784500; 
449900, 3783800; 450000, 3783800; 450000, 3783700; 450300, 3783700; 
450300, 3783800; 450400, 3783800; 450400, 3783900; 450500, 3783900; 
450500, 3784700; 450600, 3784700; 450600, 3784800; 450700, 3784800; 
450700, 3784900; 450800, 3784900; 450800, 3785100; 450900, 3785100; 
450900, 3785200; 451000, 3785200; 451000, 3785100; 451100, 3785100; 
451100, 3784800; 451000, 3784800; 451000, 3784700; 450900, 3784700; 
450900, 3784600; 450800, 3784600; 450800, 3783900; 450700, 3783900; 
450700, 3783700; 450600, 3783700; 450600, 3783600; 450500, 3783600; 
450500, 3783500; 450300, 3783500; 450300, 3783100; 450400, 3783100; 
450400, 3783000; 450500, 3783000; 450500, 3782800; 450200, 3782800; 
450200, 3782900; 450100, 3782900; 450100, 3783100; 450000, 3783100; 
450000, 3783200; 449900, 3783200; 449900, 3783500; 449800, 3783500; 
449800, 3783600; 449700, 3783600; 449700, 3783700; 449600, 3783700; 
449600, 3783900; 449700, 3783900; 449700, 3784100; 449200, 3784100; 
449200, 3784300; 449100, 3784300; 449100, 3784600; 449000, 3784600; 
449000, 3784700; 448800, 3784700; 448800, 3784800; 448700, 3784800; 
448700, 3785200; 448600, 3785200; 448600, 3785300; 448400, 3785300; 
448400, 3785400; 448300, 3785400; 448300, 3785500; 447900, 3785500; 
447900, 3785600; 447800, 3785600; 447800, 3785700; 447500, 3785700; 
447500, 3785800; 447400, 3785800; 447400, 3785900; 447300, 3785900; 
447300, 3786000; 447200, 3786000; 447200, 3786200; 447100, 3786200; 
447100, 3786300; 447000, 3786300; 447000, 3786400; 446900, 3786400; 
446900, 3786500; 446700, 3786500; 446700, 3786600; 446500, 3786600; 
446500, 3786700; 446400, 3786700; returning to 446400, 3786900.
    (B) Map of subunit 1E (Map 3) follows:

[[Page 138]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14SE06.002

    (6) Unit 2: San Bernardino Mountains, San Bernardino National 
Forest, San Bernardino County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 quadrangle 
maps Big Bear Lake, Catclaw Flat and Harrison Mountain, California.
    (i) Subunit 2A: City Creek, East and West Forks, San Bernardino 
National Forest, San Bernardino County, California.
    (A) Land bounded by the following UTM NAD27 coordinates (E, N): 
483800, 3785100; 483900, 3785100; 483900, 3785200; 484000, 3785200; 
484000, 3785400; 484100, 3785400; 484100, 3785600;

[[Page 139]]

484200, 3785600; 484200, 3785700; 484300, 3785700; 484300, 3785800; 
484400, 3785800; 484400, 3785900; 484600, 3785900; 484600, 3785600; 
484500, 3785600; 484500, 3785500; 484400, 3785500; 484400, 3785400; 
484300, 3785400; 484300, 3785200; 484200, 3785200; 484200, 3785000; 
484100, 3785000; 484100, 3784900; 484000, 3784900; 484000, 3784800; 
483900, 3784800; 483900, 3784700; 483800, 3784700; 483800, 3784400; 
483900, 3784400; 483900, 3784000; 483700, 3784000; 483700, 3783900; 
483900, 3783900; 483900, 3783800; 484000, 3783800; 484000, 3783400; 
483900, 3783400; 483900, 3783300; 483700, 3783300; 483700, 3782900; 
483900, 3782900; 483900, 3783100; 484000, 3783100; 484000, 3783200; 
484300, 3783200; 484300, 3783100; 484400, 3783100; 484400, 3783400; 
484500, 3783400; 484500, 3783500; 484400, 3783500; 484400, 3783900; 
484500, 3783900; 484500, 3784000; 484700, 3784000; 484700, 3784100; 
484800, 3784100; 484800, 3784700; 484900, 3784700; 484900, 3785000; 
485000, 3785000; 485000, 3785200; 485100, 3785200; 485100, 3785300; 
485200, 3785300; 485200, 3785400; 485400, 3785400; 485400, 3785800; 
485700, 3785800; 485700, 3785700; 485800, 3785700; 485800, 3785600; 
485600, 3785600; 485600, 3785200; 485400, 3785200; 485400, 3785100; 
485300, 3785100; 485300, 3785000; 485200, 3785000; 485200, 3784600; 
485100, 3784600; 485100, 3784200; 485000, 3784200; 485000, 3783900; 
484900, 3783900; 484900, 3783800; 484700, 3783800; 484700, 3783300; 
484800, 3783300; 484800, 3783100; 484700, 3783100; 484700, 3783000; 
484600, 3783000; 484600, 3782900; 484500, 3782900; 484500, 3782800; 
484200, 3782800; 484200, 3782900; 484100, 3782900; 484100, 3782700; 
483900, 3782700; 483900, 3782600; 483800, 3782600; 483800, 3782400; 
483700, 3782400; 483700, 3782200; 484000, 3782200; 484000, 3782000; 
484400, 3782000; 484400, 3782100; 484700, 3782100; 484700, 3782000; 
485000, 3782000; 485000, 3781900; 485200, 3781900; 485200, 3781800; 
485400, 3781800; 485400, 3781700; 485200, 3781700; 485200, 3781600; 
485000, 3781600; 485000, 3781700; 484800, 3781700; 484800, 3781800; 
484300, 3781800; 484300, 3781700; 483900, 3781700; 483900, 3781800; 
483800, 3781800; 483800, 3782000; 483600, 3782000; 483600, 3781800; 
483400, 3781800; 483400, 3781200; 483600, 3781200; 483600, 3780900; 
483500, 3780900; 483500, 3780500; 484200, 3780500; 484200, 3780600; 
484300, 3780600; 484300, 3780500; 484800, 3780500; 484800, 3780400; 
484900, 3780400; 484900, 3780300; 485000, 3780300; 485000, 3780100; 
484700, 3780100; 484700, 3780200; 484600, 3780200; 484600, 3780300; 
483700, 3780300; 483700, 3780200; 483500, 3780200; 483500, 3780100; 
483400, 3780100; 483400, 3780000; 483300, 3780000; 483300, 3779900; 
483400, 3779900; 483400, 3779500; 483300, 3779500; 483300, 3779000; 
483100, 3779000; 483100, 3778800; 482800, 3778800; 482800, 3778900; 
482700, 3778900; 482700, 3779000; 482900, 3779000; 482900, 3779200; 
483100, 3779200; 483100, 3779300; 483000, 3779300; 483000, 3779700; 
483100, 3779700; 483100, 3780100; 483200, 3780100; 483200, 3780300; 
483300, 3780300; 483300, 3780400; 483200, 3780400; 483200, 3780700; 
483300, 3780700; 483300, 3781100; 482900, 3781100; 482900, 3781200; 
482800, 3781200; 482800, 3781800; 482700, 3781800; 482700, 3781900; 
482800, 3781900; 482800, 3782600; 482900, 3782600; 482900, 3782800; 
483000, 3782800; 483000, 3782900; 483100, 3782900; 483100, 3783000; 
483000, 3783000; 483000, 3783100; 482900, 3783100; 482900, 3783200; 
482300, 3783200; 482300, 3783500; 482600, 3783500; 482600, 3783600; 
482700, 3783600; 482700, 3783500; 483000, 3783500; 483000, 3783400; 
483100, 3783400; 483100, 3783300; 483300, 3783300; 483300, 3783200; 
483500, 3783200; 483500, 3783500; 483700, 3783500; 483700, 3783700; 
483300, 3783700; 483300, 3784100; 483100, 3784100; 483100, 3784400; 
483300, 3784400; 483300, 3784300; 483500, 3784300; 483500, 3784200; 
483600, 3784200; 483600, 3784400; 483500, 3784400; 483500, 3784700; 
483400, 3784700; 483400, 3784900; 483500, 3784900; 483500, 3785100; 
483600, 3785100; 483600, 3785300; 483800, 3785300; returning to 483800, 
3785100; excluding land bounded by 483700, 3785100; 483800, 3785100; 
483800, 3785000; 483700, 3785000; 483700, 3785100; land bounded by 
483100, 3782700; 483600, 3782700; 483600, 3782600; 483500, 3782600; 
483500, 3782500; 483400, 3782500; 483400, 3782400; 483300, 3782400; 
483300, 3782300; 483200, 3782300; 483200, 3782100; 483100, 3782100; 
483100, 3782700; and land bounded by 483000, 3781800; 483100, 3781800; 
483100, 3781500; 483000, 3781500; 483000, 3781800.
    (B) Map of subunit 2A (Map 4) follows:


[[Page 140]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14SE06.003

    (ii) Subunit 2B: Barton Creek, East Fork, San Bernardino National 
Forest, San Bernardino County, California.
    (A) Land bounded by the following UTM NAD27 coordinates (E, N): 
510000, 3781300; 510100, 3781300; 510100, 3781200; 510200, 3781200; 
510200, 3781100; 510400, 3781100; 510400, 3780700; 510500, 3780700; 
510500, 3780400; 510600, 3780400; 510600, 3780200; 510500, 3780200; 
510500, 3780100; 510600, 3780100; 510600, 3779800; 510700, 3779800; 
510700, 3779600; 510800, 3779600; 510800, 3779400; 510700, 3779400; 
510700, 3779300; 510800, 3779300; 510800, 3779000; 510900, 3779000; 
510900, 3778500; 510600, 3778500; 510600, 3779100; 510500, 3779100;

[[Page 141]]

510500, 3779600; 510400, 3779600; 510400, 3779900; 510300, 3779900; 
510300, 3780400; 510200, 3780400; 510200, 3780700; 510100, 3780700; 
510100, 3781000; 510000, 3781000; returning to 510000, 3781300.
    (B) Map depicting subunit 2B is located at paragraph (6)(iii)(B) of 
this entry.
    (iii) Subunit 2C: Whitewater River, North Fork, San Bernardino 
National Forest, San Bernardino County, California.
    (A) Land bounded by the following UTM NAD27 coordinates (E, N): 
523300, 3769200; 523400, 3769200; 523400, 3769100; 523600, 3769100; 
523600, 3769000; 523800, 3769000; 523800, 3768900; 523900, 3768900; 
523900, 3768800; 524200, 3768800; 524200, 3768500; 523900, 3768500; 
523900, 3768600; 523700, 3768600; 523700, 3768700; 523600, 3768700; 
523600, 3768800; 523400, 3768800; 523400, 3768900; 523200, 3768900; 
523200, 3769100; 523300, 3769100; returning to 523300, 3769200.
    (B) Map of subunits 2B and 2C (Map 5) follows:

[[Page 142]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14SE06.004

    (7) Unit 3: San Jacinto Mountains, San Bernardino National Forest, 
Riverside County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 quadrangle maps Lake 
Fulmor, Palm Springs and San Jacinto Peak, California
    (i) Subunit 3A: San Jacinto River, North Fork, San Bernardino 
National Forest, Riverside County, California.
    (A) Land bounded by the following UTM NAD27 coordinates (E, N): 
526400, 3743000; 526600, 3743000; 526600, 3742700; 526400, 3742700; 
526400, 3742600; 526300, 3742600; 526300, 3742500;

[[Page 143]]

526200, 3742500; 526200, 3742400; 526600, 3742400; 526600, 3742300; 
526900, 3742300; 526900, 3742200; 527000, 3742200; 527000, 3742000; 
526800, 3742000; 526800, 3742100; 526300, 3742100; 526300, 3742200; 
526100, 3742200; 526100, 3742800; 526200, 3742800; 526200, 3742900; 
526400, 3742900; returning to 526400, 3743000; land bounded by: 525000, 
3742100; 525200, 3742100; 525200, 3742000; 525400, 3742000; 525400, 
3741900; 525300, 3741900; 525300, 3741800; 525100, 3741800; 525100, 
3741700; 525000, 3741700; 525000, 3741600; 524900, 3741600; 524900, 
3741800; 524800, 3741800; 524800, 3741900; 524900, 3741900; 524900, 
3742000; 525000, 3742000; returning to 525000, 3742100; land bounded by: 
522600, 3741900; 522800, 3741900; 522800, 3741800; 522900, 3741800; 
522900, 3741600; 522800, 3741600; 522800, 3741400; 522600, 3741400; 
522600, 3741300; 522500, 3741300; 522500, 3741200; 522400, 3741200; 
522400, 3741100; 522300, 3741100; 522300, 3740700; 522200, 3740700; 
522200, 3740500; 522100, 3740500; 522100, 3740000; 522000, 3740000; 
522000, 3739500; 521900, 3739500; 521900, 3739200; 521800, 3739200; 
521800, 3739000; 522000, 3739000; 522000, 3739100; 522600, 3739100; 
522600, 3739200; 523000, 3739200; 523000, 3739300; 523100, 3739300; 
523100, 3739400; 523200, 3739400; 523200, 3739000; 522900, 3739000; 
522900, 3738900; 522600, 3738900; 522600, 3738800; 521800, 3738800; 
521800, 3738700; 521700, 3738700; 521700, 3738600; 521400, 3738600; 
521400, 3738800; 521500, 3738800; 521500, 3738900; 521600, 3738900; 
521600, 3739500; 521700, 3739500; 521700, 3739700; 521800, 3739700; 
521800, 3740300; 521900, 3740300; 521900, 3740700; 522000, 3740700; 
522000, 3740900; 522100, 3740900; 522100, 3741300; 522200, 3741300; 
522200, 3741400; 522400, 3741400; 522400, 3741600; 522600, 3741600; 
returning to 522600, 3741900; land bounded by: 525800, 3741200; 525900, 
3741200; 525900, 3740900; 525800, 3740900; 525800, 3740800; 525600, 
3740800; 525600, 3740700; 525500, 3740700; 525500, 3740600; 525400, 
3740600; 525400, 3740400; 525300, 3740400; 525300, 3740300; 525200, 
3740300; 525200, 3740200; 525100, 3740200; 525100, 3740100; 525000, 
3740100; 525000, 3740000; 525600, 3740000; 525600, 3740100; 525800, 
3740100; 525800, 3740000; 525900, 3740000; 525900, 3739700; 525800, 
3739700; 525800, 3739800; 525500, 3739800; 525500, 3739700; 525700, 
3739700; 525700, 3739600; 525800, 3739600; 525800, 3739500; 525900, 
3739500; 525900, 3739400; 526000, 3739400; 526000, 3739000; 525900, 
3739000; 525900, 3739100; 525800, 3739100; 525800, 3739200; 525700, 
3739200; 525700, 3739300; 525600, 3739300; 525600, 3739400; 525100, 
3739400; 525100, 3739500; 524800, 3739500; 524800, 3739600; 524600, 
3739600; 524600, 3739500; 524500, 3739500; 524500, 3739400; 524200, 
3739400; 524200, 3739300; 524100, 3739300; 524100, 3739600; 524200, 
3739600; 524200, 3739700; 524400, 3739700; 524400, 3739800; 524500, 
3739800; 524500, 3740000; 524600, 3740000; 524600, 3740100; 524700, 
3740100; 524700, 3740200; 524800, 3740200; 524800, 3740300; 524900, 
3740300; 524900, 3740400; 525000, 3740400; 525000, 3740500; 525100, 
3740500; 525100, 3740600; 525200, 3740600; 525200, 3740700; 525300, 
3740700; 525300, 3740800; 525400, 3740800; 525400, 3740900; 525500, 
3740900; 525500, 3741000; 525600, 3741000; 525600, 3741100; 525800, 
3741100; returning to 525800, 3741200; and land bounded by 523900, 
3741000; 524200, 3741000; 524200, 3740800; 524100, 3740800; 524100, 
3740700; 524000, 3740700; 524000, 3740600; 523900, 3740600; 523900, 
3740500; 523800, 3740500; 523800, 3740400; 523600, 3740400; 523600, 
3740300; 523500, 3740300; 523500, 3740100; 523400, 3740100; 523400, 
3739500; 523200, 3739500; 523200, 3739600; 523100, 3739600; 523100, 
3740000; 523200, 3740000; 523200, 3740300; 523300, 3740300; 523300, 
3740500; 523400, 3740500; 523400, 3740600; 523600, 3740600; 523600, 
3740700; 523800, 3740700; 523800, 3740900; 523900, 3740900; returning to 
523900, 3741000.
    (B) Map depicting subunit 3A is located at paragraph (7)(iv)(B) of 
this entry.
    (ii) Subunit 3B: Indian Creek at Hall Canyon, San Bernardino 
National Forest, Riverside County, California.
    (A) Land bounded by the following UTM NAD27 coordinates (E, N): 
521600, 3742800; 521800, 3742800; 521800, 3742500; 521700, 3742500; 
521700, 3741700; 521600, 3741700; 521600, 3741500; 521500, 3741500; 
521500, 3741400; 521400, 3741400; 521400, 3741200; 521300, 3741200; 
521300, 3741100; 520900, 3741100; 520900, 3741200; 521000, 3741200; 
521000, 3741300; 521100, 3741300; 521100, 3741400; 521200, 3741400; 
521200, 3741600; 521300, 3741600; 521300, 3741700; 521400, 3741700; 
521400, 3742300; 521500, 3742300; 521500, 3742700; 521600, 3742700; 
returning to 521600, 3742800.
    (B) Map depicting subunit 3B is located at paragraph (7)(iv)(B) of 
this entry.
    (iii) Subunit 3C: Tahquitz Creek, San Bernardino National Forest, 
Riverside County, California.
    (A) Land bounded by the following UTM NAD27 coordinates (E, N): 
529600, 3739000; 529900, 3739000; 529900, 3738900; 531000, 3738900; 
531000, 3738800; 531100, 3738800; 531100, 3738700; 531200, 3738700; 
531200, 3738600; 531300, 3738600; 531300, 3738500; 531400, 3738500; 
531400, 3738400; 531500, 3738400; 531500, 3738200; 531200, 3738200; 
531200, 3738300; 531100, 3738300; 531100, 3738400; 531000, 3738400; 
531000, 3738500; 530900, 3738500; 530900, 3738600; 530200, 3738600; 
530200, 3738700; 529600, 3738700; returning to 529600, 3739000; and land 
bounded by 532100, 3737000; 532400, 3737000; 532400, 3736900; 532600, 
3736900; 532600, 3736600; 532300, 3736600; 532300, 3736700; 532200, 
3736700; 532200, 3736500; 531800, 3736500; 531800, 3736300; 531700, 
3736300; 531700, 3736200; 531600, 3736200; 531600, 3736100; 531500, 
3736100; 531500, 3736000; 531400, 3736000; 531400, 3735700; 531300, 
3735700; 531300, 3735500; 531200, 3735500; 531200, 3735300; 531100, 
3735300; 531100, 3735100; 531000, 3735100; 531000, 3735000; 530900, 
3735000; 530900, 3734900; 530600, 3734900; 530600, 3735200; 530800, 
3735200; 530800, 3735300; 530900, 3735300; 530900, 3735500; 531000, 
3735500; 531000, 3735800; 531100, 3735800; 531100, 3735900; 531200, 
3735900; 531200, 3736200; 531300, 3736200; 531300, 3736300; 531400, 
3736300; 531400, 3736400; 531500, 3736400; 531500, 3736600; 531600, 
3736600; 531600, 3736700; 531700, 3736700; 531700, 3736800; 532000, 
3736800; 532000, 3736900; 532100, 3736900; returning to 532100, 3737000.
    (B) Map depicting subunit 3C is located at paragraph (7)(iv)(B) of 
this entry.

[[Page 144]]

    (iv) Subunit 3D: Andreas Creek, San Bernardino National Forest, 
Riverside County, California.
    (A) Land bounded by the following UTM NAD27 coordinates (E, N): 
534300, 3735900; 534700, 3735900; 534700, 3735800; 535000, 3735800; 
535000, 3735700; 535100, 3735700; 535100, 3735600; 535300, 3735600; 
535300, 3735500; 535400, 3735500; 535400, 3735400; 535500, 3735400; 
535500, 3735300; 535700, 3735300; 535700, 3735000; 535500, 3735000; 
535500, 3735100; 535300, 3735100; 535300, 3735200; 535200, 3735200; 
535200, 3735300; 535100, 3735300; 535100, 3735400; 534900, 3735400; 
534900, 3735500; 534800, 3735500; 534800, 3735600; 534300, 3735600; 
returning to 534300, 3735900.
    (B) Map of Unit 3, with Subunits 3A, 3B, 3C, and 3D (Map 6), 
follows:

[[Page 145]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR14SE06.005

                 Guaj[oacute]n (Eleutherodactylus cooki)

    (1) Critical habitat units are depicted for Humacao, Las Piedras, 
Maunabo, Patillas, and Yabucoa, Puerto Rico, on the maps below.
    (2) The primary constituent elements of critical habitat for the 
guajon are the habitat components that provide:
    (i) Subtropical forest (which may include trees such as Cecropia 
schreberiana, Dendropanax arboreus, Guarea guidonia, Piper aduncum, 
Spathodea campanulata, Syzygium

[[Page 146]]

jambos, and Thespesia populnea) at elevations from 118 to 1,183 ft (36 
to 361 m) above sea level;
    (ii) Plutonic, granitic, or sedimentary rocks/boulders that form 
caves, crevices, and grottoes (interstitial spaces) in a streambed, and 
that are in proximity, or connected, to a permanent, ephemeral, or 
subterranean clear-water stream or water source. The interstitial spaces 
between or underneath rocks provide microenvironments characterized by 
generally higher humidity and cooler temperatures than outside the rock 
formations; and
    (iii) Vegetation-covered rocks (the vegetation typically includes 
moss, ferns, and hepatics such as Thuidium urceolatum, Taxilejeunea 
sulphurea, and Huokeria acutifolia) extending laterally to a maximum of 
99 feet (30 meters) on each bank of the stream. These rocks provide 
cover and foraging sites and help conserve humidity.
    (3) Critical habitat does not include manmade structures existing on 
the effective date of this rule and not containing one or more of the 
primary constituent elements, such as buildings, driveways, aqueducts, 
airports, and roads, and the land on which such structures are located.
    (4) Critical habitat maps. Data layers defining map units were 
created by delineating habitats that contain at least one or more of the 
PCEs defined in paragraph (2) of this entry, over United States 
Geological Survey topographic maps (UTM 19, NAD 83). USGS 1:20,000 
quadrangles used in the base map were: Humacao, Punta Guayanes, Juncos, 
Yabucoa, Punta Tuna, and Patillas.
    (5) Note: Index map (Map 1) follows:

[[Page 147]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23OC07.000

    (6) Unit 1: Mariana, Humacao, Puerto Rico.
    (i) General Description: Unit 1 consists of approximately 23.6 acres 
(ac) (9.6 hectares (ha)) located south of Road PR-909, west of Road PR-
3, and north of Quebrada Catano within Mariana Ward, Humacao.
    (ii) Coordinates: From Humacao and Punta Guayanes USGS 1:20,000 
quadrangle maps. Unit 1 bounded by the following UTM 19 NAD 83 
coordinates (E, N):

833916.64, 2007339.77; 833916.67, 2007341.73; 833916.83, 2007343.69; 
833917.12, 2007345.64;

[[Page 148]]

833917.53, 2007347.56; 833918.07, 2007349.45; 833918.73, 2007351.30; 
833919.51, 2007353.10; 833920.41, 2007354.85; 833921.42, 2007356.54; 
833922.53, 2007358.15; 833923.65, 2007359.57; 833989.83, 2007438.54; 
833989.93, 2007438.66; 833991.25, 2007440.12; 833992.66, 2007441.48; 
833994.16, 2007442.76; 833995.73, 2007443.93; 833997.38, 2007444.99; 
833999.10, 2007445.95; 834000.88, 2007446.79; 834002.70, 2007447.51; 
834004.57, 2007448.12; 834006.48, 2007448.60; 834008.41, 2007448.95; 
834010.36, 2007449.18; 834012.33, 2007449.27; 834014.29, 2007449.24; 
834016.25, 2007449.08; 834018.19, 2007448.80; 834020.12, 2007448.38; 
834022.01, 2007447.85; 834023.86, 2007447.19; 834025.66, 2007446.41; 
834027.41, 2007445.51; 834029.10, 2007444.50; 834030.71, 2007443.38; 
834032.25, 2007442.16; 834033.71, 2007440.84; 834035.08, 2007439.43; 
834036.35, 2007437.94; 834037.52, 2007436.36; 834038.59, 2007434.71; 
834039.54, 2007432.99; 834040.38, 2007431.21; 834041.11, 2007429.39; 
834041.71, 2007427.52; 834042.19, 2007425.61; 834042.54, 2007423.68; 
834042.77, 2007421.73; 834042.87, 2007419.76; 834042.84, 2007417.80; 
834042.68, 2007415.84; 834042.39, 2007413.90; 834041.98, 2007411.98; 
834041.44, 2007410.09; 834040.78, 2007408.23; 834040.00, 2007406.43; 
834039.10, 2007404.68; 834038.09, 2007403.00; 834036.98, 2007401.38; 
834035.86, 2007399.96; 833985.64, 2007340.04; 834043.84, 2007268.82; 
834044.09, 2007268.50; 834045.27, 2007266.93; 834046.33, 2007265.28; 
834047.29, 2007263.56; 834048.13, 2007261.78; 834048.85, 2007259.96; 
834049.45, 2007258.09; 834049.93, 2007256.18; 834050.29, 2007254.25; 
834050.51, 2007252.30; 834050.61, 2007250.33; 834050.58, 2007248.37; 
834050.42, 2007246.41; 834050.14, 2007244.47; 834049.72, 2007242.54; 
834049.18, 2007240.65; 834048.52, 2007238.80; 834048.09, 2007237.77; 
834014.85, 2007161.84; 834040.05, 2007115.14; 834132.46, 2006989.50; 
834205.56, 2006931.14; 834206.23, 2006930.59; 834207.20, 2006929.73; 
834258.63, 2006882.21; 834374.13, 2006823.87; 834375.16, 2006823.33; 
834376.84, 2006822.32; 834378.46, 2006821.20; 834380.00, 2006819.98; 
834381.46, 2006818.67; 834382.83, 2006817.25; 834384.10, 2006815.76; 
834385.27, 2006814.18; 834386.34, 2006812.53; 834387.29, 2006810.81; 
834387.80, 2006809.77; 834412.77, 2006756.30; 834413.10, 2006755.56; 
834413.82, 2006753.74; 834414.42, 2006751.87; 834414.90, 2006749.96; 
834415.26, 2006748.03; 834415.48, 2006746.07; 834415.58, 2006744.11; 
834415.55, 2006742.15; 834415.39, 2006740.19; 834415.10, 2006738.24; 
834414.69, 2006736.32; 834414.15, 2006734.43; 834413.49, 2006732.58; 
834412.71, 2006730.78; 834411.82, 2006729.03; 834410.92, 2006727.51; 
834369.80, 2006662.68; 834367.07, 2006639.75; 834374.97, 2006627.50; 
834375.47, 2006626.69; 834376.43, 2006624.98; 834377.27, 2006623.20; 
834377.99, 2006621.37; 834378.59, 2006619.50; 834379.07, 2006617.60; 
834379.43, 2006615.66; 834379.65, 2006613.71; 834379.75, 2006611.75; 
834379.72, 2006609.78; 834379.56, 2006607.83; 834379.27, 2006605.88; 
834378.86, 2006603.96; 834378.32, 2006602.07; 834377.66, 2006600.22; 
834376.88, 2006598.42; 834375.98, 2006596.67; 834374.98, 2006594.98; 
834373.86, 2006593.36; 834372.64, 2006591.82; 834371.32, 2006590.37; 
834369.91, 2006589.00; 834368.41, 2006587.73; 834366.83, 2006586.56; 
834365.82, 2006585.88; 834340.63, 2006569.89; 834334.43, 2006549.03; 
834356.52, 2006506.35; 834356.55, 2006506.29; 834357.39, 2006504.51; 
834358.12, 2006502.69; 834358.72, 2006500.82; 834358.92, 2006500.08; 
834390.20, 2006379.42; 834390.48, 2006378.25; 834390.83, 2006376.32; 
834391.06, 2006374.36; 834391.16, 2006372.40; 834391.13, 2006370.44; 
834390.97, 2006368.48; 834390.68, 2006366.53; 834390.27, 2006364.61; 
834390.01, 2006363.66; 834382.32, 2006336.64; 834382.03, 2006335.70; 
834381.37, 2006333.85; 834380.59, 2006332.05; 834379.70, 2006330.30; 
834378.69, 2006328.61; 834377.57, 2006327.00; 834376.35, 2006325.46; 
834375.03, 2006324.00; 834373.62, 2006322.63; 834372.12, 2006321.36; 
834370.54, 2006320.19; 834368.89, 2006319.12; 834367.18, 2006318.17; 
834365.40, 2006317.32; 834363.57, 2006316.60; 834361.70, 2006316.00; 
834359.80, 2006315.52; 834357.87, 2006315.17; 834357.87, 2006315.17; 
834355.91, 2006314.94; 834353.95, 2006314.84; 834351.99, 2006314.87; 
834351.36, 2006314.91; 834303.63, 2006318.22; 834285.72, 2006292.67; 
834293.36, 2006231.63; 834293.49, 2006230.38; 834293.59, 2006228.41; 
834293.56, 2006226.45; 834293.40, 2006224.49; 834293.12, 2006222.55; 
834292.70, 2006220.62; 834292.16, 2006218.73; 834291.50, 2006216.88; 
834290.72, 2006215.08; 834289.83, 2006213.33; 834288.82, 2006211.65; 
834287.70, 2006210.03; 834286.48, 2006208.49; 834285.16, 2006207.03; 
834283.75, 2006205.66; 834282.25, 2006204.39; 834280.68, 2006203.22; 
834279.03, 2006202.15; 834277.31, 2006201.20; 834275.53, 2006200.36; 
834273.71, 2006199.63; 834271.84, 2006199.03; 834269.93, 2006198.55; 
834268.00, 2006198.20; 834266.05, 2006197.97; 834264.08, 2006197.87; 
834262.12, 2006197.90; 834260.16, 2006198.06; 834258.22, 2006198.35; 
834256.29, 2006198.76; 834254.40, 2006199.30; 834252.55, 2006199.96; 
834250.75, 2006200.74; 834249.00, 2006201.64; 834247.31, 2006202.65; 
834245.70, 2006203.76; 834244.16, 2006204.98; 834242.70, 2006206.30; 
834241.33, 2006207.71; 834240.06, 2006209.21; 834238.89, 2006210.79; 
834237.82, 2006212.44; 834236.87, 2006214.16; 834236.03, 2006215.93; 
834235.30, 2006217.76; 834234.70, 2006219.63; 834234.22, 2006221.54; 
834233.87, 2006223.47; 834233.77, 2006224.17; 834224.69, 2006296.70; 
834224.56, 2006297.95; 834224.46, 2006299.92; 834224.49, 2006301.88; 
834224.65, 2006303.84; 834224.65, 2006303.84; 834224.94, 2006305.78; 
834225.35, 2006307.70; 834225.89, 2006309.59; 834226.55, 2006311.45; 
834227.33, 2006313.25; 834228.22, 2006315.00, 834229.23, 2006316.68; 
834229.23, 2006316.68; 834229.90, 2006317.67; 834264.20, 2006366.59; 
834264.65, 2006367.22; 834265.87, 2006368.76; 834267.19, 2006370.22; 
834268.60, 2006371.58; 834270.10, 2006372.86; 834271.68, 2006374.03; 
834273.33, 2006375.09; 834275.05, 2006376.05; 834276.82, 2006376.89; 
834278.65, 2006377.61; 834280.52, 2006378.22; 834282.42, 2006378.70; 
834284.36, 2006379.05; 834286.31, 2006379.28; 834288.27, 2006379.37; 
834290.24, 2006379.34;

[[Page 149]]

834290.86, 2006379.31; 834328.87, 2006376.67; 834301.63, 2006481.74; 
834275.52, 2006532.18; 834275.49, 2006532.24; 834274.65, 2006534.02; 
834273.93, 2006535.85; 834273.33, 2006537.72; 834272.85, 2006539.62; 
834272.49, 2006541.56; 834272.27, 2006543.51; 834272.17, 2006545.47; 
834272.20, 2006547.43; 834272.36, 2006549.39; 834272.65, 2006551.34; 
834273.06, 2006553.26; 834273.41, 2006554.54; 834286.26, 2006597.78; 
834286.45, 2006598.39; 834287.11, 2006600.24; 834287.89, 2006602.04; 
834288.79, 2006603.79; 834289.80, 2006605.47; 834290.91, 2006607.09; 
834292.13, 2006608.63; 834293.45, 2006610.09; 834294.86, 2006611.46; 
834296.36, 2006612.73; 834297.94, 2006613.90; 834298.95, 2006614.58; 
834308.43, 2006620.59; 834308.43, 2006620.60; 834307.71, 2006622.43; 
834307.10, 2006624.30; 834306.62, 2006626.21; 834306.27, 2006628.14; 
834306.04, 2006630.09; 834305.95, 2006632.06; 834305.98, 2006634.02; 
834306.14, 2006635.98; 834306.15, 2006636.12; 834310.97, 2006676.56; 
834311.24, 2006678.36; 834311.66, 2006680.28; 834312.19, 2006682.17; 
834312.85, 2006684.02; 834313.63, 2006685.82; 834314.53, 2006687.57; 
834315.43, 2006689.09; 834351.39, 2006745.79; 834337.78, 2006774.95; 
834227.80, 2006830.50; 834226.78, 2006831.04; 834225.09, 2006832.05; 
834223.47, 2006833.17; 834221.93, 2006834.39; 834220.97, 2006835.25; 
834167.24, 2006884.88; 834091.89, 2006945.04; 834091.21, 2006945.59; 
834089.76, 2006946.91; 834088.39, 2006948.32; 834087.11, 2006949.82; 
834086.43, 2006950.72; 833990.42, 2007081.24; 833989.94, 2007081.92; 
833988.87, 2007083.58; 833988.19, 2007084.77; 833955.04, 2007146.21; 
833954.76, 2007146.73; 833953.92, 2007148.50; 833953.20, 2007150.33; 
833952.60, 2007152.20; 833952.12, 2007154.10; 833951.76, 2007156.04; 
833951.54, 2007157.99; 833951.44, 2007159.95; 833951.47, 2007161.92; 
833951.63, 2007163.88; 833951.92, 2007165.82; 833952.33, 2007167.74; 
833952.87, 2007169.63; 833953.53, 2007171.48; 833953.96, 2007172.51; 
833985.71, 2007245.04; 833923.41, 2007321.28; 833923.16, 2007321.60; 
833921.99, 2007323.18; 833920.92, 2007324.83; 833919.97, 2007326.54; 
833919.12, 2007328.32; 833918.40, 2007330.15; 833917.80, 2007332.02; 
833917.32, 2007333.92; 833916.97, 2007335.85; 833916.74, 2007337.81; 
833916.64, 2007339.77.
    (iii) Note: Map of Unit 1 (Map 2) follows:

[[Page 150]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23OC07.001

    (7) Unit 2: Montones, Las Piedras, Puerto Rico.
    (i) General Description: Unit 2 consists of approximately 31.1 ac 
(12.6 ha) along the headwaters of the Valenciano River at PR 917 Km 9.7, 
Montones Ward, Las Piedras.
    (ii) Coordinates: From Juncos USGS 1:20,000 quadrangle map. Unit 2 
bounded by the following UTM 19 NAD 83 coordinates (E, N):
825191.05, 2008735.38; 825191.08, 2008737.35; 825191.17, 2008738.56; 
825197.07, 2008804.62; 825197.15, 2008805.37; 825197.43, 2008807.31; 
825197.85, 2008809.23; 825198.39, 2008811.12;

[[Page 151]]

825199.05, 2008812.97; 825199.83, 2008814.78; 825200.73, 2008816.52; 
825201.74, 2008818.21; 825202.09, 2008818.75; 825237.76, 2008871.58; 
825238.52, 2008872.65; 825239.74, 2008874.19; 825241.06, 2008875.65; 
825242.47, 2008877.02; 825243.97, 2008878.29; 825245.55, 2008879.46; 
825247.20, 2008880.53; 825248.91, 2008881.48; 825249.96, 2008881.99; 
825516.70, 2009006.30; 825517.43, 2009006.63; 825519.26, 2009007.35; 
825521.13, 2009007.95; 825523.03, 2009008.43; 825524.97, 2009008.78; 
825526.92, 2009009.01; 825528.88, 2009009.11; 825530.85, 2009009.08; 
825532.58, 2009008.94; 825607.77, 2009000.89; 825608.00, 2009000.86; 
825609.94, 2009000.58; 825611.86, 2009000.16; 825613.75, 2008999.62; 
825615.60, 2008998.96; 825617.41, 2008998.18; 825619.15, 2008997.28; 
825619.44, 2008997.12; 825657.84, 2008975.25; 825735.16, 2008935.69; 
825736.06, 2008935.21; 825737.74, 2008934.20; 825739.36, 2008933.08; 
825740.90, 2008931.86; 825742.35, 2008930.54; 825742.41, 2008930.48; 
825805.54, 2008869.09; 825875.41, 2008891.79; 825982.60, 2009016.88; 
826011.34, 2009100.61; 826011.81, 2009101.89; 826012.60, 2009103.69; 
826013.49, 2009105.44; 826014.50, 2009107.13; 826015.62, 2009108.74; 
826015.93, 2009109.15; 826234.92, 2009394.34; 826235.83, 2009395.46; 
826237.15, 2009396.92; 826238.56, 2009398.29; 826240.06, 2009399.56; 
826241.64, 2009400.73; 826243.28, 2009401.79; 826332.44, 2009455.31; 
826363.91, 2009522.58; 826363.96, 2009522.68; 826364.85, 2009524.43; 
826365.86, 2009526.12; 826366.98, 2009527.74; 826368.20, 2009529.27; 
826369.52, 2009530.73; 826370.93, 2009532.10; 826372.43, 2009533.37; 
826374.01, 2009534.54; 826375.66, 2009535.61; 826377.38, 2009536.56; 
826379.15, 2009537.40; 826380.92, 2009538.11; 826507.54, 2009583.75; 
826584.65, 2009645.47; 826584.74, 2009645.54; 826586.31, 2009646.72; 
826587.96, 2009647.78; 826589.68, 2009648.74; 826591.46, 2009649.58; 
826593.28, 2009650.30; 826595.15, 2009650.90; 826597.06, 2009651.38; 
826598.99, 2009651.73; 826600.95, 2009651.96; 826602.91, 2009652.05; 
826604.87, 2009652.02; 826606.83, 2009651.86; 826608.78, 2009651.58; 
826610.70, 2009651.16; 826612.59, 2009650.62; 826614.44, 2009649.96; 
826616.24, 2009649.18; 826617.99, 2009648.28; 826619.67, 2009647.27; 
826621.29, 2009646.16; 826622.83, 2009644.94; 826624.29, 2009643.62; 
826625.65, 2009642.21; 826626.92, 2009640.71; 826628.10, 2009639.13; 
826629.16, 2009637.48; 826630.12, 2009635.76; 826630.96, 2009633.99; 
826631.68, 2009632.16; 826632.28, 2009630.29; 826632.76, 2009628.38; 
826633.11, 2009626.45; 826633.34, 2009624.50; 826633.43, 2009622.53; 
826633.40, 2009620.57; 826633.24, 2009618.61; 826632.96, 2009616.67; 
826632.54, 2009614.75; 826632.00, 2009612.86; 826631.34, 2009611.01; 
826630.56, 2009609.20; 826629.66, 2009607.46; 826628.65, 2009605.77; 
826627.54, 2009604.15; 826626.32, 2009602.61; 826625.00, 2009601.16; 
826623.59, 2009599.79; 826622.18, 2009598.59; 826541.17, 2009533.75; 
826541.08, 2009533.68; 826539.51, 2009532.51; 826537.86, 2009531.45; 
826536.14, 2009530.49; 826534.36, 2009529.65; 826532.59, 2009528.95; 
826413.02, 2009485.84; 826382.96, 2009421.56; 826382.91, 2009421.45; 
826382.01, 2009419.71; 826381.00, 2009418.02; 826379.88, 2009416.40; 
826378.66, 2009414.86; 826377.34, 2009413.41; 826375.93, 2009412.04; 
826374.43, 2009410.77; 826372.86, 2009409.60; 826371.21, 2009408.54; 
826279.08, 2009353.24; 826066.55, 2009076.47; 826037.54, 2008991.95; 
826037.07, 2008990.68; 826036.29, 2008988.88; 826035.39, 2008987.13; 
826034.38, 2008985.44; 826033.26, 2008983.83; 826032.04, 2008982.29; 
826031.94, 2008982.17; 825915.52, 2008846.30; 825914.31, 2008844.97; 
825912.90, 2008843.60; 825911.40, 2008842.33; 825909.82, 2008841.16; 
825908.17, 2008840.09; 825906.45, 2008839.14; 825904.68, 2008838.30; 
825902.85, 2008837.57; 825902.00, 2008837.28; 825806.87, 2008806.38; 
825805.85, 2008806.07; 825803.94, 2008805.59; 825802.01, 2008805.24; 
825800.06, 2008805.01; 825798.10, 2008804.91; 825796.13, 2008804.95; 
825794.17, 2008805.11; 825792.23, 2008805.39; 825790.31, 2008805.81; 
825788.42, 2008806.35; 825786.57, 2008807.01; 825784.77, 2008807.79; 
825783.02, 2008808.69; 825781.33, 2008809.69; 825779.72, 2008810.81; 
825778.18, 2008812.03; 825776.72, 2008813.35; 825776.66, 2008813.41; 
825703.78, 2008884.28; 825629.89, 2008922.09; 825628.99, 2008922.57; 
825628.70, 2008922.73; 825595.16, 2008941.84; 825534.49, 2008948.34; 
825282.87, 2008831.08; 825256.20, 2008791.56; 825251.43, 2008738.26; 
825259.11, 2008707.57; 825284.21, 2008655.11; 825304.76, 2008631.14; 
825305.48, 2008630.28; 825306.65, 2008628.70; 825307.71, 2008627.05; 
825308.67, 2008625.33; 825309.51, 2008623.55; 825310.23, 2008621.73; 
825310.83, 2008619.86; 825311.31, 2008617.95; 825311.66, 2008616.02; 
825311.89, 2008614.06; 825311.99, 2008612.10; 825311.96, 2008610.14; 
825311.80, 2008608.18; 825311.51, 2008606.24; 825311.09, 2008604.31; 
825310.55, 2008602.43; 825309.89, 2008600.57; 825309.11, 2008598.77; 
825308.22, 2008597.02; 825307.21, 2008595.34; 825306.09, 2008593.72; 
825304.87, 2008592.18; 825303.55, 2008590.73; 825302.14, 2008589.36; 
825300.64, 2008588.09; 825299.06, 2008586.92; 825297.41, 2008585.85; 
825295.69, 2008584.90; 825293.92, 2008584.05; 825292.09, 2008583.33; 
825290.22, 2008582.73; 825288.31, 2008582.25; 825286.38, 2008581.90; 
825284.43, 2008581.67; 825282.47, 2008581.58; 825280.50, 2008581.61; 
825278.54, 2008581.77; 825276.60, 2008582.06; 825274.68, 2008582.47; 
825272.79, 2008583.01; 825270.94, 2008583.67; 825269.14, 2008584.45; 
825267.39, 2008585.35; 825265.70, 2008586.36; 825264.09, 2008587.47; 
825262.55, 2008588.70; 825261.09, 2008590.01; 825259.72, 2008591.43; 
825259.17, 2008592.06; 825236.04, 2008619.04; 825235.32, 2008619.90; 
825234.15, 2008621.48; 825233.09, 2008623.13; 825232.13, 2008624.85; 
825231.75, 2008625.62; 825203.63, 2008684.38; 825203.17, 2008685.39; 
825202.45, 2008687.22; 825201.84, 2008689.09; 825201.58, 2008690.06; 
825191.94, 2008728.60; 825191.73, 2008729.54; 825191.37, 2008731.47; 
825191.15, 2008733.42; 825191.05, 2008735.38.
    (iii) Note: Map of Unit 2 (Map 3) follows:

[[Page 152]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23OC07.002

    (8) Unit 3: Tejas, Las Piedras, Puerto Rico.
    (i) General Description: Unit 3 consists of approximately 5.2 ac 
(2.1 ha) between Road PR-905 to the east, Road PR-908 to the west, Road 
PR-9921 to the north, and Road PR-9904 to the south within Tejas Ward, 
Las Piedras.
    (ii) Coordinates: From Yabucoa, Humacao, Juncos, and Punta Guayanes 
USGS 1:20,000 quadrangle maps. Unit 3 bounded by the following UTM 19 
NAD 83 coordinates (E, N):

829623.13, 2007423.98; 829623.16, 2007425.95; 829623.32, 2007427.91; 
829623.60, 2007429.85;

[[Page 153]]

829624.02, 2007431.77; 829624.56, 2007433.66; 829625.22, 2007435.51; 
829626.00, 2007437.32; 829626.90, 2007439.06; 829627.90, 2007440.75; 
829629.02, 2007442.37; 829629.38, 2007442.84; 829643.74, 2007461.45; 
829644.61, 2007462.52; 829645.93, 2007463.98; 829647.34, 2007465.35; 
829648.84, 2007466.62; 829650.41, 2007467.79; 829652.06, 2007468.86; 
829653.78, 2007469.81; 829654.23, 2007470.04; 829665.53, 2007475.61; 
829666.85, 2007476.23; 829668.68, 2007476.95; 829670.55, 2007477.55; 
829672.46, 2007478.03; 829674.39, 2007478.39; 829676.34, 2007478.61; 
829678.31, 2007478.71; 829680.27, 2007478.68; 829682.23, 2007478.52; 
829682.50, 2007478.49; 829698.24, 2007476.54; 829699.91, 2007476.28; 
829701.83, 2007475.87; 829703.72, 2007475.33; 829705.57, 2007474.67; 
829707.37, 2007473.89; 829709.12, 2007472.99; 829710.81, 2007471.98; 
829712.42, 2007470.87; 829713.96, 2007469.65; 829715.42, 2007468.33; 
829716.79, 2007466.92; 829718.06, 2007465.42; 829719.23, 2007463.84; 
829720.30, 2007462.19; 829721.25, 2007460.47; 829722.09, 2007458.70; 
829722.82, 2007456.87; 829723.42, 2007455.00; 829723.52, 2007454.66; 
829736.51, 2007407.12; 829744.37, 2007381.77; 829781.75, 2007394.68; 
829783.28, 2007395.17; 829785.19, 2007395.65; 829787.12, 2007396.00; 
829789.08, 2007396.22; 829791.04, 2007396.32; 829791.73, 2007396.33; 
829845.90, 2007396.00; 829847.17, 2007395.96; 829849.13, 2007395.80; 
829849.83, 2007395.71; 829881.85, 2007391.29; 829883.10, 2007391.09; 
829885.02, 2007390.67; 829886.91, 2007390.13; 829888.76, 2007389.47; 
829890.56, 2007388.69; 829892.31, 2007387.80; 829894.00, 2007386.79; 
829895.61, 2007385.67; 829897.15, 2007384.45; 829898.61, 2007383.13; 
829899.98, 2007381.72; 829901.25, 2007380.22; 829902.42, 2007378.64; 
829903.49, 2007376.99; 829904.44, 2007375.28; 829905.28, 2007373.50; 
829906.01, 2007371.67; 829906.61, 2007369.80; 829907.09, 2007367.90; 
829907.44, 2007365.96; 829907.67, 2007364.01; 829907.76, 2007362.05; 
829907.73, 2007360.08; 829907.57, 2007358.13; 829907.28, 2007356.18; 
829906.87, 2007354.26; 829906.33, 2007352.37; 829905.67, 2007350.52; 
829904.89, 2007348.72; 829903.99, 2007346.97; 829902.99, 2007345.28; 
829901.87, 2007343.67; 829900.65, 2007342.13; 829899.33, 2007340.67; 
829897.92, 2007339.30; 829896.42, 2007338.03; 829894.84, 2007336.86; 
829893.19, 2007335.79; 829891.47, 2007334.84; 829889.70, 2007334.00; 
829887.87, 2007333.27; 829886.00, 2007332.67; 829884.09, 2007332.19; 
829882.16, 2007331.84; 829880.21, 2007331.61; 829878.25, 2007331.52; 
829876.28, 2007331.55; 829874.32, 2007331.71; 829873.62, 2007331.80; 
829843.56, 2007335.95; 829796.50, 2007336.24; 829750.67, 2007320.42; 
829749.14, 2007319.93; 829747.23, 2007319.45; 829745.30, 2007319.10; 
829743.34, 2007318.87; 829741.38, 2007318.78; 829739.42, 2007318.81; 
829737.46, 2007318.97; 829735.51, 2007319.25; 829733.59, 2007319.67; 
829731.70, 2007320.21; 829729.98, 2007320.82; 829709.83, 2007328.66; 
829709.70, 2007328.71; 829707.90, 2007329.49; 829706.15, 2007330.39; 
829704.46, 2007331.40; 829702.85, 2007332.51; 829701.31, 2007333.73; 
829699.85, 2007335.05; 829698.48, 2007336.46; 829697.21, 2007337.96; 
829696.04, 2007339.54; 829694.98, 2007341.19; 829694.02, 2007342.91; 
829693.18, 2007344.68; 829692.46, 2007346.51; 829692.04, 2007347.75; 
829679.00, 2007389.82; 829678.81, 2007390.45; 829678.71, 2007390.79; 
829675.10, 2007404.00; 829674.74, 2007403.62 829673.33, 2007402.26; 
829671.83, 2007400.98; 829670.25, 2007399.81; 829668.60, 2007398.75; 
829666.89, 2007397.79; 829665.11, 2007396.95; 829663.28, 2007396.23; 
829661.41, 2007395.62; 829659.51, 2007395.15; 829657.57, 2007394.79; 
829655.62, 2007394.57; 829653.66, 2007394.47; 829651.69, 2007394.50; 
829649.74, 2007394.66; 829647.79, 2007394.95; 829645.87, 2007395.36; 
829643.98, 2007395.90; 829642.13, 2007396.56; 829640.33, 2007397.34; 
829638.58, 2007398.24; 829636.89, 2007399.25; 829635.28, 2007400.36; 
829633.74, 2007401.58; 829632.28, 2007402.90; 829630.91, 2007404.31; 
829629.64, 2007405.81; 829628.47, 2007407.39; 829627.40, 2007409.04; 
829626.45, 2007410.76; 829625.61, 2007412.53; 829624.88, 2007414.36; 
829624.28, 2007416.23; 829623.80, 2007418.14; 829623.45, 2007420.07; 
829623.22, 2007422.02; 829623.13, 2007423.98.
    (iii) Note: Map of Unit 3 (Map 4) follows:

[[Page 154]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23OC07.003

    (9) Unit 4: Emajagua, Maunabo, Puerto Rico.
    (i) General Description: Unit 4 consists of approximately 33.0 ac 
(13.4 ha) between Quebrada Arenas and Quebrada Emajagua, north of Road 
PR-901 within Emajagua Ward, Maunabo.
    (ii) Coordinates: From Yabucoa and Punta Guayanes USGS 1:20,000 
quadrangle maps. Unit 4 bounded by the following UTM 19 NAD 83 
coordinates (E, N):


[[Page 155]]


830301.03, 1993842.17; 830301.06, 1993844.14; 830301.22, 1993846.10; 
830301.51, 1993848.04; 830301.93, 1993849.96; 830302.46, 1993851.85; 
830303.12, 1993853.70; 830303.91, 1993855.50; 830304.80, 1993857.25; 
830305.10, 1993857.77; 830382.85, 1993991.51; 830383.56, 1993992.68; 
830384.68, 1993994.30; 830385.90, 1993995.83; 830387.22, 1993997.29; 
830388.63, 1993998.66; 830389.55, 1993999.46; 830491.53, 1994084.69; 
830602.31, 1994239.62; 830670.30, 1994401.70; 830645.67, 1994534.02; 
830645.49, 1994535.09; 830645.27, 1994537.04; 830645.17, 1994539.01; 
830645.20, 1994540.97; 830645.36, 1994542.93; 830645.65, 1994544.87; 
830646.06, 1994546.79; 830646.60, 1994548.68; 830647.26, 1994550.53; 
830648.04, 1994552.34; 830648.94, 1994554.09; 830649.02, 1994554.22; 
830603.53, 1994664.55; 830603.03, 1994665.86; 830602.43, 1994667.73; 
830601.95, 1994669.64; 830601.59, 1994671.57; 830601.37, 1994673.52; 
830601.27, 1994675.49; 830601.30, 1994677.45; 830601.46, 1994679.41; 
830601.75, 1994681.35; 830602.16, 1994683.28; 830602.70, 1994685.17; 
830603.36, 1994687.02; 830604.14, 1994688.82; 830605.04, 1994690.57; 
830606.05, 1994692.25; 830607.17, 1994693.87; 830608.39, 1994695.41; 
830609.71, 1994696.87; 830611.12, 1994698.23; 830612.62, 1994699.51; 
830614.19, 1994700.68; 830615.84, 1994701.74; 830617.56, 1994702.70; 
830619.34, 1994703.54; 830621.17, 1994704.26; 830623.04, 1994704.86; 
830624.94, 1994705.34; 830626.87, 1994705.70; 830628.83, 1994705.92; 
830630.79, 1994706.02; 830632.75, 1994705.99; 830634.71, 1994705.83; 
830636.66, 1994705.54; 830638.58, 1994705.13; 830640.47, 1994704.59; 
830642.32, 1994703.93; 830644.12, 1994703.15; 830645.87, 1994702.25; 
830647.56, 1994701.24; 830649.17, 1994700.12; 830650.71, 1994698.90; 
830652.17, 1994697.58; 830653.54, 1994696.17; 830654.81, 1994694.67; 
830655.98, 1994693.10; 830657.04, 1994691.45; 830658.00, 1994689.73; 
830658.84, 1994687.95; 830659.06, 1994687.44; 830706.46, 1994572.47; 
830780.50, 1994437.89; 830780.89, 1994437.15; 830781.73, 1994435.37; 
830782.46, 1994433.55; 830783.06, 1994431.68; 830783.54, 1994429.77; 
830783.89, 1994427.84; 830784.12, 1994425.89; 830784.19, 1994424.69; 
830784.37, 1994420.55; 830925.97, 1994319.54; 830926.41, 1994319.23; 
830927.95, 1994318.00; 830929.40, 1994316.69; 830929.47, 1994316.62; 
830981.02, 1994266.48; 830982.32, 1994265.13; 830983.59, 1994263.63; 
830984.76, 1994262.06; 830985.83, 1994260.41; 830986.78, 1994258.69; 
830987.63, 1994256.91; 830987.69, 1994256.77; 831019.16, 1994183.23; 
831048.99, 1994127.46; 831110.90, 1994086.77; 831152.31, 1994063.55; 
831153.89, 1994062.60; 831155.51, 1994061.48; 831157.05, 1994060.26; 
831158.50, 1994058.94; 831159.87, 1994057.53; 831161.14, 1994056.03; 
831162.31, 1994054.46; 831163.38, 1994052.81; 831164.33, 1994051.09; 
831165.17, 1994049.31; 831165.90, 1994047.48; 831166.50, 1994045.61; 
831166.98, 1994043.71; 831167.33, 1994041.78; 831167.56, 1994039.82; 
831167.65, 1994037.86; 831167.62, 1994035.90; 831167.46, 1994033.94; 
831167.18, 1994031.99; 831166.76, 1994030.07; 831166.22, 1994028.18; 
831165.56, 1994026.33; 831164.78, 1994024.53; 831163.88, 1994022.78; 
831162.88, 1994021.10; 831161.76, 1994019.48; 831160.54, 1994017.94; 
831159.22, 1994016.48; 831157.81, 1994015.11; 831156.31, 1994013.84; 
831154.73, 1994012.67; 831153.08, 1994011.61; 831151.36, 1994010.65; 
831149.59, 1994009.81; 831147.76, 1994009.09; 831145.89, 1994008.48; 
831143.98, 1994008.01; 831142.05, 1994007.65; 831140.10, 1994007.43; 
831138.14, 1994007.33; 831136.17, 1994007.36; 831134.21, 1994007.52; 
831132.27, 1994007.81; 831130.35, 1994008.22; 831128.46, 1994008.76; 
831126.61, 1994009.42; 831124.80, 1994010.20; 831123.06, 1994011.10; 
831122.95, 1994011.16; 831080.61, 1994034.90; 831079.03, 1994035.85; 
831078.79, 1994036.00; 831009.62, 1994081.48; 831008.24, 1994082.44; 
831006.70, 1994083.66; 831005.24, 1994084.98; 831003.88, 1994086.39; 
831002.61, 1994087.89; 831001.43, 1994089.47; 831000.37, 1994091.12; 
830999.64, 1994092.40; 830965.59, 1994156.06; 830965.37, 1994156.49; 
830964.52, 1994158.26; 830964.46, 1994158.40; 830934.84, 1994227.62; 
830889.23, 1994271.98; 830787.46, 1994344.57; 830787.30, 1994342.66; 
830787.30, 1994342.64; 830780.27, 1994281.48; 830832.47, 1994149.96; 
830832.83, 1994149.01; 830833.43, 1994147.14; 830833.91, 1994145.24; 
830834.26, 1994143.30; 830834.49, 1994141.35; 830834.58, 1994139.39; 
830834.55, 1994137.42; 830834.52, 1994136.87; 830829.02, 1994054.98; 
830828.89, 1994053.58; 830828.60, 1994051.63; 830828.19, 1994049.71; 
830827.65, 1994047.82; 830826.99, 1994045.97; 830826.21, 1994044.17; 
830825.31, 1994042.42; 830824.30, 1994040.73; 830823.19, 1994039.12; 
830822.35, 1994038.04; 830736.17, 1993932.11; 830714.39, 1993876.45; 
830714.36, 1993876.37; 830713.58, 1993874.57; 830712.68, 1993872.82; 
830711.67, 1993871.13; 830710.55, 1993869.52; 830709.33, 1993867.98; 
830708.01, 1993866.52; 830706.60, 1993865.15; 830705.11, 1993863.88; 
830703.53, 1993862.71; 830701.88, 1993861.64; 830700.16, 1993860.69; 
830698.38, 1993859.85; 830696.56, 1993859.12; 830694.69, 1993858.52; 
830692.78, 1993858.04; 830690.85, 1993857.69; 830688.90, 1993857.47; 
830686.93, 1993857.37; 830684.97, 1993857.40; 830683.01, 1993857.56; 
830681.07, 1993857.85; 830679.14, 1993858.26; 830677.26, 1993858.80; 
830675.40, 1993859.46; 830673.60, 1993860.24; 830671.85, 1993861.14; 
830670.17, 1993862.15; 830668.55, 1993863.26; 830667.01, 1993864.49; 
830665.55, 1993865.80; 830664.19, 1993867.22; 830662.91, 1993868.71; 
830661.74, 1993870.29; 830660.68, 1993871.94; 830659.72, 1993873.66; 
830658.88, 1993875.43; 830658.16, 1993877.26; 830657.56, 1993879.13; 
830657.08, 1993881.04; 830656.72, 1993882.97; 830656.50, 1993884.92; 
830656.40, 1993886.89; 830656.43, 1993888.85; 830656.59, 1993890.81; 
830656.88, 1993892.75; 830657.29, 1993894.67; 830657.83, 1993896.56; 
830658.46, 1993898.34; 830681.96, 1993958.36; 830681.99, 1993958.44; 
830682.77, 1993960.24; 830683.66, 1993961.99; 830684.67, 1993963.68; 
830685.79, 1993965.29; 830686.62, 1993966.37; 830769.74, 1994068.54; 
830774.14, 1994134.12; 830721.67, 1994266.34; 830721.31, 1994267.29; 
830720.71, 1994269.16; 830720.23, 1994271.07; 830719.88, 1994273.00; 
830719.65, 1994274.95;

[[Page 156]]

830719.55, 1994276.91; 830719.58, 1994278.88; 830719.74, 1994280.84; 
830719.74, 1994280.85; 830727.37, 1994347.16; 830726.01, 1994379.24; 
830656.38, 1994213.28; 830655.84, 1994212.07; 830654.95, 1994210.32; 
830653.94, 1994208.63; 830653.12, 1994207.43; 830538.15, 1994046.64; 
830537.86, 1994046.23; 830536.63, 1994044.69; 830535.32, 1994043.23; 
830533.90, 1994041.86; 830532.98, 1994041.06; 830432.11, 1993956.76; 
830357.02, 1993827.59; 830356.30, 1993826.42; 830355.19, 1993824.80; 
830353.96, 1993823.26; 830352.65, 1993821.81; 830351.23, 1993820.44; 
830349.74, 1993819.17; 830348.16, 1993818.00; 830346.51, 1993816.93; 
830344.79, 1993815.97; 830343.02, 1993815.13; 830341.19, 1993814.41; 
830339.32, 1993813.81; 830337.41, 1993813.33; 830335.48, 1993812.98; 
830333.53, 1993812.75; 830331.56, 1993812.65; 830329.60, 1993812.69; 
830327.64, 1993812.84; 830325.70, 1993813.13; 830323.78, 1993813.55; 
830321.89, 1993814.08; 830320.04, 1993814.75; 830318.23, 1993815.53; 
830316.48, 1993816.42; 830314.80, 1993817.43; 830313.18, 1993818.55; 
830311.64, 1993819.77; 830310.19, 1993821.09; 830308.82, 1993822.50; 
830307.55, 1993824.00; 830306.37, 1993825.58; 830305.31, 1993827.23; 
830304.35, 1993828.94; 830303.51, 1993830.72; 830302.79, 1993832.55; 
830302.19, 1993834.42; 830301.71, 1993836.32; 830301.36, 1993838.26; 
830301.13, 1993840.21; 830301.03, 1993842.17.
    (iii) Note: Map of Unit 4 (Map 5) follows:

[[Page 157]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23OC07.004

    (10) Unit 5: Jacaboa, Patillas, Puerto Rico.
    (i) General Description: Unit 5 consists of approximately 10.3 ac 
(4.2 ha) northwest of road PR-758 within Rios Ward, Patillas.
    (ii) Coordinates: From Yabucoa and Punta Tuna USGS 1:20,000 
quadrangle maps. Unit 5 bounded by the following UTM 19 NAD 83 
coordinates (E, N):

820101.76, 1993627.91; 820101.80, 1993629.87; 820101.96, 1993631.83; 
820102.25, 1993633.77; 820102.66, 1993635.69; 820103.20, 1993637.58; 
820103.86, 1993639.43; 820104.64, 1993641.24;

[[Page 158]]

820105.54, 1993642.98; 820106.55, 1993644.67; 820107.67, 1993646.28; 
820108.89, 1993647.82; 820110.21, 1993649.28; 820111.62, 1993650.65; 
820113.12, 1993651.92; 820114.70, 1993653.09; 820116.35, 1993654.15; 
820118.07, 1993655.11; 820119.84, 1993655.95; 820121.67, 1993656.67; 
820123.54, 1993657.27; 820125.45, 1993657.75; 820127.38, 1993658.10; 
820129.33, 1993658.32; 820131.30, 1993658.42; 820133.26, 1993658.39; 
820135.22, 1993658.23; 820137.16, 1993657.94; 820139.08, 1993657.52; 
820140.97, 1993656.98; 820142.82, 1993656.32; 820144.62, 1993655.54; 
820146.37, 1993654.64; 820148.06, 1993653.63; 820149.67, 1993652.51; 
820149.79, 1993652.43; 820252.55, 1993575.46; 820252.92, 1993575.18; 
820351.83, 1993498.67; 820380.40, 1993494.03; 820380.96, 1993493.93; 
820382.88, 1993493.52; 820384.77, 1993492.98; 820386.62, 1993492.32; 
820388.43, 1993491.53; 820390.17, 1993490.64; 820391.86, 1993489.63; 
820393.47, 1993488.51; 820395.01, 1993487.29; 820396.47, 1993485.97; 
820397.77, 1993484.63; 820514.21, 1993356.97; 820592.94, 1993297.68; 
820655.33, 1993281.06; 820656.79, 1993280.63; 820658.64, 1993279.97; 
820660.44, 1993279.19; 820662.19, 1993278.29; 820663.87, 1993277.28; 
820665.49, 1993276.16; 820667.03, 1993274.94; 820668.48, 1993273.62; 
820669.85, 1993272.21; 820671.12, 1993270.71; 820672.29, 1993269.13; 
820673.36, 1993267.48; 820674.31, 1993265.76; 820675.15, 1993263.99; 
820675.87, 1993262.16; 820676.47, 1993260.29; 820676.95, 1993258.38; 
820677.30, 1993256.45; 820677.53, 1993254.50; 820677.62, 1993252.54; 
820677.59, 1993250.57; 820677.43, 1993248.61; 820677.14, 1993246.67; 
820676.73, 1993244.75; 820676.19, 1993242.86; 820675.53, 1993241.01; 
820674.74, 1993239.21; 820673.85, 1993237.46; 820672.84, 1993235.77; 
820671.72, 1993234.16; 820670.50, 1993232.62; 820669.18, 1993231.16; 
820667.76, 1993229.80; 820666.27, 1993228.53; 820664.69, 1993227.36; 
820663.04, 1993226.29; 820661.32, 1993225.34; 820659.54, 1993224.50; 
820657.72, 1993223.77; 820655.84, 1993223.17; 820653.94, 1993222.70; 
820652.01, 1993222.34; 820650.05, 1993222.12; 820648.09, 1993222.02; 
820646.13, 1993222.06; 820644.17, 1993222.22; 820642.22, 1993222.50; 
820640.30, 1993222.92; 820639.87, 1993223.03; 820571.82, 1993241.16; 
820570.37, 1993241.59; 820568.52, 1993242.25; 820566.71, 1993243.03; 
820564.97, 1993243.93; 820563.28, 1993244.94; 820561.66, 1993246.06; 
820561.49, 1993246.19; 820475.85, 1993310.68; 820474.48, 1993311.77; 
820473.03, 1993313.09; 820471.73, 1993314.43; 820360.45, 1993436.43; 
820334.68, 1993440.61; 820334.11, 1993440.71; 820332.19, 1993441.12; 
820330.30, 1993441.66; 820328.45, 1993442.32; 820326.65, 1993443.11; 
820324.90, 1993444.00; 820323.22, 1993445.01; 820321.60, 1993446.13; 
820321.12, 1993446.50; 820216.36, 1993527.53; 820113.79, 1993604.37; 
820112.36, 1993605.50; 820110.90, 1993606.82; 820109.54, 1993608.23; 
820108.27, 1993609.73; 820107.10, 1993611.31; 820106.03, 1993612.96; 
820105.08, 1993614.68; 820104.24, 1993616.46; 820103.52, 1993618.28; 
820102.91, 1993620.15; 820102.44, 1993622.06; 820102.09, 1993623.99; 
820101.86, 1993625.94; 820101.76, 1993627.91.
    (iii) Note: Map of Unit 5 (Map 6) follows:

[[Page 159]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23OC07.005

    (11) Unit 6: Calabazas, Yabucoa, Puerto Rico.
    (i) General Description: Unit 6 consists of approximately 13.8 ac 
(5.6 ha), including lands northeast of road PR-900, between Quebrada 
Guayabo to the south and Rio Guayanes to the north, and south of 
Guayanes Unit, within Calabazas Ward, Yabucoa.
    (ii) Coordinates: From Yabucoa USGS 1:20,000 quadrangle map. Unit 6 
bounded by

[[Page 160]]

the following UTM 19 NAD 83 coordinates (E, N):

825303.81, 1999020.54; 825324.29, 1999071.68; 825361.95, 1999106.10; 
825427.53, 1999113.37; 825493.52, 1999090.98; 825544.83, 1999057.79; 
825546.92, 1999059.93; 825572.78, 1999028.51; 825577.55, 1998990.44; 
825576.37, 1998922.62; 825547.19, 1998888.32; 825518.03, 1998851.89; 
825465.30, 1998834.21; 825446.21, 1998836.06; 825416.29, 1998854.72; 
825377.77, 1998881.73; 825354.21, 1998900.47; 825325.99, 1998948.81; 
825303.81, 1999020.54.
    (iii) Note: The map depicting Unit 6 is provided at paragraph 
(12)(iii) of this entry.
    (12) Unit 7: Guayanes, Yabucoa, Puerto Rico.
    (i) General Description: Unit 7 consists of approximately 7.9 ac 
(3.2 ha) northeast of Road PR-900 between Quebrada Guayabo to the south 
and Rio Guayanes to the north, and north of Unit 6, within Calabazas 
Ward, Yabucoa.
    (ii) Coordinates: From Yabucoa USGS 1:20,000 quadrangle map. Unit 7 
bounded by the following UTM 19 NAD 83 coordinates (E, N):

825269.89, 1999257.75; 825269.92, 1999259.72; 825270.08, 1999261.68; 
825270.37, 1999263.62; 825270.78, 1999265.54; 825271.32, 1999267.43; 
825271.98, 1999269.28; 825272.76, 1999271.09; 825273.66, 1999272.83; 
825274.67, 1999274.52; 825275.79, 1999276.13; 825277.01, 1999277.67; 
825278.33, 1999279.13; 825279.74, 1999280.50; 825281.24, 1999281.77; 
825282.82, 1999282.94; 825284.47, 1999284.01; 825286.19, 1999284.96; 
825287.96, 1999285.80; 825289.79, 1999286.52; 825291.66, 1999287.13; 
825293.57, 1999287.60; 825295.50, 1999287.96; 825297.45, 1999288.18; 
825299.41, 1999288.28; 825301.38, 1999288.25; 825303.34, 1999288.09; 
825305.28, 1999287.80; 825307.20, 1999287.38; 825309.09, 1999286.85; 
825310.94, 1999286.18; 825312.74, 1999285.40; 825314.49, 1999284.51; 
825316.18, 1999283.50; 825316.22, 1999283.47; 825459.03, 1999191.10; 
825625.66, 1999156.49; 825626.84, 1999156.22; 825628.73, 1999155.68; 
825629.63, 1999155.37; 825721.19, 1999122.74; 825722.14, 1999122.38; 
825723.95, 1999121.60; 825725.69, 1999120.71; 825727.38, 1999119.70; 
825728.99, 1999118.58; 825729.55, 1999118.16; 825761.67, 1999093.18; 
825762.66, 1999092.38; 825764.12, 1999091.06; 825765.49, 1999089.65; 
825766.76, 1999088.15; 825767.93, 1999086.57; 825768.99, 1999084.92; 
825769.95, 1999083.20; 825770.79, 1999081.43; 825771.51, 1999079.60; 
825772.11, 1999077.73; 825772.59, 1999075.82; 825772.94, 1999073.89; 
825773.17, 1999071.94; 825773.27, 1999069.98; 825773.23, 1999068.01; 
825773.07, 1999066.05; 825772.79, 1999064.11; 825772.37, 1999062.19; 
825771.83, 1999060.30; 825771.17, 1999058.45; 825770.39, 1999056.65; 
825769.49, 1999054.90; 825768.48, 1999053.21; 825767.37, 1999051.60; 
825766.15, 1999050.06; 825764.83, 1999048.60; 825763.41, 1999047.23; 
825761.92, 1999045.96; 825760.34, 1999044.79; 825758.69, 1999043.72; 
825756.97, 1999042.77; 825755.19, 1999041.93; 825753.37, 1999041.21; 
825751.50, 1999040.60; 825749.59, 1999040.13; 825747.66, 1999039.77; 
825745.71, 1999039.55; 825743.74, 1999039.45; 825741.78, 1999039.48; 
825739.82, 1999039.64; 825737.88, 1999039.93; 825735.96, 1999040.35; 
825734.07, 1999040.89; 825732.22, 1999041.55; 825730.41, 1999042.33; 
825728.66, 1999043.22; 825726.98, 1999044.23; 825725.36, 1999045.35; 
825724.81, 1999045.77; 825696.49, 1999067.79; 825611.42, 1999098.11; 
825441.33, 1999133.44; 825440.15, 1999133.71; 825438.26, 1999134.25; 
825436.41, 1999134.91; 825434.60, 1999135.69; 825432.86, 1999136.59; 
825431.17, 1999137.60; 825431.13, 1999137.62; 825283.60, 1999233.04; 
825282.03, 1999234.13; 825280.49, 1999235.35; 825279.04, 1999236.67; 
825277.67, 1999238.08; 825276.40, 1999239.58; 825275.23, 1999241.16; 
825274.16, 1999242.81; 825273.21, 1999244.53; 825272.37, 1999246.30; 
825271.64, 1999248.13; 825271.04, 1999250.00; 825270.56, 1999251.91; 
825270.21, 1999253.84; 825269.99, 1999255.79; 825269.89, 1999257.75.
    (iii) Note: Map of Units 6 and 7 (Map 7) follows:

[[Page 161]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23OC07.006

    (13) Unit 8: Panduras, Yabucoa, Puerto Rico.
    (i) General Description: Unit 8 consists of approximately 28.6 ac 
(11.6 ha) to the northwest and southeast of Road PR-3 within Calabazas 
Ward, Yabucoa, and 18.2 ac (7.4 ha) of lands owned by the Puerto Rico 
Conservation Trust near the top of Cerro La Pandura.
    (ii) Coordinates: From Yabucoa USGS 1:20,000 quadrangle map. Unit 8 
bounded by the following UTM 19 NAD 83 coordinates (E, N):


[[Page 162]]


827566.07, 1997348.94; 827566.10, 1997350.90; 827566.26, 1997352.86; 
827566.55, 1997354.81; 827566.96, 1997356.73; 827567.50, 1997358.62; 
827568.16, 1997360.47; 827568.94, 1997362.27; 827569.84, 1997364.02; 
827570.13, 1997364.53; 827611.88, 1997436.35; 827612.60, 1997437.52; 
827613.72, 1997439.14; 827614.94, 1997440.68; 827616.26, 1997442.13; 
827617.67, 1997443.50; 827619.16, 1997444.77; 827620.74, 1997445.94; 
827622.39, 1997447.01; 827624.11, 1997447.96; 827625.89, 1997448.80; 
827627.71, 1997449.53; 827629.58, 1997450.13; 827631.49, 1997450.61; 
827633.42, 1997450.96; 827635.38, 1997451.18; 827637.34, 1997451.28; 
827639.30, 1997451.25; 827641.26, 1997451.09; 827643.20, 1997450.80; 
827645.13, 1997450.39; 827647.02, 1997449.85; 827648.87, 1997449.19; 
827650.67, 1997448.41; 827652.42, 1997447.51; 827654.10, 1997446.50; 
827655.72, 1997445.38; 827657.26, 1997444.16; 827658.72, 1997442.84; 
827660.08, 1997441.43; 827661.35, 1997439.93; 827662.53, 1997438.36; 
827663.59, 1997436.70; 827664.55, 1997434.99; 827665.39, 1997433.21; 
827666.11, 1997431.38; 827666.71, 1997429.51; 827667.19, 1997427.61; 
827667.54, 1997425.68; 827667.77, 1997423.72; 827667.86, 1997421.76; 
827667.83, 1997419.80; 827667.67, 1997417.84; 827667.39, 1997415.89; 
827666.97, 1997413.97; 827666.43, 1997412.08; 827665.77, 1997410.23; 
827664.99, 1997408.43; 827664.09, 1997406.68; 827663.80, 1997406.17; 
827627.55, 1997343.81; 827640.42, 1997269.96; 827711.77, 1997123.84; 
827786.66, 1997042.73; 827883.73, 1996967.26; 827884.71, 1996966.46; 
827886.17, 1996965.14; 827887.54, 1996963.73; 827888.44, 1996962.69; 
827912.27, 1996933.87; 827952.33, 1996988.85; 827952.47, 1996989.05; 
827953.69, 1996990.59; 827955.01, 1996992.05; 827956.43, 1996993.41; 
827957.92, 1996994.69; 827959.50, 1996995.86; 827961.15, 1996996.92; 
827962.87, 1996997.88; 827964.64, 1996998.72; 827966.47, 1996999.44; 
827968.34, 1997000.04; 827968.39, 1997000.06; 828042.04, 1997020.99; 
828043.90, 1997021.45; 828045.83, 1997021.80; 828047.79, 1997022.03; 
828049.75, 1997022.12; 828051.71, 1997022.09; 828053.67, 1997021.93; 
828055.62, 1997021.65; 828057.54, 1997021.23; 828059.35, 1997020.72; 
828145.05, 1996993.46; 828145.12, 1996993.44; 828146.97, 1996992.78; 
828148.78, 1996992.00; 828150.52, 1996991.10; 828152.21, 1996990.09; 
828153.83, 1996988.97; 828155.37, 1996987.75; 828156.82, 1996986.43; 
828158.19, 1996985.02; 828159.46, 1996983.52; 828160.63, 1996981.95; 
828161.06, 1996981.32; 828201.73, 1996919.32; 828202.37, 1996918.29; 
828203.33, 1996916.58; 828204.17, 1996914.80; 828204.82, 1996913.16; 
828225.52, 1996856.56; 828225.58, 1996856.38; 828226.18, 1996854.51; 
828226.66, 1996852.60; 828227.02, 1996850.67; 828227.24, 1996848.72; 
828227.28, 1996848.25; 828230.87, 1996794.26; 828230.93, 1996792.77; 
828230.90, 1996790.81; 828230.74, 1996788.85; 828230.45, 1996786.90; 
828230.04, 1996784.98; 828229.50, 1996783.09; 828228.84, 1996781.24; 
828228.06, 1996779.44; 828227.16, 1996777.69; 828226.15, 1996776.01; 
828225.03, 1996774.39; 828223.81, 1996772.85; 828222.49, 1996771.39; 
828221.16, 1996770.10; 828170.61, 1996723.90; 828170.53, 1996723.82; 
828169.03, 1996722.55; 828167.45, 1996721.38; 828165.80, 1996720.31; 
828164.09, 1996719.36; 828162.31, 1996718.52; 828162.31, 1996718.52; 
828160.48, 1996717.80; 828158.61, 1996717.19; 828156.71, 1996716.72; 
828154.77, 1996716.36; 828152.82, 1996716.14; 828150.86, 1996716.04; 
828149.74, 1996716.04; 828067.24, 1996717.74; 828066.40, 1996717.77; 
828064.44, 1996717.93; 828062.49, 1996718.22; 828060.57, 1996718.63; 
828058.68, 1996719.17; 828056.83, 1996719.83; 828055.03, 1996720.61; 
828054.09, 1996721.08; 827968.16, 1996765.39; 827967.35, 1996765.82; 
827965.66, 1996766.83; 827964.05, 1996767.95; 827962.51, 1996769.17; 
827961.05, 1996770.49; 827959.68, 1996771.90; 827958.41, 1996773.40; 
827957.24, 1996774.98; 827956.17, 1996776.63; 827955.26, 1996778.28; 
827922.76, 1996841.09; 827880.59, 1996878.48; 827879.64, 1996879.36; 
827878.28, 1996880.77; 827877.37, 1996881.82; 827844.26, 1996921.88; 
827747.85, 1996996.84; 827746.86, 1996997.64; 827745.40, 1996998.96; 
827744.22, 1997000.18; 827664.66, 1997086.34; 827664.48, 1997086.53; 
827663.21, 1997088.03; 827662.04, 1997089.61; 827660.97, 1997091.26; 
827660.02, 1997092.98; 827659.74, 1997093.53; 827584.59, 1997247.43; 
827584.03, 1997248.65; 827583.30, 1997250.48; 827582.70, 1997252.35; 
827582.22, 1997254.26; 827581.99, 1997255.45; 827566.51, 1997344.29; 
827566.39, 1997345.02; 827566.17, 1997346.98; 827566.07, 1997348.94.
    (iii) Note: The map depicting Unit 8 is provided at paragraph 
(14)(iii) of this entry.
    (14) Unit 9: Talante, Yabucoa-Maunabo, Puerto Rico.
    (i) General Description: Unit 9 consists of approximately 23.5 ac 
(9.5 ha) east of Road PR-3, including the headwaters of the Talante 
Creek and five unnamed drainages. About 2.8 ac (1.1 ha) of Unit 9 are 
located within Calabazas Ward, Yabucoa, and the remaining 21.6 ac (8.7 
ha) are located within Talante Ward, Maunabo.
    (ii) Coordinates: From Yabucoa USGS 1:20,000 quadrangle map. Unit 9 
bounded by the following UTM 19 NAD 83 coordinates (E, N):

827501.36, 1996260.52; 827501.40, 1996262.48; 827501.41, 1996262.67; 
827503.20, 1996295.22; 827502.70, 1996331.19; 827502.73, 1996333.01; 
827504.51, 1996371.21; 827504.52, 1996371.27; 827504.68, 1996373.23; 
827504.96, 1996375.18; 827505.38, 1996377.10; 827505.92, 1996378.99; 
827506.58, 1996380.84; 827506.64, 1996380.97; 827506.08, 1996421.48; 
827506.11, 1996423.36; 827506.11, 1996423.48; 827507.89, 1996457.21; 
827507.49, 1996486.28; 827507.52, 1996488.16; 827507.68, 1996490.12; 
827507.97, 1996492.06; 827508.39, 1996493.99; 827508.93, 1996495.87; 
827509.59, 1996497.73; 827510.37, 1996499.53; 827511.26, 1996501.28; 
827512.08, 1996502.66; 827524.53, 1996522.50; 827524.72, 1996522.80; 
827525.84, 1996524.42; 827527.06, 1996525.96; 827528.38, 1996527.41; 
827529.79, 1996528.78; 827531.28, 1996530.04; 827548.77, 1996543.95; 
827551.50, 1996556.77; 827550.16, 1996581.70; 827550.12, 1996582.81; 
827550.15, 1996584.77;

[[Page 163]]

827550.31, 1996586.73; 827550.60, 1996588.68; 827551.01, 1996590.60; 
827551.01, 1996590.60; 827551.55, 1996592.49; 827552.11, 1996594.08; 
827562.90, 1996622.18; 827570.11, 1996645.71; 827570.06, 1996646.71; 
827570.05, 1996647.35; 827570.13, 1996664.90; 827554.06, 1996695.96; 
827554.02, 1996696.03; 827553.61, 1996696.87; 827529.60, 1996747.39; 
827529.18, 1996748.32; 827528.45, 1996750.15; 827527.85, 1996752.02; 
827527.37, 1996753.93; 827527.02, 1996755.86; 827526.80, 1996757.81; 
827526.70, 1996759.77; 827526.70, 1996761.01; 827528.06, 1996816.12; 
827528.09, 1996816.85; 827528.25, 1996818.81; 827528.53, 1996820.75; 
827528.95, 1996822.67; 827529.49, 1996824.56; 827529.57, 1996824.81; 
827547.87, 1996880.16; 827548.45, 1996881.75; 827549.23, 1996883.56; 
827550.13, 1996885.30; 827551.14, 1996886.99; 827552.25, 1996888.61; 
827553.48, 1996890.15; 827554.80, 1996891.60; 827554.86, 1996891.66; 
827590.37, 1996928.18; 827591.34, 1996929.13; 827639.45, 1996974.29; 
827639.83, 1996974.64; 827641.33, 1996975.92; 827642.90, 1996977.09; 
827644.56, 1996978.15; 827646.27, 1996979.11; 827648.05, 1996979.95; 
827649.88, 1996980.67; 827651.75, 1996981.27; 827653.65, 1996981.75; 
827655.58, 1996982.10; 827657.54, 1996982.33; 827659.50, 1996982.43; 
827661.46, 1996982.39; 827663.42, 1996982.23; 827665.37, 1996981.95; 
827667.29, 1996981.53; 827669.18, 1996980.99; 827671.03, 1996980.33; 
827672.83, 1996979.55; 827674.58, 1996978.65; 827676.26, 1996977.65; 
827677.88, 1996976.53; 827679.42, 1996975.31; 827680.88, 1996973.99; 
827682.24, 1996972.58; 827683.52, 1996971.08; 827684.69, 1996969.50; 
827685.75, 1996967.85; 827686.71, 1996966.13; 827687.55, 1996964.36; 
827688.27, 1996962.53; 827688.87, 1996960.66; 827689.35, 1996958.75; 
827689.70, 1996956.82; 827689.93, 1996954.87; 827690.03, 1996952.90; 
827689.99, 1996950.94; 827689.83, 1996948.98; 827689.55, 1996947.04; 
827689.13, 1996945.12; 827688.59, 1996943.23; 827687.93, 1996941.38; 
827687.15, 1996939.57; 827686.25, 1996937.83; 827685.25, 1996936.14; 
827684.13, 1996934.52; 827682.91, 1996932.98; 827681.59, 1996931.53; 
827680.55, 1996930.51; 827632.94, 1996885.81; 827602.72, 1996854.74; 
827587.99, 1996810.19; 827586.92, 1996766.70; 827607.63, 1996723.10; 
827620.43, 1996698.38; 827621.14, 1996697.71; 827622.51, 1996696.30; 
827623.78, 1996694.80; 827624.95, 1996693.22; 827626.01, 1996691.57; 
827626.97, 1996689.86; 827627.81, 1996688.08; 827628.53, 1996686.25; 
827629.14, 1996684.38; 827629.61, 1996682.48; 827629.97, 1996680.54; 
827630.19, 1996678.59; 827630.29, 1996676.63; 827630.29, 1996676.01; 
827684.67, 1996673.75; 827684.89, 1996673.74; 827686.84, 1996673.58; 
827688.79, 1996673.29; 827690.71, 1996672.87; 827692.60, 1996672.34; 
827694.45, 1996671.67; 827694.45, 1996671.67; 827696.25, 1996670.89; 
827698.00, 1996670.00; 827698.00, 1996670.00; 827699.69, 1996668.99; 
827701.30, 1996667.87; 827702.84, 1996666.65; 827704.30, 1996665.33; 
827705.66, 1996663.92; 827706.94, 1996662.42; 827708.11, 1996660.84; 
827709.17, 1996659.19; 827709.17, 1996659.19; 827710.13, 1996657.47; 
827710.97, 1996655.70; 827710.97, 1996655.70; 827711.69, 1996653.87; 
827712.29, 1996652.00; 827712.77, 1996650.09; 827713.12, 1996648.16; 
827713.35, 1996646.21; 827713.45, 1996644.25; 827713.42, 1996642.28; 
827713.26, 1996640.32; 827712.97, 1996638.38; 827712.55, 1996636.46; 
827712.01, 1996634.57; 827711.35, 1996632.72; 827711.35, 1996632.72; 
827710.57, 1996630.92; 827709.68, 1996629.17; 827709.68, 1996629.17; 
827708.67, 1996627.48; 827707.55, 1996625.87; 827706.33, 1996624.33; 
827705.01, 1996622.87; 827703.60, 1996621.50; 827702.10, 1996620.23; 
827700.52, 1996619.06; 827698.87, 1996617.99; 827698.87, 1996617.99; 
827697.15, 1996617.04; 827695.38, 1996616.20; 827695.38, 1996616.20; 
827693.55, 1996615.47; 827691.68, 1996614.87; 827689.77, 1996614.39; 
827687.84, 1996614.04; 827685.89, 1996613.82; 827683.93, 1996613.72; 
827682.99, 1996613.72; 827623.38, 1996614.57; 827620.02, 1996603.60; 
827619.90, 1996603.21; 827619.34, 1996601.62; 827610.47, 1996578.53; 
827611.68, 1996556.03; 827611.72, 1996554.91; 827611.69, 1996552.95; 
827611.53, 1996550.99; 827611.24, 1996549.05; 827611.07, 1996548.16; 
827610.79, 1996546.87; 827675.26, 1996519.57; 827676.37, 1996519.07; 
827678.12, 1996518.17; 827679.81, 1996517.16; 827681.42, 1996516.04; 
827682.96, 1996514.82; 827684.42, 1996513.50; 827685.79, 1996512.09; 
827687.06, 1996510.59; 827688.23, 1996509.01; 827689.30, 1996507.36; 
827690.25, 1996505.65; 827691.09, 1996503.87; 827691.81, 1996502.04; 
827692.42, 1996500.17; 827692.89, 1996498.27; 827693.25, 1996496.33; 
827693.47, 1996494.38; 827693.57, 1996492.42; 827693.54, 1996490.45; 
827693.38, 1996488.50; 827693.09, 1996486.55; 827692.68, 1996484.63; 
827692.14, 1996482.74; 827691.48, 1996480.89; 827690.69, 1996479.09; 
827689.80, 1996477.34; 827688.79, 1996475.65; 827687.67, 1996474.04; 
827686.45, 1996472.50; 827685.13, 1996471.04; 827683.72, 1996469.67; 
827682.22, 1996468.40; 827680.64, 1996467.23; 827678.99, 1996466.17; 
827677.27, 1996465.21; 827675.50, 1996464.37; 827673.67, 1996463.65; 
827671.80, 1996463.05; 827669.90, 1996462.57; 827667.96, 1996462.21; 
827666.01, 1996461.99; 827664.05, 1996461.89; 827662.08, 1996461.92; 
827660.12, 1996462.08; 827658.18, 1996462.37; 827656.26, 1996462.79; 
827654.37, 1996463.32; 827652.59, 1996463.96; 827580.29, 1996492.29; 
827572.67, 1996486.23; 827567.66, 1996478.25; 827567.96, 1996457.04; 
827567.93, 1996455.16; 827567.92, 1996455.04; 827566.14, 1996421.31; 
827566.34, 1996406.71; 827631.73, 1996413.78; 827632.50, 1996413.86; 
827634.46, 1996413.95; 827636.42, 1996413.92; 827638.38, 1996413.76; 
827640.33, 1996413.47; 827642.25, 1996413.06; 827644.14, 1996412.52; 
827645.99, 1996411.86; 827645.99, 1996411.86; 827647.79, 1996411.08; 
827649.54, 1996410.18; 827651.22, 1996409.17; 827652.84, 1996408.05; 
827654.38, 1996406.83; 827655.84, 1996405.51; 827657.20, 1996404.10; 
827658.48, 1996402.61; 827659.65, 1996401.03; 827660.71, 1996399.38; 
827661.67, 1996397.66; 827662.51, 1996395.88; 827662.51, 1996395.88; 
827663.23, 1996394.06; 827663.83, 1996392.19; 827664.31, 1996390.28; 
827664.66, 1996388.35; 827664.89, 1996386.39; 827664.99, 1996384.43; 
827664.95, 1996382.47;

[[Page 164]]

827664.79, 1996380.51; 827664.51, 1996378.57; 827664.09, 1996376.64; 
827663.55, 1996374.75; 827662.89, 1996372.90; 827662.89, 1996372.90; 
827662.11, 1996371.10; 827661.21, 1996369.35; 827661.21, 1996369.35; 
827660.20, 1996367.67; 827659.09, 1996366.05; 827657.87, 1996364.51; 
827656.55, 1996363.05; 827655.14, 1996361.69; 827653.64, 1996360.42; 
827652.06, 1996359.25; 827650.41, 1996358.18; 827648.69, 1996357.22; 
827646.92, 1996356.38; 827646.92, 1996356.38; 827645.09, 1996355.66; 
827643.22, 1996355.06; 827641.31, 1996354.58; 827639.38, 1996354.23; 
827639.14, 1996354.19; 827563.34, 1996343.54; 827562.76, 1996331.12; 
827563.26, 1996295.01; 827563.23, 1996293.13; 827563.22, 1996292.95; 
827561.59, 1996263.45; 827570.34, 1996223.52; 827594.25, 1996193.51; 
827594.27, 1996193.48; 827595.44, 1996191.90; 827596.51, 1996190.25; 
827597.46, 1996188.53; 827598.30, 1996186.75; 827599.03, 1996184.93; 
827599.63, 1996183.06; 827600.11, 1996181.15; 827600.46, 1996179.22; 
827600.69, 1996177.27; 827600.78, 1996175.30; 827600.79, 1996174.55; 
827600.57, 1996148.78; 827600.59, 1996148.79; 827607.79, 1996201.75; 
827608.00, 1996203.07; 827608.41, 1996204.99; 827608.95, 1996206.88; 
827609.61, 1996208.73; 827609.81, 1996209.22; 827634.31, 1996268.25; 
827650.95, 1996310.98; 827651.00, 1996311.11; 827651.78, 1996312.91; 
827652.68, 1996314.66; 827653.69, 1996316.35; 827654.80, 1996317.96; 
827656.02, 1996319.50; 827657.34, 1996320.96; 827657.40, 1996321.02; 
827719.64, 1996385.01; 827741.95, 1996410.24; 827742.86, 1996411.23; 
827744.27, 1996412.59; 827745.77, 1996413.86; 827747.35, 1996415.04; 
827749.00, 1996416.10; 827750.71, 1996417.06; 827752.49, 1996417.90; 
827754.32, 1996418.62; 827756.19, 1996419.22; 827758.09, 1996419.70; 
827760.03, 1996420.05; 827761.98, 1996420.28; 827763.94, 1996420.37; 
827765.91, 1996420.34; 827767.87, 1996420.18; 827769.81, 1996419.90; 
827771.73, 1996419.48; 827773.62, 1996418.94; 827775.47, 1996418.28; 
827777.27, 1996417.50; 827779.02, 1996416.60; 827780.71, 1996415.59; 
827782.32, 1996414.48; 827783.86, 1996413.25; 827785.32, 1996411.94; 
827786.69, 1996410.52; 827787.96, 1996409.03; 827789.13, 1996407.45; 
827790.19, 1996405.80; 827791.15, 1996404.08; 827791.99, 1996402.30; 
827792.71, 1996400.48; 827793.31, 1996398.61; 827793.79, 1996396.70; 
827794.15, 1996394.77; 827794.37, 1996392.82; 827794.47, 1996390.85; 
827794.44, 1996388.89; 827794.28, 1996386.93; 827793.99, 1996384.99; 
827793.58, 1996383.07; 827793.04, 1996381.18; 827792.37, 1996379.33; 
827791.59, 1996377.52; 827790.70, 1996375.77; 827789.69, 1996374.09; 
827788.57, 1996372.47; 827787.35, 1996370.93; 827786.94, 1996370.46; 
827764.16, 1996344.69; 827763.25, 1996343.71; 827763.19, 1996343.65; 
827704.70, 1996283.52; 827690.15, 1996246.15; 827690.10, 1996246.02; 
827689.90, 1996245.54; 827666.77, 1996189.80; 827657.85, 1996124.12; 
827657.64, 1996122.80; 827657.22, 1996120.88; 827656.68, 1996118.99; 
827656.02, 1996117.14; 827655.24, 1996115.33; 827654.34, 1996113.59; 
827653.34, 1996111.90; 827652.22, 1996110.28; 827651.00, 1996108.74; 
827649.68, 1996107.29; 827648.27, 1996105.92; 827646.77, 1996104.65; 
827645.19, 1996103.48; 827643.54, 1996102.41; 827641.82, 1996101.46; 
827640.30, 1996100.73; 827608.11, 1996086.40; 827607.85, 1996086.29; 
827607.85, 1996086.29; 827606.02, 1996085.57; 827604.15, 1996084.96; 
827604.15, 1996084.96; 827602.25, 1996084.49; 827600.31, 1996084.13; 
827598.36, 1996083.91; 827596.40, 1996083.81; 827594.44, 1996083.84; 
827592.48, 1996084.00; 827590.53, 1996084.29; 827588.61, 1996084.70; 
827588.61, 1996084.70; 827586.72, 1996085.24; 827586.03, 1996085.47; 
827560.45, 1996094.38; 827559.30, 1996094.80; 827557.49, 1996095.59; 
827555.75, 1996096.48; 827554.06, 1996097.49; 827552.44, 1996098.61; 
827550.90, 1996099.83; 827549.45, 1996101.15; 827548.08, 1996102.56; 
827546.81, 1996104.06; 827545.64, 1996105.64; 827544.57, 1996107.29; 
827543.62, 1996109.01; 827542.78, 1996110.78; 827542.05, 1996112.61; 
827541.45, 1996114.48; 827540.97, 1996116.38; 827540.62, 1996118.32; 
827540.40, 1996120.27; 827540.30, 1996122.23; 827540.30, 1996122.99; 
827540.64, 1996164.41; 827519.02, 1996191.56; 827518.99, 1996191.60; 
827517.82, 1996193.18; 827516.75, 1996194.83; 827515.80, 1996196.54; 
827514.96, 1996198.32; 827514.23, 1996200.15; 827513.63, 1996202.02; 
827513.17, 1996203.85; 827502.06, 1996254.60; 827502.04, 1996254.67; 
827501.69, 1996256.61; 827501.46, 1996258.56; 827501.36, 1996260.52.
    (iii) Note: Map of Units 8 and 9 (Map 8) follows:

[[Page 165]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23OC07.007

    (15) Unit 10: Guayabota, Yabucoa, Puerto Rico.
    (i) General Description: Unit 10 consists of approximately 13.1 ac 
(5.3 ha) to the northeast of intersection of roads PR-181 to the east, 
and PR-182 and Rio Guayanes to the south, and south of the municipal 
boundary with San Lorenzo, within Guayabota Ward, Yabucoa.
    (ii) Coordinates: From Yabucoa and Patillas USGS 1:20,000 quadrangle 
maps. Unit 10 bounded by the following UTM 19 NAD 83 coordinates (E, N):


[[Page 166]]


818663.90, 2001950.98; 818669.55, 2002001.91; 818692.20, 2002048.84; 
818715.15, 2002074.58; 818757.13, 2002102.71; 818816.53, 2002097.18; 
818863.37, 2002080.88; 818903.97, 2002056.02; 818923.80, 2002001.21; 
818925.95, 2001999.12; 818936.95, 2001969.61; 818946.01, 2001927.36; 
818917.06, 2001876.11; 818883.41, 2001858.69; 818834.74, 2001853.78; 
818779.64, 2001855.13; 818739.10, 2001875.75; 818691.94, 2001915.35; 
818689.82, 2001915.32; 818663.90, 2001950.98.
    (iii) Note: Map of Unit 10 (Map 9) follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23OC07.008
    

[[Page 167]]


    (16) Unit 11: Guayabito, Yabucoa, Puerto Rico.
    (i) General Description: Unit 11 consists of approximately 17.3 ac 
(7.0 ha) south of Road PR-900 and north of the Maunabo boundary, within 
Guayabota Ward, Yabucoa.
    (ii) Coordinates: From Yabucoa USGS 1:20,000 quadrangle map. Unit 11 
bounded by the following UTM 19 NAD 83 coordinates (E, N):

822520.09, 1998835.84; 822520.13, 1998837.81; 822520.29, 1998839.76; 
822520.57, 1998841.71; 822520.99, 1998843.63; 822521.53, 1998845.52; 
822522.19, 1998847.37; 822522.97, 1998849.17; 822523.87, 1998850.92; 
822524.88, 1998852.61; 822526.00, 1998854.22; 822527.22, 1998855.76; 
822528.54, 1998857.22; 822529.95, 1998858.58; 822531.45, 1998859.85; 
822533.03, 1998861.02; 822534.68, 1998862.09; 822536.39, 1998863.04; 
822538.17, 1998863.88; 822540.00, 1998864.61; 822541.87, 1998865.21; 
822543.77, 1998865.69; 822545.32, 1998865.98; 822611.77, 1998876.73; 
822655.55, 1998901.23; 822685.38, 1998957.12; 822733.68, 1999416.01; 
822733.71, 1999416.30; 822734.00, 1999418.24; 822734.41, 1999420.16; 
822734.95, 1999422.05; 822735.61, 1999423.90; 822736.39, 1999425.71; 
822737.29, 1999427.45; 822738.30, 1999429.14; 822738.30, 1999429.14; 
822739.42, 1999430.76; 822740.64, 1999432.30; 822741.96, 1999433.75; 
822743.37, 1999435.12; 822744.87, 1999436.39; 822746.45, 1999437.56; 
822746.45, 1999437.56; 822748.10, 1999438.62; 822749.81, 1999439.58; 
822751.59, 1999440.42; 822753.42, 1999441.14; 822755.29, 1999441.74; 
822757.19, 1999442.22; 822759.13, 1999442.57; 822761.08, 1999442.80; 
822763.04, 1999442.89; 822765.01, 1999442.86; 822766.97, 1999442.70; 
822768.91, 1999442.41; 822770.83, 1999442.00; 822772.72, 1999441.46; 
822774.57, 1999440.80; 822776.37, 1999440.02; 822778.12, 1999439.12; 
822779.81, 1999438.11; 822779.81, 1999438.11; 822781.42, 1999436.99; 
822782.96, 1999435.77; 822783.85, 1999434.99; 822805.32, 1999415.26; 
822805.89, 1999414.73; 822807.26, 1999413.32; 822808.53, 1999411.82; 
822809.70, 1999410.24; 822810.76, 1999408.59; 822811.72, 1999406.87; 
822812.56, 1999405.10; 822813.28, 1999403.27; 822813.88, 1999401.40; 
822814.36, 1999399.49; 822814.71, 1999397.56; 822814.94, 1999395.61; 
822815.03, 1999393.64; 822815.04, 1999393.56; 822815.59, 1999353.44; 
822834.40, 1999326.93; 822859.47, 1999302.21; 822860.64, 1999300.99; 
822861.91, 1999299.49; 822863.08, 1999297.91; 822864.14, 1999296.26; 
822865.10, 1999294.55; 822865.94, 1999292.77; 822866.66, 1999290.94; 
822867.26, 1999289.07; 822867.74, 1999287.17; 822868.09, 1999285.23; 
822868.32, 1999283.28; 822868.41, 1999281.32; 822868.42, 1999280.68; 
822868.13, 1999220.49; 822872.70, 1999182.15; 822872.81, 1999181.05; 
822872.89, 1999179.72; 822875.48, 1999111.28; 822875.49, 1999110.64; 
822875.46, 1999108.68; 822875.30, 1999106.72; 822875.01, 1999104.77; 
822874.60, 1999102.85; 822874.06, 1999100.96; 822873.40, 1999099.11; 
822873.18, 1999098.57; 822846.96, 1999035.79; 822846.40, 1999034.52; 
822845.50, 1999032.78; 822844.49, 1999031.09; 822843.37, 1999029.48; 
822842.15, 1999027.94; 822840.83, 1999026.48; 822840.54, 1999026.18; 
822738.32, 1998923.47; 822737.20, 1998922.41; 822735.70, 1998921.14; 
822734.13, 1998919.96; 822733.36, 1998919.47; 822704.39, 1998865.19; 
822704.15, 1998864.75; 822703.14, 1998863.06; 822702.02, 1998861.45; 
822700.80, 1998859.91; 822699.48, 1998858.45; 822698.06, 1998857.09; 
822696.57, 1998855.82; 822694.99, 1998854.64; 822693.34, 1998853.58; 
822692.56, 1998853.13; 822636.47, 1998821.73; 822635.52, 1998821.22; 
822633.75, 1998820.38; 822631.92, 1998819.66; 822630.05, 1998819.06; 
822628.14, 1998818.58; 822626.59, 1998818.29; 822554.91, 1998806.70; 
822554.53, 1998806.64; 822552.57, 1998806.41; 822550.61, 1998806.31; 
822548.65, 1998806.35; 822546.69, 1998806.51; 822544.75, 1998806.80; 
822542.83, 1998807.21; 822540.94, 1998807.75; 822539.09, 1998808.41; 
822537.28, 1998809.19; 822535.53, 1998810.09; 822533.85, 1998811.10; 
822532.23, 1998812.22; 822530.69, 1998813.44; 822529.24, 1998814.76; 
822527.87, 1998816.17; 822526.60, 1998817.67; 822525.43, 1998819.25; 
822524.36, 1998820.90; 822523.41, 1998822.61; 822522.57, 1998824.39; 
822521.85, 1998826.22; 822521.25, 1998828.09; 822520.77, 1998829.99; 
822520.42, 1998831.93; 822520.19, 1998833.88; 822520.09, 1998835.84; 
822752.71, 1999023.06; 822781.60, 1999297.57; 822786.94, 1999290.03; 
822787.92, 1999288.73; 822789.19, 1999287.23; 822790.36, 1999286.02; 
822808.30, 1999268.32; 822808.06, 1999218.93; 822808.07, 1999218.29; 
822808.17, 1999216.32; 822808.28, 1999215.22; 822812.93, 1999176.24; 
822815.22, 1999115.62; 822793.82, 1999064.36; 822752.71, 1999023.06.
    (iii) Note: The map depicting Unit 11 is provided at paragraph 
(17)(iii) of this entry.
    (17) Unit 12: Guayabo, Yabucoa, Puerto Rico.
    (i) General Description: Unit 12 consists of approximately 9.8 ac 
(3.9 ha) within Guayabota Ward, Yabucoa, crossing Road PR-900, north of 
the Maunabo boundary, and about 3,025 ft (922 m) west of Unit 11.
    (ii) Coordinates: From Yabucoa USGS 1:20,000 quadrangle map. Unit 12 
is bounded by the following UTM 19 NAD 83 coordinates (E, N):

821249.15, 1999215.02; 821249.18, 1999216.98; 821249.34, 1999218.94; 
821249.63, 1999220.88; 821250.04, 1999222.80; 821250.19, 1999223.36; 
821255.15, 1999241.68; 821255.54, 1999243.01; 821256.21, 1999244.86; 
821256.99, 1999246.67; 821257.88, 1999248.41; 821258.89, 1999250.10; 
821260.01, 1999251.72; 821261.23, 1999253.25; 821262.55, 1999254.71; 
821263.97, 1999256.08; 821265.46, 1999257.35; 821267.04, 1999258.52; 
821268.69, 1999259.58; 821270.41, 1999260.54; 821272.19, 1999261.38; 
821274.01, 1999262.10; 821275.88, 1999262.70; 821276.77, 1999262.94; 
821304.05, 1999269.84; 821305.07, 1999270.08; 821307.00, 1999270.43; 
821308.01, 1999270.56; 821349.11, 1999275.25; 821350.61, 1999289.71; 
821339.99, 1999325.55; 821339.91, 1999325.83; 821339.43, 1999327.74; 
821339.08, 1999329.67; 821338.85, 1999331.62; 821338.76, 1999333.59;

[[Page 168]]

821338.79, 1999335.55; 821338.95, 1999337.51; 821338.97, 1999337.72; 
821342.49, 1999366.45; 821342.75, 1999368.18; 821343.16, 1999370.10; 
821343.70, 1999371.99; 821344.36, 1999373.84; 821345.15, 1999375.64; 
821346.04, 1999377.39; 821347.05, 1999379.08; 821348.17, 1999380.69; 
821349.39, 1999382.23; 821350.71, 1999383.69; 821352.12, 1999385.05; 
821353.62, 1999386.32; 821355.20, 1999387.50; 821356.85, 1999388.56; 
821358.57, 1999389.51; 821359.49, 1999389.97; 821386.84, 1999402.86; 
821418.08, 1999420.93; 821419.39, 1999421.65; 821421.17, 1999422.49; 
821423.00, 1999423.21; 821424.87, 1999423.81; 821426.77, 1999424.29; 
821428.71, 1999424.64; 821430.66, 1999424.86; 821432.62, 1999424.96; 
821434.58, 1999424.93; 821436.54, 1999424.77; 821437.64, 1999424.62; 
821476.83, 1999418.65; 821477.68, 1999418.51; 821479.60, 1999418.09; 
821481.49, 1999417.55; 821483.34, 1999416.89; 821485.14, 1999416.11; 
821486.89, 1999415.21; 821488.57, 1999414.20; 821488.70, 1999414.12; 
821525.83, 1999389.92; 821527.32, 1999388.88; 821528.86, 1999387.66; 
821530.31, 1999386.34; 821531.68, 1999384.93; 821532.95, 1999383.43; 
821534.12, 1999381.85; 821535.19, 1999380.20; 821536.14, 1999378.48; 
821536.98, 1999376.71; 821537.70, 1999374.88; 821538.30, 1999373.01; 
821538.78, 1999371.10; 821539.13, 1999369.17; 821539.36, 1999367.22; 
821539.45, 1999365.26; 821539.42, 1999363.29; 821539.26, 1999361.33; 
821538.97, 1999359.39; 821538.56, 1999357.47; 821538.02, 1999355.58; 
821537.36, 1999353.73; 821536.58, 1999351.93; 821535.68, 1999350.18; 
821534.67, 1999348.49; 821533.55, 1999346.88; 821532.33, 1999345.34; 
821531.01, 1999343.88; 821529.60, 1999342.52; 821528.10, 1999341.24; 
821526.52, 1999340.07; 821524.87, 1999339.01; 821523.15, 1999338.05; 
821521.38, 1999337.21; 821519.55, 1999336.49; 821517.68, 1999335.89; 
821515.77, 1999335.41; 821513.84, 1999335.06; 821511.89, 1999334.84; 
821509.93, 1999334.74; 821507.96, 1999334.77; 821506.00, 1999334.93; 
821504.06, 1999335.22; 821502.14, 1999335.64; 821500.25, 1999336.17; 
821498.40, 1999336.84; 821496.60, 1999337.62; 821494.85, 1999338.52; 
821493.16, 1999339.53; 821493.04, 1999339.61; 821461.35, 1999360.26; 
821439.02, 1999363.66; 821415.82, 1999350.25; 821414.50, 1999349.53; 
821413.59, 1999349.08; 821400.08, 1999342.71; 821399.34, 1999336.63; 
821409.88, 1999301.06; 821409.96, 1999300.78; 821410.44, 1999298.88; 
821410.79, 1999296.94; 821411.01, 1999294.99; 821411.11, 1999293.03; 
821411.08, 1999291.06; 821410.95, 1999289.44; 821406.35, 1999245.05; 
821406.32, 1999244.72; 821406.03, 1999242.78; 821405.62, 1999240.85; 
821405.08, 1999238.97; 821404.41, 1999237.12; 821403.63, 1999235.31; 
821402.74, 1999233.56; 821401.73, 1999231.88; 821400.61, 1999230.26; 
821399.39, 1999228.72; 821398.07, 1999227.27; 821396.65, 1999225.90; 
821395.16, 1999224.63; 821393.58, 1999223.46; 821391.93, 1999222.39; 
821390.21, 1999221.44; 821388.43, 1999220.60; 821386.61, 1999219.88; 
821384.74, 1999219.28; 821382.83, 1999218.80; 821380.90, 1999218.45; 
821379.89, 1999218.32; 821331.62, 1999212.81; 821331.68, 1999212.76; 
821333.04, 1999211.35; 821334.31, 1999209.85; 821335.48, 1999208.27; 
821336.55, 1999206.62; 821337.50, 1999204.90; 821338.34, 1999203.13; 
821338.95, 1999201.61; 821353.85, 1999161.41; 821353.96, 1999161.09; 
821354.56, 1999159.22; 821355.04, 1999157.32; 821355.39, 1999155.41; 
821362.58, 1999107.28; 821362.58, 1999107.25; 821362.80, 1999105.30; 
821362.90, 1999103.34; 821362.87, 1999101.37; 821362.71, 1999099.41; 
821362.42, 1999097.47; 821362.01, 1999095.55; 821361.72, 1999094.50; 
821339.65, 1999018.19; 821340.99, 1999002.89; 821341.00, 1999002.72; 
821341.10, 1999000.76; 821341.07, 1998998.79; 821340.91, 1998996.83; 
821340.62, 1998994.89; 821340.20, 1998992.97; 821339.66, 1998991.08; 
821339.00, 1998989.23; 821338.22, 1998987.43; 821337.32, 1998985.68; 
821336.31, 1998983.99; 821335.20, 1998982.38; 821333.97, 1998980.84; 
821332.66, 1998979.38; 821331.24, 1998978.02; 821329.75, 1998976.75; 
821328.17, 1998975.58; 821326.52, 1998974.51; 821324.80, 1998973.56; 
821323.02, 1998972.72; 821321.19, 1998971.99; 821319.32, 1998971.39; 
821317.42, 1998970.91; 821315.49, 1998970.56; 821313.53, 1998970.34; 
821311.57, 1998970.24; 821309.61, 1998970.27; 821307.65, 1998970.43; 
821305.70, 1998970.72; 821303.78, 1998971.14; 821301.89, 1998971.68; 
821300.04, 1998972.34; 821298.24, 1998973.12; 821296.49, 1998974.02; 
821294.81, 1998975.03; 821293.19, 1998976.15; 821291.65, 1998977.37; 
821290.20, 1998978.69; 821288.83, 1998980.10; 821287.56, 1998981.60; 
821286.39, 1998983.17; 821285.32, 1998984.83; 821284.37, 1998986.54; 
821283.53, 1998988.32; 821282.81, 1998990.15; 821282.21, 1998992.02; 
821281.73, 1998993.92; 821281.38, 1998995.86; 821281.17, 1998997.64; 
821279.33, 1999018.53; 821279.32, 1999018.70; 821279.22, 1999020.66; 
821279.26, 1999022.62; 821279.42, 1999024.58; 821279.70, 1999026.53; 
821280.12, 1999028.45; 821280.40, 1999029.50; 821302.21, 1999104.89; 
821296.46, 1999143.46; 821285.64, 1999172.65; 821260.86, 1999191.71; 
821259.75, 1999192.61; 821258.29, 1999193.93; 821256.92, 1999195.35; 
821255.65, 1999196.84; 821254.48, 1999198.42; 821253.42, 1999200.07; 
821252.46, 1999201.79; 821251.62, 1999203.57; 821250.90, 1999205.39; 
821250.30, 1999207.26; 821249.82, 1999209.17; 821249.47, 1999211.10; 
821249.25, 1999213.06; 821249.15, 1999215.02.
    (iii) Note: Map of Units 11 and 12 (Map 10) follows:

[[Page 169]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23OC07.009

    (18) Unit 13: El Cielito, Maunabo, Puerto Rico.
    (i) General Description: Unit 13 consists of approximately 7.84 ac 
(3.17 ha), between the municipal boundary of Yabucoa to the north, PR-
759 to the south and west, and PR-3 to the east, within Talante Ward, 
Maunabo.
    (ii) Coordinates: From Yabucoa USGS 1:20,000 quadrangle map. Unit 13 
bounded by the following UTM 19 NAD 83 coordinates (E, N):


[[Page 170]]


825982.02, 1996690.65; 825982.05, 1996692.62; 825982.22, 1996694.58; 
825982.51, 1996696.52; 825982.93, 1996698.44; 825983.48, 1996700.33; 
825984.14, 1996702.18; 825984.93, 1996703.98; 825985.83, 1996705.72; 
825986.85, 1996707.40; 825987.97, 1996709.02; 825989.19, 1996710.55; 
825990.52, 1996712.01; 825991.93, 1996713.37; 825993.43, 1996714.64; 
825995.01, 1996715.80; 825996.67, 1996716.86; 825998.39, 1996717.81; 
826000.17, 1996718.65; 826002.00, 1996719.37; 826003.87, 1996719.96; 
826005.78, 1996720.44; 826007.71, 1996720.78; 826009.66, 1996721.00; 
826011.63, 1996721.09; 826013.59, 1996721.06; 826015.55, 1996720.89; 
826017.49, 1996720.60; 826019.41, 1996720.18; 826021.30, 1996719.63; 
826023.15, 1996718.97; 826024.95, 1996718.18; 826026.69, 1996717.28; 
826028.38, 1996716.27; 826029.99, 1996715.14; 826031.53, 1996713.92; 
826032.98, 1996712.59; 826034.34, 1996711.18; 826035.61, 1996709.68; 
826036.77, 1996708.10; 826037.84, 1996706.44; 826038.79, 1996704.72; 
826039.62, 1996702.94; 826040.34, 1996701.11; 826040.80, 1996699.72; 
826058.80, 1996639.86; 826064.87, 1996626.21; 826065.02, 1996625.87; 
826065.62, 1996624.39; 826077.68, 1996591.67; 826117.27, 1996543.05; 
826117.56, 1996542.70; 826118.72, 1996541.12; 826119.34, 1996540.18; 
826137.43, 1996511.67; 826137.87, 1996510.96; 826138.82, 1996509.24; 
826139.63, 1996507.52; 826162.49, 1996454.74; 826162.51, 1996454.69; 
826163.23, 1996452.86; 826163.82, 1996450.98; 826164.30, 1996449.08; 
826164.64, 1996447.14; 826164.86, 1996445.19; 826164.96, 1996443.23; 
826165.66, 1996392.36; 826165.62, 1996390.40; 826165.46, 1996388.44; 
826165.16, 1996386.49; 826164.74, 1996384.58; 826164.20, 1996382.69; 
826163.81, 1996381.55; 826132.56, 1996296.82; 826120.53, 1996241.20; 
826120.29, 1996240.18; 826119.75, 1996238.29; 826119.08, 1996236.44; 
826118.30, 1996234.64; 826117.39, 1996232.89; 826116.38, 1996231.21; 
826115.26, 1996229.60; 826114.03, 1996228.06; 826112.71, 1996226.61; 
826111.29, 1996225.25; 826109.79, 1996223.98; 826108.21, 1996222.81; 
826106.56, 1996221.75; 826104.84, 1996220.80; 826103.06, 1996219.97; 
826101.23, 1996219.25; 826099.36, 1996218.65; 826097.45, 1996218.18; 
826095.51, 1996217.83; 826093.56, 1996217.61; 826091.60, 1996217.52; 
826089.63, 1996217.56; 826087.68, 1996217.72; 826085.73, 1996218.02; 
826083.81, 1996218.44; 826081.93, 1996218.98; 826080.08, 1996219.65; 
826078.28, 1996220.43; 826076.53, 1996221.34; 826074.85, 1996222.35; 
826073.24, 1996223.47; 826071.70, 1996224.70; 826070.25, 1996226.02; 
826068.88, 1996227.44; 826067.62, 1996228.94; 826066.45, 1996230.52; 
826065.39, 1996232.17; 826064.44, 1996233.89; 826063.60, 1996235.67; 
826062.89, 1996237.50; 826062.29, 1996239.37; 826061.82, 1996241.28; 
826061.47, 1996243.21; 826061.25, 1996245.17; 826061.16, 1996247.13; 
826061.20, 1996249.09; 826061.36, 1996251.05; 826061.65, 1996253.00; 
826061.83, 1996253.89; 826074.31, 1996311.58; 826074.55, 1996312.60; 
826075.09, 1996314.49; 826075.48, 1996315.62; 826105.53, 1996397.10; 
826104.99, 1996436.39; 826085.46, 1996481.49; 826069.59, 1996506.50; 
826027.95, 1996557.62; 826027.67, 1996557.98; 826026.50, 1996559.56; 
826025.44, 1996561.21; 826024.49, 1996562.93; 826023.65, 1996564.71; 
826023.06, 1996566.20; 826009.61, 1996602.69; 826003.16, 1996617.18; 
826003.01, 1996617.52; 826002.29, 1996619.34; 826001.84, 1996620.74; 
825983.29, 1996682.42; 825983.15, 1996682.90; 825982.68, 1996684.80; 
825982.33, 1996686.74; 825982.11, 1996688.69; 825982.02, 1996690.65.
    (iii) Note: Map of Unit 13 (Map 11) follows:

[[Page 171]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23OC07.010

    (19) Unit 14: Verraco, San Lorenzo, Puerto Rico.
    (i) General Description: Unit 14 consists of approximately 8.9 ac 
(3.6 ha), between PR-181 to the north and west, R[iacute]o Grande de 
Lo[iacute]za to the east and south, and the municipal boundary of 
Yabucoa to the south, within Espino Ward, San Lorenzo.
    (ii) Coordinates: From Yabucoa and Patillas USGS 1:20,000 quadrangle 
maps. Unit 14 bounded by the following UTM 19 NAD 83 coordinates (E, N):


[[Page 172]]


818021.78, 2003743.38; 818021.82, 2003745.35; 818021.98, 2003747.31; 
818022.27, 2003749.25; 818022.69, 2003751.17; 818023.24, 2003753.06; 
818023.90, 2003754.90; 818024.69, 2003756.71; 818025.59, 2003758.45; 
818026.61, 2003760.13; 818027.41, 2003761.31; 818041.40, 2003780.81; 
818041.72, 2003781.25; 818042.95, 2003782.78; 818044.27, 2003784.24; 
818045.68, 2003785.60; 818047.19, 2003786.87; 818048.77, 2003788.03; 
818050.42, 2003789.09; 818051.64, 2003789.78; 818072.66, 2003801.02; 
818073.16, 2003801.29; 818074.94, 2003802.12; 818076.77, 2003802.84; 
818078.64, 2003803.44; 818080.55, 2003803.91; 818082.48, 2003804.26; 
818084.44, 2003804.48; 818086.40, 2003804.57; 818088.36, 2003804.53; 
818089.35, 2003804.46; 818118.63, 2003801.99; 818119.61, 2003801.89; 
818121.55, 2003801.60; 818123.47, 2003801.18; 818125.20, 2003800.69; 
818179.90, 2003783.29; 818180.06, 2003783.24; 818181.91, 2003782.58; 
818183.71, 2003781.79; 818183.86, 2003781.72; 818240.72, 2003754.27; 
818242.32, 2003753.44; 818244.00, 2003752.42; 818245.61, 2003751.30; 
818247.15, 2003750.08; 818248.60, 2003748.75; 818249.96, 2003747.34; 
818251.23, 2003745.84; 818252.40, 2003744.26; 818253.46, 2003742.60; 
818254.41, 2003740.88; 818255.24, 2003739.10; 818255.96, 2003737.28; 
818256.56, 2003735.40; 818257.03, 2003733.50; 818257.38, 2003731.56; 
818257.60, 2003729.61; 818257.69, 2003727.65; 818257.65, 2003725.68; 
818257.49, 2003723.73; 818257.19, 2003721.78; 818256.77, 2003719.86; 
818256.23, 2003717.97; 818255.56, 2003716.13; 818254.78, 2003714.33; 
818253.88, 2003712.58; 818252.86, 2003710.90; 818251.74, 2003709.28; 
818250.51, 2003707.75; 818249.19, 2003706.30; 818247.78, 2003704.93; 
818246.27, 2003703.67; 818244.69, 2003702.50; 818243.04, 2003701.44; 
818241.32, 2003700.49; 818239.54, 2003699.65; 818237.71, 2003698.93; 
818235.84, 2003698.34; 818233.93, 2003697.87; 818232.00, 2003697.52; 
818230.05, 2003697.30; 818228.08, 2003697.21; 818226.12, 2003697.24; 
818224.16, 2003697.41; 818222.22, 2003697.70; 818220.30, 2003698.12; 
818218.41, 2003698.67; 818216.56, 2003699.33; 818214.76, 2003700.12; 
818214.61, 2003700.19; 818187.94, 2003713.06; 818216.83, 2003685.69; 
818233.41, 2003672.94; 818247.97, 2003666.94; 818249.43, 2003666.29; 
818251.18, 2003665.38; 818252.86, 2003664.37; 818254.47, 2003663.25; 
818256.01, 2003662.02; 818257.46, 2003660.70; 818258.83, 2003659.29; 
818260.09, 2003657.78; 818261.26, 2003656.20; 818262.32, 2003654.55; 
818263.27, 2003652.83; 818264.11, 2003651.05; 818264.82, 2003649.22; 
818265.42, 2003647.35; 818265.89, 2003645.44; 818266.24, 2003643.51; 
818266.46, 2003641.56; 818266.55, 2003639.59; 818266.51, 2003637.63; 
818266.35, 2003635.67; 818266.06, 2003633.73; 818265.64, 2003631.81; 
818265.09, 2003629.92; 818264.43, 2003628.07; 818263.64, 2003626.27; 
818262.74, 2003624.53; 818261.72, 2003622.84; 818260.60, 2003621.23; 
818259.38, 2003619.69; 818258.05, 2003618.24; 818256.64, 2003616.88; 
818255.14, 2003615.61; 818253.56, 2003614.44; 818251.90, 2003613.38; 
818250.18, 2003612.43; 818248.40, 2003611.60; 818246.57, 2003610.88; 
818244.70, 2003610.28; 818242.80, 2003609.81; 818240.86, 2003609.46; 
818238.91, 2003609.24; 818236.95, 2003609.15; 818236.49, 2003609.16; 
818236.87, 2003608.20; 818237.46, 2003606.33; 818237.94, 2003604.42; 
818238.28, 2003602.49; 818238.50, 2003600.54; 818238.59, 2003598.57; 
818238.56, 2003596.61; 818238.39, 2003594.65; 818238.10, 2003592.71; 
818237.68, 2003590.79; 818237.13, 2003588.90; 818236.47, 2003587.05; 
818235.68, 2003585.25; 818234.78, 2003583.51; 818233.77, 2003581.82; 
818232.64, 2003580.21; 818231.42, 2003578.67; 818230.10, 2003577.22; 
818229.24, 2003576.35; 818227.83, 2003574.98; 818226.33, 2003573.72; 
818224.75, 2003572.55; 818223.09, 2003571.49; 818221.37, 2003570.54; 
818219.59, 2003569.70; 818217.76, 2003568.98; 818215.89, 2003568.39; 
818213.99, 2003567.92; 818212.05, 2003567.57; 818210.10, 2003567.35; 
818208.14, 2003567.26; 818206.17, 2003567.29; 818204.21, 2003567.46; 
818202.27, 2003567.75; 818200.35, 2003568.17; 818198.46, 2003568.72; 
818196.62, 2003569.38; 818194.81, 2003570.17; 818193.07, 2003571.07; 
818191.39, 2003572.08; 818189.77, 2003573.21; 818188.24, 2003574.43; 
818186.87, 2003575.67; 818119.61, 2003627.58; 818118.47, 2003628.50; 
818117.02, 2003629.82; 818116.33, 2003630.51; 818088.04, 2003659.86; 
818054.31, 2003681.68; 818054.28, 2003681.70; 818052.67, 2003682.82; 
818051.13, 2003684.04; 818049.68, 2003685.37; 818048.32, 2003686.78; 
818047.05, 2003688.28; 818046.58, 2003688.89; 818030.14, 2003710.85; 
818029.44, 2003711.82; 818028.38, 2003713.48; 818027.43, 2003715.20; 
818026.59, 2003716.97; 818025.88, 2003718.80; 818025.28, 2003720.68; 
818024.81, 2003722.58; 818024.52, 2003724.15; 818022.15, 2003739.10; 
818022.09, 2003739.47; 818021.87, 2003741.42; 818021.78, 2003743.38;
    (iii) Note: The map depicting Unit 14 is provided at paragraph 
(20)(iii) of this entry.
    (20) Unit 15: Cueva Marcela Unit, San Lorenzo, Puerto Rico.
    (i) General Description: Unit 15 consists of approximately 7.47 ac 
(3.02 ha), between PR-181 and Quebrada Verraco to the north, PR-181 to 
the west, and Rio Grande de Loiza and the municipal boundary of Yabucoa 
to the south, within Espino Ward, San Lorenzo.
    (ii) Coordinates: From Yabucoa and Patillas USGS 1:20,000 quadrangle 
maps. Unit 15 bounded by the following UTM 19 NAD 83 coordinates (E, N):

818171.51, 2003361.29; 818171.55, 2003363.25; 818171.72, 2003365.21; 
818172.01, 2003367.15; 818172.43, 2003369.07; 818172.97, 2003370.96; 
818173.64, 2003372.81; 818174.42, 2003374.61; 818175.33, 2003376.36; 
818176.34, 2003378.04; 818177.46, 2003379.65; 818178.69, 2003381.19; 
818180.01, 2003382.64; 818181.43, 2003384.00; 818182.93, 2003385.27; 
818184.51, 2003386.44; 818186.16, 2003387.50; 818187.88, 2003388.45; 
818189.66, 2003389.28; 818191.49, 2003390.00; 818193.36, 2003390.60; 
818195.27, 2003391.07; 818197.20, 2003391.42; 818199.16, 2003391.64; 
818201.12, 2003391.73; 818203.08, 2003391.69; 818205.04, 2003391.53; 
818206.98, 2003391.23; 818208.90, 2003390.81; 818210.79, 2003390.27; 
818212.64, 2003389.60; 818214.44, 2003388.82;

[[Page 173]]

818216.19, 2003387.92; 818217.87, 2003386.90; 818219.48, 2003385.78; 
818219.89, 2003385.47; 818287.51, 2003333.26; 818288.65, 2003332.34; 
818290.10, 2003331.02; 818291.46, 2003329.60; 818292.73, 2003328.10; 
818293.05, 2003327.68; 818343.46, 2003261.48; 818344.31, 2003260.32; 
818345.37, 2003258.66; 818346.32, 2003256.94; 818347.15, 2003255.17; 
818347.87, 2003253.34; 818348.47, 2003251.46; 818348.94, 2003249.56; 
818349.29, 2003247.62; 818349.51, 2003245.67; 818349.60, 2003243.71; 
818349.56, 2003241.74; 818349.40, 2003239.79; 818349.10, 2003237.84; 
818348.68, 2003235.92; 818348.14, 2003234.03; 818347.47, 2003232.19; 
818346.69, 2003230.39; 818345.79, 2003228.64; 818344.77, 2003226.96; 
818343.65, 2003225.34; 818342.42, 2003223.81; 818341.10, 2003222.36; 
818339.69, 2003220.99; 818338.18, 2003219.73; 818336.60, 2003218.56; 
818334.95, 2003217.50; 818333.23, 2003216.55; 818331.45, 2003215.71; 
818329.62, 2003214.99; 818327.75, 2003214.40; 818325.84, 2003213.93; 
818323.91, 2003213.58; 818321.96, 2003213.36; 818319.99, 2003213.27; 
818318.03, 2003213.30; 818316.07, 2003213.47; 818314.13, 2003213.76; 
818312.21, 2003214.18; 818310.32, 2003214.73; 818308.47, 2003215.39; 
818306.67, 2003216.18; 818304.93, 2003217.08; 818303.24, 2003218.09; 
818301.63, 2003219.22; 818300.09, 2003220.44; 818298.64, 2003221.77; 
818297.28, 2003223.18; 818296.01, 2003224.68; 818295.69, 2003225.10; 
818247.68, 2003288.15; 818183.19, 2003337.94; 818182.05, 2003338.86; 
818180.60, 2003340.18; 818179.24, 2003341.60; 818177.97, 2003343.10; 
818176.81, 2003344.68; 818175.74, 2003346.33; 818174.79, 2003348.05; 
818173.96, 2003349.83; 818173.24, 2003351.66; 818172.64, 2003353.53; 
818172.17, 2003355.44; 818171.82, 2003357.37; 818171.60, 2003359.33; 
818171.51, 2003361.29; 818164.80, 2003448.26; 818164.84, 2003450.23; 
818165.01, 2003452.18; 818165.30, 2003454.13; 818165.72, 2003456.05; 
818166.26, 2003457.93; 818166.93, 2003459.78; 818167.72, 2003461.58; 
818168.62, 2003463.33; 818169.63, 2003465.01; 818170.75, 2003466.62; 
818171.98, 2003468.16; 818173.30, 2003469.61; 818174.72, 2003470.98; 
818176.22, 2003472.24; 818177.80, 2003473.41; 818179.45, 2003474.47; 
818181.17, 2003475.42; 818182.95, 2003476.26; 818184.78, 2003476.97; 
818186.65, 2003477.57; 818188.15, 2003477.95; 818251.08, 2003492.29; 
818296.61, 2003523.57; 818376.74, 2003594.09; 818377.97, 2003595.11; 
818379.55, 2003596.27; 818381.20, 2003597.34; 818382.92, 2003598.29; 
818384.70, 2003599.12; 818386.53, 2003599.84; 818388.40, 2003600.44; 
818390.31, 2003600.91; 818392.24, 2003601.26; 818394.20, 2003601.48; 
818396.16, 2003601.57; 818398.12, 2003601.53; 818400.08, 2003601.36; 
818402.02, 2003601.07; 818403.94, 2003600.65; 818405.83, 2003600.11; 
818407.68, 2003599.44; 818409.48, 2003598.66; 818411.23, 2003597.75; 
818412.91, 2003596.74; 818414.52, 2003595.62; 818416.06, 2003594.39; 
818417.51, 2003593.07; 818418.87, 2003591.65; 818420.14, 2003590.15; 
818421.31, 2003588.57; 818422.37, 2003586.92; 818423.32, 2003585.20; 
818424.15, 2003583.42; 818424.87, 2003581.59; 818425.47, 2003579.72; 
818425.94, 2003577.81; 818426.29, 2003575.88; 818426.51, 2003573.92; 
818426.60, 2003571.96; 818426.56, 2003570.00; 818426.40, 2003568.04; 
818426.10, 2003566.10; 818425.68, 2003564.18; 818425.14, 2003562.29; 
818424.47, 2003560.44; 818423.69, 2003558.64; 818422.79, 2003556.89; 
818421.77, 2003555.21; 818420.65, 2003553.60; 818419.42, 2003552.06; 
818418.10, 2003550.61; 818416.69, 2003549.25; 818416.41, 2003549.00; 
818334.93, 2003477.30; 818333.70, 2003476.28; 818332.12, 2003475.11; 
818332.09, 2003475.09; 818280.35, 2003439.55; 818278.72, 2003438.50; 
818277.00, 2003437.55; 818275.22, 2003436.72; 818273.39, 2003436.00; 
818271.52, 2003435.40; 818270.02, 2003435.02; 818201.50, 2003419.40; 
818201.09, 2003419.31; 818199.16, 2003418.97; 818197.21, 2003418.75; 
818195.25, 2003418.66; 818193.28, 2003418.69; 818191.32, 2003418.86; 
818189.38, 2003419.15; 818187.46, 2003419.57; 818185.57, 2003420.11; 
818183.72, 2003420.78; 818181.92, 2003421.57; 818180.18, 2003422.47; 
818178.49, 2003423.48; 818176.88, 2003424.61; 818175.35, 2003425.83; 
818173.89, 2003427.15; 818172.53, 2003428.57; 818171.26, 2003430.07; 
818170.10, 2003431.65; 818169.04, 2003433.31; 818168.09, 2003435.03; 
818167.25, 2003436.80; 818166.53, 2003438.63; 818165.94, 2003440.50; 
818165.46, 2003442.41; 818165.12, 2003444.35; 818164.90, 2003446.30; 
818164.80, 2003448.26;
    (iii) Note: Map of Units 14 and 15 (Map 12) follows:

[[Page 174]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23OC07.011

    (21) Unit 16: Ceiba Sur Unit, Juncos, Puerto Rico.
    (i) General Description: Unit 16 consists of approximately 13.92 ac 
(5.63 ha) between Road PR-9934 to the east, and Road PR-919 to the west 
within Ceiba Sur Ward, Juncos.
    (ii) Coordinates: From Juncos USGS 1:20,000 quadrangle map. Unit 16 
bounded by the following UTM 19 NAD 83 coordinates (E, N):

825495.74, 2015729.02; 825495.78, 2015730.98; 825495.94, 2015732.94; 
825496.23, 2015734.88; 825496.65, 2015736.80; 825497.20, 2015738.69;

[[Page 175]]

825497.86, 2015740.54; 825498.65, 2015742.34; 825499.55, 2015744.08; 
825500.57, 2015745.77; 825501.69, 2015747.38; 825502.91, 2015748.92; 
825504.24, 2015750.37; 825505.65, 2015751.73; 825507.15, 2015753.00; 
825508.73, 2015754.17; 825510.39, 2015755.23; 825512.11, 2015756.18; 
825513.89, 2015757.01; 825515.50, 2015757.66; 825623.97, 2015797.10; 
825686.46, 2015843.70; 825729.39, 2015913.29; 825728.50, 2015977.04; 
825714.36, 2016115.79; 825714.30, 2016116.45; 825714.21, 2016118.41; 
825714.25, 2016120.38; 825714.32, 2016121.45; 825728.89, 2016288.33; 
825712.58, 2016422.79; 825712.46, 2016424.02; 825712.36, 2016425.98; 
825712.40, 2016427.95; 825712.57, 2016429.90; 825712.65, 2016430.55; 
825721.59, 2016494.66; 825721.80, 2016495.95; 825722.22, 2016497.87; 
825722.77, 2016499.76; 825723.43, 2016501.61; 825724.22, 2016503.41; 
825725.12, 2016505.16; 825726.13, 2016506.84; 825727.26, 2016508.45; 
825728.48, 2016509.99; 825729.80, 2016511.44; 825731.22, 2016512.80; 
825732.72, 2016514.07; 825734.30, 2016515.24; 825735.96, 2016516.30; 
825737.68, 2016517.25; 825739.45, 2016518.09; 825741.28, 2016518.80; 
825743.16, 2016519.40; 825745.06, 2016519.87; 825747.00, 2016520.22; 
825748.95, 2016520.44; 825750.91, 2016520.53; 825752.88, 2016520.50; 
825754.83, 2016520.33; 825756.78, 2016520.04; 825758.70, 2016519.62; 
825760.59, 2016519.07; 825762.43, 2016518.41; 825764.24, 2016517.62; 
825765.98, 2016516.72; 825767.66, 2016515.71; 825769.28, 2016514.58; 
825770.81, 2016513.36; 825772.27, 2016512.04; 825773.63, 2016510.62; 
825774.90, 2016509.12; 825776.06, 2016507.54; 825777.12, 2016505.88; 
825778.08, 2016504.16; 825778.91, 2016502.39; 825779.63, 2016500.56; 
825780.23, 2016498.69; 825780.70, 2016496.78; 825781.05, 2016494.84; 
825781.27, 2016492.89; 825781.36, 2016490.93; 825781.32, 2016488.96; 
825781.16, 2016487.01; 825781.07, 2016486.36; 825772.67, 2016426.13; 
825788.89, 2016292.45; 825789.01, 2016291.22; 825789.11, 2016289.26; 
825789.07, 2016287.29; 825788.99, 2016286.22; 825774.40, 2016119.05; 
825788.38, 2015981.81; 825788.44, 2015981.16; 825788.53, 2015979.19; 
825789.56, 2015905.38; 825789.53, 2015903.42; 825789.36, 2015901.46; 
825789.07, 2015899.52; 825788.65, 2015897.60; 825788.10, 2015895.71; 
825787.44, 2015893.86; 825786.65, 2015892.06; 825785.75, 2015890.32; 
825785.09, 2015889.20; 825734.57, 2015807.29; 825734.21, 2015806.72; 
825733.09, 2015805.11; 825731.86, 2015803.57; 825730.54, 2015802.12; 
825729.12, 2015800.76; 825727.62, 2015799.49; 825726.96, 2015798.98; 
825656.34, 2015746.31; 825655.42, 2015745.66; 825653.76, 2015744.59; 
825652.04, 2015743.64; 825650.26, 2015742.81; 825648.65, 2015742.17; 
825536.03, 2015701.22; 825535.81, 2015701.14; 825533.94, 2015700.54; 
825532.03, 2015700.07; 825530.10, 2015699.72; 825528.15, 2015699.50; 
825526.19, 2015699.41; 825524.22, 2015699.45; 825522.26, 2015699.61; 
825520.32, 2015699.91; 825518.40, 2015700.33; 825516.51, 2015700.87; 
825514.66, 2015701.54; 825512.86, 2015702.32; 825511.12, 2015703.22; 
825509.43, 2015704.24; 825507.82, 2015705.36; 825506.28, 2015706.59; 
825504.83, 2015707.91; 825503.47, 2015709.32; 825502.20, 2015710.83; 
825501.03, 2015712.41; 825499.97, 2015714.06; 825499.02, 2015715.78; 
825498.19, 2015717.56; 825497.47, 2015719.39; 825496.87, 2015721.26; 
825496.40, 2015723.17; 825496.05, 2015725.10; 825495.83, 2015727.05; 
825495.74, 2015729.02
    (iii) Note: Map of Unit 16 (Map 13) follows:

[[Page 176]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23OC07.012

    (22) Unit 17: Playita Unit, Yabucoa, Puerto Rico.
    (i) General Description: Unit 17 consists of approximately 5.27 ac 
(2.13 ha), between PR-900 to the north and east and the municipal 
boundary of Maunabo to the south, within Calabazas Ward, Yabucoa.
    (ii) Coordinates: From Yabucoa USGS 1:20,000 quadrangle map. Unit 17 
bounded by the following UTM 19 NAD 83 coordinates (E, N):

[[Page 177]]

825120.79, 1998673.78; 825120.83, 1998675.74; 825121.00, 1998677.70; 
825121.29, 1998679.64; 825121.71, 1998681.56; 825122.25, 1998683.45; 
825122.92, 1998685.30; 825123.71, 1998687.10; 825124.61, 1998688.85; 
825125.62, 1998690.53; 825126.74, 1998692.14; 825127.97, 1998693.68; 
825129.29, 1998695.13; 825130.71, 1998696.49; 825132.21, 1998697.76; 
825133.79, 1998698.93; 825135.44, 1998699.99; 825137.16, 1998700.94; 
825138.94, 1998701.77; 825140.77, 1998702.49; 825142.64, 1998703.09; 
825144.55, 1998703.56; 825146.49, 1998703.91; 825148.44, 1998704.13; 
825150.40, 1998704.22; 825152.37, 1998704.18; 825154.32, 1998704.02; 
825156.27, 1998703.72; 825158.19, 1998703.30; 825160.07, 1998702.76; 
825161.92, 1998702.09; 825163.72, 1998701.31; 825165.47, 1998700.40; 
825167.15, 1998699.39; 825168.76, 1998698.27; 825170.30, 1998697.04; 
825171.75, 1998695.72; 825172.48, 1998694.98; 825196.33, 1998670.14; 
825233.38, 1998640.82; 825234.24, 1998640.12; 825235.69, 1998638.80; 
825237.05, 1998637.38; 825238.32, 1998635.88; 825239.49, 1998634.30; 
825240.24, 1998633.15; 825266.62, 1998590.83; 825266.93, 1998590.32; 
825267.88, 1998588.60; 825268.71, 1998586.82; 825269.43, 1998584.99; 
825270.03, 1998583.12; 825270.50, 1998581.21; 825270.83, 1998579.42; 
825279.64, 1998520.84; 825279.66, 1998520.70; 825279.88, 1998518.75; 
825279.96, 1998517.25; 825283.32, 1998403.46; 825283.33, 1998402.99; 
825283.29, 1998401.03; 825283.13, 1998399.07; 825282.84, 1998397.12; 
825282.42, 1998395.21; 825281.87, 1998393.32; 825281.20, 1998391.47; 
825280.42, 1998389.67; 825279.52, 1998387.92; 825278.50, 1998386.24; 
825277.38, 1998384.63; 825276.15, 1998383.09; 825274.83, 1998381.64; 
825273.42, 1998380.27; 825271.91, 1998379.01; 825270.33, 1998377.84; 
825268.68, 1998376.78; 825266.96, 1998375.83; 825265.18, 1998374.99; 
825263.35, 1998374.28; 825261.48, 1998373.68; 825259.57, 1998373.21; 
825257.64, 1998372.86; 825255.69, 1998372.64; 825253.72, 1998372.55; 
825251.76, 1998372.59; 825249.80, 1998372.75; 825247.86, 1998373.05; 
825245.94, 1998373.46; 825244.05, 1998374.01; 825242.20, 1998374.68; 
825240.40, 1998375.46; 825238.65, 1998376.36; 825236.97, 1998377.38; 
825235.36, 1998378.50; 825233.82, 1998379.73; 825232.37, 1998381.05; 
825231.01, 1998382.46; 825229.74, 1998383.97; 825228.57, 1998385.55; 
825227.51, 1998387.20; 825226.56, 1998388.92; 825225.73, 1998390.70; 
825225.01, 1998392.53; 825224.41, 1998394.40; 825223.94, 1998396.31; 
825223.59, 1998398.24; 825223.37, 1998400.19; 825223.29, 1998401.69; 
825219.99, 1998513.68; 825212.36, 1998564.33; 825192.03, 1998596.96; 
825157.45, 1998624.31; 825156.60, 1998625.01; 825155.15, 1998626.34; 
825154.42, 1998627.07; 825129.15, 1998653.40; 825128.52, 1998654.08; 
825127.25, 1998655.59; 825126.08, 1998657.17; 825125.02, 1998658.82; 
825124.07, 1998660.54; 825123.24, 1998662.32; 825122.52, 1998664.15; 
825121.92, 1998666.02; 825121.45, 1998667.93; 825121.10, 1998669.86; 
825120.88, 1998671.81; 825120.79, 1998673.78;
    (iii) Note: Map of Unit 17 (Map 14) follows:

[[Page 178]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23OC07.013


[[Page 179]]



          California Tiger Salamander (Ambystoma californiense)

 California Tiger Salamander (Ambystoma californiense) in Santa Barbara 
                                 County

    (1) Critical habitat units are depicted for Santa Barbara County, 
California, on the maps below.
    (2) The primary constituent elements (PCEs) of critical habitat for 
the California tiger salamander in Santa Barbara County are the habitat 
components that provide:
    (i) Standing bodies of fresh water, including natural and man-made 
(e.g., stock) ponds, vernal pools, and dune ponds, and other ephemeral 
or permanent water bodies that typically become inundated during winter 
rains and hold water for a sufficient length of time (i.e., 12 weeks) 
necessary for the species to complete the aquatic portion of its life 
cycle (PCE 1).
    (ii) Barrier-free uplands adjacent to breeding ponds that contain 
small mammal burrows, including but not limited to burrows created by 
the California ground squirrel (Spermophilus beecheyi) and Botta's 
pocket gopher (Thommomys bottae). Small mammals are essential in 
creating the underground habitat that adult California tiger salamanders 
depend upon for food, shelter, and protection from the elements and 
predation (PCE 2).
    (iii) Upland areas between breeding locations (PCE 1) and areas with 
small mammal burrows (PCE 2) that allow for dispersal among such sites 
(PCE 3).
    (3) Critical habitat does not include existing features and 
structures, such as buildings, aqueducts, airports, roads and their 
rights of way, and other developed areas not containing one or more of 
the primary constituent elements.
    (4) Final critical habitat units are described below. Coordinate in 
UTM Zone 10 with units in meters using North American Datum of 1927 
(NAD27).
    (5) Note: Map 1 (Index map) follows:

[[Page 180]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR24NO04.001

    (6) Unit 1: Western Santa Maria/Orcutt Unit, Santa Barbara County, 
California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24, 000 scale quadrangle maps Guadalupe, Santa 
Maria, Orcutt and Casmalia. Lands bounded by UTM Zone 10, NAD 1927 
coordinates (E, N): 727389, 3864869; 727442, 3864843; 727875, 3864859; 
729380, 3864569; 729392, 3864085; 729538, 3864085; 729549, 3863963;

[[Page 181]]

729918, 3863978; 729917, 3864206; 729992, 3864189; 729994, 3864102; 
730189, 3864034; 730274, 3864033; 730349, 3864133; 730426, 3864139; 
730428, 3864131; 730875, 3864121; 730995, 3863984; 731124, 3863944; 
731211, 3863935; 731326, 3864047; 731326, 3864050; 731327, 3864050; 
731552, 3863889; 731688, 3863776; 731694, 3863667; 732718, 3863684; 
733501, 3863695; 733710, 3864115; 734321, 3864137; 734356, 3862460; 
734012, 3862472; 733226, 3862481; 733120, 3862472; 732971, 3862446; 
732961, 3862352; 732793, 3862347; 732789, 3862453; 732392, 3862448; 
731780, 3862433; 731777, 3862409; 731782, 3862099; 731782, 3862030; 
731972, 3862034; 731974, 3861846; 731788, 3861839; 731793, 3861647; 
731514, 3861520; 731262, 3861619; 731322, 3861818; 730590, 3862072; 
730517, 3861874; 730107, 3862013; 729738, 3862138; 729602, 3862197; 
729340, 3862322; 729093, 3862435; 728920, 3862517; 728803, 3862577; 
728697, 3862427; 728611, 3862313; 728499, 3862215; 728390, 3862156; 
728264, 3862119; 728151, 3862116; 728010, 3862126; 727823, 3862142; 
727665, 3862155; 727578, 3862147; 727520, 3862128; 727450, 3862077; 
727373, 3861996; 727263, 3861874; 726913, 3861473; 726869, 3861542; 
726733, 3861881; 726625, 3862026; 726543, 3862111; 726454, 3862257; 
726385, 3862323; 726312, 3862358; 726267, 3862377; 726195, 3862392; 
726144, 3862402; 726090, 3862433; 726030, 3862494; 725866, 3862781; 
725844, 3862860; 725847, 3862927; 725875, 3862987; 725916, 3863037; 
726214, 3863309; 726378, 3863531; 726419, 3863641; 726444, 3864049; 
726467, 3864173; 726511, 3864261; 726568, 3864745; 726596, 3864786; 
726638, 3864810; 726727, 3864827; 726866, 3864836; 727389, 3864850; 
returning to coordinates 727389, 3864869.
    (ii) Note: Unit 1 (Map 2) follows:

[[Page 182]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR24NO04.002

    (7) Unit 2: Eastern Santa Maria Unit, Santa Barbara County, 
California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle maps Guadalupe, Santa Maria, 
Twitchell Dam, Orcutt and Sisquoc. Lands bounded by UTM Zone 10, NAD 
1927 coordinates (E, N): 737445, 3864756; 737472, 3864777; 737515, 
3864783; 737548, 3864786; 737572, 3864801; 737600, 3864838;

[[Page 183]]

737615, 3864865; 737648, 3864905; 737679, 3864932; 737706, 3864950; 
737727, 3864968; 737755, 3864987; 737776, 3865011; 737779, 3865041; 
738854, 3865078; 738849, 3865074; 739192, 3865081; 739600, 3865100; 
739600, 3864300; 742500, 3864300; 742836, 3864048; 742825, 3863984; 
742805, 3863899; 742825, 3863808; 742798, 3863736; 742798, 3863677; 
742838, 3863599; 742851, 3863501; 742890, 3863429; 742942, 3863357; 
742955, 3863266; 743020, 3863122; 743086, 3863004; 743164, 3862913; 
743256, 3862841; 743308, 3862763; 743308, 3862717; 743399, 3862573; 
743497, 3862417; 743536, 3862345; 743608, 3862286; 743608, 3862201; 
743703, 3861803; 743680, 3861801; 743607, 3861773; 743552, 3861732; 
743460, 3861709; 743363, 3861672; 743299, 3861589; 743194, 3861498; 
743115, 3861392; 743083, 3861277; 743028, 3861194; 742955, 3861153; 
742844, 3861112; 742794, 3861075; 742546, 3861098; 741338, 3861104; 
741329, 3861505; 740918, 3861507; 740918, 3861880; 740700, 3862100; 
740400, 3862500; 740300, 3862700; 740300, 3863100; 738600, 3863500; 
738531, 3863657; 738371, 3863925; 738322, 3863957; 738273, 3863974; 
738219, 3863986; 738136, 3864066; 738036, 3864163; 737987, 3864215; 
737938, 3864226; 737890, 3864212; 737838, 3864206; 737795, 3864232; 
737749, 3864266; 737718, 3864321; 737672, 3864378; 737595, 3864409; 
737512, 3864441; 737493, 3864445; 737485, 3864446; 737478, 3864479; 
737466, 3864522; 737472, 3864543; 737500, 3864555; 737536, 3864561; 
737576, 3864571; 737600, 3864589; 737594, 3864625; 737563, 3864640; 
737530, 3864668; 737487, 3864689; 737460, 3864701; 737448, 3864728; 
returning to coordinates 737445, 3864756
    (i) Note: Unit 2 (Map 3) follows:

[[Page 184]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR24NO04.003

    (8) Unit 3: Western Los Alamos/Careaga Unit, Santa Barbara County, 
California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle maps Orcutt and Sisquoc. 
Lands bounded by UTM Zone 10, NAD 1927 coordinates (E, N): 739930, 
3852832; 739932, 3852861; 739942, 3852885; 739950, 3852898; 739953, 
3852908; 739948, 3852930; 739938, 3852953; 739930, 3852980; 739930, 
3853010;

[[Page 185]]

739934, 3853028; 739949, 3853035; 740004, 3853033; 740031, 3853036; 
740050, 3853048; 740057, 3853058; 740069, 3853085; 740079, 3853108; 
740089, 3853128; 740102, 3853145; 740129, 3853157; 740152, 3853178; 
740159, 3853196; 740161, 3853220; 740164, 3853243; 740194, 3853293; 
740204, 3853313; 740211, 3853337; 740215, 3853373; 740224, 3853418; 
740236, 3853465; 740233, 3853508; 740236, 3853551; 740232, 3853598; 
740212, 3853658; 740197, 3853710; 740189, 3853748; 740175, 3853778; 
740179, 3853818; 740189, 3853838; 740207, 3853850; 740227, 3853847; 
740249, 3853838; 740273, 3853833; 740288, 3853838; 740309, 3853865; 
740314, 3853898; 740309, 3853934; 740295, 3853970; 740295, 3854004; 
740301, 3854056; 740297, 3854108; 740284, 3854159; 740273, 3854198; 
740261, 3854241; 740233, 3854288; 740219, 3854318; 740219, 3854348; 
740201, 3854378; 740179, 3854408; 740175, 3854438; 740185, 3854482; 
740205, 3854528; 740210, 3854580; 740189, 3854598; 740138, 3854609; 
740067, 3854618; 740058, 3854630; 740057, 3854650; 740068, 3854705; 
740086, 3854764; 740122, 3854832; 740145, 3854873; 740171, 3854916; 
740200, 3854958; 740227, 3854990; 740246, 3855003; 740268, 3855011; 
740299, 3855016; 740327, 3855016; 740394, 3855002; 740463, 3854982; 
740529, 3854949; 740587, 3854907; 740667, 3854871; 740749, 3854847; 
740853, 3854820; 741014, 3854780; 741358, 3854674; 741546, 3854627; 
741695, 3854596; 741696, 3854596; 741734, 3854379; 741759, 3854299; 
741781, 3854220; 741811, 3854104; 741858, 3853961; 741870, 3853929; 
741886, 3853898; 741906, 3853865; 741932, 3853833; 741976, 3853784; 
742010, 3853736; 742033, 3853682; 742054, 3853628; 742075, 3853579; 
742092, 3853547; 742113, 3853517; 742142, 3853481; 742183, 3853444; 
742227, 3853411; 742263, 3853385; 742305, 3853361; 742316, 3853357; 
742332, 3853353; 742346, 3853356; 742362, 3853362; 742371, 3853371; 
742375, 3853385; 742374, 3853410; 742374, 3853450; 742374, 3853462; 
742379, 3853481; 742385, 3853496; 742392, 3853507; 742401, 3853515; 
742411, 3853518; 742433, 3853515; 742447, 3853508; 742463, 3853498; 
742486, 3853490; 742511, 3853490; 742525, 3853492; 742539, 3853496; 
742565, 3853509; 742580, 3853517; 742594, 3853520; 742605, 3853519; 
742616, 3853515; 742626, 3853502; 742634, 3853485; 742643, 3853466; 
742653, 3853451; 742664, 3853433; 742687, 3853414; 742700, 3853411; 
742712, 3853411; 742723, 3853417; 742734, 3853429; 742742, 3853451; 
742741, 3853472; 742735, 3853490; 742727, 3853511; 742719, 3853537; 
742718, 3853556; 742720, 3853577; 742741, 3853616; 742753, 3853632; 
742766, 3853645; 742786, 3853648; 742809, 3853648; 742820, 3853648; 
742834, 3853645; 742856, 3853634; 742980, 3853487; 742994, 3853477; 
743010, 3853470; 743024, 3853466; 743040, 3853463; 743058, 3853467; 
743068, 3853470; 743074, 3853474; 743082, 3853492; 743087, 3853504; 
743090, 3853519; 743092, 3853546; 743094, 3853569; 743097, 3853585; 
743100, 3853593; 743100, 3853606; 743090, 3853656; 743091, 3853667; 
743104, 3853684; 743125, 3853694; 743146, 3853691; 743171, 3853681; 
743201, 3853671; 743217, 3853677; 743229, 3853688; 743247, 3853721; 
743259, 3853762; 743269, 3853790; 743277, 3853849; 743300, 3853819; 
743300, 3853818; 743323, 3853777; 743397, 3853668; 743403, 3852407; 
743404, 3851838; 743379, 3851848; 743310, 3851856; 743246, 3851854; 
743210, 3851862; 743160, 3851881; 743107, 3851862; 743071, 3851848; 
743035, 3851839; 743001, 3851841; 742976, 3851860; 742953, 3851890; 
742771, 3852099; 742735, 3852126; 742695, 3852156; 742663, 3852192; 
742649, 3852236; 742651, 3852268; 742642, 3852300; 742625, 3852327; 
742598, 3852357; 742575, 3852378; 742539, 3852388; 742505, 3852386; 
742458, 3852350; 742323, 3852141; 742287, 3852122; 742251, 3852112; 
742211, 3852124; 742169, 3852135; 742123, 3852135; 742080, 3852131; 
742051, 3852137; 742006, 3852145; 741962, 3852148; 741932, 3852156; 
741901, 3852177; 741880, 3852198; 741859, 3852205; 741829, 3852198; 
741806, 3852207; 741774, 3852219; 741753, 3852232; 741730, 3852234; 
741709, 3852230; 741694, 3852238; 741683, 3852257; 741666, 3852279; 
741645, 3852298; 741540, 3852314; 741527, 3852333; 741521, 3852365; 
741485, 3852388; 741464, 3852395; 741430, 3852405; 741413, 3852426; 
741362, 3852448; 741324, 3852462; 741273, 3852494; 741240, 3852526; 
741056, 3852733; 740995, 3852819; 740969, 3852874; 740948, 3852919; 
740914, 3852929; 740739, 3852925; 740638, 3852914; 740536, 3852895; 
740395, 3852862; 740249, 3852823; 740205, 3852807; 740165, 3852787; 
740120, 3852761; 740076, 3852741; 740029, 3852725; 739996, 3852721; 
739966, 3852736; 739949, 3852758; 739935, 3852794; returning to 
coordinates 739930, 3852832.
    (ii) Note: Unit 3 (Map 4) follows:

[[Page 186]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR24NO04.004

    (9) Unit 4: Eastern Los Alamos Unit, Santa Barbara County, 
California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle maps Los Alamos and Zaca 
Creek. Lands bounded by UTM Zone 10, NAD 1927 coordinates (E, N): 
751549, 3847022; 751555, 3846792; 751152, 3846766; 751147, 3847077; 
751215, 3847070; return to coordinates 751549, 3847022; 752562,

[[Page 187]]

3846818; 752566, 3846816; 752568, 3846815; 753162, 3846522; 753190, 
3846371; 753198, 3846259; 752581, 3846225; 752562, 3846811; returning to 
coordinates 752562, 3846818.
    (ii) Note: Unit 4 (Map 5) follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR24NO04.005
    

[[Page 188]]


    (10) Unit 5 (Purisima Hills) and Unit 6 (Santa Rita Valley), Santa 
Barbara County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle maps Lompoc and Los Alamos. 
Lands bounded by UTM Zone 10, NAD 1927 coordinates (E, N): 740315, 
3843441; 740315, 3843571; 740333, 3843694; 740344, 3843851; 740379, 
3844016; 740440, 3844211; 740465, 3844252; 740500, 3844403; 740514, 
3844454; 740523, 3844541; 740545, 3844615; 740543, 3844650; 740562, 
3844732; 740560, 3844813; 740574, 3844876; 740605, 3844928; 740632, 
3844951; 740687, 3844979; 740760, 3844996; 740805, 3845008; 740854, 
3845018; 740926, 3845027; 740998, 3845045; 741062, 3845070; 741215, 
3845097; 741303, 3845088; 741330, 3845084; 741406, 3845068; 741449, 
3845049; 741505, 3845008; 741534, 3844944; 741565, 3844878; 741622, 
3844831; 741696, 3844819; 741830, 3844848; 741927, 3844856; 742032, 
3844878; 742137, 3844897; 742187, 3844900; 743020, 3844746; 743600, 
3844639; 743544, 3845422; 743666, 3845536; 743782, 3845507; 743804, 
3845490; 743820, 3845487; 743817, 3845472; 743789, 3845364; 743754, 
3845216; 743731, 3845103; 743737, 3845037; 743766, 3844881; 743795, 
3844800; 743801, 3844755; 743885, 3844535; 743914, 3844487; 743935, 
3844452; 743955, 3844439; 743980, 3844433; 744015, 3844435; 744049, 
3844447; 744076, 3844462; 744101, 3844484; 744191, 3844607; 744256, 
3844716; 744267, 3844736; 744287, 3844751; 744316, 3844765; 744347, 
3844771; 744379, 3844771; 744398, 3844763; 744416, 3844745; 744431, 
3844716; 744453, 3844650; 744443, 3844611; 744459, 3844574; 744482, 
3844523; 744488, 3844488; 744482, 3844462; 744449, 3844433; 744425, 
3844386; 744406, 3844347; 744392, 3844304; 744379, 3844255; 744375, 
3844189; 744361, 3844156; 744334, 3844132; 744306, 3844106; 744283, 
3844062; 744275, 3844028; 744279, 3843987; 744291, 3843933; 744308, 
3843884; 744316, 3843839; 744320, 3843801; 744303, 3843764; 744258, 
3843733; 744257, 3843733; 744209, 3843711; 744131, 3843692; 744083, 
3843690; 744032, 3843674; 743962, 3843661; 743896, 3843643; 743768, 
3843616; 743739, 3843608; 743690, 3843610; 743673, 3843616; 743651, 
3843624; 743587, 3843624; 743548, 3843624; 743519, 3843624; 743488, 
3843616; 743467, 3843585; 743439, 3843558; 743414, 3843550; 743391, 
3843543; 743373, 3843538; 743327, 3843503; 743319, 3843489; 743303, 
3843462; 743280, 3843443; 743228, 3843421; 743222, 3843416; 743194, 
3843404; 743150, 3843392; 743095, 3843367; 743037, 3843328; 742969, 
3843276; 742924, 3843237; 742891, 3843194; 742856, 3843132; 742817, 
3843073; 742790, 3842998; 742767, 3842937; 742745, 3842914; 742741, 
3842893; 742755, 3842875; 742776, 3842844; 742796, 3842819; 742811, 
3842782; 742808, 3842754; 742808, 3842756; 742806, 3842745; 742724, 
3842689; 742714, 3842673; 742714, 3842654; 742699, 3842642; 742691, 
3842619; 742679, 3842599; 742658, 3842574; 742619, 3842523; 742600, 
3842496; 742580, 3842488; 742559, 3842481; 742528, 3842473; 742512, 
3842467; 742491, 3842453; 742469, 3842436; 742460, 3842407; 742452, 
3842376; 742446, 3842358; 742432, 3842352; 742423, 3842346; 742423, 
3842331; 742423, 3842321; 742415, 3842300; 742401, 3842292; 742382, 
3842284; 742366, 3842278; 742360, 3842263; 742347, 3842255; 742337, 
3842238; 742331, 3842214; 742325, 3842195; 742322, 3842177; 742333, 
3842156; 742333, 3842133; 742325, 3842113; 742308, 3842100; 742283, 
3842082; 742263, 3842053; 742215, 3842063; 742205, 3842084; 742199, 
3842144; 742189, 3842214; 742182, 3842267; 742162, 3842317; 742131, 
3842362; 742065, 3842407; 742020, 3842428; 741952, 3842434; 741925, 
3842430; 741907, 3842411; 741884, 3842343; 741859, 3842259; 741834, 
3842222; 741785, 3842199; 741678, 3842164; 741618, 3842152; 741524, 
3842191; 741449, 3842218; 741383, 3842245; 741322, 3842265; 741194, 
3842306; 741101, 3842329; 741029, 3842343; 740984, 3842374; 740953, 
3842407; 740908, 3842494; 740846, 3842572; 740805, 3842632; 740760, 
3842702; 740681, 3842796; 740578, 3842885; 740374, 3843079; 740346, 
3843118; 740329, 3843163; 740321, 3843192; 740323, 3843280; 740319, 
3843359; returning to coordinates 740315, 3843441.
    (ii) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle map Los Alamos. Lands 
bounded by UTM Zone 10, NAD 1927 coordinates (E, N): 745831, 3837355; 
745836, 3837400; 745868, 3837517; 745882, 3837595; 745885, 3837796; 
745931, 3837850; 745943, 3837841; 746054, 3837754; 746086, 3837749; 
746174, 3837796; 746193, 3837805; 746210, 3837817; 746240, 3837814; 
746238, 3837834; 746237, 3837848; 746238, 3837859; 746246, 3837885; 
746252, 3837904; 746264, 3837925; 746270, 3837939; 746273, 3837961; 
746333, 3837969; 746362, 3837961; 746389, 3837952; 746410, 3837932; 
746447, 3837910; 746481, 3837886; 746510, 3837871; 746524, 3837871; 
746574, 3837901; 746641, 3837941; 746671, 3837958; 746698, 3837971; 
746711, 3837990; 746719, 3838016; 746722, 3838057; 746732, 3838099; 
746754, 3838127; 746774, 3838153; 746800, 3838178; 746812, 3838172; 
746830, 3838154; 746849, 3838139; 746872, 3838143; 746890, 3838153; 
746910, 3838175; 746936, 3838195; 746973, 3838226; 747007, 3838275; 
747028, 3838292; 747042, 3838295; 747065, 3838297; 747100, 3838307; 
747126, 3838325; 747165, 3838333; 747192, 3838314; 747175, 3838300; 
747164, 3838280; 747130, 3838159; 747094, 3838014; 746951, 3837865; 
746923, 3837601; 746880, 3837223; 746875, 3837182; 746875, 3837180; 
746819, 3837113; 747089, 3836795; 747166, 3836717; 747266, 3836621; 
747421, 3836483; 747555, 3836383; 747819, 3836198; 747789, 3836153; 
747755, 3836094; 747708, 3836034; 747619, 3836017; 747525, 3836009; 
747485, 3835980; 747470, 3835953; 747470, 3835945; 747428, 3835918; 
747391, 3835882; 747345, 3835822; 747298, 3835796; 747255, 3835776; 
747202, 3835757; 747159, 3835786; 747080, 3835838; 747045, 3835853; 
747015, 3835866; 746987, 3835870; 746960, 3835858; 746907, 3835796; 
746883, 3835755; 746875, 3835741; 746860, 3835729; 746841, 3835737; 
746825, 3835750; 746722, 3835836; 746666, 3835870; 746586, 3835909; 
746526, 3835966; 746474, 3836020; 746369, 3836096; 746284, 3836134; 
746251, 3836133; 746219, 3836119; 746195, 3836119; 746169, 3836122; 
746153, 3836147; 746086, 3836247; 746015, 3836335; 745961, 3836422; 
745892, 3836592; 745874, 3836696; 745868, 3836781; 745884, 3836906; 
745884, 3836988; 745866, 3837121; 745866, 3837174; 745855, 3837241; 
745837, 3837310; returning to coordinates 745831, 3837355.
    (iii) Note: Units 5 and 6 (Map 6) follow:

[[Page 189]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR24NO04.006


[[Page 190]]



    Central Population of the California Tiger Salamander (Ambystoma 
                             californiense)

    (11) Critical habitat units are depicted for the Central population 
of the California tiger salamander in California on the maps below.
    (12) The PCEs of critical habitat for the Central population of the 
California tiger salamander (Ambystoma californiense) are the habitat 
components that provide:
    (i) Standing bodies of fresh water (including natural and manmade 
(e.g., stock)) ponds, vernal pools, and other ephemeral or permanent 
water bodies which typically support inundation during winter rains and 
hold water for a minimum of 12 weeks in a year of average rainfall;
    (ii) Upland habitats adjacent and accessible to and from breeding 
ponds that contain small mammal burrows or other underground habitat 
that CTS depend upon for food, shelter, and protection from the elements 
and predation; and
    (iii) Accessible upland dispersal habitat between occupied locations 
that allow for movement between such sites.
    (13) Critical habitat does not include manmade structures existing 
on the effective date of this rule and not containing one or more of the 
PCEs, such as buildings, aqueducts, airports, and roads, and the land on 
which such structures are located.
    (14) Critical habitat units are described below. Data layers 
defining map units were created by screen digitizing habitat boundaries 
using ArcMap GIS.
    (15) Note: Map 7 (Index map) follows:

[[Page 191]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23AU05.001

    (16) Central Valley Region: Unit 1, Yolo County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles Wildwood School, Dunnigan, 
Bird Valley, Zamora. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 
coordinates (E,N): 586407, 4303194; 585908, 4303117; 585550, 4303309; 
585255, 4303424; 584910, 4303603; 584500, 4303795; 584231,

[[Page 192]]

4303962; 583975, 4304179; 583783, 4304551; 583988, 4305229; 584116, 
4305537; 584321, 4305729; 584602, 4305997; 584615, 4306446; 584654, 
4306689; 584922, 4306830; 585089, 4306906; 585370, 4307047; 585486, 
4307355; 585914, 4307355; 586996, 4307355; 587000, 4306558; 587204, 
4306457; 587208, 4305759; 587600, 4305747; 587609, 4305701; 587617, 
4304857; 587488, 4304855; 587486, 4304740; 587486, 4304618; 586854, 
4304617; 586795, 4304534; 586983, 4304309; 586935, 4304197; 586912, 
4304035; 586970, 4303827; 586715, 4303400; returning to 586407, 4303194.
    (ii) Note: Map 8 (Central Valley Region, Unit 1) follows:

[[Page 193]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23AU05.002

    (17) Central Valley Region: Unit 2, Solano County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles Dozier, and Birds Landing. 
Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates (E,N): 
601869, 4237342; 601865, 4236938; 601654, 4236932; 601647, 4237125; 
601764, 4237131; 601764, 4237339; 601264, 4237328; 601264, 4237123;

[[Page 194]]

601288, 4237127; 601297, 4236925; 601267, 4236923; 601266, 4236556; 
601589, 4236551; 601590, 4236740; 601703, 4236734; 601710, 4236549; 
602349, 4236539; 602884, 4237289; 602883, 4237336; returning to 601869, 
4237342.; excluding land bounded by: 603666, 4238548; 604112, 4238500; 
604463, 4238516; 604510, 4237050; 604494, 4233370; 601674, 4233354; 
600161, 4233354; 599699, 4233386; 599667, 4238197; 602105, 4238197; 
602375, 4238548; 602822, 4238548; 603666, 4238548
    (ii) Note: Map 9 (Central Valley Region, Unit 2) follows:

[[Page 195]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23AU05.003

    (18) Central Valley Region: Unit 3, Sacramento County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles Clay, and Goose Creek. Land 
bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates (E,N): 664836, 
4248038; 665672, 4248010; 668028, 4248080; 667972, 4246477; 668014, 
4245543; 668070, 4244525; 668098, 4244093; 667735, 4243954; 667443,

[[Page 196]]

4243758; 667178, 4243424; 666927, 4242866; 666982, 4242588; 666885, 
4242323; 666718, 4242016; 666606, 4241667; 666216, 4241361; 665644, 
4241193; 665337, 4241207; 664947, 4241249; 664766, 4241124; 664362, 
4241138; 664125, 4241110; 663790, 4240970; 663246, 4242100; 663149, 
4242323; 662884, 4242936; 663316, 4243312; 663302, 4243758; 663051, 
4243898; 662633, 4243954; 662563, 4244121; 662563, 4244665; 662368, 
4244679; 661713, 4244706; 660626, 4244623; 660626, 4244804; 660723, 
4245013; 660514, 4245180; 660500, 4245613; 660514, 4245919; 660654, 
4246337; 660960, 4246672; 661072, 4247048; 660779, 4247146; 660695, 
4247369; 660793, 4247732; 660904, 4248219; 661211, 4248526; 661629, 
4248721; 664822, 4248735; 664905, 4248554; returning to 664836, 4248038; 
excluding land bounded by: 663699, 4245563; 663773, 4245470; 663872, 
4245529; 663908, 4245484; 664132, 4245487; 664193, 4245525; 664343, 
4245508; 664446, 4245534; 664455, 4245223; 664686, 4245225; 664681, 
4245603; 664669, 4245660; 664669, 4245731; 664793, 4245767; 664776, 
4245798; 664712, 4245836; 664686, 4245962; 664629, 4246000; 664643, 
4246107; 664517, 4246081; 664512, 4246171; 664315, 4246178; 664236, 
4246190; 663987, 4246188; 663813, 4245903; 663732, 4245860; and 
returning to 663699, 4245563.; and excluding land bounded by: 663893, 
4245225; 663790, 4245261; 663740, 4245213; 663759, 4244776; 663937, 
4244476; 664146, 4244482; 664133, 4245143; returning to 663893, 4245225.
    (ii) Note: Central Valley Region, Unit 3 is depicted on Map 10--
Units 3 and 4--see paragraph (19)(ii).
    (19) Central Valley Region: Unit 4, Amador County, California, and 
San Joaquin County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles Goose Creek, Ione, 
Clements, and Wallace. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 
coordinates (E,N): 672313, 4240429; 672654, 4240270; 672756, 4240232; 
673017, 4240134; 673290, 4239940; 673438, 4239952; 673699, 4239838; 
674062, 4239736; 674380, 4239498; 674698, 4239304; 674925, 4239089; 
675039, 4238646; 675084, 4238248; 675039, 4237771; 675050, 4237658; 
675175, 4237396; 675130, 4236954; 675346, 4236613; 675323, 4236045; 
675198, 4235738; 675152, 4235409; 674653, 4235398; 674499, 4235346; 
674346, 4235295; 674119, 4235023; 673812, 4234989; 673449, 4234864; 
673188, 4234841; 673040, 4234455; 672961, 4234114; 672506, 4233944; 
672313, 4234069; 672154, 4234160; 671723, 4233910; 671257, 4233774; 
670905, 4233796; 670587, 4233830; 670246, 4233898; 670099, 4234160; 
669905, 4234455; 669656, 4234637; 669292, 4234682; 669054, 4234682; 
668883, 4234932; 668815, 4235295; 668747, 4235602; 668815, 4235977; 
668622, 4236227; 668281, 4236499; 668020, 4236613; 667736, 4236806; 
667566, 4237022; 667452, 4237408; 667566, 4237976; 667657, 4238135; 
667816, 4238328; 667861, 4238441; 667804, 4238623; 667589, 4238827; 
667555, 4239111; 667623, 4239339; 668009, 4239600; 668202, 4239827; 
668497, 4240134; 668940, 4240395; 669201, 4240372; 669440, 4240327; 
669803, 4240338; 670064, 4239906; 670269, 4239520; 670564, 4239463; 
670928, 4239657; 671212, 4240099; 671564, 4240429; 671916, 4240406; 
returning to 672313, 4240429.
    (ii) Note: Unit 4 is depicted on Map 10--Units 3 and 4--which 
follows:

[[Page 197]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23AU05.004

    (20) Central Valley Region: Unit 5, Calaveras County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles Goose Creek, Ione, 
Clements, and Wallace. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 
coordinates (E,N): 683568, 4220263; 682958, 4220198; 682573, 4220519; 
682460, 4220664; 682316, 4221113; 682316, 4221499; 682348, 4221772;

[[Page 198]]

682508, 4222125; 682589, 4222494; 682974, 4222976; 683343, 4223345; 
683279, 4223762; 683375, 4224067; 683343, 4224501; 683183, 4224790; 
683086, 4225352; 683215, 4225657; 683456, 4225994; 683632, 4226170; 
683953, 4226283; 684114, 4226411; 684467, 4226411; 684804, 4226267; 
685157, 4226026; 685334, 4225496; 685350, 4224982; 685334, 4224549; 
685510, 4224115; 685494, 4223682; 685382, 4223297; 685173, 4222976; 
685029, 4222719; 684852, 4222205; 684772, 4221900; 684643, 4221483; 
684531, 4220985; 684306, 4220664; 683921, 4220391; returning to 683568, 
4220263.
    (ii) Note: Central Valley Region, Unit 5 is depicted on Map 11--
Units 5, 6, and 7--see paragraph (22)(ii).
    (21) Central Valley Region: Unit 6, Calaveras County, California, 
Stanislaus County, California, and San Joaquin County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles Valley Springs SW, Jenny 
Lind, Farmington, and Bachelor Valley. Land bounded by the following UTM 
Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates (E,N): 686359, 4213033; 686987, 4212296; 
687479, 4211559; 687315, 4210958; 687542, 4210371; 687779, 4209756; 
687643, 4209128; 687725, 4208582; 688134, 4208308; 688544, 4207789; 
688844, 4207298; 688571, 4206424; 688349, 4206061; 688544, 4205714; 
688708, 4205277; 688372, 4204505; 686597, 4204505; 685277, 4204505; 
684693, 4204235; 684316, 4203393; 683884, 4202567; 683811, 4201719; 
683900, 4199972; 683710, 4199678; 683164, 4199104; 682563, 4198831; 
682285, 4198727; 682126, 4198667; 681470, 4198503; 680869, 4198858; 
680665, 4199223; 680627, 4200080; 679933, 4200062; 679777, 4200279; 
679777, 4201016; 679882, 4201242; 680596, 4201279; 680584, 4201670; 
680077, 4201672; 679832, 4202382; 679764, 4202757; 679752, 4203304; 
679504, 4203338; 679531, 4203829; 679149, 4204048; 678630, 4204212; 
678220, 4204649; 677810, 4204976; 677346, 4205495; 677264, 4206069; 
677264, 4206834; 677483, 4207817; 678329, 4208145; 678603, 4208308; 
678684, 4209100; 678821, 4209483; 680253, 4210794; 681850, 4211270; 
681985, 4211350; 682777, 4211817; 683589, 4212297; 684384, 4212766; 
685533, 4212474; 685557, 4212491; returning to 686359, 4213033.
    (ii) Note: Central Valley Region, Unit 6 is depicted on Map 11--
Units 5, 6, and 7--see paragraph (22)(ii).
    (22) Central Valley Region: Unit 7, Stanislaus County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Oakdale. Land bounded by the 
following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates (E,N): 693428, 4186960; 693463, 
4186942; 693504, 4186969; 693517, 4186960; 693709, 4186853; 693941, 
4186479; 694034, 4186323; 694003, 4186260; 693941, 4186198; 693900, 
4186166; 693816, 4186086; 693771, 4186059; 693646, 4186006; 693588, 
4185993; 693544, 4185975; 693544, 4185930; 693517, 4185877; 693526, 
4185792; 693495, 4185805; 693459, 4185836; 693423, 4185823; 693397, 
4185863; 693352, 4185859; 693330, 4185828; 693303, 4185756; 693298, 
4185712; 693218, 4185689; 693191, 4185645; 693138, 4185640; 693080, 
4185676; 693026, 4185671; 693000, 4185645; 692964, 4185582; 693000, 
4185511; 693049, 4185493; 693018, 4185440; 693022, 4185386; 692995, 
4185333; 692991, 4185284; 693058, 4185261; 693098, 4185243; 693093, 
4185168; 692986, 4185177; 692527, 4185172; 692514, 4185243; 692506, 
4185297; 692501, 4185303; 692478, 4185364; 692456, 4185413; 692420, 
4185449; 692456, 4185515; 692509, 4185627; 692523, 4185716; 692523, 
4185774; 692523, 4185823; 692433, 4185841; 692179, 4185850; 692152, 
4185903; 692157, 4185966; 691916, 4186028; 691925, 4186064; 692010, 
4186122; 692041, 4186175; 692090, 4186220; 692121, 4186260; 692179, 
4186327; 692246, 4186349; 692277, 4186389; 692291, 4186421; 692273, 
4186461; 692228, 4186470; 692144, 4186447; 692108, 4186434; 692108, 
4186376; 692099, 4186323; 692019, 4186314; 691987, 4186345; 691970, 
4186345; 691921, 4186345; 691880, 4186345; 691858, 4186385; 691858, 
4186434; 691840, 4186452; 691800, 4186470; 691782, 4186496; 691747, 
4186532; 691729, 4186568; 691738, 4186621; 691773, 4186675; 691818, 
4186719; 691858, 4186746; 691903, 4186764; 691947, 4186795; 691987, 
4186804; 692045, 4186804; 692144, 4186608; 692228, 4186626; 692326, 
4186639; 692398, 4186644; 692478, 4186644; 692540, 4186768; 692607, 
4186755; 692634, 4186786; 692670, 4186849; 692790, 4186933; 692848, 
4186969; 692911, 4187000; 693026, 4187005; 693067, 4186951; 693125, 
4186947; 693174, 4186951; 693200, 4187027; 693379, 4186987; returning to 
693428, 4186960.
    (ii) Note: Central Valley Region, Unit 7 is depicted on Map 11--
Units 5, 6, and 7--which follows:

[[Page 199]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23AU05.005

    (23) Central Valley Region: Unit 8, Stanislaus County, California, 
and Merced County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles La Grange, and Snelling. 
Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates (E,N): 
725431, 4171496; 725601, 4170824;

[[Page 200]]

725374, 4170317; 725561, 4169703; 725374, 4168849; 725587, 4168488; 
725787, 4167394; 725257, 4165657; 725200, 4165472; 725093, 4164938; 
724466, 4164337; 724132, 4164284; 723759, 4164284; 723267, 4164611; 
723238, 4164631; 722571, 4165765; 722250, 4166366; 721817, 4167393; 
723498, 4167406; 723802, 4167803; 723935, 4168465; 724279, 4168677; 
724252, 4169047; 723894, 4169053; 723869, 4168849; 723432, 4168835; 
723458, 4168663; 722664, 4168650; 722651, 4169074; 722584, 4170027; 
723086, 4170091; 723352, 4169961; 723869, 4170371; 724200, 4170411; 
724133, 4170861; 724199, 4171065; 724438, 4171245; 724888, 4171192; 
724914, 4171391; 725153, 4171457; returning to 725431, 4171496.
    (ii) Note: Central Valley Region, Unit 8 is depicted on Map 12--
Units 8, 9, and 10--see paragraph (25)(ii).
    (24) Central Valley Region: Unit 9, Merced County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles Yosemite Lake, Haystack 
Mtn., Merced, and Planada. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, 
NAD83 coordinates (E,N): 737111, 4141220; 736885, 4140606; 736578, 
4140319; 735779, 4139868; 735411, 4139418; 735001, 4138885; 734755, 
4138516; 734345, 4138352; 733977, 4138291; 733198, 4137390; 732850, 
4137308; 732625, 4137738; 732707, 4138230; 732359, 4138414; 732133, 
4138373; 731990, 4138230; 731969, 4138127; 731744, 4137922; 731457, 
4137308; 731129, 4137082; 730904, 4137349; 730638, 4137697; 730310, 
4137656; 729900, 4137717; 729593, 4137758; 729409, 4138127; 729368, 
4138332; 729081, 4138516; 729224, 4138783; 729532, 4139008; 729511, 
4139315; 729204, 4139418; 728897, 4139520; 729429, 4140278; 729224, 
4140667; 728897, 4140933; 728692, 4140892; 728282, 4140708; 728118, 
4140667; 727914, 4140729; 727729, 4141077; 727606, 4141077; 727442, 
4141179; 727238, 4141282; 726848, 4141302; 726725, 4141445; 726643, 
4141753; 726725, 4141937; 726562, 4142654; 726562, 4142838; 726439, 
4142982; 726172, 4143084; 725660, 4143105; 725476, 4143187; 725599, 
4143412; 725476, 4143822; 725333, 4143965; 725087, 4144026; 724943, 
4144149; 724902, 4144477; 725066, 4144948; 725455, 4145235; 725968, 
4145399; 726193, 4145522; 726480, 4145890; 726930, 4146095; 727381, 
4146136; 727729, 4146485; 728180, 4146874; 728630, 4147263; 728897, 
4147591; 729388, 4147795; 729900, 4147816; 730392, 4147857; 730945, 
4148103; 731478, 4148021; 732010, 4147714; 732297, 4147283; 732338, 
4146915; 732625, 4146525; 733034, 4146157; 733260, 4145890; 733260, 
4145276; 733116, 4144784; 733362, 4144211; 733608, 4143801; 733854, 
4143514; 734120, 4143289; 734550, 4142982; 735370, 4142797; 736189, 
4142593; 736619, 4142470; 737111, 4141978; returning to 737111, 4141220.
    (ii) Note: Central Valley Region, Unit 9 is depicted on Map 12--
Units 8, 9, and 10--see paragraph (25)(ii):
    (25) Central Valley Region: Unit 10, Merced County, California, and 
Mariposa County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles Planada, and Owens 
Reservoir. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 745886, 4137625; 746150, 4137196; 746265, 4136981; 746447, 
4136371; 746447, 4136305; 746529, 4136041; 746530, 4136009; 746546, 
4135595; 746645, 4135364; 746760, 4135315; 746880, 4135309; 747140, 
4135298; 747338, 4135067; 747519, 4134655; 747750, 4134226; 748031, 
4133945; 748229, 4133533; 748311, 4133170; 748353, 4132808; 748361, 
4132741; 748394, 4132625; 748394, 4132394; 748344, 4132047; 748328, 
4131750; 748212, 4131371; 748064, 4131123; 747866, 4130579; 747684, 
4130414; 747288, 4130232; 746826, 4130117; 746562, 4129952; 746100, 
4129589; 745820, 4129275; 745605, 4128978; 745292, 4128714; 744863, 
4128648; 744367, 4128632; 743856, 4128665; 743608, 4129209; 743608, 
4129572; 743608, 4130232; 743641, 4130579; 743493, 4130793; 743179, 
4130942; 743014, 4131107; 742684, 4131123; 742404, 4131255; 742288, 
4131684; 742024, 4131750; 741727, 4131783; 741628, 4131684; 741150, 
4131453; 741117, 4131932; 740820, 4132180; 740407, 4132163; 740061, 
4132444; 740358, 4132757; 740589, 4132922; 740919, 4133153; 741249, 
4133351; 741414, 4133417; 741826, 4133681; 742156, 4133929; 742585, 
4134308; 742618, 4134556; 742371, 4134721; 742437, 4134853; 742470, 
4135067; 742453, 4135331; 742486, 4135595; 742618, 4135727; 742668, 
4135859; 742684, 4136255; 742668, 4136437; 742585, 4136800; 742783, 
4136981; 742882, 4137097; 743146, 4137344; 743460, 4137410; 743740, 
4137460; 744103, 4137559; 744450, 4137542; 744632, 4137592; 744863, 
4137757; 745077, 4137790; 745393, 4137760; 745424, 4137757; returning to 
745886, 4137625.
    (ii) Note: Central Valley Region, Unit 10 is depicted on Map 12--
Units 8, 9, and 10--which follows:

[[Page 201]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23AU05.006

    (26) Central Valley Region: Unit 11, Madera County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Raymond. Land bounded by the 
following UTM Zone 11, NAD83 coordinates (E,N): 236646, 4118534; 236735, 
4119457; 236919, 4119535; 237364, 4119940; 237297, 4120289; 237671, 
4120535; 237749, 4120814; 237895, 4121224; 238305, 4121557;

[[Page 202]]

238526, 4121737; 238726, 4121829; 239329, 4121896; 239728, 4121811; 
240005, 4121943; 240340, 4122266; 240817, 4122475; 241265, 4122461; 
241503, 4122431; 241714, 4122463; 242088, 4122454; 242236, 4122430; 
242404, 4122240; 242517, 4121903; 242649, 4121386; 242729, 4121007; 
242656, 4120563; 242498, 4120423; 242265, 4120288; 242025, 4120049; 
241933, 4119770; 241837, 4119447; 241973, 4119229; 242224, 4118929; 
242164, 4118469; 242064, 4118071; 242454, 4117612; 242521, 4117249; 
242406, 4116852; 242463, 4116564; 242691, 4116146; 242868, 4115880; 
243004, 4115423; 242888, 4115011; 242718, 4114693; 241980, 4114620; 
241532, 4114633; 241135, 4114733; 240843, 4114856; 240549, 4115174; 
240283, 4115221; 239933, 4115138; 239492, 4115032; 239192, 4115021; 
238894, 4115279; 238776, 4115541; 238564, 4115973; 238623, 4116194; 
238668, 4116431; 238374, 4116988; 238226, 4117252; 237848, 4117650; 
237318, 4117788; 236903, 4118099; 236797, 4118315; returning to 236646, 
4118534.
    (ii) Note: Map 13 (Central Valley Region, Unit 11) follows:

[[Page 203]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23AU05.007

    (27) Central Valley Region: Unit 18, Alameda County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Tassajara, and Livermore. 
Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates (E,N): 
606493, 4148131; 606445, 4148064; 606428, 4148018; 606432, 4147932; 
606450, 4147848; 606466, 4147818; 606558, 4147771; 606599, 4147772;

[[Page 204]]

606755, 4147834; 606834, 4147825; 606924, 4147745; 606959, 4147723; 
606992, 4147438; 606865, 4146951; 606716, 4146634; 606357, 4146443; 
606039, 4146380; 605807, 4146487; 605801, 4146507; 605762, 4146550; 
605680, 4146592; 605678, 4146593; 605573, 4146697; 605446, 4146951; 
605479, 4147194; 605495, 4147179; 605532, 4147116; 605552, 4147114; 
605551, 4147218; 605591, 4147274; 605593, 4147302; 605461, 4147339; 
605440, 4147342; 605404, 4147396; 605341, 4147607; 605300, 4147660; 
605329, 4147701; 605322, 4147708; 605273, 4147694; 605244, 4147731; 
605245, 4147738; 605236, 4147742; 605192, 4147798; 605044, 4148010; 
605102, 4148319; 605127, 4148265; 605220, 4148111; 605251, 4148083; 
605294, 4148086; 605431, 4148129; 605537, 4148188; 605655, 4148273; 
605680, 4148317; 605768, 4148412; 605818, 4148448; 605900, 4148447; 
605946, 4148417; 606075, 4148398; 606134, 4148371; 606201, 4148308; 
606331, 4148228; 606492, 4148189; 606500, 4148167; returning to 606493, 
4148131.
    (ii) Note: Map 14 (Central Valley Region, Unit 18) follows:

[[Page 205]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23AU05.008

    (28) Southern San Joaquin Region: Unit 1a, Madera County, 
California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles Little Table Mtn., 
Millerton Lake West, Lanes Bridge, and Friant. Land bounded by the 
following UTM Zone 11, NAD83 coordinates (E,N): 253140, 4094581; 253210, 
4094842; 253281, 4095121; 253387, 4095398; 253645, 4095559;

[[Page 206]]

253861, 4095616; 253852, 4096041; 253748, 4096349; 253653, 4096816; 
253632, 4097047; 253685, 4097593; 253940, 4097984; 254341, 4098171; 
254443, 4098377; 254346, 4098808; 254531, 4099222; 254727, 4099510; 
254695, 4099849; 254591, 4100174; 254965, 4100204; 255341, 4100552; 
255900, 4100711; 256220, 4100727; 256431, 4101262; 256505, 4101877; 
256706, 4102254; 256840, 4102405; 257279, 4102626; 257811, 4102645; 
258162, 4102587; 258498, 4102301; 258635, 4101955; 258734, 4101560; 
258553, 4100933; 258138, 4100535; 257954, 4100347; 257908, 4100348; 
257918, 4100725; 257542, 4100727; 257557, 4101144; 257113, 4101161; 
256981, 4098268; 256639, 4098365; 255431, 4098363; 255427, 4097540; 
256213, 4097523; 256203, 4096729; 254978, 4096742; 254920, 4094736; 
254503, 4094762; 254503, 4094758; 253976, 4094771; 253976, 4094613; 
253892, 4094501; 253919, 4094443; 253916, 4094397; 253914, 4094362; 
253868, 4094365; 253822, 4094362; 253718, 4094252; 253710, 4094201; 
253710, 4094200; 253701, 4094209; 253429, 4094386; 253140, 4094581.
    (ii) Note: Southern San Joaquin Region, Unit 1a is depicted on--
Units 1a, 1b, and 2--see paragraph (30)(ii).
    (29) Southern San Joaquin Region: Unit 1b, Madera County, 
California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Lanes Bridge. Land bounded 
by the following UTM Zone 11, NAD83 coordinates (E,N): 251184, 4092207; 
251205, 4092542; 251262, 4093159; 252944, 4093159; 253152, 4093075; 
253259, 4093191; 253246, 4093164; 253246, 4092760; 253951, 4092757; 
254008, 4092773; 254065, 4092790; 254068, 4092831; 254018, 4092849; 
253977, 4092852; 253939, 4092895; 253937, 4092936; 253960, 4092986; 
253988, 4093030; 254024, 4093028; 254075, 4093024; 254098, 4092992; 
254134, 4092985; 254195, 4092981; 254190, 4092910; 254216, 4092832; 
254223, 4092791; 254226, 4092744; 254465, 4092734; 254461, 4092342; 
254633, 4092331; 254636, 4092535; 254698, 4092551; 254738, 4092615; 
254757, 4092670; 254772, 4092746; 254777, 4092832; 254817, 4092901; 
254877, 4092959; 254914, 4092978; 254971, 4092712; 254985, 4092375; 
254980, 4092021; 254713, 4091436; 254292, 4091214; 253805, 4091086; 
253542, 4090837; 253614, 4090584; 253836, 4090446; 253770, 4090238; 
253503, 4089936; 253348, 4089733; 253173, 4089528; 253141, 4089490; 
253105, 4089475; 252915, 4089348; 252875, 4089294; 252838, 4089192; 
252842, 4089126; 252835, 4089116; 252636, 4088822; 252641, 4088627; 
252573, 4088288; 252564, 4088242; 252170, 4087611; 251840, 4087437; 
251615, 4087239; 251458, 4087089; 251407, 4087039; 251122, 4087288; 
251185, 4087726; 251211, 4088132; 251215, 4088486; 251168, 4088861; 
251100, 4089184; 251100, 4089751; 251111, 4089927; 251999, 4089960; 
252301, 4089976; 252328, 4090400; 252364, 4090982; 252307, 4091198; 
251941, 4091292; 251477, 4091232; 251191, 4091481; 251185, 4091658; 
returning to 251184, 4092207.
    (ii) Note: Southern San Joaquin Region, Unit 1b is depicted on Map 
15--Units 1A, 1B, and 2--see paragraph (30)(ii).
    (30) Southern San Joaquin Region: Unit 2, Fresno County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Friant. Land bounded by the 
following UTM Zone 11, NAD83 coordinates (E,N): 259307, 4097734; 259442, 
4097902; 259483, 4097988; 259743, 4097901; 260153, 4097663; 260490, 
4097393; 260773, 4097110; 260916, 4096853; 261506, 4096656; 261810, 
4096708; 262107, 4097203; 262261, 4097388; 262718, 4097625; 263193, 
4097577; 263655, 4097318; 263988, 4096978; 264104, 4096298; 263703, 
4095827; 263821, 4095465; 264110, 4095270; 264211, 4095169; 264294, 
4094979; 264329, 4094398; 264769, 4094484; 264988, 4094446; 265443, 
4094298; 265672, 4094337; 266030, 4094264; 265865, 4093902; 265521, 
4093499; 265441, 4093345; 265199, 4093165; 264774, 4093047; 264401, 
4093181; 264044, 4093188; 263971, 4093270; 264002, 4093471; 263856, 
4093802; 263594, 4093711; 263462, 4093422; 263323, 4093192; 263373, 
4093166; 263222, 4092989; 262867, 4092976; 262704, 4093198; 262451, 
4093108; 262142, 4092986; 261885, 4092843; 261639, 4092593; 261510, 
4092512; 261139, 4092518; 260841, 4092572; 260715, 4092261; 260534, 
4092127; 260512, 4092123; 260039, 4092041; 259874, 4092120; 259842, 
4092143; 259838, 4092231; 259887, 4092407; 259978, 4092494; 260034, 
4092547; 260200, 4092731; 260241, 4092941; 260482, 4093245; 260433, 
4093402; 260625, 4093897; 260461, 4094183; 260327, 4094416; 260317, 
4094701; 260313, 4094838; 259541, 4096215; 259541, 4096227; 259623, 
4096279; 259542, 4096507; 259542, 4096570; 259485, 4096704; 259472, 
4096979; 259490, 4097262; 259412, 4097426; 259331, 4097555; returning to 
259307, 4097734.
    (ii) Note: Southern San Joaquin Valley Region, Unit 2 is depicted on 
Map 15--Units 1a, 1b, and 2--which follows:

[[Page 207]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23AU05.009

    (31) Southern San Joaquin Region: Unit 3a, Fresno County, 
California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Orange Cove North. Land 
bounded by the following UTM Zone 11, NAD83 coordinates (E,N): 290111, 
4064680; 291311, 4064655; 292277, 4064495; 292897, 4064406; 293304, 
4064906; 293877, 4065270; 294584, 4065309; 294577, 4064940; 294973,

[[Page 208]]

4064926; 294962, 4064261; 294150, 4064279; 294132, 4063716; 293340, 
4063754; 293311, 4063118; 292970, 4062774; 292103, 4062528; 291469, 
4062793; 291158, 4063413; 291086, 4063868; 290091, 4063956; returning to 
290111, 4064680.
    (ii) Note: Southern San Joaquin Region, Unit 3a is depicted on Map 
16--Units 3A and 3B--see paragraph (32)(ii).
    (32) Southern San Joaquin Region: Unit 3b, Fresno County, 
California, and Tulare County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles Orange Cove North, and 
Tucker Mtn. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 11, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 296384, 4058957; 296398, 4059181; 296564, 4059658; 298431, 
4059652; 298432, 4059676; 298529, 4061925; 298738, 4062217; 298933, 
4062407; 299169, 4062400; 299471, 4062349; 299655, 4062030; 299619, 
4061457; 299860, 4060916; 299700, 4060350; 299740, 4059797; 300013, 
4059606; 300483, 4059275; 301039, 4058965; 301116, 4058185; 300650, 
4057538; 299855, 4057238; 299218, 4057453; 298847, 4057926; 298453, 
4058427; 297933, 4058509; 297411, 4058567; 297115, 4058636; 296596, 
4058743; returning to 296384, 4058957.
    (ii) Note: Southern San Joaquin Valley Region, Unit 3b is depicted 
on Map 16--Units 3a and 3b--which follows:

[[Page 209]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23AU05.010

    (33) Southern San Joaquin Region: Unit 5, Kings County, California, 
and Tulare County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles Burris Park, Traver, 
Monson, and Remnoy. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 11, NAD83 
coordinates (E,N): 274730, 4029784;

[[Page 210]]

275563, 4029744; 276147, 4030226; 276443, 4030631; 276461, 4031301; 
277082, 4031301; 277215, 4031301; 278021, 4031581; 278032, 4031768; 
279633, 4031751; 279157, 4032817; 280534, 4032802; 281370, 4033174; 
282087, 4033164; 282812, 4033837; 282978, 4034239; 283924, 4034298; 
284654, 4035065; 288568, 4034950; 288557, 4035728; 287806, 4035763; 
287831, 4036538; 289234, 4036569; 289420, 4036545; 289388, 4034511; 
288623, 4034511; 288596, 4034089; 287738, 4034107; 287670, 4034524; 
286957, 4034603; 286918, 4034358; 284966, 4034398; 284896, 4033837; 
283612, 4033835; 283601, 4033647; 283093, 4033631; 283051, 4033140; 
282531, 4033101; 282523, 4032784; 282074, 4032765; 282062, 4031058; 
280018, 4031127; 280070, 4030841; 278735, 4030571; 278537, 4030418; 
278407, 4030226; 278030, 4030026; 278008, 4030027; 276325, 4030062; 
276285, 4029617; 275634, 4029551; 275660, 4028843; 275341, 4028816; 
275122, 4028323; 274758, 4027969; 274702, 4028196; returning to 274730, 
4029784.
    (ii) Note: Map 17 (Southern San Joaquin Valley Region, Unit 5) 
follows:

[[Page 211]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23AU05.011

    (34) East Bay Region: Unit 3, Santa Clara County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Calaveras Reservoir. Land 
bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates (E,N): 606493, 
4148131; 606445, 4148064; 606428, 4148018; 606432, 4147932; 606450, 
4147848; 606466, 4147818; 606558, 4147771; 606599, 4147772; 606755,

[[Page 212]]

4147834; 606834, 4147825; 606924, 4147745; 606959, 4147723; 606992, 
4147438; 606865, 4146951; 606716, 4146634; 606357, 4146443; 606039, 
4146380; 605807, 4146487; 605801, 4146507; 605762, 4146550; 605680, 
4146592; 605678, 4146593; 605573, 4146697; 605446, 4146951; 605479, 
4147194; 605495, 4147179; 605532, 4147116; 605552, 4147114; 605551, 
4147218; 605591, 4147274; 605593, 4147302; 605461, 4147339; 605440, 
4147342; 605404, 4147396; 605341, 4147607; 605300, 4147660; 605329, 
4147701; 605322, 4147708; 605273, 4147694; 605244, 4147731; 605245, 
4147738; 605236, 4147742; 605192, 4147798; 605044, 4148010; 605102, 
4148319; 605127, 4148265; 605220, 4148111; 605251, 4148083; 605294, 
4148086; 605431, 4148129; 605537, 4148188; 605655, 4148273; 605680, 
4148317; 605768, 4148412; 605818, 4148448; 605900, 4148447; 605946, 
4148417; 606075, 4148398; 606134, 4148371; 606201, 4148308; 606331, 
4148228; 606492, 4148189; 606500, 4148167; returning to 606493, 4148131.
    (ii) Note: Map 18 (East Bay Region, Unit 3) follows:

[[Page 213]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23AU05.012

    (35) East Bay Region: Unit 5, Santa Clara County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles Calaveras Reservoir, and 
Mt. Day. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 611993, 4142407; 612080, 4142353; 612254, 4142429; 612417, 
4142559; 612570, 4142679; 612668, 4142744; 612896, 4142712;

[[Page 214]]

613157, 4142614; 613375, 4142483; 613560, 4142265; 613625, 4142113; 
613669, 4141950; 613778, 4141819; 613963, 4141656; 614180, 4141406; 
614246, 4141123; 614333, 4140851; 614267, 4140513; 614300, 4140296; 
614191, 4139991; 614061, 4139795; 613832, 4139599; 613691, 4139480; 
613527, 4139458; 613299, 4139534; 613081, 4139599; 612983, 4139686; 
612809, 4139774; 612613, 4139752; 612504, 4139861; 612439, 4139948; 
612254, 4139893; 612091, 4139991; 611971, 4140067; 610905, 4139741; 
610208, 4139850; 609588, 4140546; 609621, 4141188; 609936, 4141656; 
610415, 4141950; 610698, 4142026; 610763, 4142396; 610850, 4142570; 
611025, 4142777; 611177, 4142918; 611340, 4142951; 611612, 4142799; 
611884, 4142570; returning to 611993, 4142407.
    (ii) Note: East Bay Region, Unit 5 is depicted on Map 19--Units 5, 
6, 7, and 8--see paragraph (38)(ii).
    (36) East Bay Region: Unit 6, Santa Clara County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles Lick Observatory, and 
Isabel Valley. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 
coordinates (E,N): 622442, 4134132; 622178, 4133537; 621384, 4132677; 
620789, 4132346; 620326, 4131817; 619664, 4131156; 619003, 4131090; 
618341, 4130891; 617283, 4130957; 616688, 4131553; 616489, 4132413; 
615894, 4132876; 614769, 4133206; 613976, 4133008; 613248, 4133008; 
612520, 4133140; 611793, 4133537; 611197, 4134198; 611131, 4135058; 
612057, 4135654; 613050, 4135786; 613711, 4135852; 614637, 4135786; 
615629, 4135654; 616026, 4135257; 616158, 4134860; 616555, 4134397; 
617283, 4134198; 617746, 4133802; 618540, 4134000; 619069, 4134595; 
620061, 4135654; 620921, 4135852; 621847, 4135786; 622442, 4135455; 
622905, 4134661; returning to 622442, 4134132.
    (ii) Note: East Bay Region, Unit 6 is depicted on Map 19--Units 5, 
6, 7, and 8--see paragraph (38)(ii).
    (37) East Bay Region: Unit 7, Santa Clara County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles Lick Observatory, Isabel 
Valley, Morgan Hill, and Mt. Sizer. Land bounded by the following UTM 
Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates (E,N): 619400, 4126459; 619796, 4126327; 
621053, 4126459; 621582, 4126393; 622641, 4126592; 623434, 4126592; 
623964, 4126129; 624096, 4125467; 624096, 4124872; 623633, 4124277; 
623699, 4123681; 622575, 4123417; 621384, 4123747; 620656, 4124210; 
619796, 4124541; 619201, 4124078; 618540, 4123086; 618077, 4122094; 
618143, 4120837; 618010, 4119779; 617217, 4118919; 616555, 4118919; 
616158, 4119249; 615563, 4120043; 615100, 4121035; 614637, 4122028; 
614703, 4122755; 615232, 4123218; 615629, 4123681; 615894, 4124343; 
616026, 4124938; 616225, 4125070; 616489, 4126658; 616754, 4127187; 
617217, 4127650; 617878, 4127650; 618804, 4127121; returning to 619400, 
4126459.
    (ii) Note: East Bay Region, Unit 7 is depicted on Map 19--Units 5, 
6, 7, and 8--see paragraph (38)(ii).
    (38) East Bay Region: Unit 8, Santa Clara County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Santa Teresa Hills. Land 
bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates (E,N): 607465, 
4115477; 607584, 4115457; 607783, 4115457; 607902, 4115457; 608219, 
4115417; 608517, 4115913; 608735, 4115913; 608973, 4115834; 609112, 
4115695; 609291, 4115497; 609410, 4115338; 609529, 4115536; 609588, 
4115675; 609727, 4115715; 609707, 4115834; 609767, 4116052; 609866, 
4116211; 609927, 4116356; 609946, 4116348; 609990, 4116306; 610036, 
4116246; 610131, 4116099; 610087, 4116065; 609930, 4115808; 609958, 
4115742; 610012, 4115687; 610086, 4115410; 610096, 4115322; 610135, 
4115089; 610138, 4115056; 610146, 4114967; 610194, 4114679; 610388, 
4114391; 610474, 4114261; 610507, 4113796; 610840, 4113506; 610342, 
4113592; 610045, 4113770; 609807, 4113850; 609092, 4114485; 608239, 
4114068; 607584, 4114008; 606691, 4113909; 606036, 4114028; 605699, 
4114266; 605401, 4114763; 605421, 4115080; 605461, 4115556; 605401, 
4115715; 605123, 4115993; 605024, 4116152; 605084, 4116449; 605024, 
4116648; 604945, 4116767; 605123, 4117144; 605481, 4117223; 605758, 
4117104; 606076, 4116985; 606393, 4116826; 606671, 4116668; 606830, 
4116449; 607108, 4116072; 607306, 4115953; 607247, 4115775; 607247, 
4115695; 607346, 4115576; returning to 607465, 4115477.
    (ii) Note: East Bay Region, Unit 6 is depicted on Map 19--Units 5, 
6, 7, and 8--which follows:

[[Page 215]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23AU05.013

    (39) East Bay Region: Unit 9, Santa Clara County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles Gilroy. Land bounded by the 
following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates (E,N): 631716, 4102121; 631597, 
4102061; 631279, 4102081; 630982, 4102220; 630644, 4102478; 630466, 
4102915; 630466, 4103312; 630545, 4103669; 630823, 4103966; 631061,

[[Page 216]]

4104205; 631220, 4104324; 631418, 4104621; 631418, 4104760; 631101, 
4104978; 630922, 4105177; 630525, 4105673; 630347, 4106110; 630307, 
4106506; 630188, 4106784; 630029, 4107280; 630267, 4107558; 630466, 
4107657; 630704, 4107836; 631021, 4108015; 631299, 4108074; 631608, 
4108074; 632003, 4107936; 632368, 4107679; 632506, 4107363; 632605, 
4107017; 632921, 4105822; 632990, 4105289; 632704, 4104716; 632506, 
4104410; 632487, 4103985; 632704, 4103531; 632743, 4103156; 632664, 
4102879; 632566, 4102682; 632368, 4102405; 632093, 4102121; returning to 
631716, 4102121.
    (ii) Note: East Bay Region, Unit 9 is depicted on Map 20--Units 9, 
10a, 10b, 11, and 12--see paragraph (43)(ii).
    (40) East Bay Region: Unit 10a, Santa Clara County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Mt. Madonna. Land bounded by 
the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates (E,N): 621036, 4103975; 
620814, 4103967; 620501, 4104023; 620498, 4104024; 620493, 4104030; 
620454, 4104197; 620640, 4104325; 620875, 4104403; 620983, 4104462; 
621101, 4104491; 621238, 4104580; 621415, 4104727; 621611, 4104854; 
621807, 4104903; 622072, 4104707; 622162, 4104667; 622146, 4104640; 
621926, 4104390; 621741, 4104273; 621587, 4104150; 621234, 4104025; 
returning to 621036, 4103975.
    (ii) Note: East Bay Region, Unit 10a is depicted on Map 20--Units 9, 
10a, 10b, 11, and 12--see paragraph (43)(ii).
    (41) East Bay Region: Unit 10b, Santa Clara County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles Gilroy, and Mt. Madonna. 
Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates (E,N): 
623013, 4101932; 623082, 4101638; 623121, 4101363; 623131, 4100981; 
623033, 4100804; 622895, 4100755; 622758, 4100657; 622591, 4100500; 
622573, 4100477; 622408, 4100545; 622373, 4100472; 622228, 4100526; 
622167, 4100637; 622181, 4100752; 622102, 4100840; 621967, 4100895; 
621852, 4101162; 621524, 4101274; 621477, 4101239; 621444, 4101255; 
621189, 4101265; 621022, 4101353; 620787, 4101520; 620777, 4101706; 
620885, 4101922; 620910, 4101980; 620947, 4101966; 621114, 4101924; 
621263, 4101903; 621314, 4101852; 621397, 4101845; 621533, 4101885; 
621594, 4102028; 621627, 4102049; 621676, 4102210; 621751, 4102302; 
621833, 4102372; 621944, 4102424; 622126, 4102445; 622288, 4102596; 
622376, 4102520; 622601, 4102442; 622788, 4102334; 622935, 4102158; 
returning to 623013, 4101932.
    (ii) Note: East Bay Region, Unit 10b is depicted on Map 20--Units 9, 
10a, 10b, 11, and 12--see paragraph (43)(ii).
    (42) East Bay Region: Unit 11, Santa Clara County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Gilroy Hot Springs. Land 
bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates (E,N):639775, 
4106027; 640158, 4105923; 640506, 4105923; 641028, 4106271; 641272, 
4106062; 641550, 4105471; 641724, 4105192; 642385, 4105018; 642594, 
4104670; 642629, 4104183; 642803, 4103730; 642768, 4103138; 643221, 
4102616; 643847, 4102477; 644404, 4101676; 644056, 4101537; 643847, 
4101363; 643743, 4100632; 643256, 4100180; 642629, 4100180; 641968, 
4100388; 641376, 4100214; 640854, 4100075; 640088, 4100180; 639740, 
4100597; 639427, 4101259; 639531, 4101920; 639322, 4102268; 638905, 
4102686; 638417, 4102999; 637860, 4103521; 637129, 4103904; 636990, 
4104148; 636851, 4104983; 636920, 4105366; 637129, 4105679; 637582, 
4106271; 638139, 4106584; 638626, 4106445; 639009, 4106376; 639392, 
4106306; returning to 639775, 4106027.
    (ii) Note: East Bay Region, Unit 11 is depicted on Map 20--Units 9, 
10a, 10b, 11, and 12--see paragraph (43)(ii).
    (43) East Bay Region: Unit 12, Santa Clara County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles Gilroy Hot Springs, and San 
Felipe. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 643914, 4095004; 643892, 4094772; 643829, 4094369; 643956, 
4093946; 644013, 4093764; 644006, 4093721; 644006, 4093721; 643977, 
4093529; 643977, 4093529; 643891, 4092970; 643891, 4092969; 643891, 
4092969; 643890, 4092963; 643849, 4092776; 643849, 4092775; 643848, 
4092770; 643848, 4092768; 643832, 4092624; 643832, 4092620; 643832, 
4092615; 643832, 4092614; 643837, 4092282; 643838, 4092065; 643838, 
4091759; 643837, 4091756; 643835, 4091751; 643834, 4091746; 643832, 
4091741; 643832, 4091736; 643831, 4091731; 643831, 4091726; 643831, 
4091722; 643831, 4091719; 643842, 4091603; 643851, 4091516; 643851, 
4091516; 643854, 4091478; 643856, 4091367; 643856, 4091367; 643856, 
4091358; 643856, 4091355; 643857, 4091350; 643858, 4091345; 643858, 
4091342; 643929, 4091037; 643974, 4090778; 643946, 4090690; 643913, 
4090588; 643897, 4090567; 643894, 4090563; 643891, 4090559; 643889, 
4090555; 643887, 4090550; 643887, 4090549; 643885, 4090546; 643885, 
4090545; 643859, 4090480; 643830, 4090454; 643640, 4090475; 643365, 
4090560; 643069, 4090729; 642709, 4090729; 642497, 4090878; 642370, 
4091026; 642222, 4091216; 641989, 4091428; 641800, 4091569; 641735, 
4091618; 641418, 4091809; 641227, 4092063; 641312, 4092317; 641333, 
4092550; 641143, 4092656; 641164, 4092952; 640994, 4093079; 640993, 
4093078; 640782, 4092994; 640529, 4092994; 640528, 4092994; 640527, 
4092994; 640379, 4092846; 640042, 4092867; 639767, 4092888; 639534, 
4092922; 639470, 4092931; 639415, 4092984; 639320, 4093078; 639172, 
4093438; 639123, 4093490; 639085, 4093565; 639045, 4093645; 638953, 
4093932; 638852, 4094180; 638579, 4094348; 638410, 4094221; 638357, 
4094075; 638356, 4094072; 638325, 4093988; 638108, 4093823; 638054, 
4093568; 638023, 4093382; 637914, 4092762; 637744, 4092545; 637310, 
4092402; 636884, 4093142; 636699, 4093626; 636543, 4094032; 634886, 
4094373; 634553, 4094838; 635056, 4095202; 635335, 4095039; 635676, 
4095551; 635869, 4095659; 635916, 4095992; 636218, 4096062; 636815, 
4096054; 637246, 4095872; 637712, 4096063; 638093, 4096084; 638833, 
4095893; 639236, 4095724; 639553, 4095661; 639913, 4095512; 640146, 
4095428; 640590, 4095110; 640929, 4094877; 640930, 4094879; 640931, 
4094878; 641248, 4095217; 641481, 4095365; 641672, 4095513; 641968, 
4095767; 642307, 4096021; 642771, 4096190; 643342, 4096042; 643660, 
4095682; 643871, 4095280; returning to 643914, 4095004.
    (ii) Note: East Bay Region, Unit 12 is depicted on Map 20--Units 9, 
10a, 10b, 11, and 12--which follows:

[[Page 217]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23AU05.014

    (44) East Bay Region: Unit 13, Merced County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles Mariposa Peak, and Los 
Banos Valley. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 
coordinates (E,N):670740, 4094185; 670879, 4093959; 670965, 4093691; 
671019, 4093455; 670890, 4093358; 670632, 4093262; 670450, 4093101;

[[Page 218]]

670299, 4093004; 670171, 4092864; 670010, 4092703; 669870, 4092242; 
669645, 4092038; 669387, 4091802; 669248, 4091609; 669140, 4091383; 
668947, 4091254; 668636, 4091233; 668314, 4091233; 668099, 4091169; 
667949, 4090868; 667756, 4090729; 667380, 4090611; 667090, 4090428; 
666886, 4090417; 666682, 4090568; 666210, 4090922; 666060, 4091104; 
665996, 4091437; 665963, 4091974; 666232, 4092285; 666457, 4092424; 
666800, 4092585; 667058, 4092661; 667273, 4092725; 667402, 4092832; 
667616, 4092940; 667874, 4092929; 668153, 4092875; 668357, 4093079; 
668421, 4093122; 668529, 4093326; 668400, 4093562; 668228, 4093669; 
668228, 4093809; 668357, 4093991; 668582, 4094120; 668786, 4094131; 
668872, 4094131; 668990, 4094152; 669173, 4094152; 669334, 4094152; 
669559, 4094142; 669763, 4094163; 669956, 4094313; 670181, 4094399; 
670439, 4094346; 670589, 4094292; returning to 670740, 4094185.
    (ii) Note: Map 21 (East Bay Region, Unit 13) follows:

[[Page 219]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23AU05.015

    (45) East Bay Region: Unit 14, Merced County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles Ruby Canyon, and Ortigalita 
Peak. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 679370, 4078644; 679558, 4078303; 679567, 4078064; 679490, 
4077773; 679396, 4077671; 679149, 4077483; 678901, 4077253;

[[Page 220]]

679003, 4076945; 678799, 4076800; 678483, 4076536; 678295, 4076186; 
678184, 4075947; 678082, 4075537; 677894, 4075401; 677646, 4075162; 
677382, 4075042; 676989, 4075000; 676742, 4075017; 676409, 4075187; 
676161, 4075477; 676008, 4075682; 676213, 4075862; 676349, 4075964; 
676409, 4076143; 676366, 4076331; 676272, 4076442; 676119, 4076604; 
676085, 4076647; 676042, 4076707; 676042, 4076886; 675999, 4077031; 
675931, 4077210; 676025, 4077441; 676170, 4077475; 676469, 4077475; 
676665, 4077569; 676836, 4077705; 677015, 4077893; 677279, 4077970; 
677476, 4077927; 677732, 4078029; 677988, 4078234; 677954, 4078542; 
677663, 4078618; 677390, 4078593; 677365, 4078576; 677365, 4078695; 
677510, 4078968; 677595, 4079156; 677681, 4079233; 677826, 4079233; 
678022, 4079267; 678372, 4079335; 678585, 4079352; 678816, 4079386; 
679029, 4079327; 679353, 4079079; 679345, 4078926; 679336, 4078823; 
returning to 679370, 4078644.
    (ii) Note: Map 22 (East Bay Region, Unit 14) follows:

[[Page 221]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23AU05.016

    (46) East Bay Region: Unit 15a, San Benito County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles Tres Pinos. Land bounded by 
the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates (E,N): 648975, 4074659; 
648866, 4074439; 648756, 4074518; 648584, 4074486; 648443, 4074424; 
648345, 4074265; 647958, 4074729; 647957, 4074730; 647957, 4074730;

[[Page 222]]

647737, 4074980; 647737, 4074980; 647686, 4075039; 647685, 4075039; 
647683, 4075042; 647572, 4075156; 647267, 4075490; 647264, 4075493; 
647261, 4075496; 647260, 4075497; 647205, 4075544; 647201, 4075547; 
647197, 4075550; 647195, 4075551; 647136, 4075588; 647134, 4075589; 
647129, 4075592; 647128, 4075592; 647066, 4075622; 647062, 4075623; 
647059, 4075625; 646994, 4075648; 646992, 4075649; 646988, 4075650; 
646985, 4075651; 646870, 4075678; 646867, 4075679; 646866, 4075679; 
646057, 4075828; 646057, 4075828; 646015, 4075835; 646015, 4075836; 
646014, 4075836; 645999, 4075838; 645995, 4075946; 645992, 4076037; 
645986, 4076234; 645971, 4076906; 645969, 4077086; 645965, 4077530; 
645965, 4077566; 645956, 4077596; 645946, 4077933; 645946, 4077933; 
645953, 4077979; 645953, 4078182; 645953, 4078495; 645953, 4078809; 
645953, 4079075; 645796, 4079341; 645828, 4079686; 646109, 4079873; 
646313, 4080014; 646423, 4080265; 646517, 4080469; 646830, 4080672; 
647080, 4080656; 647487, 4080641; 647738, 4080343; 647926, 4079920; 
648036, 4079482; 647910, 4078903; 648004, 4078605; 648020, 4078245; 
647910, 4077932; 647738, 4077728; 647534, 4077493; 647441, 4077258; 
647503, 4077039; 647769, 4076929; 648145, 4076788; 648270, 4076679; 
648396, 4076381; 648458, 4076052; 648458, 4075739; 648490, 4075598; 
648662, 4075442; 648897, 4075175; returning to 648975, 4074659.
    (ii) East Bay Region, Unit 15a is depicted on Map 23--Units 15a and 
15b--see paragraph (47)(ii).
    (47) East Bay Region: Unit 15b, San Benito County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles Tres Pinos. Land bounded by 
the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates (E,N): 648559, 4073866; 
648564, 4073866; 648565, 4073866; 648646, 4073750; 648239, 4073453; 
647816, 4073500; 647566, 4073750; 647628, 4074283; 647628, 4074471; 
647613, 4074690; 647558, 4074952; 647572, 4074937; 647623, 4074880; 
647623, 4074880; 647623, 4074879; 647842, 4074630; 648249, 4074142; 
648251, 4074140; 648254, 4074137; 648366, 4074023; 648373, 4074013; 
648374, 4074012; 648377, 4074008; 648381, 4074004; 648384, 4074001; 
648513, 4073885; 648514, 4073885; 648518, 4073882; 648522, 4073879; 
648526, 4073876; 648530, 4073874; 648535, 4073872; 648540, 4073870; 
648544, 4073868; 648549, 4073867; 648554, 4073866; returning to 648559, 
4073866.
    (ii) Note: East Bay Region, Unit 15b is depicted on Map 23--Units 
15a and 15b--which follows:

[[Page 223]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23AU05.017

    (48) East Bay Region: Unit 16, San Benito County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles San Benito, Topo Valley, 
Rock Springs Peak, Pinalito Canyon, and Lonoak. Land bounded by the 
following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates (E,N): 674357, 4038468; 674568, 
4038151; 674859, 4038204; 675098, 4038733;

[[Page 224]]

675468, 4038944; 676050, 4038918; 676262, 4038547; 676341, 4038230; 
676791, 4038098; 677214, 4037965; 677664, 4037965; 678008, 4037965; 
678908, 4037674; 679252, 4037357; 679622, 4037357; 680310, 4037542; 
680813, 4037383; 681289, 4036881; 681448, 4036325; 681315, 4035822; 
681157, 4035108; 680892, 4034843; 679992, 4034896; 679622, 4035187; 
678961, 4035293; 678749, 4035029; 679490, 4034552; 679992, 4034129; 
680231, 4033732; 680231, 4033362; 679860, 4033044; 679754, 4032806; 
679754, 4032330; 679860, 4031854; 679754, 4031430; 679992, 4031060; 
680310, 4030636; 680866, 4030266; 681077, 4029869; 680892, 4029578; 
680601, 4029075; 680522, 4028705; 680866, 4028202; 681051, 4027832; 
680892, 4027144; 680680, 4026694; 680389, 4026350; 679887, 4026059; 
679728, 4025874; 679622, 4025477; 679199, 4025027; 678881, 4024763; 
678564, 4024339; 677982, 4024075; 677585, 4023863; 677082, 4023916; 
676764, 4024101; 676659, 4024525; 676421, 4024657; 676050, 4025001; 
675944, 4025398; 675997, 4025662; 676024, 4025874; 676500, 4026271; 
676738, 4026403; 676923, 4026668; 677056, 4026774; 677294, 4027065; 
677638, 4027197; 677876, 4027144; 678114, 4027356; 678220, 4027832; 
678061, 4028626; 677982, 4028996; 677532, 4029340; 677267, 4029763; 
676712, 4030319; 676526, 4030927; 676923, 4031298; 677611, 4031642; 
677849, 4032409; 677585, 4032912; 677214, 4033097; 676712, 4033282; 
676156, 4033626; 675706, 4034155; 675389, 4034685; 675071, 4035055; 
674542, 4035214; 674251, 4035452; 673933, 4035822; 673854, 4036007; 
673669, 4036695; 673325, 4036907; 673060, 4037119; 672690, 4037410; 
672452, 4037648; 672293, 4037912; 671658, 4038309; 671261, 4038759; 
671076, 4039394; 671102, 4039897; 671023, 4040214; 670600, 4040611; 
670176, 4040744; 669885, 4041167; 669674, 4041802; 669938, 4042384; 
670309, 4042754; 670600, 4042860; 671129, 4042860; 671579, 4042675; 
671790, 4042384; 671711, 4041908; 671499, 4041484; 671764, 4041193; 
672028, 4041167; 672346, 4040929; 672663, 4040717; 672928, 4040400; 
673060, 4040320; 673351, 4040109; 673854, 4039659; 674145, 4039288; 
674277, 4038891; returning to 674357, 4038468.
    (ii) Note: Map 24 (East Bay Region, Unit 16) follows:

[[Page 225]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23AU05.018

    (49) East Bay Region: Unit 17, San Benito County, California, and 
Monterey County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Mount Johnson. Land bounded 
by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates (E,N): 654222, 4043469; 
654725, 4043363; 655413,

[[Page 226]]

4043442; 655651, 4043072; 656048, 4042543; 656259, 4042331; 656392, 
4041617; 656074, 4041405; 655571, 4041511; 655148, 4041326; 654803, 
4041088; 654725, 4041035; 654381, 4041078; 654301, 4041087; 653719, 
4041220; 653713, 4041222; 653474, 4041307; 653349, 4041352; 653301, 
4041352; 653086, 4041352; 653060, 4041352; 652873, 4041352; 652555, 
4041167; 652479, 4041178; 652474, 4041179; 652049, 4041243; 652026, 
4041246; 651775, 4040954; 651708, 4040876; 651686, 4040872; 651417, 
4040823; 651285, 4041114; 651308, 4041306; 651338, 4041564; 651345, 
4041581; 651444, 4041828; 651444, 4041831; 651550, 4042252; 651593, 
4042303; 651973, 4042754; 651990, 4042771; 652003, 4042784; 652449, 
4043231; 652545, 4043638; 652555, 4043680; 651655, 4043866; 651364, 
4044315; 651259, 4044845; 650941, 4045347; 650968, 4045824; 651166, 
4045978; 651206, 4046009; 651232, 4046141; 651603, 4046353; 652079, 
4046538; 652608, 4046538; 653217, 4046168; 653481, 4045744; 653508, 
4045003; 653455, 4044342; 653587, 4043786; returning to 654222, 4043469.
    (ii) Note: Map 25 (East Bay Region, Unit 17) follows:

[[Page 227]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23AU05.019

    (50) Central Coast Region: Unit 3, Monterey County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles Rana Creek. Land bounded by 
the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates (E,N): 627509, 4030548; 
627840, 4030382; 628072, 4030440; 628412, 4030573; 628645, 4030498; 
628902, 4030506; 629208, 4030564; 629590, 4030473; 630029, 4030282;

[[Page 228]]

630294, 4029984; 630361, 4029602; 630353, 4029296; 630278, 4028939; 
630236, 4028649; 630427, 4028450; 630610, 4028201; 630701, 4027903; 
630726, 4027588; 630684, 4027273; 630477, 4026991; 630319, 4026742; 
629623, 4026518; 629233, 4026560; 628926, 4026684; 628711, 4026825; 
628487, 4027074; 628155, 4027231; 627923, 4027463; 627650, 4027613; 
627252, 4027596; 626845, 4027687; 626456, 4027969; 626373, 4028218; 
626257, 4028591; 626074, 4028732; 625908, 4028906; 625784, 4029113; 
625701, 4029403; 625701, 4029694; 625751, 4030034; 625933, 4030299; 
626306, 4030606; 626688, 4030730; 627011, 4030763; 627301, 4030722; 
returning to 627509, 4030548.
    (ii) Note: Map 26 (Central Coast Region, Unit 3) follows:

[[Page 229]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23AU05.020

    (51) Central Coast Region: Unit 6, Kern County, California, and San 
Luis Obispo County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles Orchard Peak, and Holland 
Canyon. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 757032, 3945151;

[[Page 230]]

757374, 3944871; 757614, 3944675; 758116, 3944463; 758513, 3944172; 
758831, 3943590; 759016, 3943193; 759360, 3942929; 759519, 3942770; 
759545, 3942399; 759386, 3941950; 759254, 3941447; 758884, 3941076; 
758487, 3941156; 758090, 3941553; 757693, 3941711; 757561, 3941579; 
757481, 3941632; 757243, 3942002; 756873, 3942055; 756503, 3942241; 
756264, 3942505; 755920, 3942876; 755815, 3943114; 755709, 3943431; 
755497, 3943537; 755391, 3943616; 755180, 3943881; 754941, 3944093; 
754730, 3944331; 754439, 3944516; 754068, 3944569; 754015, 3944860; 
753724, 3944939; 753592, 3944860; 753275, 3945098; 752851, 3945151; 
752428, 3945204; 752084, 3945521; 751925, 3945760; 751819, 3946104; 
751793, 3946447; 751766, 3947030; 751608, 3947559; 751502, 3947903; 
751026, 3948061; 750840, 3948405; 750814, 3948776; 750814, 3949120; 
750523, 3949384; 750100, 3949622; 750047, 3949887; 750020, 3950152; 
749835, 3950734; 749650, 3951025; 749676, 3951342; 749756, 3951739; 
749888, 3952030; 750444, 3952295; 750840, 3952533; 751131, 3952718; 
751634, 3952586; 751899, 3952559; 752243, 3952480; 752613, 3952030; 
752878, 3951554; 752666, 3951051; 753063, 3950707; 753248, 3950390; 
753328, 3950046; 753566, 3949781; 753804, 3949411; 753777, 3949014; 
753804, 3948723; 754062, 3948505; 754306, 3948300; 754598, 3948035; 
754862, 3947717; 755418, 3947321; 755629, 3946924; 755868, 3946421; 
756238, 3946024; 756529, 3945680; 756820, 3945416; returning to 757032, 
3945151.
    (ii) Note: Map 27 (Central Coast Region, Unit 6) follows:

[[Page 231]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23AU05.021

              California Tiger Salamander in Sonoma County

    Pursuant to section 4(b)(2) of the Act, we have excluded all areas 
determined to meet the definition of critical habitat under section 
4(b)(2) of the Act for California tiger salamander in Sonoma County. 
Therefore, no

[[Page 232]]

specific areas are designated as critical habitat for this species.

           Frosted Flatwoods Salamander (Ambystoma cingulatum)

    (1) Critical habitat units are depicted for Baker, Franklin, 
Jefferson, Liberty, and Wakulla Counties in Florida; and Berkeley, 
Charleston, and Jasper Counties in South Carolina on the maps below.
    (2) The primary constituent elements of critical habitat for the 
frosted flatwoods salamander are:
    (i) Breeding habitat. Small (generally less than 1 to 10 ac (less 
than 0.4 to 4.0 ha)), acidic, depressional standing bodies of freshwater 
(wetlands) that:
    (A) Are seasonally flooded by rainfall in late fall or early winter 
and dry in late spring or early summer;
    (B) Are geographically isolated from other water bodies;
    (C) Occur within pine flatwoods-savanna communities;
    (D) Are dominated by grasses and grass-like species in the ground 
layer and overstories of pond-cypress, blackgum, and slash pine;
    (E) Have a relatively open canopy, necessary to maintain the 
herbaceous component that serves as cover for flatwoods salamander 
larvae and their aquatic invertebrate prey; and
    (F) Typically have a burrowing crayfish fauna, but, due to periodic 
drying, the breeding ponds typically lack large, predatory fish (for 
example, Lepomis (sunfish), Micropterus (bass), Amia calva (bowfin)).
    (ii) Non-breeding habitat. Upland pine flatwoods-savanna habitat 
that is open, mesic woodland maintained by frequent fires and that:
    (A) Is within 1,500 ft (457 m) of adjacent and accessible breeding 
ponds;
    (B) Contains crayfish burrows or other underground habitat that the 
flatwoods salamander depends upon for food, shelter, and protection from 
the elements and predation;
    (C) Has an organic hardpan in the soil profile, which inhibits 
subsurface water penetration and typically results in moist soils with 
water often at or near the surface under normal conditions; and
    (D) Often has wiregrasses as the dominant grasses in the abundant 
herbaceous ground cover, which supports the rich herbivorous 
invertebrates that serve as a food source for the frosted flatwoods 
salamander.
    (iii) Dispersal habitat. Upland habitat areas between nonbreeding 
and breeding habitat that allows for salamander movement between such 
sites and that is characterized by:
    (A) A mix of vegetation types representing a transition between 
wetland and upland vegetation (ecotone);
    (B) An open canopy and abundant native herbaceous species;
    (C) Moist soils as described in paragraph (2)(ii); and
    (D) Subsurface structure, such as that provided by deep litter cover 
or burrows, that provides shelter for salamanders during seasonal 
movements.
    (3) Critical habitat does not include manmade structures (such as 
buildings, aqueducts, runways, roads, and other paved areas) and the 
land on which they are located existing within the legal boundaries on 
the effective date of this rule.
    (4) Critical habitat map units. Data layers defining map units were 
created on a base of USGS 7.5[min] quadrangles, and critical habitat 
units were then mapped using Universal Transverse Mercator (UTM) 
coordinates.
    (5) Note: Index map of critical habitat for the frosted flatwoods 
salamander follows:

[[Page 233]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10FE09.000

    (6) Frosted flatwood salamander--Baker, Franklin, Jefferson, 
Liberty, and Wakulla Counties, Florida.
    (i) Unit FFS-1, Subunit A--Liberty County, Florida. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangle maps Estiffanulga and Woods, Florida.
    (A) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 16N NAD83 coordinates, 
(E, N): 691617.99, 3350707.71; 693095.71, 3348233.03; 692983.53, 
3348209.57; 692897.48, 3348210.76; 692828.41, 3348229.52; 692759.43, 
3348248.25; 692691.40, 3348292.76; 692639.72, 3348326.57; 690393.30, 
3350136.47; 690313.39, 3350218.63;

[[Page 234]]

690268.29, 3350291.92; 690230.96, 3350400.29; 690221.36, 3350485.81; 
690241.25, 3350627.47; 690274.03, 3350707.04; 690333.43, 3350797.24; 
690401.06, 3350865.47; 690279.29, 3350935.03; 690182.82, 3351040.66; 
690111.95, 3351227.14; 690119.70, 3351398.31; 690131.84, 3352855.50; 
690169.32, 3352993.56; 690267.58, 3353133.94; 690384.46, 3353216.42; 
690549.65, 3353261.95; 690664.14, 3353256.77; 690773.74, 3353223.27; 
690871.58, 3353163.57; 690968.05, 3353057.95; 692565.25, 3351422.56; 
692602.62, 3351378.97; 692634.23, 3351331.03; 692669.80, 3351252.67; 
692690.04, 3351169.02; 693379.09, 3348814.26; 693399.33, 3348730.61; 
693403.55, 3348644.66; 693391.58, 3348559.43; 693363.86, 3348477.96; 
693321.37, 3348403.12; 693265.60, 3348337.58; 693174.08, 3348268.59; 
693095.71, 3348233.03.
    (B) Note: Map depicting Unit FFS-1, Subunit A is provided at 
paragraph (6)(x)(B) of this entry.
    (ii) Unit FFS-1, Subunit B--Liberty County, Florida. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangle map Orange, Florida.
    (A) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 16N NAD83 coordinates, 
(E, N): 689802.94, 3340960.90; 689428.14, 3339447.54; 689123.11, 
3339393.72; 688873.13, 3339525.49; 688743.74, 3339836.26; 688831.13, 
3340169.91; 689917.07, 3342147.02; 690004.49, 3342326.33; 690240.38, 
3342481.91; 690522.67, 3342469.12; 690726.97, 3342316.32; 690843.40, 
3342033.33; 690847.40, 3341805.94; 690741.36, 3341604.76; 689705.63, 
3339902.63; 689617.94, 3339656.89; 689428.14, 3339447.54.
    (B) Note: Map depicting Unit FFS-1, Subunit B is provided at 
paragraph (6)(x)(B) of this entry.
    (iii) Unit FFS-1, Subunit C--Liberty County, Florida. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangle map Wilma, Florida.
    (A) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 16N NAD83 coordinates, 
(E, N): 695595.00, 3340429.07; 695320.75, 3338608.68; 695308.16, 
3338582.86; 695293.97, 3338557.88; 695278.24, 3338533.84; 695261.04, 
3338510.84; 695242.42, 3338488.97; 695222.47, 3338468.30; 695201.27, 
3338448.93; 695178.88, 3338430.93; 695155.41, 3338414.37; 695130.95, 
3338399.31; 695105.59, 3338385.83; 695079.43, 3338373.95; 695052.58, 
3338363.76; 695025.14, 3338355.26; 694997.23, 3338348.50; 694968.94, 
3338343.51; 694940.40, 3338340.31; 694911.71, 3338338.90; 694882.99, 
3338339.30; 694854.35, 3338341.50; 694825.90, 3338345.50; 694797.76, 
3338351.27; 694770.05, 3338358.80; 694742.85, 3338368.06; 694709.40, 
3338382.20; 694683.58, 3338394.79; 694658.61, 3338408.98; 694634.57, 
3338424.71; 694611.57, 3338441.91; 694589.69, 3338460.52; 694569.03, 
3338480.47; 694549.66, 3338501.69; 694531.66, 3338524.07; 694515.10, 
3338547.54; 694500.05, 3338572.01; 694486.56, 3338597.37; 694474.69, 
3338623.53; 694464.49, 3338650.38; 694455.99, 3338677.82; 694449.24, 
3338705.74; 694444.25, 3338734.03; 694441.05, 3338762.57; 694439.64, 
3338791.26; 694440.04, 3338819.98; 694442.24, 3338848.63; 694446.23, 
3338877.07; 694452.01, 3338905.21; 694459.53, 3338932.93; 694468.79, 
3338960.12; 694479.73, 3338986.68; 695846.37, 3342195.36; 695866.57, 
3342249.11; 695909.07, 3342323.95; 695944.89, 3342368.83; 696008.43, 
3342426.87; 696081.72, 3342471.97; 696134.73, 3342494.04; 696218.37, 
3342514.28; 696304.32, 3342518.50; 696399.96, 3342505.83; 696481.43, 
3342478.10; 696532.23, 3342451.33; 696601.14, 3342399.78; 696659.17, 
3342336.24; 696716.14, 3342236.78; 696741.60, 3342154.57; 696751.20, 
3342069.05; 696748.60, 3342011.68; 696738.84, 3341955.10; 696711.11, 
3341873.63; 695320.75, 3338608.68.
    (B) Note: Map depicting Unit FFS-1, Subunit C is provided at 
paragraph (6)(x)(B) of this entry.
    (iv) Unit FFS-1, Subunit D--Liberty County, Florida. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangle map Wilma, Florida.
    (A) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 16N NAD83 coordinates, 
(E, N): 698315.71, 3338507.25; 697480.52, 3338897.39; 697508.44, 
3338904.15; 699107.25, 3339112.64; 699249.88, 3339101.68; 699357.17, 
3339061.36; 699491.10, 3338954.46; 699566.06, 3338832.62; 699600.72, 
3338636.16; 699571.97, 3338496.02; 699501.32, 3338371.62; 699419.16, 
3338291.70; 699319.85, 3338227.75; 699161.66, 3338161.88; 697647.47, 
3337884.31; 697505.31, 3337868.36; 697338.62, 3337908.06; 697240.79, 
3337967.76; 697160.88, 3338049.93; 697093.71, 3338176.24; 697068.86, 
3338317.12; 697081.23, 3338431.07; 697135.72, 3338563.34; 697197.51, 
3338669.79; 697283.19, 3338784.36; 697400.08, 3338866.83; 697480.52, 
3338897.39.
    (B) Note: Map depicting Unit FFS-1, Subunit D is provided at 
paragraph (6)(x)(B) of this entry.
    (v) Unit FFS-1, Subunit E--Liberty County, Florida. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangle maps Orange and Kennedy Creek, Florida.
    (A) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 16N NAD83 coordinates, 
(E, N): 686367.53, 3332295.84; 686431.12, 3334276.72; 686521.73, 
3334038.23; 686486.41, 3333905.93; 686456.16, 3333792.66; 686384.37, 
3333673.40; 686529.54, 3333545.42; 686684.99, 3333670.42; 686821.64, 
3333712.74; 686964.68, 3333710.75; 689322.67, 3333980.79; 689576.20, 
3334009.24; 689736.59, 3333948.97; 689863.53, 3333833.87; 689945.95, 
3333652.21; 689948.95, 3333480.88; 689888.68, 3333320.48; 689773.58, 
3333193.53; 688133.75, 3332060.68; 687963.85, 3331956.15; 687770.73, 
3331922.03; 687750.83, 3331780.36; 687652.31, 3331606.91; 687435.02, 
3331473.21; 686480.70, 3331191.98; 686369.22, 3331102.34; 685860.73, 
3329667.19; 685722.17, 3329523.69; 685535.70, 3329452.84; 685421.11, 
3329450.84; 685283.06, 3329488.34; 685142.70, 3329586.62; 685038.17, 
3329756.51; 684075.02, 3330678.79; 683908.10, 3330788.01; 683825.64, 
3330904.90; 683780.13, 3331070.10; 683798.63, 3331240.45; 683861.33, 
3331369.02; 685068.99, 3333929.17; 685144.99, 3334113.61; 685267.82, 
3334233.07; 685426.00, 3334298.93; 685697.77, 3334272.20; 685864.11, 
3334411.77; 686057.99, 3334458.69; 686253.39, 3334418.58; 686431.12, 
3334276.72.

[[Page 235]]

    (B) Note: Map depicting Unit FFS-1, Subunit E is provided at 
paragraph (6)(x)(B) of this entry.
    (vi) Unit FFS-1, Subunit F--Liberty County, Florida. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangle map Kennedy Creek, Florida.
    (A) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 16N NAD83 coordinates, 
(E, N): 686994.66, 3327715.03; 687031.71, 3327259.31; 687003.02, 
3327257.90; 686974.30, 3327258.30; 686945.66, 3327260.51; 686917.22, 
3327264.50; 686889.08, 3327270.28; 686861.36, 3327277.81; 686834.17, 
3327287.06; 686781.80, 3327310.60; 686756.83, 3327324.79; 686718.31, 
3327349.17; 686687.92, 3327376.34; 686647.89, 3327417.50; 686629.89, 
3327439.88; 686598.28, 3327487.82; 686584.79, 3327513.18; 686562.73, 
3327566.19; 686547.48, 3327621.55; 686539.29, 3327678.38; 686538.28, 
3327735.79; 686544.48, 3327792.87; 686557.79, 3327848.73; 686577.99, 
3327902.48; 686604.76, 3327953.27; 686627.73, 3327993.87; 686676.26, 
3328042.84; 686697.47, 3328062.21; 686719.85, 3328080.21; 686767.79, 
3328111.82; 686819.30, 3328137.17; 686873.59, 3328155.87; 686929.80, 
3328167.62; 686987.03, 3328172.22; 687072.83, 3328165.62; 687128.68, 
3328152.32; 687182.43, 3328132.12; 687233.22, 3328105.34; 687280.26, 
3328072.41; 687342.16, 3328012.63; 687391.77, 3327942.31; 687417.12, 
3327890.79; 687435.81, 3327836.50; 687447.56, 3327780.29; 687450.76, 
3327751.75; 687451.76, 3327694.34; 687445.57, 3327637.25; 687432.26, 
3327581.40; 687423.01, 3327554.21; 687385.28, 3327476.86; 687352.35, 
3327429.82; 687292.58, 3327367.91; 687222.26, 3327318.30; 687143.89, 
3327282.75; 687116.45, 3327274.26; 687088.54, 3327267.50; 687060.25, 
3327262.51; 687031.71, 3327259.31.
    (B) Note: Map depicting Unit FFS-1, Subunit F is provided at 
paragraph (6)(x)(B) of this entry.
    (vii) Unit FFS-1, Subunit G--Liberty County, Florida. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangle maps Kennedy Creek and Sumatra, Florida.
    (A) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 16N NAD83 coordinates, 
(E, N): 692743.43, 3325970.41; 690511.49, 3328333.04; 690352.62, 
3327300.27; 690398.82, 3327359.05; 690435.78, 3327418.40; 690476.94, 
3327458.44; 690522.80, 3327492.99; 690572.10, 3327512.25; 690653.06, 
3327552.10; 690737.82, 3327567.04; 690852.31, 3327561.85; 690961.91, 
3327528.34; 691036.74, 3327485.83; 691102.27, 3327430.06; 691139.64, 
3327386.47; 691184.74, 3327313.17; 691206.80, 3327260.16; 691226.10, 
3327181.87; 691285.53, 3327253.00; 691352.60, 3327306.93; 691428.57, 
3327347.33; 691510.78, 3327372.78; 691596.30, 3327382.38; 691653.66, 
3327379.78; 691709.33, 3327370.19; 691748.27, 3327399.19; 691798.09, 
3327427.72; 691851.10, 3327449.80; 691906.46, 3327465.04; 691963.28, 
3327473.24; 691991.97, 3327474.64; 692049.33, 3327472.04; 692105.91, 
3327462.27; 692160.82, 3327445.48; 692197.42, 3327442.46; 692254.00, 
3327432.70; 692315.34, 3327416.01; 692284.77, 3327496.45; 692273.03, 
3327552.66; 692268.42, 3327609.90; 692271.03, 3327667.26; 692288.33, 
3327751.56; 692308.53, 3327805.31; 692351.03, 3327880.14; 692388.83, 
3327927.78; 692448.61, 3327989.69; 692518.93, 3328039.30; 692570.45, 
3328064.66; 692624.74, 3328083.35; 692709.48, 3328098.30; 692766.90, 
3328099.31; 692823.98, 3328093.10; 694135.90, 3328069.14; 694193.26, 
3328066.53; 694249.84, 3328056.76; 694304.75, 3328039.98; 694357.13, 
3328016.44; 694406.14, 3327986.52; 694451.01, 3327950.70; 694491.04, 
3327909.54; 694525.60, 3327863.68; 694554.14, 3327813.85; 694576.20, 
3327760.84; 694591.45, 3327705.48; 694596.44, 3327677.19; 694601.05, 
3327619.96; 694598.45, 3327562.59; 694588.68, 3327506.01; 694571.89, 
3327451.10; 694548.36, 3327398.72; 694518.44, 3327349.71; 693770.98, 
3326221.08; 693868.81, 3326161.37; 693948.72, 3326079.20; 694005.68, 
3325979.75; 694036.11, 3325869.25; 694038.12, 3325754.65; 695152.74, 
3325675.90; 695209.97, 3325680.51; 695267.33, 3325677.91; 695323.91, 
3325668.13; 695378.82, 3325651.35; 695431.20, 3325627.81; 695480.21, 
3325597.89; 695525.08, 3325562.07; 695565.11, 3325520.90; 695581.45, 
3325500.59; 695608.30, 3325493.29; 695629.02, 3325486.24; 695635.41, 
3325556.71; 695657.97, 3325639.76; 695695.70, 3325717.11; 695728.63, 
3325764.15; 695767.20, 3325806.69; 695810.79, 3325844.06; 695864.85, 
3325870.66; 695911.78, 3325893.76; 695964.54, 3325919.72; 696020.74, 
3325931.47; 696077.98, 3325936.07; 696135.33, 3325933.47; 696219.63, 
3325916.16; 696273.38, 3325895.96; 696324.17, 3325869.18; 696371.21, 
3325836.25; 696413.74, 3325797.68; 696467.67, 3325730.61; 697336.67, 
3324321.07; 697362.02, 3324269.54; 697380.72, 3324215.25; 697392.46, 
3324159.04; 697397.07, 3324101.80; 697394.46, 3324044.44; 697384.69, 
3323987.86; 697367.90, 3323932.94; 697344.37, 3323880.57; 697314.45, 
3323831.55; 697258.68, 3323766.01; 697215.08, 3323728.64; 697167.14, 
3323697.03; 697115.63, 3323671.68; 697061.33, 3323652.99; 697005.13, 
3323641.24; 696947.90, 3323636.64; 696890.54, 3323639.24; 696806.24, 
3323656.54; 696752.49, 3323676.75; 696677.66, 3323719.26; 695425.27, 
3324601.45; 694686.48, 3324259.64; 694636.66, 3324231.10; 694583.65, 
3324209.03; 694528.29, 3324193.78; 694471.46, 3324185.59; 694414.05, 
3324184.59; 694356.97, 3324190.79; 694304.17, 3324203.26; 694297.65, 
3324123.23; 694284.34, 3324067.37; 694264.14, 3324013.62; 694237.37, 
3323962.82; 694185.82, 3323893.91; 694144.65, 3323853.88; 694084.93, 
3323810.79; 694067.06, 3323750.57; 694043.52, 3323698.19; 694010.56, 
3323625.86; 693968.05, 3323551.04; 693932.23, 3323506.16; 693868.68, 
3323448.13; 693820.75, 3323416.52; 693769.23, 3323391.17; 693714.94, 
3323372.47; 693658.74, 3323360.73; 693601.51, 3323356.12; 693544.15, 
3323358.72; 693487.56, 3323368.50; 693432.65, 3323385.28; 693380.29, 
3323408.82; 693331.27, 3323438.74; 693286.40, 3323474.56; 693246.37, 
3323515.72; 693224.54, 3323543.55; 693210.13, 3323497.41; 693186.60, 
3323445.03; 693156.69, 3323396.02; 693120.86, 3323351.14; 693079.70, 
3323311.11; 693033.84, 3323276.55; 692984.02, 3323248.02; 692931.01, 
3323225.95; 692875.65, 3323210.70; 692818.82, 3323202.51; 692761.42, 
3323201.50; 692704.33, 3323207.71; 692648.47, 3323221.01;

[[Page 236]]

692608.55, 3323235.51; 692570.41, 3323187.10; 692529.25, 3323147.06; 
692458.93, 3323097.45; 692407.41, 3323072.10; 692325.20, 3323046.65; 
692268.37, 3323038.46; 692210.96, 3323037.46; 692125.74, 3323049.44; 
692070.83, 3323066.22; 692011.40, 3323093.76; 691923.51, 3323089.22; 
691866.43, 3323095.42; 691810.57, 3323108.73; 691731.01, 3323141.52; 
691682.00, 3323171.44; 691637.13, 3323207.26; 691597.10, 3323248.43; 
691562.54, 3323294.28; 691534.00, 3323344.11; 691503.44, 3323424.56; 
691491.70, 3323480.77; 691487.09, 3323538.00; 691489.70, 3323595.37; 
691507.00, 3323679.67; 691539.79, 3323759.24; 692318.77, 3325166.83; 
692288.21, 3325247.29; 692273.27, 3325332.04; 692269.31, 3326096.13; 
692212.73, 3326105.90; 692165.53, 3326127.24; 692126.83, 3326144.74; 
692092.01, 3326160.48; 692049.42, 3326179.73; 692011.56, 3326211.96; 
691971.53, 3326253.13; 691936.98, 3326298.98; 691908.44, 3326348.81; 
691872.05, 3326393.76; 691837.49, 3326439.61; 691816.22, 3326475.77; 
691767.03, 3326455.43; 691711.68, 3326440.18; 691654.84, 3326431.99; 
691626.16, 3326430.59; 691568.79, 3326433.19; 691512.21, 3326442.96; 
691457.31, 3326459.75; 691390.25, 3326491.62; 691353.93, 3326429.48; 
691298.16, 3326363.94; 691231.09, 3326310.01; 691155.11, 3326269.60; 
691072.90, 3326244.15; 689760.49, 3325296.16; 689712.55, 3325264.55; 
689661.04, 3325239.20; 689606.75, 3325220.50; 689550.54, 3325208.76; 
689493.31, 3325204.15; 689407.51, 3325210.75; 689324.46, 3325233.31; 
689247.12, 3325271.04; 689157.55, 3325342.54; 689103.62, 3325409.61; 
689063.22, 3325485.59; 689044.52, 3325539.88; 689032.78, 3325596.09; 
689028.17, 3325653.33; 689034.77, 3325739.13; 689233.31, 3327105.96; 
689637.00, 3328600.37; 689861.46, 3329635.49; 689894.25, 3329715.06; 
689924.16, 3329764.07; 689959.98, 3329808.95; 690001.15, 3329848.98; 
690047.00, 3329883.54; 690096.82, 3329912.08; 690149.83, 3329934.15; 
690205.19, 3329949.40; 690262.02, 3329957.59; 690319.43, 3329958.59; 
690404.65, 3329946.62; 690457.17, 3329926.88; 690511.93, 3329906.30; 
690560.94, 3329876.39; 690626.48, 3329820.61; 690663.84, 3329777.02; 
690695.45, 3329729.08; 690720.81, 3329677.56; 690739.50, 3329623.27; 
690751.25, 3329567.06; 690755.85, 3329509.83; 690749.26, 3329424.02; 
690735.95, 3329368.16; 690529.29, 3328448.39; 690524.80, 3328388.90; 
690511.49, 3328333.04.
    (B) Note: Map depicting Unit FFS-1, Subunit G is provided at 
paragraph (6)(x)(B) of this entry.
    (viii) Unit FFS-1, Subunit H--Liberty County, Florida. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangle maps Sumatra and Owens Bridge, Florida.
    (A) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 16N NAD83 coordinates, 
(E, N): 705290.30, 3325041.96; 706646.10, 3324321.38; 706503.21, 
3324314.39; 704109.35, 3324557.65; 703953.05, 3324627.90; 703833.59, 
3324750.75; 703782.98, 3324853.59; 703758.14, 3324994.48; 703787.30, 
3325163.35; 703857.96, 3325287.74; 703940.13, 3325367.66; 704025.87, 
3325418.40; 704016.83, 3325569.76; 704034.13, 3325654.07; 704096.85, 
3325782.66; 704196.22, 3325885.57; 704322.53, 3325952.74; 704463.41, 
3325977.58; 704605.08, 3325957.68; 706601.96, 3325223.59; 706713.46, 
3325197.03; 706859.72, 3325107.75; 706949.37, 3324996.25; 707005.16, 
3324834.22; 707007.16, 3324719.61; 706989.86, 3324635.31; 706942.88, 
3324530.75; 706871.37, 3324441.17; 706796.16, 3324398.25; 706728.31, 
3324346.84; 706646.10, 3324321.38.
    (B) Note: Map depicting Unit FFS-1, Subunit H is provided at 
paragraph (6)(x)(B) of this entry.
    (ix) Unit FFS-1, Subunit I--Liberty County, Florida. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangle map Owens Bridge, Florida.
    (A) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 16N NAD83 coordinates, 
(E, N): 712262.72, 3326181.63; 712356.33, 3325733.94; 712270.80, 
3325724.34; 712213.44, 3325726.95; 712129.13, 3325744.25; 712101.94, 
3325753.51; 712024.58, 3325791.24; 711977.54, 3325824.17; 711955.67, 
3325842.79; 711915.63, 3325883.96; 711881.07, 3325929.82; 711852.53, 
3325979.66; 711830.47, 3326032.67; 711815.21, 3326088.04; 711807.02, 
3326144.87; 711805.62, 3326173.57; 711808.22, 3326230.94; 711817.99, 
3326287.52; 711834.78, 3326342.44; 711858.32, 3326394.82; 711888.24, 
3326443.84; 711905.44, 3326466.84; 711944.01, 3326509.39; 711965.23, 
3326528.76; 711987.61, 3326546.76; 712011.09, 3326563.32; 712060.92, 
3326591.86; 712087.08, 3326603.73; 712113.93, 3326613.93; 712169.29, 
3326629.18; 712226.13, 3326637.37; 712254.82, 3326638.78; 712312.18, 
3326636.17; 712368.77, 3326626.40; 712423.68, 3326609.61; 712476.06, 
3326586.07; 712525.08, 3326556.15; 712590.62, 3326500.37; 712644.55, 
3326433.30; 712684.96, 3326357.30; 712703.65, 3326303.01; 712715.40, 
3326246.79; 712720.00, 3326189.55; 712717.40, 3326132.18; 712707.63, 
3326075.60; 712700.10, 3326047.87; 712674.07, 3325977.60; 712653.11, 
3325943.32; 712601.56, 3325874.40; 712560.39, 3325834.36; 712538.01, 
3325816.36; 712514.54, 3325799.80; 712464.71, 3325771.26; 712411.69, 
3325749.19; 712356.33, 3325733.94.
    (B) Note: Map depicting Unit FFS-1, Subunit I is provided at 
paragraph (6)(x)(B) of this entry.
    (x) Unit FFS-1, Subunit J--Franklin County, Florida. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangle map Fort Gadsen, Florida.
    (A) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 16N NAD83 coordinates, 
(E, N): 696448.29, 3312586.05; 697417.53, 3311729.38; 697304.09, 
3311713.04; 697218.29, 3311719.64; 697135.24, 3311742.21; 697057.90, 
3311779.94; 695449.24, 3312550.89; 695396.87, 3312574.43; 695324.87, 
3312621.56; 695282.33, 3312660.13; 695228.41, 3312727.20; 695188.01, 
3312803.20; 695162.57, 3312885.41; 695152.98, 3312970.93; 695159.58, 
3313056.74; 695182.15, 3313139.79; 695219.88, 3313217.14; 695271.43, 
3313286.05; 695335.05, 3313350.76; 695405.38, 3313400.37; 695456.90, 
3313425.72; 695511.18, 3313444.41; 695595.94, 3313459.35; 695710.43, 
3313454.14; 695820.03, 3313420.63; 697427.52, 3312615.68; 697509.40, 
3312574.69; 697581.41, 3312527.56; 697643.31, 3312467.77; 697706.40, 
3312372.08;

[[Page 237]]

697743.71, 3312263.71; 697752.89, 3312149.46; 697733.38, 3312036.51; 
697686.39, 3311931.97; 697653.45, 3311884.93; 697593.67, 3311823.03; 
697523.35, 3311773.42; 697417.53, 3311729.38.
    (B) Note: Map of Unit FFS-1 follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10FE09.001
    

[[Page 238]]


    (xi) Unit FFS-3, Subunit A--Wakulla County, Florida. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangle maps St. Marks and St. Marks NE, Florida.
    (A) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 16N, NAD83 coordinates 
(E, N): 775789.22, 3340665.92; 778066.61, 3340484.87; 777670.88, 
3338778.31; 777533.15, 3338184.41; 777525.56, 3338156.70; 777516.42, 
3338129.40; 777505.42, 3338102.83; 777492.86, 3338076.99; 777478.74, 
3338052.00; 777471.13, 3338040.27; 777482.70, 3338036.35; 777509.30, 
3338025.48; 777535.17, 3338012.93; 777560.12, 3337998.80; 777584.24, 
3337982.99; 777607.24, 3337965.82; 777629.12, 3337947.29; 777649.88, 
3337927.29; 777669.21, 3337906.14; 777687.24, 3337883.74; 777703.84, 
3337860.31; 777714.90, 3337842.39; 777724.48, 3337852.29; 777745.69, 
3337871.69; 777768.09, 3337889.78; 777791.49, 3337906.35; 777815.99, 
3337921.39; 777841.30, 3337934.91; 777867.51, 3337946.89; 777894.35, 
3337957.11; 777921.81, 3337965.57; 777949.70, 3337972.38; 777978.02, 
3337977.42; 777990.29, 3337977.52; 778007.58, 3337977.78; 778035.40, 
3337978.19; 778064.31, 3337978.62; 778092.26, 3337979.03; 778121.08, 
3337975.61; 778149.29, 3337969.88; 778177.06, 3337962.38; 778204.20, 
3337953.08; 778230.80, 3337942.21; 778256.67, 3337929.67; 778281.62, 
3337915.43; 778305.74, 3337899.73; 778328.75, 3337882.56; 778350.72, 
3337863.93; 778371.38, 3337844.03; 778390.82, 3337822.89; 778408.84, 
3337800.49; 778425.45, 3337776.95; 778440.53, 3337752.59; 778454.00, 
3337727.19; 778465.95, 3337700.97; 778476.17, 3337674.16; 778484.68, 
3337646.75; 778491.46, 3337618.85; 778496.52, 3337590.46; 778499.75, 
3337561.92; 778501.16, 3337533.22; 778500.82, 3337504.47; 778498.66, 
3337475.90; 778494.65, 3337447.40; 778488.90, 3337419.29; 778481.41, 
3337391.48; 778472.17, 3337364.28; 778461.27, 3337337.71; 778448.71, 
3337311.87; 778434.49, 3337286.88; 778418.81, 3337262.74; 778401.64, 
3337239.78; 778383.01, 3337217.89; 778363.09, 3337197.19; 778341.88, 
3337177.80; 778319.48, 3337159.70; 778296.08, 3337143.13; 778271.58, 
3337128.08; 778246.27, 3337114.46; 778220.05, 3337102.59; 778193.21, 
3337092.37; 778165.75, 3337083.80; 778137.85, 3337077.10; 778109.53, 
3337072.05; 778080.97, 3337068.78; 778052.27, 3337067.39; 778023.61, 
3337067.77; 777994.91, 3337069.93; 777966.46, 3337073.87; 777938.25, 
3337079.59; 777910.58, 3337087.10; 777883.34, 3337096.29; 777856.73, 
3337107.26; 777830.96, 3337119.82; 777805.91, 3337133.94; 777781.88, 
3337149.75; 777758.79, 3337166.92; 777736.91, 3337185.45; 777716.25, 
3337205.45; 777696.81, 3337226.60; 777678.79, 3337249.00; 777662.19, 
3337272.43; 777651.12, 3337290.35; 777641.54, 3337280.46; 777620.33, 
3337261.06; 777598.03, 3337242.96; 777574.53, 3337226.39; 777550.03, 
3337211.35; 777524.72, 3337197.84; 777498.59, 3337185.86; 777471.75, 
3337175.64; 777444.29, 3337167.07; 777416.30, 3337160.37; 777410.25, 
3337159.33; 777411.85, 3337145.51; 777413.25, 3337116.80; 777412.92, 
3337088.06; 777410.75, 3337059.38; 777406.74, 3337030.88; 777400.99, 
3337002.77; 777393.49, 3336975.07; 777384.25, 3336947.76; 777373.35, 
3336921.19; 777360.79, 3336895.35; 777346.57, 3336870.36; 777330.87, 
3336846.33; 777313.71, 3336823.27; 777295.07, 3336801.38; 777275.15, 
3336780.69; 777253.94, 3336761.29; 777231.63, 3336743.20; 777208.13, 
3336726.63; 777183.73, 3336711.59; 777158.32, 3336698.08; 777132.19, 
3336686.10; 777105.35, 3336675.88; 777077.88, 3336667.42; 777049.99, 
3336660.62; 777021.67, 3336655.58; 776993.11, 3336652.30; 776964.40, 
3336650.92; 776935.65, 3336651.30; 776907.05, 3336653.46; 776878.50, 
3336657.40; 776850.38, 3336663.13; 776822.61, 3336670.64; 776795.47, 
3336679.83; 776768.87, 3336690.81; 776742.99, 3336703.36; 776718.05, 
3336717.49; 776693.93, 3336733.19; 776670.93, 3336750.37; 776648.95, 
3336769.01; 776628.29, 3336788.90; 776608.85, 3336810.16; 776590.83, 
3336832.56; 776574.23, 3336856.00; 776570.11, 3336862.66; 776553.01, 
3336856.13; 776525.55, 3336847.67; 776497.65, 3336840.87; 776469.33, 
3336835.83; 776440.77, 3336832.56; 776412.07, 3336831.17; 776383.32, 
3336831.56; 776354.72, 3336833.72; 776326.26, 3336837.66; 776298.05, 
3336843.39; 776270.38, 3336850.90; 776243.14, 3336860.09; 776216.54, 
3336871.08; 776190.67, 3336883.63; 776165.72, 3336897.76; 776141.60, 
3336913.46; 776118.60, 3336930.63; 776096.72, 3336949.28; 776075.97, 
3336969.17; 776056.63, 3336990.43; 776038.52, 3337012.83; 776021.92, 
3337036.27; 776006.84, 3337060.74; 775993.38, 3337086.03; 775981.43, 
3337112.25; 775971.21, 3337139.07; 775962.71, 3337166.48; 775955.93, 
3337194.49; 775950.88, 3337222.77; 775947.66, 3337251.31; 775946.17, 
3337280.01; 775946.60, 3337308.76; 775948.78, 3337337.32; 775952.69, 
3337365.83; 775958.44, 3337394.04; 775965.94, 3337421.74; 775975.19, 
3337448.94; 775986.10, 3337475.51; 775998.66, 3337501.34; 776012.79, 
3337526.33; 776028.58, 3337550.47; 776045.74, 3337573.53; 776064.28, 
3337595.41; 776084.30, 3337616.11; 776105.42, 3337635.50; 776127.82, 
3337653.48; 776151.32, 3337670.16; 776175.72, 3337685.20; 776201.13, 
3337698.71; 776227.26, 3337710.57; 776244.06, 3337717.09; 776242.57, 
3337718.94; 776232.10, 3337713.35; 776205.89, 3337701.38; 776179.04, 
3337691.16; 776151.58, 3337682.70; 776123.69, 3337675.90; 776095.37, 
3337670.86; 776066.81, 3337667.59; 776038.11, 3337666.20; 776009.36, 
3337666.59; 775980.76, 3337668.76; 775952.31, 3337672.70; 775924.10, 
3337678.43; 775896.43, 3337685.94; 775869.20, 3337695.13; 775842.60, 
3337706.12; 775816.73, 3337718.67; 775791.78, 3337732.80; 775767.66, 
3337748.50; 775744.67, 3337765.68; 775722.70, 3337784.32; 775702.04, 
3337804.22; 775682.61, 3337825.48; 775664.59, 3337847.77; 775648.00, 
3337871.32; 775632.92, 3337895.68; 775619.36, 3337921.08; 775607.52, 
3337947.30; 775597.30, 3337974.11; 775588.70, 3338001.52; 775581.93, 
3338029.42; 775576.97, 3338057.81; 775573.65, 3338086.36; 775572.26, 
3338115.06; 775572.59, 3338143.80; 775574.77, 3338172.37; 775578.78, 
3338200.87; 775584.54, 3338228.98; 775592.03, 3338256.79; 775601.19, 
3338283.98; 775612.19, 3338310.55; 775624.75, 3338336.39; 775638.88, 
3338361.37; 775654.57, 3338385.51; 775671.73, 3338408.46; 775690.37, 
3338430.46; 775710.29, 3338451.15;

[[Page 239]]

775731.50, 3338470.54; 775753.90, 3338488.52; 775777.31, 3338505.09; 
775801.80, 3338520.24; 775827.21, 3338533.75; 775853.33, 3338545.61; 
775880.17, 3338555.94; 775907.63, 3338564.39; 775935.52, 3338571.20; 
775963.84, 3338576.23; 775992.39, 3338579.50; 776021.09, 3338580.89; 
776049.84, 3338580.50; 776078.53, 3338578.34; 776106.98, 3338574.40; 
776135.09, 3338568.67; 776162.85, 3338561.16; 776190.08, 3338551.97; 
776216.69, 3338540.99; 776242.46, 3338528.43; 776267.50, 3338514.30; 
776291.52, 3338498.60; 776314.61, 3338481.43; 776336.49, 3338462.78; 
776357.24, 3338442.89; 776376.58, 3338421.63; 776392.70, 3338401.62; 
776403.17, 3338407.21; 776429.29, 3338419.08; 776456.13, 3338429.40; 
776483.59, 3338437.86; 776511.57, 3338444.67; 776539.80, 3338449.71; 
776568.35, 3338452.98; 776597.05, 3338454.37; 776625.80, 3338453.98; 
776654.49, 3338451.82; 776660.01, 3338451.07; 776670.54, 3338476.85; 
776827.26, 3339164.36; 777053.70, 3340157.85; 775510.45, 3340235.09; 
775168.35, 3339961.10; 775144.54, 3339940.36; 775091.43, 3339897.57; 
774949.30, 3339783.09; 774965.89, 3339759.65; 774980.97, 3339735.17; 
774994.43, 3339709.77; 775006.36, 3339683.66; 775016.58, 3339656.74; 
775025.08, 3339629.33; 775031.95, 3339601.43; 775036.90, 3339573.15; 
775039.60, 3339549.86; 775040.22, 3339544.61; 775041.61, 3339515.91; 
775041.27, 3339487.16; 775041.13, 3339484.94; 775057.54, 3339480.47; 
775084.67, 3339471.27; 775111.27, 3339460.29; 775137.13, 3339447.74; 
775162.17, 3339433.61; 775186.18, 3339417.90; 775209.27, 3339400.73; 
775231.15, 3339382.08; 775251.80, 3339362.18; 775271.23, 3339340.93; 
775289.24, 3339318.63; 775305.83, 3339295.08; 775321.00, 3339270.72; 
775334.47, 3339245.32; 775346.40, 3339219.21; 775356.62, 3339192.29; 
775365.12, 3339164.87; 775371.89, 3339136.97; 775376.94, 3339108.70; 
775380.17, 3339080.04; 775381.66, 3339051.34; 775381.32, 3339022.71; 
775379.14, 3338994.03; 775375.13, 3338965.53; 775369.38, 3338937.42; 
775361.88, 3338909.61; 775352.63, 3338882.42; 775341.73, 3338855.85; 
775329.16, 3338830.02; 775315.04, 3338805.03; 775299.35, 3338780.89; 
775282.09, 3338757.94; 775263.54, 3338735.95; 775243.62, 3338715.26; 
775222.41, 3338695.86; 775200.01, 3338677.88; 775176.51, 3338661.32; 
775152.11, 3338646.17; 775126.70, 3338632.67; 775100.58, 3338620.80; 
775073.74, 3338610.48; 775046.28, 3338602.03; 775018.39, 3338595.22; 
774990.07, 3338590.19; 774961.52, 3338586.92; 774932.82, 3338585.54; 
774904.08, 3338585.82; 774875.38, 3338588.09; 774846.93, 3338592.04; 
774818.83, 3338597.77; 774791.06, 3338605.29; 774763.83, 3338614.48; 
774737.24, 3338625.35; 774711.37, 3338638.02; 774686.43, 3338652.15; 
774662.31, 3338667.86; 774639.71, 3338684.71; 774638.37, 3338684.57; 
774609.67, 3338683.18; 774582.28, 3338683.50; 774581.67, 3338680.60; 
774574.17, 3338652.89; 774564.92, 3338625.59; 774554.01, 3338599.02; 
774541.45, 3338573.19; 774527.32, 3338548.21; 774511.63, 3338524.18; 
774494.37, 3338501.12; 774475.82, 3338479.24; 774455.89, 3338458.55; 
774434.69, 3338439.05; 774412.28, 3338421.07; 774388.88, 3338404.51; 
774364.38, 3338389.36; 774338.97, 3338375.86; 774312.85, 3338364.00; 
774286.01, 3338353.68; 774258.55, 3338345.22; 774230.66, 3338338.43; 
774202.34, 3338333.39; 774173.78, 3338330.13; 774145.08, 3338328.74; 
774116.34, 3338329.03; 774087.74, 3338331.20; 774059.19, 3338335.25; 
774031.09, 3338340.99; 774003.32, 3338348.51; 773976.09, 3338357.70; 
773949.59, 3338368.58; 773923.73, 3338381.14; 773898.69, 3338395.38; 
773874.67, 3338411.09; 773851.58, 3338428.26; 773829.72, 3338446.80; 
773808.97, 3338466.81; 773789.64, 3338487.96; 773771.53, 3338510.37; 
773754.94, 3338533.81; 773739.86, 3338558.28; 773726.41, 3338583.58; 
773714.47, 3338609.79; 773704.26, 3338636.61; 773695.67, 3338664.02; 
773688.90, 3338692.03; 773683.85, 3338720.31; 773680.63, 3338748.86; 
773679.24, 3338777.56; 773679.59, 3338806.30; 773681.77, 3338834.98; 
773685.69, 3338863.37; 773691.44, 3338891.58; 773698.95, 3338919.28; 
773708.20, 3338946.47; 773719.11, 3338973.04; 773731.67, 3338998.98; 
773745.80, 3339023.97; 773761.50, 3339047.99; 773778.76, 3339071.05; 
773797.31, 3339092.93; 773817.23, 3339113.62; 773838.44, 3339133.01; 
773860.84, 3339151.10; 773884.34, 3339167.66; 773908.74, 3339182.80; 
773934.15, 3339196.31; 773960.27, 3339208.16; 773987.11, 3339218.38; 
774014.57, 3339226.94; 774042.46, 3339233.74; 774070.77, 3339238.77; 
774099.33, 3339242.04; 774128.03, 3339243.42; 774155.42, 3339242.99; 
774156.02, 3339246.00; 774163.52, 3339273.71; 774172.77, 3339301.01; 
774174.22, 3339304.59; 774174.02, 3339304.92; 774162.19, 3339331.03; 
774151.88, 3339357.85; 774143.38, 3339385.37; 774136.61, 3339413.27; 
774131.56, 3339441.55; 774128.34, 3339470.09; 774126.85, 3339498.79; 
774127.29, 3339527.54; 774129.37, 3339556.21; 774133.39, 3339584.61; 
774139.14, 3339612.82; 774146.65, 3339640.52; 774150.33, 3339651.49; 
774130.27, 3339662.97; 774106.16, 3339678.68; 774083.17, 3339695.85; 
774061.21, 3339714.39; 774040.56, 3339734.40; 774021.14, 3339755.55; 
774003.13, 3339777.95; 773986.54, 3339801.39; 773971.46, 3339825.87; 
773957.91, 3339851.27; 773945.98, 3339877.38; 773935.76, 3339904.19; 
773927.27, 3339931.72; 773926.18, 3339936.26; 773926.14, 3339936.25; 
773920.50, 3339959.62; 773915.45, 3339987.90; 773912.23, 3340016.44; 
773910.75, 3340045.14; 773910.93, 3340060.90; 773909.63, 3340058.87; 
773892.47, 3340035.81; 773873.92, 3340013.93; 773853.91, 3339993.24; 
773832.70, 3339973.85; 773810.39, 3339955.76; 773786.90, 3339939.20; 
773777.78, 3339933.61; 773777.91, 3339933.62; 773762.40, 3339924.06; 
773737.09, 3339910.55; 773710.97, 3339898.70; 773684.04, 3339888.48; 
773656.68, 3339879.92; 773628.70, 3339873.12; 773600.38, 3339868.09; 
773571.83, 3339864.83; 773543.13, 3339863.45; 773514.39, 3339863.73; 
773485.80, 3339865.90; 773476.45, 3339867.03; 773476.45, 3339867.18; 
773457.35, 3339869.96; 773429.15, 3339875.70; 773401.39, 3339883.21; 
773374.17, 3339892.41; 773347.58, 3339903.29; 773321.81, 3339915.85; 
773296.78, 3339930.09; 773272.67, 3339945.80; 773249.68, 3339962.98; 
773227.82, 3339981.52; 773207.07, 3340001.53; 773187.65, 3340022.68; 
773169.64, 3340045.08; 773153.05, 3340068.52; 773137.98, 3340093.00; 
773124.43, 3340118.29;

[[Page 240]]

773112.50, 3340144.51; 773102.29, 3340171.33; 773093.80, 3340198.74; 
773086.93, 3340226.64; 773081.99, 3340255.03; 773078.67, 3340283.58; 
773077.28, 3340312.28; 773077.63, 3340341.02; 773079.81, 3340369.59; 
773083.82, 3340398.09; 773089.48, 3340426.30; 773096.99, 3340454.00; 
773106.24, 3340481.19; 773117.15, 3340507.76; 773129.71, 3340533.59; 
773143.94, 3340558.68; 773159.63, 3340582.71; 773176.80, 3340605.77; 
773195.44, 3340627.64; 773215.36, 3340648.33; 773236.57, 3340667.72; 
773240.54, 3340670.93; 774190.69, 3341600.54; 774207.73, 3341623.69; 
774226.19, 3341645.71; 774245.99, 3341666.54; 774267.06, 3341686.08; 
774289.32, 3341704.26; 774312.67, 3341721.00; 774337.03, 3341736.25; 
774362.30, 3341749.94; 774388.38, 3341762.01; 774415.16, 3341772.42; 
774442.55, 3341781.13; 774470.43, 3341788.10; 774498.69, 3341793.31; 
774527.22, 3341796.73; 774555.91, 3341798.36; 774584.65, 3341798.18; 
774613.32, 3341796.20; 774641.80, 3341792.42; 774670.00, 3341786.86; 
774697.79, 3341779.54; 774725.06, 3341770.48; 774751.71, 3341759.74; 
774777.64, 3341747.34; 774802.74, 3341733.34; 774826.90, 3341717.79; 
774850.05, 3341700.75; 774872.07, 3341682.30; 774892.90, 3341662.49; 
774912.44, 3341641.42; 775378.58, 3341173.26; 775544.57, 3341006.80; 
777609.30, 3341044.76; 777638.03, 3341044.58; 777666.70, 3341042.60; 
777680.70, 3341040.35; 777695.19, 3341038.82; 777723.39, 3341033.26; 
777751.18, 3341025.93; 777778.45, 3341016.88; 777805.10, 3341006.14; 
777831.03, 3340993.74; 777856.13, 3340979.74; 777880.29, 3340964.19; 
777903.44, 3340947.15; 777925.47, 3340928.69; 777946.29, 3340908.89; 
777965.83, 3340887.82; 777984.01, 3340865.56; 778000.76, 3340842.21; 
778016.00, 3340817.85; 778029.69, 3340792.58; 778041.76, 3340766.50; 
778052.18, 3340739.71; 778060.89, 3340712.33; 778067.86, 3340684.45; 
778073.07, 3340656.19; 778076.49, 3340627.65; 778078.11, 3340598.96; 
778077.93, 3340570.22; 778075.95, 3340541.55; 778072.17, 3340513.07; 
778066.61, 3340484.87.
    (B) Note: Map depicting Unit FFS-3, Subunit A is provided at 
paragraph (6)(xiii)(B) of this entry.
    (xii) Unit FFS-3, Subunit B--Wakulla and Jefferson Counties, 
Florida. From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle map St. Marks NE, Florida.
    (A) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 16N, NAD83 coordinates 
(E, N): 781813.02, 3338564.97; 780854.75, 3336748.56; 780826.19, 
3336745.28; 780797.49, 3336743.88; 780768.74, 3336744.25; 780751.83, 
3336745.48; 780740.73, 3336730.55; 780722.10, 3336708.66; 780702.18, 
3336687.96; 780680.97, 3336668.56; 780658.57, 3336650.57; 780635.18, 
3336633.88; 780610.68, 3336618.83; 780585.37, 3336605.31; 780559.15, 
3336593.44; 780532.31, 3336583.21; 780504.85, 3336574.63; 780476.95, 
3336567.82; 780448.63, 3336562.88; 780420.07, 3336559.60; 780391.36, 
3336558.20; 780362.71, 3336558.58; 780334.01, 3336560.73; 780305.55, 
3336564.66; 780277.43, 3336570.38; 780249.66, 3336577.88; 780222.42, 
3336587.17; 780195.81, 3336598.03; 780170.02, 3336610.69; 780144.97, 
3336624.81; 780120.94, 3336640.51; 780097.94, 3336657.67; 780075.95, 
3336676.31; 780055.29, 3336696.20; 780035.94, 3336717.45; 780017.82, 
3336739.85; 780001.31, 3336763.28; 779986.22, 3336787.75; 779972.64, 
3336813.14; 779960.79, 3336839.25; 779950.56, 3336866.06; 779941.95, 
3336893.58; 779935.16, 3336921.48; 779930.20, 3336949.76; 779926.96, 
3336978.30; 779925.49, 3337005.78; 779913.72, 3337013.47; 779890.72, 
3337030.63; 779868.74, 3337049.27; 779848.07, 3337069.16; 779828.63, 
3337090.41; 779810.60, 3337112.81; 779794.09, 3337136.24; 779779.00, 
3337160.71; 779765.43, 3337186.11; 779753.58, 3337212.21; 779743.35, 
3337239.02; 779734.74, 3337266.54; 779727.96, 3337294.44; 779722.99, 
3337322.72; 779719.76, 3337351.26; 779718.26, 3337379.96; 779718.68, 
3337408.71; 779720.84, 3337437.39; 779724.75, 3337465.89; 779730.49, 
3337494.00; 779738.08, 3337521.71; 779747.22, 3337548.90; 779758.21, 
3337575.59; 779770.77, 3337601.43; 779784.89, 3337626.42; 779800.67, 
3337650.46; 779817.83, 3337673.53; 779836.46, 3337695.42; 779856.38, 
3337716.12; 779877.58, 3337735.52; 779899.88, 3337753.51; 779923.38, 
3337770.08; 779947.87, 3337785.24; 779973.18, 3337798.76; 779999.40, 
3337810.63; 780026.23, 3337820.86; 780046.61, 3337827.26; 780031.54, 
3337835.75; 780007.52, 3337851.45; 779984.42, 3337868.61; 779962.53, 
3337887.25; 779941.87, 3337907.14; 779922.43, 3337928.39; 779904.40, 
3337950.79; 779887.80, 3337974.22; 779872.71, 3337998.69; 779859.23, 
3338024.09; 779859.02, 3338024.55; 779847.29, 3338050.19; 779837.06, 
3338077.00; 779828.54, 3338104.52; 779821.76, 3338132.42; 779816.70, 
3338160.70; 779813.46, 3338189.24; 779812.06, 3338217.94; 779812.38, 
3338246.69; 779814.55, 3338275.37; 779818.54, 3338303.87; 779824.29, 
3338331.98; 779831.78, 3338359.69; 779841.02, 3338386.88; 779851.91, 
3338413.57; 779864.56, 3338439.41; 779878.68, 3338464.40; 779894.36, 
3338488.43; 779911.61, 3338511.51; 779930.15, 3338533.40; 779950.16, 
3338554.10; 779971.36, 3338573.50; 779993.66, 3338591.49; 780017.15, 
3338608.07; 780041.65, 3338623.23; 780066.95, 3338636.74; 780093.17, 
3338648.62; 780120.00, 3338658.84; 780147.46, 3338667.42; 780175.35, 
3338674.13; 780203.67, 3338679.18; 780232.22, 3338682.46; 780260.92, 
3338683.85; 780289.67, 3338683.48; 780318.27, 3338681.32; 781659.28, 
3338623.11; 783371.06, 3341075.49; 783388.08, 3341098.65; 783406.52, 
3341120.69; 783426.31, 3341141.53; 783447.37, 3341161.09; 783469.61, 
3341179.28; 783492.96, 3341196.05; 783517.31, 3341211.31; 783542.57, 
3341225.02; 783568.64, 3341237.11; 783595.42, 3341247.54; 783622.80, 
3341256.27; 783650.68, 3341263.26; 783678.94, 3341268.49; 783707.47, 
3341271.93; 783736.16, 3341273.58; 783764.90, 3341273.42; 783793.57, 
3341271.45; 783822.06, 3341267.69; 783850.26, 3341262.15; 783878.06, 
3341254.85; 783905.34, 3341245.82; 783932.00, 3341235.09; 783957.94, 
3341222.71; 783983.05, 3341208.72; 784007.23, 3341193.19; 784030.38, 
3341176.17; 784052.42, 3341157.73; 784073.27, 3341137.94; 784092.82, 
3341116.88; 784111.02, 3341094.63; 784127.78, 3341071.29; 784143.04, 
3341046.94; 784156.75, 3341021.68; 784168.84, 3340995.61;

[[Page 241]]

784179.27, 3340968.83; 784188.00, 3340941.45; 784194.99, 3340913.57; 
784200.22, 3340885.31; 784203.67, 3340856.78; 784205.31, 3340828.09; 
784205.15, 3340799.35; 784203.19, 3340770.67; 784199.43, 3340742.18; 
784193.88, 3340713.98; 784186.58, 3340686.19; 784177.55, 3340658.90; 
784166.82, 3340632.24; 784154.44, 3340606.31; 784140.46, 3340581.20; 
784124.92, 3340557.02; 782277.60, 3337914.11; 782294.12, 3337890.57; 
782309.21, 3337866.10; 782322.78, 3337840.82; 782334.64, 3337814.60; 
782344.88, 3337787.79; 782353.40, 3337760.27; 782360.19, 3337732.38; 
782365.26, 3337704.10; 782368.50, 3337675.56; 782369.91, 3337646.86; 
782369.59, 3337618.11; 782367.34, 3337589.43; 782363.44, 3337561.03; 
782357.70, 3337532.81; 782350.22, 3337505.10; 782340.98, 3337477.90; 
782330.00, 3337451.33; 782317.45, 3337425.48; 782303.24, 3337400.49; 
782287.56, 3337376.34; 782270.41, 3337353.37; 782251.78, 3337331.48; 
782231.86, 3337310.77; 782210.66, 3337291.37; 782188.27, 3337273.26; 
782164.78, 3337256.68; 782140.38, 3337241.63; 782114.97, 3337228.11; 
781683.92, 3337059.84; 780938.43, 3336768.89; 780910.97, 3336760.31; 
780883.08, 3336753.50; 780854.75, 3336748.56.
    (B) Note: Map depicting Unit FFS-3, Subunit B is located at 
paragraph (6)(xiii)(B) of this entry.
    (xiii) Unit FFS-3, Subunit C--Jefferson County, Florida. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangle map Cody, Florida.
    (A) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 16N, NAD83 coordinates 
(E, N): 784571.80, 3351736.64; 784608.07, 3351280.60; 784579.36, 
3351279.22; 784554.83, 3351279.59; 784550.62, 3351279.65; 784521.97, 
3351281.88; 784493.51, 3351285.91; 784465.37, 3351291.71; 784437.64, 
3351299.27; 784410.44, 3351308.56; 784383.88, 3351319.54; 784358.06, 
3351332.16; 784333.09, 3351346.38; 784309.05, 3351362.14; 784286.06, 
3351379.37; 784264.19, 3351398.02; 784243.53, 3351418.00; 784224.17, 
3351439.25; 784206.19, 3351461.66; 784189.64, 3351485.16; 784174.61, 
3351509.65; 784161.14, 3351535.04; 784149.29, 3351561.22; 784139.11, 
3351588.10; 784130.64, 3351615.56; 784123.90, 3351643.50; 784118.94, 
3351671.81; 784115.76, 3351700.37; 784114.38, 3351729.08; 784114.81, 
3351757.81; 784117.04, 3351786.47; 784121.07, 3351814.92; 784126.87, 
3351843.07; 784134.43, 3351870.80; 784143.72, 3351897.99; 784154.70, 
3351924.55; 784167.32, 3351950.37; 784181.54, 3351975.35; 784197.30, 
3351999.38; 784214.53, 3352022.38; 784233.18, 3352044.25; 784253.16, 
3352064.90; 784274.40, 3352084.26; 784296.82, 3352102.25; 784320.32, 
3352118.79; 784344.81, 3352133.83; 784370.20, 3352147.30; 784396.38, 
3352159.15; 784423.26, 3352169.33; 784450.72, 3352177.80; 784478.66, 
3352184.53; 784506.97, 3352189.50; 784535.53, 3352192.68; 784558.55, 
3352193.78; 784564.24, 3352194.05; 784592.97, 3352193.63; 784621.63, 
3352191.40; 784650.08, 3352187.37; 784678.23, 3352181.56; 784705.96, 
3352174.00; 784733.15, 3352164.72; 784759.71, 3352153.74; 784785.53, 
3352141.12; 784810.51, 3352126.90; 784834.54, 3352111.14; 784857.54, 
3352093.90; 784879.41, 3352075.26; 784900.06, 3352055.27; 784919.42, 
3352034.03; 784937.41, 3352011.62; 784953.96, 3351988.12; 784968.99, 
3351963.63; 784982.46, 3351938.24; 784994.31, 3351912.06; 785004.49, 
3351885.18; 785012.96, 3351857.72; 785019.70, 3351829.78; 785024.66, 
3351801.47; 785027.84, 3351772.91; 785029.21, 3351744.20; 785028.79, 
3351715.46; 785026.56, 3351686.81; 785022.53, 3351658.36; 785016.72, 
3351630.21; 785009.16, 3351602.48; 784999.88, 3351575.28; 784988.90, 
3351548.72; 784976.28, 3351522.90; 784962.06, 3351497.93; 784946.30, 
3351473.89; 784929.06, 3351450.90; 784910.42, 3351429.03; 784890.43, 
3351408.37; 784869.19, 3351389.01; 784846.78, 3351371.03; 784823.28, 
3351354.48; 784798.79, 3351339.44; 784773.40, 3351325.98; 784747.21, 
3351314.13; 784720.34, 3351303.95; 784692.88, 3351295.47; 784664.94, 
3351288.74; 784636.63, 3351283.78; 784608.07, 3351280.60.
    (B) Note: Map of Unit FFS-3 follows:

[[Page 242]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10FE09.002

    (xiv) Unit FFS-4, Subunit A--Baker County, Florida. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangle maps Big Gum Swamp and Sanderson North, 
Florida.
    (A) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 17N NAD83 coordinates, 
(E, N): 367084.38, 3347273.00; 367857.36, 3347865.13; 367885.57, 
3347850.05; 367910.67, 3347848.97;

[[Page 243]]

367939.21, 3347845.97; 367967.54, 3347841.08; 367995.46, 3347834.54; 
368022.88, 3347826.11; 368076.03, 3347804.41; 368126.01, 3347776.10; 
368149.58, 3347759.63; 368172.08, 3347741.85; 368213.36, 3347702.00; 
368249.49, 3347657.34; 368279.60, 3347608.54; 368303.41, 3347556.26; 
368320.55, 3347501.41; 368326.47, 3347473.30; 368330.56, 3347444.98; 
368333.52, 3347387.64; 368329.18, 3347330.38; 368324.31, 3347302.07; 
368309.40, 3347246.60; 368287.59, 3347193.55; 368274.29, 3347168.10; 
368242.92, 3347120.04; 368205.82, 3347076.15; 368163.49, 3347037.42; 
368116.61, 3347004.29; 368066.05, 3346977.19; 368012.39, 3346956.67; 
367956.61, 3346943.15; 366301.34, 3346652.76; 366243.94, 3346653.45; 
366187.08, 3346661.34; 366131.66, 3346676.29; 366078.54, 3346698.07; 
366028.58, 3346726.33; 365982.55, 3346760.63; 365941.18, 3346800.43; 
365889.28, 3346869.05; 365862.23, 3346919.69; 365841.75, 3346973.32; 
365828.15, 3347029.09; 365821.64, 3347086.12; 365822.34, 3347143.52; 
365830.23, 3347200.39; 365845.18, 3347255.81; 365866.95, 3347308.92; 
365895.22, 3347358.89; 365948.77, 3347426.23; 365991.09, 3347465.01; 
366037.94, 3347498.19; 366088.58, 3347525.23; 366142.20, 3347545.72; 
367577.52, 3347903.88; 367634.57, 3347910.39; 367692.00, 3347909.70; 
367748.88, 3347901.80; 367804.22, 3347886.84; 367857.36, 3347865.13.
    (B) Note: Map depicting Unit FFS-3, Subunit A is provided at 
paragraph (6)(xv)(B) of this entry.
    (xv) Unit FFS-4, Subunit B: Baker County, Florida. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangle map Sanderson North, Florida.
    (A) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 17N NAD83 coordinates, 
(E, N): 372674.15, 3352411.84; 372686.30, 3351954.90; 372657.58, 
3351955.03; 372628.93, 3351956.98; 372600.46, 3351960.71; 372572.28, 
3351966.23; 372544.50, 3351973.51; 372517.23, 3351982.51; 372490.58, 
3351993.21; 372464.66, 3352005.56; 372439.56, 3352019.52; 372415.39, 
3352035.02; 372392.24, 3352052.02; 372370.20, 3352070.43; 372349.36, 
3352090.19; 372329.81, 3352111.21; 372311.61, 3352133.43; 372294.84, 
3352156.74; 372279.57, 3352181.06; 372265.86, 3352206.29; 372253.76, 
3352232.34; 372243.32, 3352259.09; 372234.58, 3352286.44; 372227.57, 
3352314.29; 372222.33, 3352342.52; 372218.86, 3352371.03; 372217.20, 
3352399.70; 372217.34, 3352428.41; 372219.28, 3352457.06; 372223.02, 
3352485.54; 372228.54, 3352513.72; 372235.81, 3352541.50; 372244.82, 
3352568.77; 372255.52, 3352595.41; 372267.87, 3352621.34; 372281.83, 
3352646.43; 372297.33, 3352670.61; 372314.32, 3352693.76; 372332.73, 
3352715.79; 372352.49, 3352736.63; 372373.52, 3352756.19; 372395.74, 
3352774.38; 372419.05, 3352791.15; 372443.37, 3352806.42; 372468.60, 
3352820.13; 372494.64, 3352832.23; 372521.39, 3352842.68; 372548.75, 
3352851.42; 372576.60, 3352858.42; 372604.83, 3352863.67; 372633.34, 
3352867.13; 372662.00, 3352868.79; 372690.72, 3352868.66; 372719.37, 
3352866.71; 372747.84, 3352862.98; 372776.02, 3352857.46; 372803.80, 
3352850.18; 372831.07, 3352841.18; 372857.72, 3352830.48; 372883.64, 
3352818.12; 372908.74, 3352804.17; 372932.91, 3352788.66; 372956.06, 
3352771.67; 372978.10, 3352753.26; 372998.94, 3352733.50; 373018.49, 
3352712.47; 373036.69, 3352690.26; 373053.46, 3352666.95; 373068.73, 
3352642.63; 373082.44, 3352617.40; 373094.54, 3352591.35; 373104.98, 
3352564.60; 373113.72, 3352537.25; 373120.73, 3352509.40; 373125.97, 
3352481.17; 373129.43, 3352452.66; 373131.10, 3352423.99; 373130.96, 
3352395.28; 373129.02, 3352366.63; 373125.28, 3352338.15; 373119.76, 
3352309.97; 373112.49, 3352282.19; 373103.48, 3352254.92; 373092.78, 
3352228.28; 373080.43, 3352202.35; 373066.47, 3352177.26; 373050.97, 
3352153.08; 373033.98, 3352129.93; 373015.57, 3352107.90; 372995.81, 
3352087.06; 372974.78, 3352067.50; 372952.56, 3352049.31; 372929.25, 
3352032.54; 372904.93, 3352017.27; 372879.70, 3352003.56; 372853.66, 
3351991.46; 372826.91, 3351981.01; 372799.55, 3351972.27; 372771.70, 
3351965.27; 372743.47, 3351960.02; 372714.96, 3351956.56; 372686.30, 
3351954.90.
    (B) Note: Map of Unit FFS-4 follows:

[[Page 244]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10FE09.003

    (7) Frosted flatwood salamander--Berkeley, Charleston, and Jasper 
Counties, South Carolina.
    (i) Unit FFS-5, Subunit A--Jasper County, South Carolina. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangle map Limehouse, South Carolina.

[[Page 245]]

    (A) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 17N, NAD83 coordinates 
(E, N): 497847.74, 3566350.32; 498446.09, 3566295.60; 498439.16, 
3566219.48; 498471.15, 3566178.02; 498514.08, 3566169.34; 498465.77, 
3566061.18; 498347.55, 3566000.50; 498335.98, 3566046.55; 498253.70, 
3566211.29; 498242.87, 3566287.84; 498145.31, 3566241.91; 498093.47, 
3566197.40; 497998.76, 3566059.86; 497934.00, 3565901.25; 497898.67, 
3565909.74; 497750.14, 3565959.14; 497684.01, 3565953.12; 497606.99, 
3565916.86; 497442.74, 3566050.55; 497406.11, 3566214.18; 497415.01, 
3566475.87; 497493.26, 3566667.21; 497540.65, 3566737.25; 497620.82, 
3566798.86; 497732.91, 3566816.47; 497862.02, 3566803.14; 497974.49, 
3566781.53; 497979.42, 3566780.58; 497992.64, 3566773.81; 497990.36, 
3566773.41; 497991.28, 3566768.03; 497987.84, 3566757.91; 497989.91, 
3566748.69; 497989.47, 3566747.94; 497988.60, 3566711.90; 497989.72, 
3566675.82; 498042.65, 3566632.46; 498093.51, 3566608.11; 498098.16, 
3566599.05; 498150.81, 3566572.33; 498174.50, 3566503.10; 498224.43, 
3566468.83; 498297.24, 3566436.54; 498367.33, 3566396.68; 498406.68, 
3566344.87; 498446.09, 3566295.60.
    (B) Note: Map depicting Unit FFS-5, Subunit A is provided at 
paragraph (7)(ii)(B) of this entry.
    (ii) Unit FFS-5, Subunit B--Jasper County, South Carolina. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangle map Hardeeville, South Carolina.
    (A) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 17N, NAD83 coordinates 
(E, N): 489561.94, 3573503.59; 489722.85, 3573967.97; 489813.22, 
3573903.16; 489904.81, 3573840.10; 489926.27, 3573824.52; 489946.02, 
3573806.80; 489963.82, 3573787.14; 489979.50, 3573765.74; 489992.88, 
3573742.83; 490003.82, 3573718.67; 490012.20, 3573693.50; 490017.94, 
3573667.60; 490016.20, 3573652.66; 490013.19, 3573637.92; 490015.98, 
3573632.12; 490025.87, 3573604.58; 490032.87, 3573576.16; 490036.91, 
3573547.18; 490037.03, 3573543.60; 490041.81, 3573520.55; 490043.92, 
3573497.11; 490043.41, 3573474.57; 490040.43, 3573452.23; 490035.01, 
3573430.36; 490027.22, 3573409.21; 490026.77, 3573385.43; 490023.98, 
3573361.81; 490018.89, 3573338.58; 490011.54, 3573315.96; 490002.00, 
3573294.17; 489990.37, 3573273.42; 489980.99, 3573259.55; 489970.67, 
3573246.37; 489959.67, 3573227.66; 489937.65, 3573195.84; 489913.35, 
3573165.71; 489886.91, 3573137.45; 489858.47, 3573111.20; 489828.18, 
3573087.11; 489796.21, 3573065.31; 489762.72, 3573045.91; 489727.90, 
3573029.02; 489644.36, 3573024.70; 489560.73, 3573022.61; 489477.08, 
3573022.74; 489393.46, 3573025.10; 489359.85, 3573040.41; 489327.69, 
3573058.58; 489297.23, 3573079.47; 489268.70, 3573102.92; 489242.31, 
3573128.77; 489218.27, 3573156.80; 489196.75, 3573186.82; 489177.92, 
3573218.59; 489161.92, 3573251.88; 489148.87, 3573286.44; 489138.87, 
3573321.99; 489085.29, 3573601.84; 489092.79, 3573641.38; 489103.20, 
3573680.27; 489116.45, 3573718.27; 489132.48, 3573755.19; 489151.20, 
3573790.83; 489172.50, 3573824.98; 489196.26, 3573857.47; 489214.53, 
3573880.49; 489235.17, 3573901.42; 489257.94, 3573920.01; 489282.57, 
3573936.04; 489308.78, 3573949.34; 489336.26, 3573959.75; 489364.71, 
3573967.15; 489393.78, 3573971.44; 489423.15, 3573972.59; 489452.47, 
3573970.58; 489453.58, 3573970.39; 489507.35, 3573975.17; 489561.29, 
3573977.32; 489615.28, 3573976.84; 489669.17, 3573973.72; 489722.85, 
3573967.97.
    (B) Note: Map of Unit FFS-5 follows:

[[Page 246]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10FE09.004

    (iii) Unit FFS-6--Berkeley County, South Carolina. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangle map Cainhoy, South Carolina.
    (A) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 17N NAD83 coordinates, 
(E, N): 611278.81, 3648848.98; 613513.07, 3649951.18; 613527.98, 
3649895.75; 613535.82, 3649838.89;

[[Page 247]]

613536.47, 3649781.49; 613529.62, 3649718.85; 613516.29, 3649668.71; 
613495.76, 3649615.10; 613468.68, 3649564.49; 613435.47, 3649517.67; 
613416.73, 3649495.91; 613396.66, 3649475.38; 613352.85, 3649438.29; 
613304.74, 3649406.98; 613265.68, 3649387.26; 613198.69, 3649363.59; 
613142.44, 3649352.20; 613087.44, 3649348.04; 613094.83, 3649293.89; 
613095.48, 3649236.49; 613088.93, 3649179.46; 613075.29, 3649123.71; 
613054.77, 3649070.10; 613042.02, 3649044.36; 613027.69, 3649019.49; 
612994.47, 3648972.67; 612955.66, 3648930.38; 612911.85, 3648893.29; 
612888.28, 3648876.88; 612863.74, 3648861.98; 612812.08, 3648836.95; 
609500.97, 3647503.91; 609474.07, 3647493.88; 609446.58, 3647485.56; 
609418.63, 3647478.99; 609390.32, 3647474.18; 609361.76, 3647471.16; 
609333.08, 3647469.94; 609304.37, 3647470.53; 609275.75, 3647472.91; 
609247.34, 3647477.09; 609219.25, 3647483.04; 609191.59, 3647490.74; 
609164.46, 3647500.17; 609137.99, 3647511.28; 609112.26, 3647524.03; 
609087.38, 3647538.37; 609063.45, 3647554.25; 609040.57, 3647571.59; 
609018.82, 3647590.34; 608998.29, 3647610.42; 608979.07, 3647631.75; 
608961.22, 3647654.24; 608944.81, 3647677.81; 608929.92, 3647702.36; 
608916.60, 3647727.80; 608904.91, 3647754.02; 608894.88, 3647780.93; 
608886.56, 3647808.42; 608879.99, 3647836.37; 608875.18, 3647864.68; 
608872.16, 3647893.23; 608870.94, 3647921.92; 608871.52, 3647950.63; 
608873.91, 3647979.25; 608878.08, 3648007.66; 608884.04, 3648035.75; 
608891.74, 3648063.41; 608901.17, 3648090.53; 608912.28, 3648117.01; 
608925.03, 3648142.74; 608939.37, 3648167.62; 608955.25, 3648191.54; 
608972.59, 3648214.43; 608991.34, 3648236.18; 609011.42, 3648256.70; 
609032.74, 3648275.93; 609055.24, 3648293.78; 609078.81, 3648310.18; 
609103.36, 3648325.08; 612197.25, 3649979.02; 612248.91, 3650004.05; 
612275.81, 3650014.08; 612331.23, 3650028.99; 612359.55, 3650033.80; 
612416.80, 3650038.06; 612474.12, 3650035.11; 612502.53, 3650030.94; 
612558.29, 3650017.30; 612611.90, 3649996.77; 612655.36, 3649973.81; 
612691.29, 3650045.52; 612724.50, 3650092.34; 612743.24, 3650114.09; 
612784.64, 3650153.86; 612830.69, 3650188.12; 612855.24, 3650203.02; 
612906.90, 3650228.05; 612961.29, 3650246.41; 613025.74, 3650257.06; 
613074.79, 3650262.06; 613103.50, 3650261.49; 613160.52, 3650254.94; 
613216.28, 3650241.30; 613269.89, 3650220.78; 613295.63, 3650208.03; 
613320.51, 3650193.70; 613367.33, 3650160.49; 613409.62, 3650121.67; 
613428.85, 3650100.35; 613463.11, 3650054.30; 613491.34, 3650004.31; 
613513.07, 3649951.18.
    (B) Note: Map depicting Unit FFS-6 is provided at paragraph 
(7)(iv)(B) of this entry.
    (iv) Unit FFS-7--Charleston County, South Carolina. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangle map, Santee, South Carolina.
    (A) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 17N NAD83 coordinates, 
(E, N): 648576.17, 3668543.24; 648579.86, 3668086.10; 648551.15, 
3668086.77; 648522.54, 3668089.24; 648494.14, 3668093.50; 648466.06, 
3668099.54; 648438.42, 3668107.33; 648411.32, 3668116.84; 648384.87, 
3668128.03; 648359.18, 3668140.86; 648334.34, 3668155.28; 648310.46, 
3668171.23; 648287.62, 3668188.65; 648265.93, 3668207.47; 648245.46, 
3668227.61; 648226.29, 3668249.00; 648208.50, 3668271.55; 648192.17, 
3668295.17; 648177.35, 3668319.77; 648164.11, 3668345.25; 648152.49, 
3668371.52; 648142.54, 3668398.46; 648134.31, 3668425.97; 648127.82, 
3668453.95; 648123.09, 3668482.28; 648120.16, 3668510.84; 648119.03, 
3668539.54; 648119.70, 3668568.25; 648122.17, 3668596.86; 648126.43, 
3668625.26; 648132.47, 3668653.34; 648140.26, 3668680.98; 648149.77, 
3668708.08; 648160.96, 3668734.53; 648173.79, 3668760.22; 648188.21, 
3668785.06; 648204.16, 3668808.94; 648221.58, 3668831.78; 648240.40, 
3668853.47; 648260.54, 3668873.94; 648281.93, 3668893.11; 648304.48, 
3668910.89; 648328.10, 3668927.23; 648352.70, 3668942.05; 648378.18, 
3668955.29; 648404.45, 3668966.91; 648431.39, 3668976.86; 648458.90, 
3668985.09; 648486.88, 3668991.58; 648515.21, 3668996.30; 648543.77, 
3668999.24; 648572.47, 3669000.37; 648601.18, 3668999.70; 648629.80, 
3668997.23; 648658.20, 3668992.97; 648686.27, 3668986.93; 648713.92, 
3668979.14; 648741.02, 3668969.63; 648767.46, 3668958.44; 648793.16, 
3668945.61; 648818.00, 3668931.19; 648841.88, 3668915.24; 648864.71, 
3668897.82; 648886.41, 3668879.00; 648906.88, 3668858.86; 648926.04, 
3668837.47; 648943.83, 3668814.92; 648960.16, 3668791.30; 648974.98, 
3668766.70; 648988.23, 3668741.22; 648999.85, 3668714.96; 649009.79, 
3668688.01; 649018.03, 3668660.50; 649024.52, 3668632.53; 649029.24, 
3668604.20; 649032.17, 3668575.63; 649033.31, 3668546.93; 649032.64, 
3668518.22; 649030.17, 3668489.61; 649025.90, 3668461.21; 649019.86, 
3668433.13; 649012.08, 3668405.49; 649002.57, 3668378.39; 648991.37, 
3668351.94; 648978.54, 3668326.25; 648964.12, 3668301.41; 648948.17, 
3668277.53; 648930.76, 3668254.69; 648911.94, 3668233.00; 648891.79, 
3668212.53; 648870.41, 3668193.36; 648847.86, 3668175.58; 648824.23, 
3668159.24; 648799.63, 3668144.42; 648774.15, 3668131.18; 648747.89, 
3668119.56; 648720.94, 3668109.62; 648693.43, 3668101.38; 648665.46, 
3668094.89; 648637.13, 3668090.17; 648608.56, 3668087.23; 648579.86, 
3668086.10.
    (B) Note: Map of Units FFS-6 and FFS-7 follows:

[[Page 248]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10FE09.005

          Reticulated Flatwoods Salamander (Ambystoma bishopi)

    (1) Critical habitat units are depicted for Calhoun, Holmes, 
Jackson, Santa Rosa, Walton, and Washington Counties in Florida; and 
Baker and Miller Counties in Georgia on the maps below.

[[Page 249]]

    (2) The primary constituent elements of critical habitat for the 
reticulated flatwoods salamander are the habitat components that 
provide:
    (i) Breeding habitat. Small (generally less than 1 to 10 ac (less 
than 0.4 to 4.0 ha)), acidic, depressional standing bodies of freshwater 
(wetlands) that:
    (A) Are seasonally flooded by rainfall in late fall or early winter 
and dry in late spring or early summer;
    (B) Are geographically isolated from other water bodies;
    (C) Occur within pine flatwoods-savanna communities;
    (D) Are dominated by grasses and grass-like species in the ground 
layer and overstories of pond-cypress, blackgum, and slash pine;
    (E) Have a relatively open canopy, necessary to maintain the 
herbaceous component that serves as cover for flatwoods salamander 
larvae and their aquatic invertebrate prey; and
    (F) Typically have a burrowing crayfish fauna, but, due to periodic 
drying, the breeding ponds typically lack large, predatory fish (for 
example, Lepomis (sunfish), Micropterus (bass), Amia calva (bowfin)).
    (ii) Non-breeding habitat. Upland pine flatwoods-savanna habitat 
that is open, mesic woodland maintained by frequent fires and that:
    (A) Is within 1,500 ft (457 m) of adjacent and accessible breeding 
ponds;
    (B) Contains crayfish burrows or other underground habitat that the 
flatwoods salamander depends upon for food, shelter, and protection from 
the elements and predation;
    (C) Has an organic hardpan in the soil profile, which inhibits 
subsurface water penetration and typically results in moist soils with 
water often at or near the surface under normal conditions; and
    (D) Often has wiregrasses as the dominant grasses in the abundant 
herbaceous ground cover, which supports the rich herbivorous 
invertebrates that serve as a food source for the reticulated flatwoods 
salamander.
    (iii) Dispersal habitat. Upland habitat areas between nonbreeding 
and breeding habitat that allows for salamander movement between such 
sites and that is characterized by:
    (A) A mix of vegetation types representing a transition between 
wetland and upland vegetation (ecotone);
    (B) An open canopy and abundant native herbaceous species;
    (C) Moist soils as described in paragraph (2)(ii); and
    (D) Subsurface structure, such as deep litter cover or burrows that 
provide shelter for salamanders during seasonal movements.
    (3) Critical habitat does not include manmade structures (such as 
buildings, aqueducts, runways, roads, and other paved areas) and the 
land on which they are located existing within the legal boundaries on 
the effective date of this rule.
    (4) Critical habitat map units. Data layers defining map units were 
created on a base of USGS 7.5[min] quadrangles, and critical habitat 
units were then mapped using Universal Transverse Mercator (UTM) 
coordinates.
    (5) Note: Index map of critical habitat for the reticulated 
flatwoods salamander follows:

[[Page 250]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10FE09.006

    (6) Reticulated flatwood salamander--Calhoun, Holmes, Jackson, Santa 
Rosa, Walton and Washington Counties, Florida.
    (i) Unit RFS-1--Santa Rosa County, Florida. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle map Garcon Point, Florida.
    (A) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 16N, North American Datum 
of 1983 (NAD83) coordinates, (E, N): 492983.94, 3372029.94; 493099.21, 
3373387.45; 493154.87, 3373453.03; 493198.40, 3373490.44; 493271.61, 
3373535.60; 493351.98, 3373566.25; 493436.67,

[[Page 251]]

3373581.30; 493522.69, 3373580.20; 493551.12, 3373576.25; 493606.97, 
3373563.02; 493686.54, 3373530.34; 493735.56, 3373500.50; 493801.14, 
3373444.83; 493838.55, 3373401.30; 493870.20, 3373353.43; 493905.84, 
3373275.14; 493921.15, 3373219.82; 493930.85, 3373134.35; 493928.32, 
3373077.01; 493918.62, 3373020.45; 493901.91, 3372965.54; 492974.90, 
3370886.40; 492965.68, 3370859.21; 492954.77, 3370832.65; 492942.22, 
3370806.83; 492928.07, 3370781.84; 492912.38, 3370757.80; 492895.22, 
3370734.79; 492876.64, 3370712.90; 492856.72, 3370692.22; 492835.54, 
3370672.83; 492813.19, 3370654.81; 492789.75, 3370638.23; 492765.32, 
3370623.16; 492739.98, 3370609.64; 492713.85, 3370597.75; 492687.03, 
3370587.52; 492659.61, 3370578.99; 492631.71, 3370572.21; 492603.45, 
3370567.18; 492574.92, 3370563.95; 492546.24, 3370562.51; 492517.54, 
3370562.87; 492488.91, 3370565.04; 492460.47, 3370568.99; 492432.34, 
3370574.73; 492404.62, 3370582.22; 492377.43, 3370591.44; 492350.87, 
3370602.35; 492320.06, 3370618.11; 492291.54, 3370614.88; 492262.86, 
3370613.44; 492234.15, 3370613.80; 492205.52, 3370615.97; 492177.09, 
3370619.93; 492148.96, 3370625.66; 492121.24, 3370633.16; 492094.05, 
3370642.37; 492067.49, 3370653.28; 492041.67, 3370665.83; 492016.69, 
3370679.98; 491992.64, 3370695.67; 491969.63, 3370712.84; 491947.74, 
3370731.42; 491927.07, 3370751.34; 491907.68, 3370772.52; 491889.66, 
3370794.87; 491873.08, 3370818.31; 491858.01, 3370842.75; 491850.37, 
3370857.07; 491865.61, 3370901.72; 491918.43, 3370965.16; 491965.55, 
3371021.75; 492011.53, 3371083.74; 492053.38, 3371140.16; 492103.93, 
3371212.08; 492141.72, 3371264.53; 492176.37, 3371309.64; 492207.14, 
3371351.35; 492243.74, 3371397.83; 492283.27, 3371453.23; 492331.51, 
3371520.83; 493069.37, 3373338.43; 493099.21, 3373387.45.
    (B) Note: Map depicting Unit RFS-1 is provided at paragraph 
(6)(v)(B) of this entry.
    (ii) Unit RFS-2, Subunit A--Santa Rosa County, Florida. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangle map Harold, Florida.
    (A) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 16N, North American Datum 
of 1983 (NAD83) coordinates, (E, N): 501542.20, 3392876.13; 501578.50, 
3392420.55; 501549.82, 3392419.17; 501521.11, 3392419.59; 501492.49, 
3392421.82; 501464.06, 3392425.84; 501435.94, 392431.63; 501408.24, 
3392439.18; 501381.07, 3392448.45; 501354.53, 3392459.42; 501328.74, 
3392472.02; 501303.78, 3392486.22; 501279.77, 3392501.96; 501256.80, 
392519.18; 501234.95, 3392537.80; 501214.31, 3392557.76; 501194.97, 
3392578.98; 501176.99, 3392601.37; 501160.46, 3392624.84; 501145.44, 
3392649.31; 501131.98, 392674.67; 501120.14, 3392700.83; 501109.96, 
3392727.67; 501101.49, 3392755.11; 501094.76, 3392783.02; 501089.80, 
3392811.30; 501086.62, 3392839.83; 501085.24, 392868.51; 501085.25, 
3392868.93; 501085.66, 3392897.21; 501086.27, 3392904.98; 501087.89, 
3392925.84; 501091.91, 3392954.27; 501097.70, 3392982.39; 501105.25, 
393010.09; 501114.52, 3393037.26; 501125.49, 3393063.80; 501138.09, 
3393089.59; 501152.29, 3393114.54; 501168.03, 3393138.56; 501185.25, 
3393161.53; 501203.87, 393183.38; 501223.83, 3393204.02; 501245.05, 
3393223.36; 501267.44, 3393241.33; 501290.91, 3393257.87; 501315.38, 
3393272.89; 501340.74, 3393286.35; 501366.90, 393298.19; 501393.74, 
3393308.36; 501421.18, 3393316.83; 501449.09, 3393323.56; 501477.37, 
3393328.53; 501505.90, 3393331.70; 501534.58, 3393333.08; 501563.29, 
393332.66; 501584.95, 3393330.98; 501591.91, 3393330.44; 501613.98, 
3393327.32; 501620.34, 3393326.42; 501648.46, 3393320.62; 501676.16, 
3393313.07; 501703.33, 393303.80; 501729.87, 3393292.84; 501755.66, 
3393280.23; 501780.61, 3393266.03; 501804.63, 3393250.29; 501827.60, 
3393233.08; 501849.45, 3393214.45; 501870.09, 393194.49; 501889.43, 
3393173.27; 501907.41, 3393150.89; 501923.94, 3393127.41; 501938.96, 
3393102.95; 501952.42, 3393077.59; 501964.26, 3393051.43; 501974.44, 
393024.58; 501982.91, 3392997.15; 501989.64, 3392969.24; 501994.60, 
3392940.96; 501997.78, 3392912.43; 501999.16, 3392883.75; 501998.73, 
3392855.04; 501996.51, 392826.42; 501992.49, 3392797.99; 501986.70, 
3392769.87; 501979.15, 3392742.17; 501969.87, 3392715.00; 501958.91, 
3392688.46; 501946.31, 3392662.66; 501932.11, 392637.71; 501916.37, 
3392613.70; 501899.15, 3392590.72; 501880.52, 3392568.87; 501860.56, 
3392548.24; 501839.35, 3392528.89; 501816.96, 3392510.92; 501793.48, 
392494.39; 501769.02, 3392479.36; 501743.66, 3392465.90; 501717.50, 
3392454.06; 501690.66, 3392443.89; 501663.22, 3392435.42; 501635.31, 
3392428.69; 501607.03, 3392423.73; 501578.50, 3392420.55.
    (B) Note: Map depicting Unit RFS-2, Subunit A is provided at 
paragraph (6)(v)(B) of this entry.
    (iii) Unit RFS-2, Subunit B--Santa Rosa County, Florida. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangle map Floridale, Florida.
    (A) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 16N NAD83 coordinates, 
(E, N): 518978.93, 3390847.46; 519015.23, 3390391.88; 518986.55, 
3390390.50; 518957.84, 3390390.92; 518929.22, 3390393.14; 518900.79, 
3390397.16; 518872.67, 390402.96; 518844.97, 3390410.51; 518817.80, 
3390419.78; 518791.26, 3390430.74; 518765.46, 3390443.35; 518740.51, 
3390457.55; 518716.50, 3390473.29; 518693.52, 3390490.50; 518671.67, 
3390509.13; 518651.04, 3390529.09; 518631.69, 3390550.31; 518613.72, 
3390572.70; 518597.19, 3390596.17; 518582.16, 3390620.64; 518568.70, 
3390646.00; 518556.86, 3390672.15; 518546.69, 3390699.00; 518538.22, 
3390726.43; 518531.49, 3390754.34; 518526.53, 3390782.62; 518523.35, 
3390811.16; 518521.97, 3390839.83; 518522.39, 3390868.54; 518524.62, 
3390897.17; 518528.63, 3390925.59; 518534.43, 3390953.71; 518541.98, 
3390981.41; 518551.25, 3391008.59; 518562.21, 3391035.12; 518574.82, 
3391060.92; 518589.02, 3391085.87; 518604.76, 3391109.88; 518621.98, 
3391132.86; 518640.60, 3391154.71; 518660.56, 3391175.35; 518681.78, 
3391194.69; 518704.17, 3391212.66; 518727.64, 3391229.19; 518752.11, 
3391244.22; 518777.47, 3391257.68; 518803.62, 3391269.52; 518830.47, 
3391279.69; 518857.91, 3391288.16; 518885.82, 3391294.89; 518914.10, 
3391299.86; 518942.63, 3391303.03;

[[Page 252]]

518971.31, 3391304.41; 519000.02, 3391303.99; 519028.64, 3391301.77; 
519057.07, 3391297.75; 519085.19, 3391291.95; 519112.89, 3391284.40; 
519140.06, 3391275.13; 519166.60, 3391264.17; 519192.39, 3391251.56; 
519217.35, 3391237.36; 519241.36, 3391221.62; 519264.33, 3391204.41; 
519286.18, 3391185.78; 519306.82, 3391165.82; 519326.16, 3391144.60; 
519344.14, 3391122.21; 519360.67, 3391098.74; 519375.69, 3391074.28; 
519389.16, 3391048.92; 519401.00, 3391022.77; 519410.33, 3390998.13; 
519411.17, 3390995.92; 519419.64, 3390968.48; 519426.37, 3390940.57; 
519431.34, 3390912.29; 519434.51, 3390883.76; 519435.89, 3390855.08; 
519435.47, 3390826.37; 519433.25, 3390797.7493; 519429.2274, 
3390769.3210; 519423.4325, 3390741.2012; 519415.8831, 3390713.50; 
519406.61, 3390686.33; 519395.65, 3390659.79; 519383.04, 3390634.00; 
519368.84, 3390609.04; 519353.10, 3390585.03; 519335.89, 3390562.06; 
519317.26, 3390540.21; 519297.30, 3390519.57; 519276.08, 3390500.23; 
519253.69, 3390482.25; 519230.22, 3390465.72; 519205.75, 3390450.70; 
519180.39, 3390437.24; 519154.24, 3390425.40; 519127.39, 3390415.22; 
519099.96, 3390406.75; 519072.05, 3390400.02; 519043.77, 3390395.06; 
519025.17, 3390392.99; 519015.23, 3390391.88.
    (B) Note: Map depicting Unit RFS-2, Subunit B is provided at 
paragraph (6)(v)(B) of this entry.
    (iv) Unit RFS-3, Subunit A--Santa Rosa County, Florida. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangle map Holley, Florida.
    (A) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 16N NAD83 coordinates, 
(E, N): 503177.78, 3363967.21; 503665.03, 3364056.93; 503673.05, 
3364029.36; 503679.32, 3364001.35; 503683.82, 3363972.99; 503686.53, 
3363944.41; 503687.44, 3363915.71; 503694.98, 3363896.36; 503703.23, 
3363884.01; 503713.36, 3363875.67; 503720.87, 3363866.60; 503726.39, 
3363857.48; 503733.34, 3363843.78; 503741.25, 3363818.20; 503752.72, 
3363782.15; 503757.95, 3363757.83; 503766.30, 3363741.51; 503653.07, 
3363742.06; 503644.01, 3363721.11; 503630.98, 3363695.52; 503615.44, 
3363669.75; 503614.55, 3363724.18; 503603.43, 3363777.35; 503601.27, 
3363799.83; 503594.64, 3363834.69; 503563.00, 3363831.09; 503563.97, 
3363824.67; 503558.81, 3363820.93; 503559.46, 3363811.37; 503555.68, 
3363800.73; 503543.49, 3363787.96; 503527.75, 3363771.89; 503514.02, 
3363772.76; 503464.40, 3363773.57; 503448.85, 3363749.85; 503448.44, 
3363558.27; 503320.62, 3363559.79; 503273.43, 3363560.71; 503273.49, 
3363572.75; 503279.14, 3363573.95; 503279.03, 3363592.72; 503284.42, 
3363598.55; 503277.70, 3363622.86; 503272.12, 3363658.96; 503257.00, 
3363659.53; 503220.26, 3363657.70; 503211.46, 3363656.94; 503211.34, 
3363632.86; 503198.99, 3363600.69; 503189.65, 3363605.42; 503175.37, 
3363661.31; 503174.55, 3363690.00; 503175.30, 3363735.30; 503170.12, 
3363757.64; 503161.91, 3363768.67; 503127.37, 3363773.12; 503100.70, 
3363791.93; 503033.44, 3363790.29; 502978.97, 3363827.84; 502954.55, 
3363827.72; 502938.01, 3363827.31; 502928.95, 3363818.51; 502929.56, 
3363685.06; 502929.74, 3363569.45; 502821.80, 3363570.13; 502821.27, 
3363591.92; 502814.36, 3363603.64; 502789.75, 3363608.33; 502751.22, 
3363613.34; 502704.61, 3363624.01; 502670.48, 3363639.13; 502640.35, 
3363788.37; 502630.38, 3363844.28; 502624.76, 3363884.45; 502620.15, 
3363937.85; 502612.79, 3363995.15; 502605.87, 3364010.90; 502632.10, 
3364030.43; 502667.63, 3364049.11; 502682.24, 3364047.48; 502713.23, 
3364052.86; 502771.52, 3364051.63; 502794.68, 3364052.20; 502805.45, 
3364083.69; 502816.85, 3364110.04; 502829.87, 3364135.63; 502844.48, 
3364160.34; 502860.61, 3364184.09; 502878.20, 3364206.79; 502897.18, 
3364228.33; 502917.48, 3364248.63; 502939.01, 3364267.63; 502961.69, 
3364285.23; 502985.43, 3364301.38; 503010.14, 3364316.00; 503035.71, 
3364329.04; 503062.06, 3364340.45; 503089.07, 3364350.18; 503116.64, 
3364358.20; 503144.65, 3364364.47; 503173.01, 3364368.97; 503201.59, 
3364371.69; 503230.29, 3364372.60; 503258.99, 3364371.70; 503287.57, 
3364369.01; 503315.93, 3364364.53; 503343.95, 3364358.27; 503371.52, 
3364350.27; 503398.54, 3364340.55; 503424.89, 3364329.16; 503450.47, 
3364316.13; 503475.19, 3364301.52; 503498.94, 3364285.39; 503521.63, 
3364267.80; 503543.18, 3364248.82; 503563.48, 3364228.53; 503582.48, 
3364207.00; 503600.08, 3364184.32; 503616.23, 3364160.57; 503630.85, 
3364135.87; 503643.89, 3364110.29; 503655.30, 3364083.94; 503665.03, 
3364056.93.
    (B) Note: Map depicting Unit RFS-3, Subunit A is provided at 
paragraph (6)(v)(B) of this entry.
    (v) Unit RFS-3, Subunit B--Santa Rosa County, Florida. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangle map Holley, Florida.
    (A) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 16N NAD83 coordinates, 
(E, N): 507814.78, 3364090.74; 508038.93, 3364260.63; 508159.63, 
3364258.28; 508158.08, 3364132.67; 508156.37, 3364018.27; 508155.42, 
3363957.25; 508106.06, 3363958.06; 508068.35, 3363958.68; 508035.07, 
3363959.24; 507887.21, 3363961.45; 507885.38, 3363855.42; 507685.15, 
3363855.35; 507684.90, 3363837.37; 507612.21, 3363836.12; 507612.77, 
3363907.73; 507612.90, 3363927.61; 507638.84, 3363928.05; 507638.99, 
3363940.21; 507583.59, 3364018.73; 507491.86, 3364016.60; 507493.27, 
3364096.55; 507471.91, 3364096.05; 507455.12, 3364095.65; 507457.47, 
3364243.92; 507529.64, 3364243.19; 507566.34, 3364270.07; 507830.20, 
3364271.25; 507890.35, 3364271.37; 507890.09, 3364262.80; 507967.94, 
3364261.67; 508038.93, 3364260.63.
    (B) Note: Map of Units RFS-1, RFS-2, and RFS-3 follows:

[[Page 253]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10FE09.007

    (vi) Unit RFS-6, Subunit A--Walton County, Florida. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangle map Bruce, Florida.
    (A) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 16N, NAD83 coordinates 
(E, N): 601647.75, 3373576.77; 601493.33, 3374109.03; 601522.04, 
3374108.60; 601550.67, 3374106.38; 601579.10, 3374102.36; 601607.23, 
3374096.56; 601634.93, 3374089.01; 601662.11, 3374079.74; 601688.65, 
3374068.77; 601714.44, 3374056.17; 601739.40, 3374041.96; 601763.41, 
3374026.22; 601786.39, 3374009.00; 601808.25, 3373990.37;

[[Page 254]]

601828.89, 3373970.41; 601848.23, 3373949.19; 601866.21, 3373926.80; 
601882.74, 3373903.32; 601897.76, 3373878.85; 601911.23, 3373853.49; 
601923.07, 3373827.33; 601933.24, 3373800.48; 601941.71, 3373773.04; 
601948.44, 3373745.13; 601953.40, 3373716.84; 601956.58, 3373688.31; 
601957.96, 3373659.62; 601957.54, 3373630.91; 601955.31, 3373602.29; 
601951.29, 3373573.85; 601945.50, 3373545.73; 601937.95, 3373518.03; 
601932.81, 3373498.30; 602077.97, 3373412.75; 602148.71, 3373370.38; 
602189.04, 3373346.29; 602226.02, 3373324.08; 602242.81, 3373314.59; 
602251.57, 3373308.87; 602249.73, 3373302.87; 602248.52, 3373298.22; 
602244.07, 3373290.84; 602232.30, 3373285.25; 602226.49, 3373279.16; 
602219.36, 3373273.03; 602212.40, 3373260.30; 602203.50, 3373245.54; 
602189.89, 3373207.54; 602185.07, 3373188.25; 602182.00, 3373178.92; 
602174.92, 3373170.82; 602167.16, 3373163.35; 602161.52, 3373150.66; 
602159.44, 3373128.14; 602152.20, 3373073.77; 602147.72, 3373041.28; 
602068.26, 3373014.83; 602046.87, 3372996.45; 602018.93, 3372975.27; 
601977.95, 3372972.42; 601920.70, 3372984.20; 601893.12, 3373001.35; 
601867.36, 3373025.15; 601844.26, 3373048.36; 601816.50, 3373072.78; 
601799.99, 3373071.04; 601789.68, 3373059.55; 601764.95, 3373042.41; 
601751.13, 3373012.99; 601725.10, 3372994.49; 601700.34, 3373005.10; 
601680.55, 3373028.40; 601659.92, 3373058.94; 601630.17, 3373083.30; 
601595.72, 3373083.76; 601568.63, 3373081.76; 601562.85, 3373153.48; 
601546.32, 3373152.40; 601512.87, 3373139.67; 601482.57, 3373133.62; 
601457.54, 3373128.37; 601443.06, 3373124.70; 601441.20, 3373198.67; 
601422.79, 3373201.67; 601394.66, 3373207.46; 601366.96, 3373215.01; 
601339.78, 3373224.29; 601313.25, 3373235.25; 601287.45, 3373247.86; 
601262.49, 3373262.06; 601238.48, 3373277.81; 601215.50, 3373295.02; 
601193.65, 3373313.65; 601173.01, 3373333.62; 601153.66, 3373354.84; 
601135.69, 3373377.23; 601119.15, 3373400.70; 601104.13, 3373425.17; 
601090.67, 3373450.54; 601078.83, 3373476.70; 601068.65, 3373503.55; 
601060.18, 3373530.98; 601053.45, 3373558.90; 601048.49, 3373587.18; 
601045.31, 3373615.72; 601043.93, 3373644.40; 601044.35, 3373673.11; 
601046.58, 3373701.74; 601050.60, 3373730.17; 601056.39, 3373758.30; 
601063.95, 3373786.00; 601073.22, 3373813.17; 601084.18, 3373839.71; 
601096.79, 3373865.51; 601111.00, 3373890.47; 601126.74, 3373914.48; 
601143.96, 3373937.46; 601162.58, 3373959.31; 601182.55, 3373979.95; 
601203.77, 3373999.30; 601226.16, 3374017.27; 601249.64, 3374033.81; 
601274.11, 3374048.83; 601299.47, 3374062.29; 601325.63, 3374074.13; 
601352.48, 3374084.31; 601379.92, 3374092.78; 601407.83, 3374099.51; 
601436.11, 3374104.47; 601464.65, 3374107.65; 601493.33, 3374109.03.
    (B) Note: Map depicting Unit RFS-6, Subunit A is provided at 
paragraph (6)(ix)(B) of this entry.
    (vii) Unit RFS-6, Subunit B--Washington County, Florida. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangle map Bruce, Florida.
    (A) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 16N, NAD83 coordinates 
(E, N): 607444.16, 3365585.74; 607435.59, 3366042.75; 607464.30, 
3366042.38; 607492.93, 3366040.22; 607521.37, 3366036.26; 607549.51, 
3366030.52; 607577.23, 3366023.03; 607604.42, 3366013.81; 607630.98, 
3366002.90; 607656.81, 3365990.35; 607681.79, 3365976.20; 607705.84, 
3365960.50; 607728.86, 3365943.33; 607750.75, 3365924.75; 607771.43, 
3365904.83; 607790.82, 3365883.65; 607808.84, 3365861.30; 607825.42, 
3365837.85; 607840.50, 3365813.42; 607854.02, 3365788.08; 607865.91, 
3365761.94; 607876.14, 3365735.11; 607884.67, 3365707.70; 607891.46, 
3365679.79; 607896.48, 3365651.52; 607899.72, 3365622.99; 607901.16, 
3365594.31; 607900.79, 3365565.60; 607898.63, 3365536.97; 607894.67, 
3365508.53; 607888.93, 3365480.39; 607881.44, 3365452.67; 607872.22, 
3365425.48; 607861.31, 3365398.91; 607848.76, 3365373.09; 607834.61, 
3365348.10; 607818.91, 3365324.06; 607801.74, 3365301.04; 607783.16, 
3365279.15; 607763.24, 3365258.47; 607742.06, 3365239.08; 607719.71, 
3365221.06; 607696.26, 3365204.48; 607671.83, 3365189.40; 607646.49, 
3365175.88; 607620.36, 3365163.99; 607593.53, 3365153.76; 607566.11, 
3365145.23; 607538.21, 3365138.44; 607509.93, 3365133.42; 607481.40, 
3365130.18; 607452.72, 3365128.74; 607424.01, 3365129.11; 607395.38, 
3365131.27; 607366.94, 3365135.23; 607338.80, 3365140.97; 607311.08, 
3365148.46; 607283.89, 3365157.68; 607257.33, 3365168.59; 607231.50, 
3365181.14; 607206.52, 3365195.29; 607182.47, 3365210.99; 607159.45, 
3365228.16; 607137.56, 3365246.74; 607116.88, 3365266.66; 607097.49, 
3365287.84; 607079.47, 3365310.19; 607062.89, 3365333.64; 607047.81, 
3365358.07; 607034.30, 3365383.41; 607022.40, 3365409.54; 607012.17, 
3365436.37; 607003.64, 3365463.79; 606996.85, 3365491.69; 606991.83, 
3365519.97; 606988.59, 3365548.50; 606987.15, 3365577.18; 606987.52, 
3365605.89; 606989.68, 3365634.52; 606993.64, 3365662.96; 606999.38, 
3365691.10; 607006.87, 3365718.82; 607016.09, 3365746.01; 607027.00, 
3365772.57; 607039.55, 3365798.40; 607053.70, 3365823.38; 607069.40, 
3365847.43; 607086.57, 3365870.45; 607105.15, 3365892.34; 607125.07, 
3365913.02; 607146.25, 3365932.41; 607168.60, 3365950.43; 607192.05, 
3365967.01; 607216.48, 3365982.09; 607241.82, 3365995.60; 607267.95, 
3366007.50; 607294.78, 3366017.73; 607322.20, 3366026.26; 607350.10, 
3366033.05; 607378.38, 3366038.07; 607406.91, 3366041.31; 607435.59, 
3366042.75.
    (B) Note: Map depicting Unit RFS-6, Subunit B is provided at 
paragraph (6)(ix)(B) of this entry.
    (viii) Unit RFS-7, Subunit A--Holmes County, Florida. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangle map Bonifay, Florida.
    (A) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 16N, NAD83 coordinates 
(E, N): 630429.91, 3415116.39; 630422.24, 3415573.43; 630450.95, 
3415573.01; 630479.58, 3415570.79; 630508.01, 3415566.77; 630536.14, 
3415560.98; 630563.84, 3415553.43; 630591.02, 3415544.16; 630617.56, 
3415533.20; 630643.36, 3415520.59; 630668.32, 3415506.39; 630692.34, 
3415490.65; 630715.32, 3415473.44; 630737.18, 3415454.81; 630757.82, 
3415434.85; 630777.17, 3415413.63;

[[Page 255]]

630795.15, 3415391.24; 630811.68, 3415367.76; 630826.71, 3415343.29; 
630840.18, 3415317.93; 630852.02, 3415291.77; 630862.20, 3415264.92; 
630870.67, 3415237.48; 630877.41, 3415209.57; 630882.38, 3415181.28; 
630885.56, 3415152.74; 630886.94, 3415124.06; 630886.52, 3415095.35; 
630884.30, 3415066.72; 630880.28, 3415038.28; 630874.49, 3415010.16; 
630866.94, 3414982.45; 630857.67, 3414955.27; 630846.71, 3414928.73; 
630834.11, 3414902.93; 630819.91, 3414877.97; 630804.17, 3414853.95; 
630786.95, 3414830.97; 630768.32, 3414809.11; 630748.36, 3414788.47; 
630727.15, 3414769.12; 630704.75, 3414751.14; 630681.28, 3414734.60; 
630656.81, 3414719.57; 630631.45, 3414706.11; 630605.29, 3414694.26; 
630578.44, 3414684.08; 630551.00, 3414675.61; 630523.09, 3414668.88; 
630494.81, 3414663.91; 630466.27, 3414660.73; 630437.59, 3414659.34; 
630408.87, 3414659.76; 630380.24, 3414661.99; 630351.81, 3414666.00; 
630323.69, 3414671.79; 630295.98, 3414679.34; 630268.80, 3414688.61; 
630242.26, 3414699.58; 630216.46, 3414712.18; 630191.50, 3414726.38; 
630167.49, 3414742.12; 630144.51, 3414759.34; 630122.65, 3414777.97; 
630102.01, 3414797.93; 630082.66, 3414819.15; 630064.68, 3414841.54; 
630048.14, 3414865.01; 630033.11, 3414889.48; 630019.65, 3414914.85; 
630007.80, 3414941.01; 629997.63, 3414967.86; 629989.15, 3414995.29; 
629982.42, 3415023.21; 629977.45, 3415051.49; 629974.27, 3415080.03; 
629972.89, 3415108.72; 629973.31, 3415137.43; 629975.53, 3415166.06; 
629979.54, 3415194.49; 629985.34, 3415222.62; 629992.88, 3415250.32; 
630002.16, 3415277.50; 630013.12, 3415304.04; 630025.72, 3415329.85; 
630039.92, 3415354.81; 630055.66, 3415378.82; 630072.88, 3415401.81; 
630091.50, 3415423.66; 630111.46, 3415444.31; 630132.68, 3415463.65; 
630155.07, 3415481.63; 630178.55, 3415498.17; 630203.02, 3415513.20; 
630228.38, 3415526.67; 630254.54, 3415538.51; 630281.39, 3415548.69; 
630308.82, 3415557.16; 630336.74, 3415563.90; 630365.02, 3415568.87; 
630393.56, 3415572.05; 630422.24, 3415573.43.
    (B) Note: Map depicting Unit RFS-7, Subunit A is provided at 
paragraph (6)(ix)(B) of this entry.
    (ix) Unit RFS-7, Subunit B--Washington County, Florida. From USGS 
1:24,000 quadrangle map Millers Ferry, Florida.
    (A) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 16N, NAD83 coordinates 
(E, N): 618603.41, 3387429.45; 618699.68, 3387966.18; 618708.26, 
3387969.49; 618723.71, 3387970.50; 618726.33, 3387965.00; 618725.78, 
3387937.80; 618728.76, 3387918.09; 618732.40, 3387896.55; 618738.22, 
3387886.81; 618755.97, 3387870.57; 618776.73, 3387857.50; 618803.06, 
3387844.57; 618839.32, 3387830.66; 618872.53, 3387815.43; 618904.43, 
3387802.63; 618918.85, 3387795.58; 618926.43, 3387789.59; 618930.96, 
3387781.67; 618931.79, 3387748.94; 618930.13, 3387716.76; 618932.43, 
3387674.79; 618932.53, 3387646.37; 618934.03, 3387611.79; 618948.87, 
3387588.07; 618962.97, 3387569.26; 618980.28, 3387545.60; 618995.92, 
3387515.09; 619007.01, 3387492.50; 619018.24, 3387464.98; 619025.65, 
3387441.06; 619035.64, 3387413.50; 619042.95, 3387393.91; 619052.14, 
3387373.13; 619059.11, 3387348.17; 619055.09, 3387319.74; 619049.30, 
3387291.61; 619041.75, 3387263.91; 619032.48, 3387236.73; 619021.51, 
3387210.19; 619008.91, 3387184.39; 618994.70, 3387159.43; 618978.96, 
3387135.42; 618961.74, 3387112.44; 618943.12, 3387090.58; 618923.15, 
3387069.94; 618901.93, 3387050.59; 618879.54, 3387032.62; 618856.06, 
3387016.08; 618831.60, 3387001.05; 618806.23, 3386987.59; 618780.07, 
3386975.75; 618753.22, 3386965.57; 618725.78, 3386957.10; 618697.87, 
3386950.37; 618669.59, 3386945.41; 618641.05, 3386942.23; 618612.37, 
3386940.85; 618583.65, 3386941.27; 618555.02, 3386943.49; 618526.59, 
3386947.51; 618498.47, 3386953.31; 618470.76, 3386960.86; 618443.59, 
3386970.13; 618417.05, 3386981.10; 618391.25, 3386993.70; 618366.29, 
3387007.91; 618342.28, 3387023.65; 618319.30, 3387040.87; 618297.44, 
3387059.49; 618276.80, 3387079.46; 618257.46, 3387100.68; 618239.48, 
3387123.07; 618222.95, 3387146.55; 618207.92, 3387171.02; 618194.46, 
3387196.38; 618182.61, 3387222.54; 618172.44, 3387249.39; 618163.97, 
3387276.83; 618157.24, 3387304.75; 618152.27, 3387333.03; 618149.09, 
3387361.57; 618147.71, 3387390.25; 618148.13, 3387418.97; 618150.36, 
3387447.59; 618154.38, 3387476.03; 618160.17, 3387504.15; 618167.72, 
3387531.86; 618177.00, 3387559.03; 618187.96, 3387585.58; 618200.57, 
3387611.37; 618214.77, 3387636.33; 618230.51, 3387660.35; 618247.73, 
3387683.33; 618266.36, 3387705.18; 618286.32, 3387725.82; 618307.54, 
3387745.17; 618329.93, 3387763.15; 618353.41, 3387779.68; 618377.88, 
3387794.71; 618403.24, 3387808.17; 618429.40, 3387820.02; 618456.25, 
3387830.19; 618483.69, 3387838.66; 618511.60, 3387845.39; 618552.33, 
3387867.90; 618598.24, 3387912.94; 618635.11, 3387948.48; 618647.90, 
3387956.84; 618666.90, 3387964.74; 618689.14, 3387966.53; 618699.68, 
3387966.18.
    (B) Note: Map of Units RFS-6 and RFS-7 follows:

[[Page 256]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10FE09.008

    (x) Unit RFS-8, Subunit A--Jackson County, Florida. From USGS 
1:24,000 quadrangle map Cottondale West, Florida.
    (A) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 16N, NAD83 coordinates 
(E, N): 652825.49, 3407068.83; 652825.48, 3407068.83; 653303.68, 
3406605.29; 653038.02, 3406583.61;

[[Page 257]]

653039.18, 3406691.92; 653028.57, 3406721.18; 653006.55, 3406734.40; 
652986.39, 3406751.60; 652981.54, 3406786.91; 652980.43, 3406830.19; 
652979.67, 3406859.70; 652965.63, 3406869.19; 652941.78, 3406876.45; 
652916.11, 3406877.76; 652884.59, 3406876.95; 652859.18, 3406868.42; 
652831.89, 3406855.91; 652800.52, 3406849.20; 652767.02, 3406848.34; 
652747.17, 3406853.74; 652732.87, 3406873.06; 652724.33, 3406898.44; 
652743.83, 3406906.81; 652763.39, 3406913.22; 652758.74, 3406940.66; 
652753.99, 3406972.04; 652760.86, 3407011.59; 652764.09, 3407039.23; 
652761.57, 3407060.82; 652749.49, 3407070.36; 652725.65, 3407077.62; 
652709.68, 3407085.09; 652701.20, 3407108.49; 652698.57, 3407134.02; 
652696.09, 3407153.64; 652674.12, 3407164.89; 652656.23, 3407170.34; 
652642.04, 3407185.72; 652620.14, 3407175.05; 652594.55, 3407165.80; 
652583.46, 3407159.57; 652578.33, 3407152.82; 652573.28, 3407143.44; 
652569.58, 3407132.77; 652565.24, 3407121.42; 652555.67, 3407107.29; 
652545.45, 3407092.48; 652535.85, 3407079.68; 652526.16, 3407070.17; 
652517.58, 3407069.29; 652507.43, 3407077.62; 652495.88, 3407089.23; 
652486.90, 3407103.54; 652483.22, 3407117.99; 652480.80, 3407135.12; 
652478.24, 3407157.53; 652480.37, 3407177.42; 652480.51, 3407197.92; 
652475.78, 3407201.76; 652465.72, 3407206.79; 652458.25, 3407213.87; 
652449.33, 3407226.21; 652438.05, 3407227.24; 652428.85, 3407224.36; 
652417.75, 3407218.12; 652411.37, 3407208.70; 652407.64, 3407199.35; 
652404.20, 3407178.77; 652402.01, 3407160.86; 652397.94, 3407138.94; 
652395.00, 3407124.32; 652386.76, 3407110.23; 652373.71, 3407102.62; 
652360.44, 3407103.60; 652343.53, 3407117.72; 652333.43, 3407124.07; 
652322.15, 3407125.10; 652314.14, 3407127.54; 652305.95, 3407137.25; 
652296.58, 3407140.97; 652287.20, 3407145.36; 652274.56, 3407147.68; 
652268.06, 3407142.89; 652261.53, 3407139.41; 652255.03, 3407134.62; 
652248.60, 3407127.18; 652243.50, 3407119.78; 652238.44, 3407110.39; 
652237.44, 3407097.81; 652241.12, 3407083.36; 652242.82, 3407068.86; 
652245.24, 3407051.73; 652244.24, 3407039.14; 652236.01, 3407024.39; 
652221.05, 3407014.09; 652203.25, 3407010.99; 652190.56, 3407015.29; 
652182.47, 3407021.03; 652175.50, 3407034.74; 652172.53, 3407047.22; 
652173.53, 3407059.81; 652170.75, 3407065.03; 652164.64, 3407070.82; 
652155.26, 3407075.21; 652145.32, 3407075.61; 652133.44, 3407073.99; 
652119.02, 3407068.33; 652106.60, 3407062.06; 652100.97, 3407049.36; 
652097.32, 3407036.70; 652077.38, 3407039.50; 652052.56, 3407052.08; 
652042.52, 3407056.45; 652034.12, 3407074.09; 652048.98, 3407088.35; 
652061.11, 3407105.85; 652085.32, 3407117.05; 652106.16, 3407130.80; 
652105.19, 3407142.68; 652106.02, 3407161.87; 652112.91, 3407177.25; 
652135.31, 3407181.79; 652182.83, 3407187.64; 652215.86, 3407190.47; 
652257.41, 3407196.82; 652295.04, 3407201.09; 652314.35, 3407205.65; 
652308.49, 3407218.63; 652292.89, 3407233.43; 652266.52, 3407254.57; 
652238.70, 3407280.96; 652220.19, 3407305.61; 652212.44, 3407323.92; 
652210.01, 3407341.05; 652209.77, 3407350.30; 652210.11, 3407362.87; 
652213.26, 3407375.54; 652299.80, 3407383.66; 652374.80, 3407395.52; 
652472.45, 3407408.60; 652594.12, 3407426.43; 652663.66, 3407439.95; 
652719.80, 3407445.35; 652756.73, 3407450.93; 652822.76, 3407457.91; 
652861.06, 3407462.20; 652917.52, 3407467.64; 652905.20, 3407362.30; 
652901.54, 3407298.74; 652968.31, 3407276.65; 653003.40, 3407251.11; 
653001.57, 3407219.33; 652994.98, 3407166.27; 653006.18, 3407142.76; 
653022.74, 3407116.74; 653023.96, 3407069.17; 653009.23, 3407023.84; 
653002.04, 3406994.56; 653028.78, 3406984.67; 653046.56, 3407014.22; 
653069.77, 3407038.61; 653101.19, 3407052.64; 653145.98, 3407061.72; 
653188.39, 3407060.16; 653209.09, 3407079.20; 653227.21, 3407095.54; 
653233.05, 3407074.53; 653231.22, 3407042.75; 653237.12, 3407019.10; 
653258.77, 3407001.15; 653290.87, 3406988.75; 653294.33, 3406957.10; 
653292.43, 3406927.97; 653290.39, 3406904.11; 653290.87, 3406885.61; 
653306.88, 3406880.74; 653330.43, 3406891.92; 653353.91, 3406905.74; 
653377.80, 3406903.71; 653389.13, 3406874.91; 653395.38, 3406838.05; 
653396.39, 3406798.41; 653397.07, 3406771.98; 653400.40, 3406745.62; 
653413.97, 3406732.75; 653440.50, 3406730.79; 653454.01, 3406720.56; 
653454.42, 3406704.70; 653438.67, 3406699.01; 653411.87, 3406711.54; 
653393.20, 3406716.35; 653374.68, 3406715.88; 653358.93, 3406710.18; 
653341.08, 3406683.28; 653331.11, 3406659.23; 653321.06, 3406637.81; 
653308.37, 3406616.33; 653303.68, 3406605.29.
    (B) Note: Map depicting Unit RFS-8, Subunit A is provided at 
paragraph (6)(xiv)(B) of this entry.
    (xi) Unit RFS-8, Subunit B--Jackson County, Florida. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangle map Oakdale, Florida.
    (A) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 16N, NAD83 coordinates 
(E, N): 674995.60, 3401690.28; 673875.85, 3402158.93; 674341.17, 
3402164.28; 674675.84, 3402154.41; 674910.48, 3402162.13; 675034.90, 
3402087.99; 675083.93, 3402061.49; 675233.86, 3401974.12; 675401.89, 
3401877.97; 675485.18, 3401832.51; 675531.62, 3401803.30; 675583.62, 
3401764.31; 675781.28, 3401546.61; 675851.43, 3401471.73; 675878.14, 
3401437.38; 675932.68, 3401376.64; 675959.66, 3401349.36; 675970.87, 
3401333.99; 675981.97, 3401314.44; 676115.36, 3401200.87; 676086.59, 
3401161.12; 676052.69, 3401114.62; 676041.90, 3401096.49; 676016.12, 
3401069.38; 675998.03, 3401051.73; 675964.86, 3401028.39; 675934.93, 
3401007.79; 675918.10, 3400992.81; 675908.38, 3400984.62; 675897.49, 
3400970.46; 675889.97, 3400953.73; 675879.31, 3400879.41; 675844.53, 
3400893.06; 675327.40, 3401121.69; 674861.39, 3401328.81; 674684.03, 
3401401.59; 674391.31, 3401530.89; 673876.29, 3401753.54; 673877.85, 
3402081.41; 673875.85, 3402158.93.
    (B) Note: Map depicting Unit RFS-8, Subunit B is provided at 
paragraph (6)(xiv)(B) of this entry.
    (xii) Unit RFS-8, Subunit C--Jackson County, Florida. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangle map Cypress, Florida.
    (A) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 16N, NAD83 coordinates 
(E, N): 683829.73, 3393074.70; 684023.32, 3393574.80;

[[Page 258]]

684052.04, 3393574.38; 684080.68, 3393572.16; 684109.12, 3393568.14; 
684137.25, 3393562.34; 684164.96, 3393554.79; 684192.15, 3393545.52; 
684218.69, 3393534.55; 684244.50, 3393521.94; 684269.46, 3393507.74; 
684293.49, 3393491.99; 684316.47, 3393474.77; 684338.33, 3393456.14; 
684358.98, 3393436.17; 684378.33, 3393414.95; 684396.32, 3393392.55; 
684412.86, 3393369.07; 684427.89, 3393344.60; 684441.36, 3393319.23; 
684453.20, 3393293.06; 684463.38, 3393266.20; 684471.86, 3393238.76; 
684478.59, 3393210.84; 684483.56, 3393182.55; 684486.74, 3393154.00; 
684488.12, 3393125.31; 684487.70, 3393096.59; 684485.48, 3393067.96; 
684481.46, 3393039.52; 684475.66, 3393011.38; 684468.11, 3392983.67; 
684458.84, 3392956.49; 684447.87, 3392929.94; 684435.27, 3392904.13; 
684421.06, 3392879.17; 684405.32, 3392855.15; 684388.09, 3392832.16; 
684369.46, 3392810.30; 684349.50, 3392789.65; 684328.27, 3392770.30; 
684305.87, 3392752.32; 684282.39, 3392735.78; 684257.92, 3392720.75; 
684232.55, 3392707.28; 684206.38, 3392695.43; 684179.52, 3392685.25; 
684152.08, 3392676.78; 684124.16, 3392670.04; 684095.87, 3392665.08; 
684067.32, 3392661.89; 684038.63, 3392660.51; 684009.91, 3392660.93; 
683981.28, 3392663.16; 683966.02, 3392656.75; 683947.05, 3392647.66; 
683923.43, 3392639.12; 683903.85, 3392628.04; 683886.86, 3392619.00; 
683867.12, 3392613.87; 683843.82, 3392618.55; 683819.20, 3392623.21; 
683789.11, 3392634.33; 683770.46, 3392638.47; 683744.30, 3392651.02; 
683720.12, 3392664.28; 683706.10, 3392668.55; 683685.47, 3392672.64; 
683658.43, 3392667.97; 683632.03, 3392664.65; 683606.95, 3392661.36; 
683585.89, 3392656.18; 683542.11, 3392633.24; 683512.11, 3392615.27; 
683479.46, 3392597.24; 683450.00, 3392583.92; 683423.91, 3392568.70; 
683385.42, 3392545.89; 683371.14, 3392534.94; 683348.35, 3392519.81; 
683332.69, 3392510.81; 683315.62, 3392505.08; 683294.59, 3392498.59; 
683272.28, 3392490.74; 683253.15, 3392487.60; 683203.24, 3392496.89; 
683207.64, 3392582.95; 683209.99, 3392696.72; 683212.45, 3392729.84; 
683218.34, 3392783.54; 683218.66, 3392796.77; 683214.15, 3392817.81; 
683194.50, 3392886.06; 683182.83, 3392927.40; 683174.68, 3392960.91; 
683171.34, 3392987.93; 683171.38, 3393011.73; 683174.93, 3393028.35; 
683181.19, 3393042.39; 683179.64, 3393050.95; 683179.13, 3393070.77; 
683177.70, 3393100.48; 683176.50, 3393146.73; 683179.16, 3393171.92; 
683183.14, 3393197.15; 683188.54, 3393219.10; 683190.03, 3393238.31; 
683189.67, 3393252.19; 683214.05, 3393256.78; 683227.92, 3393258.46; 
683266.03, 3393270.03; 683309.50, 3393279.08; 683347.79, 3393284.04; 
683367.66, 3393283.89; 683389.34, 3393286.52; 683469.22, 3393300.40; 
683524.08, 3393304.46; 683580.93, 3393308.57; 683593.71, 3393300.97; 
683608.59, 3393292.07; 683614.08, 3393305.37; 683626.69, 3393331.18; 
683640.90, 3393356.14; 683656.64, 3393380.17; 683673.86, 3393403.15; 
683692.49, 3393425.01; 683712.46, 3393445.66; 683733.68, 3393465.01; 
683756.08, 3393482.99; 683779.56, 3393499.53; 683804.04, 3393514.57; 
683829.41, 3393528.03; 683855.57, 3393539.88; 683882.43, 3393550.06; 
683909.88, 3393558.54; 683937.80, 3393565.27; 683966.09, 3393570.24; 
683994.63, 3393573.42; 684023.32, 3393574.80.
    (B) Note: Map depicting Unit RFS-8, Subunit C is provided at 
paragraph (6)(xiv)(B) of this entry.
    (xiii) Unit RFS-9, Subunit A--Calhoun County, Florida. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangle map Broad Branch, Florida.
    (A) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 16N, NAD83 coordinates 
(E, N): 664818.75, 3351879.40; 664810.75, 3352336.50; 664839.47, 
3352336.10; 664868.11, 3352333.90; 664896.55, 3352329.90; 664924.68, 
3352324.13; 664952.40, 3352316.60; 664979.59, 3352307.34; 665006.14, 
3352296.40; 665031.95, 3352283.81; 665056.93, 3352269.63; 665080.96, 
3352253.90; 665103.96, 3352236.70; 665125.83, 3352218.08; 665146.49, 
3352198.13; 665165.86, 3352176.93; 665183.85, 3352154.54; 665200.41, 
3352131.08; 665215.46, 3352106.61; 665228.94, 3352081.26; 665240.81, 
3352055.10; 665251.01, 3352028.25; 665259.50, 3352000.82; 665266.26, 
3351972.90; 665271.25, 3351944.62; 665274.45, 3351916.08; 665275.85, 
3351887.39; 665275.45, 3351858.67; 665273.25, 3351830.04; 665269.26, 
3351801.60; 665263.48, 3351773.46; 665255.95, 3351745.75; 665246.70, 
3351718.56; 665235.75, 3351692.00; 665223.16, 3351666.19; 665208.98, 
3351641.22; 665193.25, 3351617.18; 665176.05, 3351594.19; 665157.44, 
3351572.31; 665137.49, 3351551.65; 665116.28, 3351532.29; 665093.90, 
3351514.29; 665070.43, 3351497.73; 665045.97, 3351482.68; 665020.61, 
3351469.20; 664994.45, 3351457.33; 664967.61, 3351447.13; 664940.17, 
3351438.64; 664912.26, 3351431.89; 664883.97, 3351426.90; 664855.43, 
3351423.70; 664826.74, 3351422.29; 664798.03, 3351422.69; 664769.39, 
3351424.89; 664740.95, 3351428.89; 664712.82, 3351434.66; 664685.10, 
3351442.19; 664657.91, 3351451.45; 664631.36, 3351462.39; 664605.54, 
3351474.98; 664580.57, 3351489.17; 664556.54, 3351504.89; 664533.54, 
3351522.09; 664511.67, 3351540.71; 664491.01, 3351560.66; 664471.64, 
3351581.87; 664453.64, 3351604.25; 664437.09, 3351627.72; 664422.04, 
3351652.18; 664408.55, 3351677.53; 664396.69, 3351703.69; 664386.49, 
3351730.54; 664377.99, 3351757.97; 664371.24, 3351785.89; 664366.25, 
3351814.17; 664363.05, 3351842.71; 664361.65, 3351871.40; 664362.05, 
3351900.12; 664364.25, 3351928.75; 664368.24, 3351957.19; 664374.02, 
3351985.33; 664381.55, 3352013.04; 664390.80, 3352040.23; 664401.74, 
3352066.79; 664414.33, 3352092.60; 664428.52, 3352117.57; 664444.24, 
3352141.60; 664461.45, 3352164.60; 664480.06, 3352186.47; 664500.01, 
3352207.14; 664521.22, 3352226.50; 664543.60, 3352244.50; 664567.07, 
3352261.06; 664591.53, 3352276.11; 664616.89, 3352289.59; 664643.04, 
3352301.46; 664669.89, 3352311.66; 664697.33, 3352320.15; 664725.24, 
3352326.90; 664753.53, 3352331.89; 664782.07, 3352335.09; 664810.75, 
3352336.50.
    (B) Note: Map depicting Unit RFS-9, Subunit A is provided at 
paragraph (6)(xiv)(B) of this entry.
    (xiv) Unit RFS-9, Subunit B--Calhoun County, Florida. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangle map Dead Lake, Florida.

[[Page 259]]

    (A) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 16N, NAD83 coordinates 
(E, N): 677786.48, 3346665.69; 676322.21, 3345710.86; 676293.52, 
3345709.49; 676264.80, 3345709.91; 676236.17, 3345712.14; 676207.73, 
3345716.17; 676179.60, 3345721.97; 676151.89, 3345729.52; 676124.71, 
3345738.80; 676098.16, 3345749.77; 676072.36, 3345762.39; 676047.40, 
3345776.60; 676023.38, 3345792.34; 676000.40, 3345809.57; 675978.54, 
3345828.20; 675957.90, 3345848.17; 675938.55, 3345869.40; 675920.57, 
3345891.80; 675904.04, 3345915.28; 675889.01, 3345939.76; 675875.55, 
3345965.13; 675863.71, 3345991.30; 675853.53, 3346018.16; 675845.07, 
3346045.60; 675838.34, 3346073.52; 675833.38, 3346101.81; 675830.20, 
3346130.36; 675828.82, 3346159.05; 675829.25, 3346187.76; 675831.48, 
3346216.40; 675835.50, 3346244.84; 675841.31, 3346272.97; 675848.86, 
3346300.67; 675858.14, 3346327.85; 675869.11, 3346354.40; 675881.73, 
3346380.20; 675895.94, 3346405.16; 675911.69, 3346429.18; 675928.91, 
3346452.16; 675947.55, 3346474.02; 675967.52, 3346494.66; 675988.75, 
3346514.01; 676011.15, 3346531.98; 676034.63, 3346548.52; 676059.11, 
3346563.55; 676084.48, 3346577.01; 676110.65, 3346588.85; 676137.51, 
3346599.02; 679138.53, 3347597.18; 679165.98, 3347605.65; 679193.90, 
3347612.37; 679222.19, 3347617.34; 679250.74, 3347620.51; 679279.43, 
3347621.89; 679308.15, 3347621.46; 679336.78, 3347619.23; 679365.22, 
3347615.21; 679393.35, 3347609.41; 679421.06, 3347601.85; 679448.25, 
3347592.57; 679474.79, 3347581.60; 679500.60, 3347568.99; 679525.56, 
3347554.78; 679549.58, 3347539.03; 679572.56, 3347521.81; 679594.42, 
3347503.17; 679615.06, 3347483.20; 679634.41, 3347461.97; 679652.39, 
3347439.57; 679668.92, 3347416.09; 679683.95, 3347391.61; 679697.41, 
3347366.24; 679709.25, 3347340.07; 679719.43, 3347313.22; 679727.89, 
3347285.77; 679734.62, 3347257.85; 679739.58, 3347229.56; 679742.76, 
3347201.01; 679744.14, 3347172.32; 679743.71, 3347143.61; 679741.48, 
3347114.97; 679737.46, 3347086.53; 679731.66, 3347058.40; 679724.10, 
3347030.69; 679714.82, 3347003.51; 679703.85, 3346976.97; 679691.23, 
3346951.16; 679677.02, 3346926.20; 679661.27, 3346902.19; 679644.05, 
3346879.20; 679625.41, 3346857.35; 679605.44, 3346836.70; 679584.21, 
3346817.36; 679561.81, 3346799.38; 679538.33, 3346782.84; 679513.85, 
3346767.82; 679488.47, 3346754.36; 679462.31, 3346742.52; 679435.45, 
3346732.34; 676434.42, 3345734.20; 676406.97, 3345725.73; 676379.05, 
3345719.00; 676350.76, 3345714.04; 676322.21, 3345710.86.
    (B) Note: Map of Units RFS-8 and RFS-9 follows:

[[Page 260]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10FE09.009

    (7) Reticulated flatwood salamander--Baker and Miller Counties, 
Georgia.
    (i) Unit RFS-10, Subunit A--Miller County, Georgia. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangle map Donalsonville NE, Georgia.

[[Page 261]]

    (A) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 16N, NAD83 coordinates 
(E, N): 709773.06, 3456290.97; 709801.78, 3456290.64; 709830.43, 
3456288.51; 709858.89, 3456284.58; 709887.04, 3456278.87; 709914.78, 
3456271.41; 709942.00, 3456262.22; 709968.58, 3456251.34; 709994.43, 
3456238.81; 710019.45, 3456224.68; 710043.52, 3456209.01; 710066.57, 
3456191.86; 710088.49, 3456173.30; 710109.20, 3456153.39; 710128.62, 
3456132.23; 710146.68, 3456109.89; 710163.30, 3456086.45; 710178.41, 
3456062.02; 710191.96, 3456036.69; 710203.89, 3456010.56; 710214.16, 
3455983.73; 710222.72, 3455956.31; 710229.54, 3455928.41; 710234.60, 
3455900.13; 710237.88, 3455871.59; 710239.35, 3455842.91; 710239.02, 
3455814.18; 710236.89, 3455785.53; 710232.96, 3455757.08; 710227.25, 
3455728.92; 710219.79, 3455701.18; 710210.60, 3455673.97; 710199.72, 
3455647.38; 710187.19, 3455621.53; 710173.06, 3455596.52; 710157.39, 
3455572.44; 710140.24, 3455549.40; 710121.68, 3455527.48; 710101.77, 
3455506.76; 710080.61, 3455487.34; 710058.27, 3455469.29; 710034.83, 
3455452.67; 710010.40, 3455437.56; 709985.07, 3455424.01; 709958.94, 
3455412.08; 709932.11, 3455401.81; 709904.69, 3455393.25; 709876.79, 
3455386.42; 709848.51, 3455381.36; 709819.97, 3455378.09; 709791.29, 
3455376.62; 709762.56, 3455376.95; 709733.91, 3455379.08; 709705.46, 
3455383.01; 709677.30, 3455388.71; 709649.56, 3455396.18; 709622.35, 
3455405.37; 709595.76, 3455416.25; 709569.91, 3455428.78; 709544.90, 
3455442.90; 709520.82, 3455458.57; 709497.78, 3455475.73; 709475.86, 
3455494.29; 709455.15, 3455514.19; 709435.72, 3455535.36; 709417.67, 
3455557.70; 709401.05, 3455581.13; 709385.94, 3455605.56; 709372.39, 
3455630.89; 709360.46, 3455657.02; 709350.19, 3455683.85; 709341.63, 
3455711.27; 709334.80, 3455739.18; 709329.75, 3455767.45; 709326.47, 
3455795.99; 709325.00, 3455824.68; 709325.33, 3455853.40; 709327.46, 
3455882.05; 709331.39, 3455910.51; 709337.10, 3455938.66; 709344.56, 
3455966.40; 709353.75, 3455993.62; 709364.63, 3456020.20; 709377.16, 
3456046.05; 709391.29, 3456071.07; 709406.96, 3456095.14; 709424.11, 
3456118.19; 709442.67, 3456140.11; 709462.57, 3456160.82; 709483.74, 
3456180.24; 709506.08, 3456198.30; 709529.51, 3456214.92; 709553.94, 
3456230.03; 709579.27, 3456243.58; 709605.40, 3456255.51; 709632.23, 
3456265.78; 709659.65, 3456274.34; 709687.56, 3456281.16; 709715.83, 
3456286.22; 709744.37, 3456289.49; 709773.06, 3456290.97.
    (B) Note: Map depicting Unit RFS-10, Subunit A is provided at 
paragraph (7)(ii)(B) of this entry.
    (ii) Unit RFS-10, Subunit B--Baker County, Georgia. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangle map Bethany, Georgia.
    (A) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 16N, NAD83 coordinates 
(E, N): 734799.11, 3462120.86; 735025.60, 3462958.51; 735075.16, 
3462764.67; 735444.38, 3461469.20; 735412.19, 3461400.33; 735420.28, 
3461310.28; 735420.28, 3461223.05; 735430.58, 3461136.30; 735479.60, 
3461141.39; 735578.13, 3461132.68; 735613.43, 3461091.58; 735650.82, 
3461010.58; 735669.51, 3460923.35; 735703.92, 3460811.06; 735756.74, 
3460736.42; 735800.35, 3460649.19; 735744.28, 3460624.27; 735432.74, 
3460624.27; 735021.51, 3460618.04; 735040.20, 3460767.58; 734952.97, 
3460823.66; 734840.82, 3460861.04; 734812.02, 3460938.41; 734541.74, 
3461658.58; 734504.36, 3461783.19; 734301.81, 3462565.34; 734165.92, 
3462612.37; 734048.55, 3462652.99; 733925.73, 3462646.35; 733818.44, 
3462640.54; 733818.98, 3462680.42; 733831.44, 3462724.03; 733831.91, 
3462789.15; 733887.18, 3462970.92; 733929.82, 3463111.13; 733981.10, 
3463244.98; 734029.39, 3463371.05; 734111.12, 3463466.09; 734161.67, 
3463534.03; 734214.05, 3463602.19; 734302.98, 3463595.69; 734405.69, 
3463535.78; 734460.75, 3463434.34; 734585.36, 3463428.11; 734697.51, 
3463384.49; 734766.02, 3463372.96; 734844.43, 3463268.82; 734936.26, 
3463146.86; 735025.60, 3462958.51.
    (B) Note: Map of Unit RFS-10 follows:

[[Page 262]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10FE09.010

                  San Marcos Salamander (Eurycea nana)

    Texas. Hays County--Spring Lake and its outflow, the San Marcos 
River, downstream approximately 50 meters from the Spring Lake Dam.
    Note: Map follows:

[[Page 263]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.082

                     Arroyo Toad (Bufo californicus)

    (1) Critical habitat units are depicted for Santa Barbara, Ventura, 
Los Angeles, San Bernardino, and Riverside Counties, California, on the 
maps below.
    (2) The primary constituent elements of critical habitat for the 
arroyo toad are the habitat components that provide:
    (i) Rivers or streams with hydrologic regimes that supply water to 
provide space, food, and cover needed to sustain eggs, tadpoles, 
metamorphosing juveniles, and adult breeding toads. Specifically, the 
conditions necessary to allow for successful breeding of arroyo toads 
are:
    (A) Breeding pools with areas less than 12 in (30 cm) deep;
    (B) Areas of flowing water with current velocities less than 1.3 ft 
per second (40 cm per second); and
    (C) Surface water that lasts for a minimum length of 2 months in 
most years, i.e., a sufficient wet period in the spring months to allow 
arroyo toad larvae to hatch, mature, and metamorphose.
    (ii) Low-gradient stream segments (typically less than 6 percent) 
with sandy or fine gravel substrates that support the formation of 
shallow pools and sparsely vegetated sand and gravel bars for breeding 
and rearing of tadpoles and juveniles.
    (iii) A natural flooding regime or one sufficiently corresponding to 
a natural regime that will periodically scour riparian vegetation, 
rework stream channels and terraces, and redistribute sands and 
sediments, such that breeding pools and terrace habitats with scattered 
vegetation are maintained.
    (iv) Riparian and adjacent upland habitats (particularly alluvial 
streamside terraces and adjacent valley bottomlands that include areas 
of loose soil where toads can burrow underground) to provide foraging 
and living areas for subadult and adult arroyo toads.
    (v) Stream channels and adjacent upland habitats that allow for 
migration to foraging areas, overwintering sites, dispersal between 
populations, and recolonization of areas that contain suitable habitat.
    (3) Critical habitat does not include man-made structures existing 
on the effective date of this rule and not containing one or more of the 
primary constituent elements, such as buildings, aqueducts, airports, 
roads, and the land on which such structures are located.
    (4) Index maps of arroyo toad critical habitat.
    (i) Note: Map 1 (index map) follows:

[[Page 264]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR13AP05.000

    (ii) Map 2 (index map) follows:

[[Page 265]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR13AP05.001

    (5) Unit 2; Sisquoc River, Santa Barbara County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles Foxen Canyon, Zaca Lake, 
Bald Mountain and Hurricane Deck. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 
10, NAD 27 coordinates (E, N): 754600, 3859000; 754600, 3859600; 754700, 
3859600; 754700, 3859700; 754800, 3859700; 754800, 3859800; 754900, 
3859800; 754900, 3859900; 755000, 3859900; 755000, 3860000; 755100, 
3860000; 755100, 3860100; 755300, 3860100; 755300, 3860200; 756200, 
3860200; 756200, 3860300; 756500, 3860300; 756500,

[[Page 266]]

3860200; 756600, 3860200; 756600, 3859700; 756400, 3859700; 756400, 
3859600; 756700, 3859600; 756700, 3859700; 757400, 3859700; 757400, 
3859600; 757600, 3859600; 757600, 3859500; 757700, 3859500; 757700, 
3859400; 757800, 3859400; 757800, 3859200; 757900, 3859200; 757900, 
3859100; 758100, 3859100; 758100, 3858900; 758200, 3858900; 758200, 
3858800; 758300, 3858800; 758300, 3858700; 758500, 3858700; 758500, 
3858600; 758600, 3858600; 758600, 3858700; 758800, 3858700; 758800, 
3859100; 758900, 3859100; 758900, 3859200; 759600, 3859200; 759600, 
3859100; 759700, 3859100; 759700, 3859000; 759900, 3859000; 759900, 
3858800; 760000, 3858800; 760000, 3858700; 759900, 3858700; 759900, 
3858600; 760000, 3858600; 760000, 3858500; 760200, 3858500; 760200, 
3858400; 760300, 3858400; 760300, 3858300; 760600, 3858300; 760600, 
3858400; 760900, 3858400; 760900, 3858200; 761000, 3858200; 761000, 
3858000; 761400, 3858000; 761400, 3858100; 761600, 3858100; 761600, 
3858200; 761700, 3858200; 761700, 3858300; 761800, 3858300; 761800, 
3858600; 762000, 3858600; 762000, 3858700; 762300, 3858700; 762300, 
3858800; 762400, 3858800; 762400, 3858700; 762500, 3858700; 762500, 
3858800; 762900, 3858800; 762900, 3858700; 763600, 3858700; 763600, 
3858600; 763800, 3858600; 763800, 3858500; 763900, 3858500; 763900, 
3858300; 764700, 3858300; 764700, 3858400; 765100, 3858400; 765100, 
3858500; 765200, 3858500; 765200, 3858600; 765300, 3858600; 765300, 
3858700; 765400, 3858700; 765400, 3858800; 765600, 3858800; 765600, 
3859000; 765700, 3859000; 765700, 3859100; 765800, 3859100; 765800, 
3859200; 766000, 3859200; 766000, 3859300; 766100, 3859300; 766100, 
3859400; 766200, 3859400; 766200, 3859500; 766600, 3859500; 766600, 
3859600; 766700, 3859600; 766700, 3859700; 767000, 3859700; 767000, 
3859800; 767300, 3859800; 767300, 3859900; 767700, 3859900; 767700, 
3860000; 767900, 3860000; 767900, 3860200; 767800, 3860200; 767800, 
3860300; 767900, 3860300; 767900, 3860400; 768000, 3860400; 768000, 
3860500; 768100, 3860500; 768100, 3860400; 768300, 3860400; 768300, 
3860500; 768399, 3860500; 768400, 3860500; 768400, 3860600; 768800, 
3860600; 768800, 3860500; 768900, 3860500; 768900, 3860400; 769000, 
3860400; 769000, 3860200; 769200, 3860200; 769200, 3860300; 769300, 
3860300; 769300, 3860200; 769400, 3860200; 769400, 3860000; 769500, 
3860000; 769500, 3860100; 769800, 3860100; 769800, 3860200; 770000, 
3860200; 770000, 3860100; 770200, 3860100; 770200, 3860000; 770300, 
3860000; 770300, 3860100; 770500, 3860100; 770500, 3860000; 770700, 
3860000; 770700, 3859900; 770900, 3859900; 770900, 3859800; 771400, 
3859800; 771400, 3859700; 771700, 3859700; 771700, 3859600; 771800, 
3859600; 771800, 3859500; 771900, 3859500; 771900, 3859400; 772100, 
3859400; 772100, 3859300; 772200, 3859300; 772200, 3858900; 772400, 
3858900; 772400, 3859000; 772500, 3859000; 772500, 3858900; 772800, 
3858900; 772800, 3859000; 772900, 3859000; 772900, 3858700; 773200, 
3858700; 773200, 3858600; 773500, 3858600; 773500, 3858500; 773900, 
3858500; 773900, 3858400; 774100, 3858400; 774100, 3858100; 774200, 
3858100; 774200, 3858000; thence east to the meridian of longitude at 
120 degrees at y-coordinate 3858000; thence from the meridian of 
longitude at 120 degrees at UTM zone 11, NAD 27 y-coordinate 3858000, 
east and following UTM zone 11, NAD 27 coordinates 226200, 3858000; 
226200, 3857900; 226400, 3857900; 226400, 3858000; 226600, 3858000; 
226600, 3857900; 227100, 3857900; 227100, 3857800; 227700, 3857800; 
227700, 3857900; 228000, 3857900; 228000, 3858000; 228200, 3858000; 
228200, 3858100; 228500, 3858100; 228500, 3858000; 228700, 3858000; 
228700, 3857800; 228800, 3857800; 228800, 3857900; 229200, 3857900; 
229200, 3858000; 229500, 3858000; 229500, 3858100; 230000, 3858100; 
230000, 3858200; 230100, 3858200; 230100, 3858300; 230300, 3858300; 
230300, 3858600; 230400, 3858600; 230400, 3858700; 230500, 3858700; 
230500, 3858800; 230600, 3858800; 230600, 3859400; 230800, 3859400; 
230800, 3859700; 230900, 3859700; 230900, 3859800; 231200, 3859800; 
231200, 3859700; 231300, 3859700; 231300, 3859800; 231600, 3859800; 
231600, 3859900; 231700, 3859900; 231700, 3860000; 231800, 3860000; 
231800, 3860100; 232100, 3860100; 232100, 3860000; 232200, 3860000; 
232200, 3859800; 232300, 3859800; 232300, 3859700; 232400, 3859700; 
232400, 3859600; 232500, 3859600; 232500, 3859400; 232600, 3859400; 
232600, 3859200; 232700, 3859200; 232700, 3858900; 232900, 3858900; 
232900, 3858700; 233000, 3858700; 233000, 3858800; 233100, 3858800; 
233100, 3858700; 233600, 3858700; 233600, 3858800; 234000, 3858800; 
234000, 3858600; 234200, 3858600; 234200, 3858500; 234300, 3858500; 
234300, 3858200; 234400, 3858200; 234400, 3858300; 234600, 3858300; 
234600, 3858400; 235000, 3858400; 235000, 3858300; 235100, 3858300; 
235100, 3858200; 235200, 3858200; 235200, 3858100; 235300, 3858100; 
235300, 3858000; 235600, 3858000; 235600, 3857900; 235800, 3857900; 
235800, 3858000; 236400, 3858000; 236400, 3857600; 236900, 3857600; 
236900, 3857500; 237100, 3857500; 237100, 3857600; 237200, 3857600; 
237200, 3857700; 237400, 3857700; 237400, 3857300; 237300, 3857300; 
237300, 3857100; 236900, 3857100; 236900, 3857200; 236700, 3857200; 
236700, 3857300; 236000, 3857300; 236000, 3857500; 235900, 3857500; 
235900, 3857400; 235800, 3857400; 235800, 3857500; 235700, 3857500; 
235700, 3857600; 235300, 3857600; 235300, 3857700; 235100, 3857700; 
235100, 3857800; 235000, 3857800; 235000, 3857900; 234600, 3857900; 
234600, 3857700; 234200, 3857700; 234200, 3857900; 234100, 3857900; 
234100, 3858000; 234000, 3858000; 234000, 3858100; 233900, 3858100; 
233900, 3858300; 233600, 3858300; 233600, 3858200; 233500, 3858200; 
233500, 3858100; 233200, 3858100; 233200, 3858200; 232700, 3858200; 
232700, 3858300; 232600, 3858300; 232600, 3858400; 232500, 3858400; 
232500, 3858700; 232400, 3858700; 232400, 3859200; 232300, 3859200; 
232300, 3859300; 232200, 3859300; 232200, 3859400; 232000, 3859400; 
232000, 3859600; 231700, 3859600; 231700, 3859500; 231600, 3859500; 
231600, 3859400; 231100, 3859400; 231100, 3859200; 231000, 3859200; 
231000, 3859100; 231100, 3859100; 231100, 3858800; 231000, 3858800; 
231000, 3858700; 230900, 3858700; 230900, 3858500; 230800, 3858500; 
230800, 3858400; 230900, 3858400; 230900, 3858100; 230800, 3858100; 
230800, 3858000; 230700, 3858000; 230700, 3857900; 230300, 3857900; 
230300, 3857700; 229800, 3857700; 229800, 3857800; 229700, 3857800; 
229700, 3857700; 229500, 3857700; 229500, 3857600; 229400, 3857600; 
229400, 3857500; 228500, 3857500; 228500, 3857600; 228200, 3857600; 
228200, 3857500; 228100, 3857500; 228100, 3857400; 228000, 3857400; 
228000, 3857300; 227300, 3857300; 227300, 3857400; 226600, 3857400; 
226600, 3857500; 226400, 3857500; 226400, 3857400; 226300, 3857400; 
226300, 3857300; 226200, 3857300; 226200, 3857200;

[[Page 267]]

225900, 3857200; 225900, 3857600; thence west to the meridian of 
longitude at 120 degrees at y-coordinate 3857600; thence from the 
meridian of longitude at 120 degrees at UTM zone 10, NAD 27 y-coordinate 
3857600, west and following UTM zone 10, NAD 27 coordinates 773900, 
3857600; 773900, 3857700; 773800, 3857700; 773800, 3857900; 773700, 
3857900; 773700, 3858000; 773600, 3858000; 773600, 3858100; 773100, 
3858100; 773100, 3858200; 772800, 3858200; 772800, 3858400; 772500, 
3858400; 772500, 3858500; 772100, 3858500; 772100, 3858600; 771900, 
3858600; 771900, 3858900; 771800, 3858900; 771800, 3859000; 771700, 
3859000; 771700, 3859100; 771600, 3859100; 771600, 3859200; 771100, 
3859200; 771100, 3859300; 770600, 3859300; 770600, 3859400; 770500, 
3859400; 770500, 3859500; 770000, 3859500; 770000, 3859600; 769800, 
3859600; 769800, 3859700; 769600, 3859700; 769600, 3859600; 769500, 
3859600; 769500, 3859500; 769400, 3859500; 769400, 3859400; 769200, 
3859400; 769200, 3859500; 769100, 3859500; 769100, 3859700; 769000, 
3859700; 769000, 3859800; 768800, 3859800; 768800, 3860000; 768500, 
3860000; 768500, 3860100; 768400, 3860100; 768400, 3860000; 768300, 
3860000; 768300, 3859600; 768200, 3859600; 768200, 3859500; 767400, 
3859500; 767400, 3859400; 767300, 3859400; 767300, 3859500; 767200, 
3859500; 767200, 3859400; 767000, 3859400; 767000, 3859300; 766800, 
3859300; 766800, 3859200; 766500, 3859200; 766500, 3859100; 766400, 
3859100; 766400, 3859000; 766100, 3859000; 766100, 3858900; 766000, 
3858900; 766000, 3858800; 765900, 3858800; 765900, 3858500; 765700, 
3858500; 765700, 3858400; 765800, 3858400; 765800, 3858200; 765700, 
3858200; 765700, 3858100; 764800, 3858100; 764800, 3858000; 763900, 
3858000; 763900, 3857900; 763600, 3857900; 763600, 3858200; 763500, 
3858200; 763500, 3858300; 763300, 3858300; 763300, 3858400; 762800, 
3858400; 762800, 3858200; 762700, 3858200; 762700, 3858100; 762200, 
3858100; 762200, 3858000; 762100, 3858000; 762100, 3857900; 762000, 
3857900; 762000, 3857800; 761900, 3857800; 761900, 3857900; 761800, 
3857900; 761800, 3857700; 761600, 3857700; 761600, 3857600; 761500, 
3857600; 761500, 3857700; 761400, 3857700; 761400, 3857600; 760700, 
3857600; 760700, 3857900; 760300, 3857900; 760300, 3858000; 760100, 
3858000; 760100, 3858100; 759900, 3858100; 759900, 3858200; 759800, 
3858200; 759800, 3858300; 759700, 3858300; 759700, 3858500; 759500, 
3858500; 759500, 3858600; 759300, 3858600; 759300, 3858700; 759200, 
3858700; 759200, 3858600; 759100, 3858600; 759100, 3858500; 759000, 
3858500; 759000, 3858200; 758900, 3858200; 758900, 3858000; 758700, 
3858000; 758700, 3857900; 758500, 3857900; 758500, 3858000; 758400, 
3858000; 758400, 3857900; 758200, 3857900; 758200, 3858000; 757900, 
3858000; 757900, 3858100; 757800, 3858100; 757800, 3858200; 757700, 
3858200; 757700, 3858300; 757500, 3858300; 757500, 3858400; 757400, 
3858400; 757400, 3858500; 757300, 3858500; 757300, 3858600; 757200, 
3858600; 757200, 3858700; 757000, 3858700; 757000, 3858600; 756600, 
3858600; 756600, 3858700; 756400, 3858700; 756400, 3858800; 756300, 
3858800; 756300, 3858900; 756200, 3858900; 756200, 3859000; 756100, 
3859000; 756100, 3859100; 755800, 3859100; 755800, 3859200; 755200, 
3859200; 755200, 3859100; 755100, 3859100; 755100, 3859000; returning 
to754600, 3859000.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit 2 follows.

[[Page 268]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR13AP05.002

    (6) Unit 4; Sespe Creek, Ventura County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles Wheeler Springs, Lion 
Canyon, Topatopa Mountains, and Devils Heart Peak. Land bounded by the 
following UTM zone 11, NAD 27 coordinates (E, N): 318600, 3828000; 
318600, 3827800; 318800, 3827800; 318800, 3827700; 318900, 3827700; 
318900, 3827400; 319100, 3827400; 319100, 3827700; 319200, 3827700; 
319200, 3827800; 319500, 3827800; 319500, 3827700; 319600, 3827700; 
319600, 3827500; 319700, 3827500; 319700, 3827300; 319800, 3827300; 
319800, 3827400; 319900, 3827400; 319900, 3827300; 320000, 3827300; 
320000, 3826900; 320100,

[[Page 269]]

3826900; 320100, 3826800; 320400, 3826800; 320400, 3826700; 320500, 
3826700; 320500, 3826500; 320900, 3826500; 320900, 3826300; 321000, 
3826300; 321000, 3826100; 320900, 3826100; 320900, 3826000; 320700, 
3826000; 320700, 3826200; 320600, 3826200; 320600, 3826300; 320400, 
3826300; 320400, 3826400; 320300, 3826400; 320300, 3826500; 320200, 
3826500; 320200, 3826600; 319900, 3826600; 319900, 3826700; 319800, 
3826700; 319800, 3826900; 319700, 3826900; 319700, 3827000; 319400, 
3827000; 319400, 3827300; 319300, 3827300; 319300, 3827100; 319200, 
3827100; 319200, 3827000; 318800, 3827000; 318800, 3827200; 318700, 
3827200; 318700, 3827400; 318500, 3827400; 318500, 3827600; 318300, 
3827600; 318300, 3827700; 318200, 3827700; 318200, 3827600; 318100, 
3827600; 318100, 3827400; 318000, 3827400; 318000, 3827300; 317500, 
3827300; 317500, 3827400; 317400, 3827400; 317400, 3827500; 317100, 
3827500; 317100, 3827400; 317000, 3827400; 317000, 3826900; 316800, 
3826900; 316800, 3826800; 316400, 3826800; 316400, 3826900; 316200, 
3826900; 316200, 3827000; 316000, 3827000; 316000, 3827100; 315800, 
3827100; 315800, 3827200; 315700, 3827200; 315700, 3827300; 315500, 
3827300; 315500, 3827200; 315400, 3827200; 315400, 3827100; 315300, 
3827100; 315300, 3827000; 314500, 3827000; 314500, 3826900; 314400, 
3826900; 314400, 3826800; 314200, 3826800; 314200, 3826900; 314100, 
3826900; 314100, 3826800; 313900, 3826800; 313900, 3826900; 313600, 
3826900; 313600, 3826800; 313100, 3826800; 313100, 3827000; 313000, 
3827000; 313000, 3827200; 312800, 3827200; 312800, 3827300; 312400, 
3827300; 312400, 3827200; 312500, 3827200; 312500, 3826900; 312600, 
3826900; 312600, 3826400; 312000, 3826400; 312000, 3826500; 311900, 
3826500; 311900, 3826400; 311800, 3826400; 311800, 3826200; 311600, 
3826200; 311600, 3826300; 311300, 3826300; 311300, 3826600; 311200, 
3826600; 311200, 3826500; 311100, 3826500; 311100, 3826400; 311000, 
3826400; 311000, 3826200; 310900, 3826200; 310900, 3826100; 310800, 
3826100; 310800, 3825900; 310700, 3825900; 310700, 3825800; 310500, 
3825800; 310500, 3825500; 310100, 3825500; 310100, 3825400; 310000, 
3825400; 310000, 3825500; 309500, 3825500; 309500, 3825400; 309300, 
3825400; 309300, 3825500; 309100, 3825500; 309100, 3825900; 309000, 
3825900; 309000, 3826000; 308200, 3826000; 308200, 3825900; 307900, 
3825900; 307900, 3826000; 307600, 3826000; 307600, 3826100; 307500, 
3826100; 307500, 3826000; 307400, 3826000; 307400, 3825900; 307200, 
3825900; 307200, 3825800; 307100, 3825800; 307100, 3825700; 306800, 
3825700; 306800, 3825800; 306300, 3825800; 306300, 3825700; 305300, 
3825700; 305300, 3825800; 305000, 3825800; 305000, 3825900; 304800, 
3825900; 304800, 3826000; 304700, 3826000; 304700, 3826100; 304600, 
3826100; 304600, 3826200; 304500, 3826200; 304500, 3825800; 304400, 
3825800; 304400, 3825700; 304300, 3825700; 304300, 3825600; 304100, 
3825600; 304100, 3825500; 304000, 3825500; 304000, 3825600; 303600, 
3825600; 303600, 3825700; 303500, 3825700; 303500, 3825800; 303100, 
3825800; 303100, 3825700; 302500, 3825700; 302500, 3825800; 302300, 
3825800; 302300, 3825900; 301800, 3825900; 301800, 3826000; 301700, 
3826000; 301700, 3825900; 301500, 3825900; 301500, 3826100; 301200, 
3826100; 301200, 3826200; 301100, 3826200; 301100, 3826100; 300700, 
3826100; 300700, 3826000; 300400, 3826000; 300400, 3825900; 300100, 
3825900; 300100, 3825800; 300000, 3825800; 300000, 3825700; 299800, 
3825700; 299800, 3825600; 299600, 3825600; 299600, 3825700; 299500, 
3825700; 299500, 3825800; 298500, 3825800; 298500, 3825700; 298300, 
3825700; 298300, 3825600; 297600, 3825600; 297600, 3825500; 297500, 
3825500; 297500, 3825300; 297300, 3825300; 297300, 3825600; 297200, 
3825600; 297200, 3825700; 297100, 3825700; 297100, 3825500; 297000, 
3825500; 297000, 3825400; 296900, 3825400; 296900, 3825300; 296700, 
3825300; 296700, 3825400; 296600, 3825400; 296600, 3825500; 296400, 
3825500; 296400, 3825600; 296300, 3825600; 296300, 3825700; 296200, 
3825700; 296200, 3825800; 295900, 3825800; 295900, 3825700; 295800, 
3825700; 295800, 3825600; 295400, 3825600; 295400, 3825500; 295200, 
3825500; 295200, 3825400; 295100, 3825400; 295100, 3825200; 294900, 
3825200; 294900, 3825300; 294700, 3825300; 294700, 3825400; 294600, 
3825400; 294600, 3825500; 294400, 3825500; 294400, 3825600; 294100, 
3825600; 294100, 3825800; 294000, 3825800; 294000, 3825900; 293900, 
3825900; 293900, 3826000; 293800, 3826000; 293800, 3825900; 293000, 
3825900; 293000, 3825800; 292000, 3825800; 292000, 3826000; 291800, 
3826000; 291800, 3826200; 291600, 3826200; 291600, 3826300; 291500, 
3826300; 291500, 3826500; 291800, 3826500; 291800, 3826400; 291900, 
3826400; 291900, 3826500; 292200, 3826500; 292200, 3826600; 292100, 
3826600; 292100, 3826700; 292000, 3826700; 292000, 3827000; 292100, 
3827000; 292100, 3827100; 292200, 3827100; 292200, 3827200; 292400, 
3827200; 292800, 3827200; 292800, 3827100; 292700, 3827100; 292700, 
3826900; 292600, 3826900; 292600, 3826700; 292700, 3826700; 292700, 
3826600; 292600, 3826600; 292600, 3826400; 292500, 3826400; 292500, 
3826300; 292400, 3826300; 292400, 3826200; 292700, 3826200; 292700, 
3826300; 292900, 3826300; 292900, 3826400; 293000, 3826400; 293000, 
3826500; 293400, 3826500; 293400, 3826600; 293600, 3826600; 293600, 
3826700; 293900, 3826700; 293900, 3826500; 294100, 3826500; 294100, 
3826400; 294300, 3826400; 294300, 3826500; 294800, 3826500; 294800, 
3826400; 294700, 3826400; 294700, 3826300; 294600, 3826300; 294600, 
3826200; 294500, 3826200; 294500, 3826100; 294600, 3826100; 294600, 
3826000; 294700, 3826000; 294700, 3825900; 294800, 3825900; 294800, 
3825800; 295000, 3825800; 295000, 3825900; 295300, 3825900; 295300, 
3826100; 295200, 3826100; 295200, 3826300; 295300, 3826300; 295300, 
3826400; 295400, 3826400; 295400, 3826300; 295700, 3826300; 295700, 
3826400; 296000, 3826400; 296000, 3826200; 296300, 3826200; 296300, 
3826100; 296400, 3826100; 296400, 3826000; 296500, 3826000; 296500, 
3825900; 296600, 3825900; 296600, 3825800; 296700, 3825800; 296700, 
3825600; 296800, 3825600; 296800, 3825900; 296900, 3825900; 296900, 
3826000; 297000, 3826000; 297000, 3826100; 297300, 3826100; 297300, 
3826000; 297600, 3826000; 297600, 3826100; 297800, 3826100; 297800, 
3826000; 297900, 3826000; 297900, 3825900; 298000, 3825900; 298000, 
3826100; 298100, 3826100; 298100, 3826200; 298400, 3826200; 298400, 
3826300; 298500, 3826300; 298500, 3826400; 298700, 3826400; 298700, 
3826500; 298900, 3826500; 298900, 3826400; 299000, 3826400; 299000, 
3826300; 299600, 3826300; 299600, 3826200; 299700, 3826200; 299700, 
3826000; 299800, 3826000; 299800, 3826100; 299900, 3826100; 299900, 
3826300; 300000, 3826300; 300000, 3826400; 300100, 3826400; 300100, 
3826500; 300200, 3826500; 300200, 3826600; 300500, 3826600; 300500, 
3826500; 300900, 3826500; 300900, 3826600; 301700, 3826600; 301700, 
3826500; 301900, 3826500; 301900,

[[Page 270]]

3826400; 302000, 3826400; 302000, 3826200; 302400, 3826200; 302400, 
3826400; 302700, 3826400; 302700, 3826100; 303000, 3826100; 303000, 
3826200; 303100, 3826200; 303100, 3826300; 303600, 3826300; 303600, 
3826100; 303800, 3826100; 303800, 3826000; 304000, 3826000; 304000, 
3826100; 304100, 3826100; 304100, 3826200; 304200, 3826200; 304200, 
3826500; 304300, 3826500; 304300, 3826600; 304800, 3826600; 304800, 
3826500; 304900, 3826500; 304900, 3826400; 305100, 3826400; 305100, 
3826300; 305300, 3826300; 305300, 3826200; 305500, 3826200; 305500, 
3826300; 305700, 3826300; 305700, 3826200; 306000, 3826200; 306000, 
3826100; 306200, 3826100; 306200, 3826200; 306500, 3826200; 306500, 
3826300; 306900, 3826300; 306900, 3826200; 307100, 3826200; 307100, 
3826300; 307200, 3826300; 307200, 3826400; 307500, 3826400; 307500, 
3826500; 307800, 3826500; 307800, 3826400; 307900, 3826400; 307900, 
3826300; 308000, 3826300; 308000, 3826200; 308200, 3826200; 308200, 
3826300; 308300, 3826300; 308300, 3826500; 308600, 3826500; 308600, 
3826400; 309000, 3826400; 309000, 3826300; 309300, 3826300; 309300, 
3826200; 309400, 3826200; 309400, 3825800; 309900, 3825800; 309900, 
3825900; 309800, 3825900; 309800, 3826000; 310100, 3826000; 310100, 
3825900; 310200, 3825900; 310200, 3826100; 310300, 3826100; 310300, 
3826200; 310600, 3826200; 310600, 3826400; 310700, 3826400; 310700, 
3826600; 310800, 3826600; 310800, 3826700; 310800, 3826800; 311100, 
3826800; 311100, 3826900; 311600, 3826900; 311600, 3827000; 311900, 
3827000; 311900, 3826900; 312000, 3826900; 312000, 3826800; 312200, 
3826800; 312200, 3826900; 312100, 3826900; 312100, 3827100; 312000, 
3827100; 312000, 3827500; 312100, 3827500; 312100, 3827600; 312500, 
3827600; 312500, 3827700; 312600, 3827700; 312600, 3827600; 313000, 
3827600; 313000, 3827500; 313200, 3827500; 313200, 3827400; 313300, 
3827400; 313300, 3827300; 315100, 3827300; 315100, 3827400; 315200, 
3827400; 315200, 3827700; 315400, 3827700; 315400, 3827800; 315500, 
3827800; 315500, 3827700; 316000, 3827700; 316000, 3827600; 316100, 
3827600; 316100, 3827400; 316300, 3827400; 316300, 3827300; 316400, 
3827300; 316400, 3827100; 316700, 3827100; 316700, 3827600; 316800, 
3827600; 316800, 3827700; 316900, 3827700; 316900, 3827900; 317000, 
3827900; 317000, 3828000; 317500, 3828000; 317500, 3827900; 317600, 
3827900; 317600, 3827800; 317800, 3827800; 317800, 3827900; 317900, 
3827900; 317900, 3828000; returning to 318600, 3828000; excluding land 
bounded by 293600, 3826200; 293600, 3826300; 293400, 3826300; 293400, 
3826200; 293600, 3826200.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit 4 follows.

[[Page 271]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR13AP05.003

    (7) Unit 9; San Jacinto River Basin/Bautista Creek, Riverside 
County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Blackburn Canyon. Land 
bounded by the following UTM zone 11, NAD27 coordinates (E, N): 515200, 
3733300; thence east to the Cleveland National Forest (CNF) boundary at 
y-coordinate 3733300; thence south, west, and north along the CNF 
boundary, passing y-coordinate 3733300, to x-coordinate 515200; 
returning to 515200, 3733300.
    (ii) Land bounded by the following UTM zone 11, NAD27 coordinates 
(E, N): 517000,

[[Page 272]]

3732900; thence south to the CNF boundary at x-coordinate 517000; thence 
west and north along the CNF boundary to y-coordinate 3732900; returning 
to 517000, 3732900.
    (iii) Land bounded by the following UTM zone 11, NAD27 coordinates 
(E, N): 516700, 3732300; 516700, 3732400; thence west to the CNF 
boundary at y-coordinate 3732400; thence north and southeast along the 
CNF boundary to y-coordinate 3732300; returning to 516700, 3732300.
    (iv) Land bounded by the following UTM zone 11, NAD27 coordinates 
(E, N): 514700, 3726400; 514700, 3726700; 514600, 3726700; 514600, 
3726800; 514500, 3726800; 514500, 3727100; 514400, 3727100; 514400, 
3727200; 514200, 3727200; thence north to the CNF boundary at x-
coordinate 514200; thence east and south along the CNF boundary to y-
coordinate 3726300; thence west and following coordinates 514800, 
3726300; 514800, 3726400; returning to 514700, 3726400.
    (v) Land bounded by the following UTM zone 11, NAD27 coordinates (E, 
N): 515800, 3725000; 515900, 3725000; 515900, 3724900; 516200, 3724900; 
516200, 3724700; 516300, 3724700; 516300, 3724500; 516600, 3724500; 
516600, 3724400; 516800, 3724400; 516800, 3724200; 516900, 3724200; 
516900, 3724100; 517000, 3724100; 517000, 3723800; 517200, 3723800; 
517200, 3723400; 517300, 3723400; thence south to the CNF boundary at x-
coordinate 517300; thence west and southeast along the CNF boundary, 
passing x-coordinate 518500, to y-coordinate 518800; thence east 
following coordinates 3721900; 518800, 3722000; 518900, 3722000; 518900, 
3722100; 519000, 3722100; 519000, 3721900; 519100, 3721900; 519100, 
3721700; 519000, 3721700; 519000, 3721500; 518900, 3721500; 518900, 
3721400; 518300, 3721400; 518300, 3721500; 518200, 3721500; 518200, 
3721600; 518100, 3721600; 518100, 3721700; 517900, 3721700; 517900, 
3721900; 517700, 3721900; 517700, 3722000; 517600, 3722000; 517600, 
3722100; 517500, 3722100; 517500, 3722300; 517200, 3722300; 517200, 
3722400; 517100, 3722400; 517100, 3722800; 517000, 3722800; 517000, 
3722900; 516900, 3722900; 516900, 3723000; 516800, 3723000; 516800, 
3723500; 516500, 3723500; 516500, 3723700; 516600, 3723700; 516600, 
3723900; 516500, 3723900; 516500, 3724100; 516300, 3724100; 516300, 
3724200; 515900, 3724200; 515900, 3724500; 515800, 3724500; 515800, 
3724600; 515600, 3724600; 515600, 3724700; 515500, 3724700; 515500, 
3725400; 515400, 3725400; thence north to the CNF boundary at x-
coordinate 515400; thence east along the CNF boundary to x-coordinate 
515800; returning to 515800, 3725000. Land bounded by the following UTM 
zone 11, NAD27 coordinates (E, N): 518000, 3723100; 518000, 3723000; 
518100, 3723000; 518100, 3722900; 518300, 3722900; 518300, 3722700; 
518200, 3722700; 518200, 3722600; 518300, 3722600; 518300, 3722500; 
518400, 3722500; 518400, 3722400; 518500, 3722400; 518500, 3722300; 
518600, 3722300; 518600, 3722100; 518700, 3722100; thence south to the 
CNF boundary at x-coordinate 518700; thence northwest along the CNF 
boundary to y-coordinate 3723100; returning to 518000, 3723100.
    (vi) Note: Map of Unit 9 follows.

[[Page 273]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR13AP05.004

    (8) Unit 20; Upper Santa Ana River Basin/Cajon Wash, San Bernardino 
County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Cajon. Land bounded by the 
following UTM zone 11, NAD27 coordinates (E, N): 457100, 3792000; 
457300, 3792000; 457300, 3791900; 457400, 3791900; 457400, 3792000; 
457500, 3792000; 457500, 3791900; 457600, 3791900; 457600, 3792000; 
457700, 3792000; 457700, 3791900; 457800, 3791900; 457800, 3791800; 
457900, 3791800; 457900, 3791700; 458000, 3791700; 458000, 3791500; 
457900, 3791500; 457900, 3791400; 457400, 3791400; 457400, 3791300; 
457200, 3791300; 457200, 3791000; 457100, 3791000; 457100,

[[Page 274]]

3790800; 457200, 3790800; 457200, 3790600; 457300, 3790600; 457300, 
3790500; 457400, 3790500; 457400, 3790400; 457500, 3790400; 457500, 
3790300; 458000, 3790300; 458000, 3790200; 458300, 3790200; 458300, 
3790100; 458600, 3790100; 458600, 3790000; 458700, 3790000; 458700, 
3789900; 458800, 3789900; 458800, 3789800; 458900, 3789800; 458900, 
3789700; 459000, 3789700; 459000, 3789600; 459100, 3789600; 459100, 
3789400; 459400, 3789400; 459400, 3789300; 459500, 3789300; 459500, 
3789200; 459600, 3789200; 459600, 3789000; 459700, 3789000; 459700, 
3788900; 459800, 3788900; 459800, 3788800; 459900, 3788800; 459900, 
3788700; 460000, 3788700; 460000, 3788600; 460100, 3788600; 460100, 
3788500; 460400, 3788500; 460400, 3788400; 460600, 3788400; 460600, 
3788300; 460700, 3788300; 460700, 3788200; 460800, 3788200; 460800, 
3788100; 460900, 3788100; 460900, 3787400; 460800, 3787400; 460800, 
3787200; 460500, 3787200; 460500, 3787300; 460400, 3787300; 460400, 
3787400; 460300, 3787400; 460300, 3787500; 460200, 3787500; 460200, 
3787600; 460100, 3787600; 460100, 3787700; 460000, 3787700; 460000, 
3787800; 459800, 3787800; 459800, 3787900; 459700, 3787900; 459700, 
3788000; 459600, 3788000; 459600, 3788100; 459400, 3788100; 459400, 
3788200; 459300, 3788200; 459300, 3788300; 459200, 3788300; 459200, 
3788500; 459100, 3788500; 459100, 3788700; 458900, 3788700; 458900, 
3788900; 458700, 3788900; 458700, 3789000; 458500, 3789000; 458500, 
3789100; 458300, 3789100; 458300, 3789300; 458100, 3789300; 458100, 
3789400; 458000, 3789400; 458000, 3789500; 457900, 3789500; 457900, 
3789600; 457800, 3789600; 457800, 3789700; 457700, 3789700; 457700, 
3789800; 457600, 3789800; 457600, 3789700; 457500, 3789700; 457500, 
3789800; 457300, 3789800; 457300, 3789900; 457000, 3789900; 457000, 
3790100; 456900, 3790100; 456900, 3790200; 456800, 3790200; 456800, 
3790500; 456700, 3790500; 456700, 3791000; 456600, 3791000; 456600, 
3791200; 456700, 3791200; 456700, 3791300; 456800, 3791300; 456800, 
3791400; 456900, 3791400; 456900, 3791500; 457100, 3791500; returning to 
457100, 3792000.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit 20 follows.

[[Page 275]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR13AP05.005

    (9) Unit 21; Little Rock Creek Basin, Los Angeles County, 
California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles Juniper Hills and Pacifico 
Mountain. Land bounded by the following UTM zone 11, NAD27 coordinates 
(E, N): 406300, 3814500; 406500, 3814500; 406500, 3814100; 406600, 
3814100; 406600, 3813600; 406800, 3813600; 406800, 3813400; 406700, 
3813400; 406700, 3813300; 406800, 3813300; 406800, 3812700; 406900, 
3812700; 406900, 3812300; 407000, 3812300; 407000, 3812200; 407200, 
3812200; 407200, 3811900; 407300, 3811900; 407300, 3811800; 407400, 
3811800; 407400, 3811700; 407500, 3811700; 407500, 3811600; 407600, 
3811600; 407600, 3811400;

[[Page 276]]

407800, 3811400; 407800, 3811200; 408200, 3811200; 408200, 3811100; 
408500, 3811100; 408500, 3811000; 408700, 3811000; 408700, 3810900; 
409000, 3810900; 409000, 3810800; 409100, 3810800; 409100, 3810600; 
409200, 3810600; 409200, 3810400; 409300, 3810400; 409300, 3810300; 
409400, 3810300; 409400, 3810100; 409500, 3810100; 409500, 3810000; 
409800, 3810000; 409800, 3809900; 409900, 3809900; 409900, 3809500; 
409600, 3809500; 409600, 3809700; 409300, 3809700; 409300, 3809800; 
409200, 3809800; 409200, 3810000; 409100, 3810000; 409100, 3810100; 
409000, 3810100; 409000, 3810300; 408900, 3810300; 408900, 3810400; 
408800, 3810400; 408800, 3810500; 408600, 3810500; 408600, 3810600; 
408200, 3810600; 408200, 3810800; 407900, 3810800; 407900, 3810900; 
407700, 3810900; 407700, 3811000; 407600, 3811000; 407600, 3811100; 
407500, 3811100; 407500, 3811200; 407400, 3811200; 407400, 3811300; 
407300, 3811300; 407300, 3811400; 407100, 3811400; 407100, 3811500; 
407000, 3811500; 407000, 3811600; 406900, 3811600; 406900, 3811700; 
406800, 3811700; 406800, 3811800; 406700, 3811800; 406700, 3811900; 
406600, 3811900; 406600, 3812600; 406500, 3812600; 406500, 3813100; 
406400, 3813100; 406400, 3813200; 406300, 3813200; 406300, 3813500; 
406400, 3813500; 406400, 3813800; 406300, 3813800; 406300, 3814000; 
406200, 3814000; 406200, 3813900; 406100, 3813900; 406100, 3813800; 
406000, 3813800; 406000, 3813700; 405900, 3813700; 405900, 3813600; 
405700, 3813600; 405700, 3813500; 405600, 3813500; 405600, 3813400; 
405500, 3813400; 405500, 3813300; 405400, 3813300; 405400, 3813100; 
405200, 3813100; 405200, 3813000; 405000, 3813000; 405000, 3812900; 
404800, 3812900; 404800, 3813100; 404900, 3813100; 404900, 3813300; 
405000, 3813300; 405000, 3813400; 405100, 3813400; 405100, 3813500; 
405200, 3813500; 405200, 3813600; 405400, 3813600; 405400, 3813700; 
405500, 3813700; 405500, 3813800; 405600, 3813800; 405600, 3813900; 
405800, 3813900; 405800, 3814000; 405900, 3814000; 405900, 3814200; 
406000, 3814200; 406000, 3814300; 406100, 3814300; 406100, 3814400; 
406300, 3814400; returning to 406300, 3814500.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit 21 follows.

[[Page 277]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR13AP05.006

    (10) Unit 23; Whitewater River Basin, Riverside County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle White Water. Land bounded by 
the following UTM zone 11, NAD27 coordinates (E, N): 532500, 3759600; 
532600, 3759600; 532600, 3759200; 532700, 3759200; 532700, 3758900; 
532800, 3758900; 532800, 3758700; 532900, 3758700; 532900, 3758400; 
532800, 3758400; 532800, 3757800; 532900, 3757800; thence south to the 
Bureau of Land Management (BLM) boundary at x-coordinate 532900; thence 
west and south along the BLM boundary to y-coordinate 3757400; thence 
west and following coordinates 532400, 3757400; 532400,

[[Page 278]]

3757600; 532300, 3757600; 532300, 3757800; 532200, 3757800; 532200, 
3758000; 532100, 3758000; thence north to the BLM boundary at x-
coordinate 532100; thence east and north along the BLM boundary to y-
coordinate 3759600; returning to 532500, 3759600.
    Land bounded by the following UTM zone 11, NAD27 coordinates (E, N): 
532800, 3755600; thence north to the BLM boundary at x-coordinate 
532800; thence eastward along the BLM boundary to x-coordinate 533600; 
thence south and following coordinates 533600, 3755200; 533700, 3755200; 
thence south to the BLM boundary at x-coordinate 533700; thence westward 
along the BLM boundary to x-coordinate 533000; thence north and 
following coordinates 533000, 3755400; 532900, 3755400; 532900, 3755600; 
returning to 532800, 3755600.
    (ii) Note: Unit 23 included on map with Unit 9.

[[Page 279]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR13AP05.007

                    Houston Toad (Bufo houstonensis)

    Texas: Areas of land, water, and airspace as follows:
    (1) Bastrop County. From the junction of a line corresponding to 
30[deg]12[min]00[sec] N. and Texas State Highway 95 east along a line 
corresponding to 30[deg]12[min]00[sec] N. to where it intersects a line 
corresponding to 97[deg]7[min]30[sec] W. and south along a line 
corresponding to 97[deg]7[min]30[sec] W. to where it intersects the 
Colorado River, west and northwest along the north bank of the Colorado 
River to the due southward extension of Texas State Highway 95, and 
north

[[Page 280]]

along that extension and Texas State Highway 95 to where it intersects a 
line corresponding to 30[deg]12[min]00[sec] N.
    Note: Map follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.083
    
    (2) Burleson County. A circular area with a 1-mile radius, the 
center being the north entrance to Lake Woodrow from Texas FM 2000.
    Note: Map follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.084
    


    (e) Fishes.

                    Yaqui Catfish (Ictalurus pricei)

    Arizona, Cochise County. All aquatic habitats of San Bernardino NWR 
in S\1/2\ Sec. 11; Sec. 14; S\1/2\ and NE\1/4\ Sec. 15; T24S, R30E.
    Known constituent elements include clean unpolluted permanent water 
in streams with medium current with clear pools in the Rio Yaqui 
drainage. These waters should be without introduced exotic fishes.
    Note: Map follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.085
    
               Alabama Cavefish (Speoplatyrhinus poulsoni)

    Alabama. Lauderdale County. More Specific locality data for Federal 
agencies fulfilling their obligations under Section 7 of the Endangered 
Species Act of 1973 can be obtained from the Office of Endangered 
Species, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Washington, DC 20240.

    Note: No map.

                      Bonytail Chub (Gila elegans)

    Description of areas taken from the Bureau of Land Management (BLM) 
1:100,000 scale maps (available from BLM State Offices): Rangely, CO 
1989; Canyon of Lodore, CO 1990; Seep Ridge, UT/CO 1982; La Sal, UT/CO 
1985; Hite Crossing, UT 1982; Parker, AZ/CA 1980; Davis Dam, AZ/NV/CA 
1982; Boulder City, NV/AZ 1978; Needles, CA 1986.
    Colorado: Moffat County. The Yampa River from the boundary of 
Dinosaur National Monument in T.6N., R.99W., sec. 27 (6th Principal 
Meridian) to the confluence with the Green River in T.7N., R.103W., sec. 
28 (6th Principal Meridian).
    Utah: Uintah County; and Colorado: Moffat County. The Green River 
from the confluence with the Yampa River in T.7N., R.103W., sec. 28 (6th 
Principal Meridian) to the boundary of Dinosaur National Monument in 
T.6N., R.24E., sec. 30 (Salt Lake Meridian).
    Utah: Uintah and Grand Counties. The Green River (Desolation and 
Gray Canyons) from Sumner's Amphitheater in T.12S., R.18E., sec. 5 (Salt 
Lake Meridian) to Swasey's Rapid in T.20S., R.16E., sec. 3 (Salt Lake 
Meridian).

[[Page 281]]

    Utah: Grand County; and Colorado: Mesa County. The Colorado River 
from Black Rocks in T.10S., R.104W., sec. 25 (6th Principal Meridian) to 
Fish Ford in T.21S., R.24E., sec. 35 (Salt Lake Meridian).
    Utah: Garfield and San Juan Counties. The Colorado River from Brown 
Betty Rapid in T.30S., R.18E., sec. 34 (Salt Lake Meridian) to Imperial 
Canyon in T.31S., R.17E., sec. 28 (Salt Lake Meridian).
    Arizona: Mohave County; Nevada: Clark County; and California: San 
Bernardino County. The Colorado River from Hoover Dam in T.30N., R.23W., 
sec. 3 (Gila and Salt River Meridian) to Davis Dam in T.21N., R.21W., 
sec. 18 (Gila and Salt River Meridian) including Lake Mohave up to its 
full pool elevation.
    Arizona: Mohave County; and California: San Bernardino County. The 
Colorado River from the northern boundary of Havasu National Wildlife 
Refuge in R.22W., T.16N., sec. 1 (Gila and Salt River Meridian) to 
Parker Dam in T.11N., R.18W., sec. 16 (Gila and Salt River Meridian) 
including Lake Havasu up to its full pool elevation.
    Known constituent elements include water, physical habitat, and 
biological environment as required for each particular life stage for 
each species.
    Note: Map follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.086
    
                    Borax Lake Chub (Gila boraxobius)

    Oregon. Harney County. Borax Lake and environments associated with 
the outflow from Borax Lake located within SW\1/4\ Sec. 11, W\1/2\ Sec. 
14, E\3/4\ of the SE\1/4\ Sec. 15, and the SE\1/4\ of the NE\1/4\ Sec. 
15; T37S; R33E.
    Note: Map follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.087
    
                       Gila Chub (Gila intermedia)

    (1) Critical habitat for the Gila chub in Grant County, New Mexico, 
and Yavapai, Gila, Greenlee, Graham, Cochise, Pima, Santa Cruz, and 
Pinal Counties in Arizona is described in detail and depicted on the 
following maps below.
    (2) Within these areas, the primary constituent elements are the 
following:
    (i) Perennial pools, areas of higher velocity between pool areas, 
and areas of shallow water among plants or eddies all found in small 
segments of headwaters, springs, or cienegas of smaller tributaries;
    (ii) Water temperatures for spawning ranging from 17 to 24 [deg]C 
(62.6 to 75.2 [deg]F), and seasonally appropriate temperatures for all 
life stages (e.g., varying from approximately 10 [deg]C to 30 [deg]C);
    (iii) Water quality with reduced levels of contaminants, including 
excessive levels of sediments adverse to Gila chub health, and adequate 
levels of pH (e.g., ranging from 6.5 to 9.5), dissolved oxygen (e.g., 
ranging from 3.0 to 10.0) and conductivity (e.g., 100 to 1000 mmhos);
    (iv) Food base consisting of invertebrates (e.g., aquatic and 
terrestrial insects) and aquatic plants (e.g., diatoms and filamentous 
green algae);
    (v) Sufficient cover consisting of downed logs in the water channel, 
submerged aquatic vegetation, submerged large tree root wads, undercut 
banks with sufficient overhanging vegetation, large rocks and boulders 
with overhangs, and a high degree of streambank stability and healthy, 
intact riparian vegetative community;
    (vi) Habitat devoid of nonnative aquatic species detrimental to Gila 
chub or habitat in which detrimental nonnatives are kept at a level that 
allows Gila chub to continue to survive and reproduce; and

[[Page 282]]

    (vii) Streams that maintain a natural flow pattern including 
periodic flooding.
    (3) Each stream segment includes a lateral component that consists 
of 300 feet on either side of the stream channel measured from the 
stream edge at bank full discharge. This lateral component of critical 
habitat is intended as a surrogate for the 100-year floodplain.
    (4) Lands located within the boundaries of the critical habitat 
designation, but are excluded by definition include: Existing paved 
roads; bridges; parking lots; dikes; levees; diversion structures; 
railroad tracks; railroad trestles; water diversion canals outside of 
natural stream channels; active gravel pits; cultivated agricultural 
land; and residential, commercial, and industrial developments. These 
developed areas do not contain any of the primary constituent elements, 
do not provide habitat or biological features essential to the 
conservation of the Gila chub, and generally will not contribute to the 
species' recovery.
    (5) Critical Habitat Map Areas. Data layers defining map areas, and 
mapping of critical habitat areas, was done using Arc GIS and verifying 
with USGS 7.5[min] quadrangles. Legal descriptions for New Mexico and 
Arizona are based on the Public Lands Survey System (PLSS). Within this 
system, all coordinates reported for New Mexico are in the New Mexico 
Principal Meridian (NMPM), while those in Arizona are in the Gila and 
Salt River Meridian (GSRM). Township has been abbreviated as ``T'', 
Range as ``R'', and section as ``sec.'' Where possible, the ending or 
starting points have been described to the nearest quarter-section, 
abbreviated as ``\1/4\''. Cardinal directions are also abbreviated (N = 
North, S = South, W = West, and E = East). All mileage calculations were 
performed using GIS.
    (6) Note: Map 1 (index map) follows:

[[Page 283]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR02NO05.036

    (7) Area 1: Upper Gila River--Grant County, New Mexico, and Greenlee 
County, Arizona.
    (i) Turkey Creek: 22.3 km (13.8 mi) of creek extending from the edge 
of the Gila Wilderness boundary at T14S, R16W, sec. 15 NW\1/4\ and 
continuing upstream to T13S, R15W, sec. 30 NE\1/4\. Land ownership: Gila 
National Forest and private.
    (ii) Eagle Creek and East Eagle Creek: 39.2 km (24.4 mi) of creek 
extending from its confluence with an unnamed tributary at T1N,

[[Page 284]]

R28E, sec. 31 SW\1/4\ upstream to the headwaters of East Eagle Creek 
just south of Highway 191 in T3N, R29E, sec. 28 SE\1/4\. Land ownership: 
Apache-Sitgreaves National Forest and private.
    (iii) Harden Cienega Creek: 22.6 km (14.0 mi) of creek extending 
from its confluence with the San Francisco River in GSRM T3S, R31E, sec. 
3 SE\1/4\ upstream to the headwaters in NMPM T14S, R21W, sec. 6 NE\1/4\. 
Land ownership: Apache-Sitgreaves National Forest, Gila National Forest, 
and private.
    (iv) Dix Creek: Portions of the Creek beginning 1.0 mile upstream 
from its confluence with the San Francisco River at a natural rock 
barrier in T3S, R31E, sec. 9 NE\1/4\ continuing upstream for 0.9 km (0.6 
mi.) to the confluence of the right and left prongs of Dix Creek in T3S, 
R31E, sec. 9 center. Includes Left Prong of Dix Creek upstream of its 
confluence with Dix Creek 2.0 km (1.2 mi) to T3S, R31E, section 15 NW\1/
4\. Land ownership: Apache-Sitgreaves National Forest. Includes the 
Right Prong of Dix Creek continuing upstream of its confluence with Dix 
Creek 4.8 km (3.0 mi) to T3S, R31E, section 20 SE\1/4\. Land ownership: 
Apache-Sitgreaves National Forest.
    (v) Note: Map of Area 1, Gila River, (Map 2) follows:

[[Page 285]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR02NO05.037

    (8) Area 2: Middle Gila River--Gila and Pinal Counties, Arizona.
    (i) Mineral Creek: 14.4 km (9.0 mi) of creek extending from its 
confluence with Devil's Canyon in T2S, R13E, section 35 NW\1/4\ 
continuing upstream to its headwaters in T2S, R14E, sec. 15 center at 
the confluence of Mineral Creek and an unknown drainage. Land ownership: 
Tonto National Forest, State, and private.
    (ii) Note: Map of Area Upper Gila River, (Map 3) follows:

[[Page 286]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR02NO05.038

    (9) Area 3: Babocomari River--Santa Cruz County, Arizona.
    (i) O'Donnell Canyon: 10.0 km (6.2 mi) of creek extending from its 
confluence with Turkey Creek at T21S, R18E, sec. 22 SE\1/4\ upstream to 
the confluences of Western, Middle, and Pauline Canyons in T22S, R18E, 
sec. 17 NE\1/4\. Land ownership: Bureau of Land Management, Coronado 
National Forest, and private.
    (ii) Turkey Creek: 6.3 km (3.9 mi) of creek extending from its 
confluence with

[[Page 287]]

O'Donnell Canyon in T21S, R18E, sec. 22 SE\1/4\ upstream to where Turkey 
Creek crosses AZ Highway 83 in T22S, R18E, sec. 9 NE\1/4\. Land 
ownership: Coronado National Forest, and private.
    (iii) Note: Map of Area 3, Babocomari River, (Map 4) follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR02NO05.039
    

[[Page 288]]


    (10) Area 4: Lower San Pedro River--Cochise and Graham Counties, 
Arizona.
    (i) Bass Canyon: 5.5 km (3.4 mi) of creek extending from its 
confluence with Hot Springs Canyon in T12S, R20E, sec. 36 NE\1/4\ 
upstream to the confluence with Pine Canyon in T12S, R21E, sec. 20 SW\1/
4\. Land ownership: Bureau of Land Management and private.
    (ii) Hot Springs Canyon: 10.5 km (6.5 mi) of creek extending from 
T13S R20E, sec. 5 NW\1/4\ continuing upstream to its confluence with 
Bass Canyon in T12S, R20E, sec. 36 NE\1/4\. Land ownership: Bureau of 
Land Management, State, and private (The Nature Conservancy).
    (iii) Redfield Canyon: 9.8 km (6.1 mi) of creek extending from the 
western boundary of T11S, R19E, section 35 upstream to its confluence 
with Sycamore Canyon in T11S, R20E, sec. 28 NE\1/4\. Land ownership: 
Bureau of Land Management, State, and private.
    (iv) Note: Map of Area 4, Lower San Pedro River, (Map 5) follows:

[[Page 289]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR02NO05.040

    (11) Area 5: Lower Santa Cruz River--Pima County, Arizona.
    (i) Cienega Creek: (Two Segments). First segment includes 14.2 km 
(8.8 mi) of creek extending from where Cienega Creek becomes Pantano 
Wash T16S, R16E, at the boundary of sec. 14 and sec. 23 to where it 
crosses Interstate 10 at T17S, R17E, sec. 1 NW\1/4\. Land ownership: 
County and State Trust. Second segment includes 13.6 km (8.4 mi) of 
creek extending from T18S, R18E, sec. 6 S\1/2\ to its confluence with 
Empire Gulch at

[[Page 290]]

T19S, R17E, sec. 3 SE\1/4\. Land ownership: Bureau of Land Management 
and State.
    (ii) Mattie Canyon: 4.0 km (2.5 mi) of creek extending from its 
confluence with Cienega Creek in T18S, R17E, sec. 23 NE\1/4\ upstream to 
the Bureau of Land Management Boundary in T18S, R17E, sec. 25 SW\1/4\. 
Land Ownership: Bureau of Land Management.
    (iii) Empire Gulch: 5.2 km (3.2 mi) of creek extending from its 
confluence with Cienega Creek in T19S, R17E, sec. 3 SE\1/4\ continuing 
upstream to T19S, R17E, sec. 16 NW\1/4\ on the western boundary of 
section 16. Land Ownership: Bureau of Land Management and State.
    (iv) Sabino Canyon: 11.1 km (6.9 mi) of creek extending from the 
southern boundary of the Coronado National Forest in T13S, R15E, sec. 9 
SE\1/4\ upstream to its confluence with the West Fork of Sabino Canyonin 
T12S, R15E, sec. 22 NE\1/4\. Land ownership: Coronado National Forest.
    (v) Note: Map of Area 5, Lower Santa Cruz River, (Map 6) follows:

[[Page 291]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR02NO05.041

    (12) Area 6: Upper Verde River--Yavapai County, Arizona.
    (i) Walker Creek: 7.6 km (4.7 mi) of creek extending from Prescott 
National Forest Road 618 in T15N, R6E, sec. 33 SW\1/4\ upstream to its 
confluence with Spring Creek in T14N, R6E, sec. 1, SE\1/4\. Land 
ownership: Coconino National Forest and private.
    (ii) Red Tank Draw: 11.1 km (6.9 mi) of creek extending from the 
National Park Service boundary just upstream of its confluence with Wet 
Beaver Creek in T15N, R6E,

[[Page 292]]

sec. 31 NE\1/4\ upstream to the confluence of Mullican and Rarick 
canyons in T15N, R6E, sec. 2 NW\1/4\. Land ownership: Coconino National 
Forest and private.
    (iii) Spring Creek: 2.7 km (1.7 mi) of creek including all non-
private land extending from T16N, R4E, sec. 27 SE\1/4\ at the boundary 
of Forest Service land and continuing upstream to the Arizona Highway 
89A crossing in T16N, R4E, sec. 16 SE\1/4\. Land ownership: Coconino 
National Forest, and State.
    (iv) Williamson Valley Wash: 7.2 km (4.4 mi) of creek extending from 
the gauging station in T17N, R3W, sec. 7 SE\1/4\ upstream to the 
crossing of the Williamson Valley Road in T17N, R4W, sec. 36 NE\1/4\. 
Land ownership: private.
    (v) Note: Map of Area 6, Upper Verde River, (Map 7) follows:

[[Page 293]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR02NO05.042

    (13) Area 7: Agua Fria River--Yavapai County, Arizona.
    (i) Little Sycamore Creek: 4.7 km (2.9 mi) of creek extending from 
its confluence with Sycamore Creek in T11N, R4E, sec. 6 SW\1/4\ upstream 
to T11N, R4E, sec. 4 NE\1/4\. Land ownership: Prescott National Forest 
and private.
    (ii) Sycamore Creek: 18.3 km (11.4 mi) of creek extending from its 
confluence with Little Sycamore Creek at T11N, R4E, sec. 6 SW\1/4\ 
upstream to Nelson Place Spring in

[[Page 294]]

T11N, R5E, sec. 21 NE\1/4\. Land ownership: Prescott National Forest and 
private.
    (iii) Indian Creek: 8.4 km (5.2 mi) of creek extending from T11N, 
R3E, sec. 35 NE\1/4\ to Upper Water Springs in T11N, R4E, sec. 16 SE\1/
4\. Land ownership: Bureau of Land Management, Prescott National Forest, 
and private.
    (iv) Silver Creek: 8.5 km (5.3 mi) of creek extending from T10N, 
R3E, sec. 10 SE\1/4\ continuing upstream to the spring in T10N, R4E, 
Sec. 4 SW\1/4\. Land ownership: Tonto National Forest and Bureau of Land 
Management.
    (v) Lousy Canyon: Portions of the creek from the confluence of an 
unnamed tributary upstream to the fork with an unnamed tributary 
approximately 0.6 km (0.4 mi) upstream, all entirely T9N, R3E, sec. 5 
NW\1/4\. Land ownership: Bureau of Land Management.
    (vi) Larry Creek: Portions of the creek from an unnamed tributary 
and continuing upstream 0.7 km (0.4 mi) to the confluence of two 
adjoining unnamed tributaries, entirely within T9N, R3E, sec. 9 NW\1/4\. 
Land ownership: Bureau of Land Management.
    (vii) Note: Map of Area 7, Aqua Fria River, (Map 8) follows:

[[Page 295]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR02NO05.043

                       Humpback Chub (Gila cypha)

    Description of areas taken from BLM 1:100,000 scale maps (available 
from BLM State Offices): Rangely, CO 1989; Canyon of Lodore, CO 1990; 
Seep Ridge, UT/CO 1982; Vernal, UT/CO 1982; Grand Junction, CO 1990; 
Moab, UT/CO 1985; La Sal, UT/CO 1985; Tuba City, AZ 1983; Peach Springs, 
AZ 1980; Grand Canyon, AZ 1980; Mt. Trumbull, AZ 1979.
    Colorado: Moffat County. The Yampa River from the boundary of 
Dinosaur National Monument in T.6N., R.99W., sec. 27 (6th Principal 
Meridian) to the confluence with the

[[Page 296]]

Green River in T.7N., R.103W., sec. 28 (6th Principal Meridian).
    Utah: Uintah County; and Colorado: Moffat County. The Green River 
from the confluence with the Yampa River in T.7N., R.103W., sec. 28 (6th 
Principal Meridian) to the southern boundary of Dinosaur National 
Monument in T.6N., R.24E., sec. 30 (Salt Lake Meridian).
    Utah: Uintah and Grand Counties. The Green River (Desolation and 
Gray Canyons) from Sumner's Amphitheater in T.12S., R.18E., sec. 5 (Salt 
Lake Meridian) to Swasey's Rapid in T.20S., R.16E., sec. 3 (Salt Lake 
Meridian).
    Utah: Grand County; and Colorado: Mesa County. The Colorado River 
from Black Rocks in T.10S., R.104W., sec. 25 (6th Principal Meridian) to 
Fish Ford River in T.21S., R.24E., sec. 35 (Salt Lake Meridian).
    Utah: Garfield and San Juan Counties. The Colorado River from Brown 
Betty Rapid River in T.30S., R.18E., sec. 34 (Salt Lake Meridian) to 
Imperial Canyon in T.31S., R.17E., sec. 28 (Salt Lake Meridian).
    Arizona: Coconino County. The Little Colorado River from river mile 
8 in T.32N., R.6E., sec. 12 (Salt and Gila River Meridian) to the 
confluence with the Colorado River in T.32N., R.5E., sec. 1 (Salt and 
Gila River Meridian).
    Arizona: Coconino County. The Colorado River from Nautiloid Canyon 
in T.36N., R.5E., sec. 35 (Salt and Gila River Meridian) to Granite Park 
in T.30N., R.10W., sec. 25 (Salt and Gila River Meridian).
    Known constituent elements include water, physical habitat, and 
biological environment as required for each particular life stage for 
each species.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.088

                   Oregon Chub (Oregonichthys crameri)

    (1) Critical habitat units are depicted for Benton, Lane, Linn, and 
Marion Counties, Oregon, on the maps below.
    (2) The primary constituent elements of critical habitat for the 
Oregon chub are the habitat components that provide:
    (i) Off-channel water bodies such as beaver ponds, oxbows, side-
channels, stable backwater sloughs, low-gradient tributaries, and 
flooded marshes, including at least 500 continuous square meters (0.12 
ac) of aquatic surface area at depths between approximately 0.5-2.0 m 
(1.6-6.6 ft).
    (ii) Aquatic vegetation covering a minimum of 250 square meters (.06 
ac) (or between approximately 25 and 100 percent of the total surface 
area of the habitat). This vegetation is primarily submergent for 
purposes of spawning, but also includes emergent and floating vegetation 
and algae, which are important for cover throughout the year. Areas with 
sufficient vegetation are likely to also have the following 
characteristics:
    (A) Gradient less than 2.5 percent;
    (B) No or very low water velocity in late spring and summer;
    (C) Silty, organic substrate; and
    (D) Abundant minute organisms such as rotifers, copepods, 
cladocerans, and chironomid larvae.
    (iii) Late spring and summer subsurface water temperatures between 
15 and 25 [deg]C (59 and 78 [deg]F), with natural diurnal and seasonal 
variation.
    (iv) No or negligible levels of nonnative aquatic predatory or 
competitive species. Negligible is defined for the purpose of this rule 
as a minimal level of nonnative species that will still allow the Oregon 
chub to continue to survive and recover.
    (3) Critical habitat does not include manmade structures (including, 
but not limited to, docks, seawalls, pipelines, runways, or other 
structures or paved areas) and the land or waterway on which they are 
located that exist within the legal boundaries on the effective date of 
this rule.
    (4) Critical Habitat Map Units. The data layer defining critical 
habitat was created using a Trimble GeoXT GPS unit. These critical 
habitat units were mapped using Universal Transverse Mercator, Zone 10, 
North American Datum 1983 (UTM NAD 83) coordinates. These coordinates 
establish the vertices and endpoints of the boundaries of the units. 
From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Albany.
    (5) Note: Index map for critical habitat for the Oregon chub 
(Oregonichthys crameri) follows:

[[Page 297]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10MR10.000

    (6) Unit 1A: Santiam I-5 Side Channels, Linn County, Oregon.
    (i) This unit consists of three ponds totaling 1.4 ha (3.3 ac), 
located on a 27-ha (66-ac) property on the south side of the Santiam 
River, upstream of the Interstate Highway 5 bridge crossing in Linn 
County, Oregon.
    (ii) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 495981, 4953649; 495990, 4953647; 496000, 4953645; 496010, 
4953645; 496012, 4953644; 496012, 4953642; 496010, 4953640; 496001, 
4953639; 495992, 4953638; 495980, 4953640; 495975, 4953641; 495966, 
4953644; 495959, 4953647; 495954, 4953648; 495941, 4953649; 495933,

[[Page 298]]

4953648; 495926, 4953649; 495907, 4953654; 495897, 4953656; 495888, 
4953658; 495879, 4953660; 495862, 4953661; 495864, 4953676; 495876, 
4953675; 495889, 4953673; 495900, 4953671; 495912, 4953667; 495922, 
4953664; 495930, 4953660; 495941, 4953660; 495945, 4953659; 495955, 
4953658; 495962, 4953656; 495973, 4953653; 495981, 4953649;
    Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates (E,N): 
496146, 4953619; 496158, 4953612; 496173, 4953605; 496182, 4953598; 
496191, 4953592; 496202, 4953587; 496212, 4953583; 496220, 4953581; 
496225, 4953579; 496229, 4953582; 496232, 4953576; 496229, 4953573; 
496231, 4953570; 496238, 4953564; 496242, 4953559; 496247, 4953555; 
496249, 4953550; 496246, 4953547; 496243, 4953547; 496237, 4953552; 
496230, 4953556; 496225, 4953562; 496221, 4953567; 496216, 4953569; 
496214, 4953571; 496209, 4953568; 496202, 4953570; 496196, 4953573; 
496186, 4953578; 496182, 4953575; 496190, 4953567; 496199, 4953563; 
496206, 4953558; 496205, 4953547; 496193, 4953540; 496179, 4953540; 
496168, 4953539; 496161, 4953529; 496147, 4953530; 496139, 4953538; 
496131, 4953549; 496120, 4953561; 496114, 4953571; 496109, 4953580; 
496108, 4953587; 496106, 4953594; 496098, 4953604; 496090, 4953611; 
496082, 4953619; 496084, 4953627; 496077, 4953635; 496068, 4953641; 
496056, 4953649; 496045, 4953656; 496030, 4953662; 496017, 4953668; 
496002, 4953671; 495979, 4953676; 495969, 4953678; 495957, 4953681; 
495947, 4953683; 495935, 4953687; 495925, 4953688; 495917, 4953692; 
495917, 4953699; 495925, 4953705; 495932, 4953707; 495947, 4953708; 
495960, 4953708; 495978, 4953710; 495993, 4953707; 496009, 4953700; 
496024, 4953694; 496038, 4953690; 496051, 4953685; 496061, 4953678; 
496070, 4953672; 496078, 4953665; 496089, 4953655; 496100, 4953646; 
496117, 4953634; 496126, 4953627; 496136, 4953624; 496146, 4953619; and 
excluding land bound by 496163, 4953570; 496160, 4953566; 496153, 
4953567; 496151, 4953564; 496151, 4953561; 496156, 4953559; 496162, 
4953562; 496167, 4953565; 496172, 4953564; 496176, 4953564; 496181, 
4953566; 496176, 4953573; 496173, 4953582; 496167, 4953587; 496161, 
4953586; 496156, 4953588; 496153, 4953592; 496146, 4953596; 496137, 
4953599; 496131, 4953601; 496123, 4953606; 496115, 4953611; 496109, 
4953615; 496104, 4953619; 496109, 4953611; 496110, 4953603; 496117, 
4953598; 496121, 4953592; 496129, 4953587; 496136, 4953580; 496143, 
4953577; 496150, 4953576; 496163, 4953570; and excluding land bound by 
496137, 4953566; 496135, 4953569; 496131, 4953569; 496131, 4953565; 
496134, 4953562; 496136, 4953564; 496137, 4953566;
    (iii) Map of Unit 1A of critical habitat for the Oregon chub 
(Oregonichthys crameri) follows:

[[Page 299]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10MR10.001

    (7) Unit 1B(1): Geren Island North Channel, Marion County, Oregon.
    (i) This unit totals approximately 0.8 ha (1.9 ac) and is located on 
the grounds of a water treatment facility owned by the City of Salem in 
Marion County, Oregon.
    (ii) Land bound by the following coordinates (EN): 519305, 4960118; 
519312, 4960112; 519322, 4960112; 519338, 4960110; 519360, 4960109; 
519367, 4960111; 519380, 4960106; 519387, 4960105; 519405, 4960103; 
519427, 4960100; 519439, 4960098; 519446, 4960097; 519461, 4960094; 
519468, 4960092; 519490, 4960089; 519511, 4960081; 519526, 4960079;

[[Page 300]]

519540, 4960073; 519553, 4960069; 519560, 4960068; 519564, 4960067; 
519576, 4960062; 519593, 4960056; 519616, 4960047; 519628, 4960039; 
519633, 4960033; 519634, 4960019; 519627, 4960014; 519615, 4960018; 
519606, 4960023; 519595, 4960031; 519590, 4960035; 519581, 4960040; 
519568, 4960045; 519547, 4960053; 519533, 4960057; 519520, 4960062; 
519497, 4960065; 519474, 4960073; 519464, 4960074; 519442, 4960077; 
519413, 4960083; 519381, 4960088; 519366, 4960091; 519355, 4960093; 
519340, 4960091; 519322, 4960089; 519311, 4960089; 519298, 4960090; 
519290, 4960091; 519281, 4960105; 519278, 4960114; 519289, 4960131; 
519293, 4960137; 519299, 4960134; 519301, 4960124; 519305, 4960118;
    (iii) Map of Unit 1B(1) of critical habitat for the Oregon chub 
(Oregonichthys crameri) follows:

[[Page 301]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10MR10.002

    (8) Unit 1B(2): Stayton Public Works Pond, Marion County, Oregon.
    (i) This unit totals approximately 0.4 ha (1.0 ac) and is located in 
and owned by the City of Stayton, in Marion County, Oregon.
    (ii) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 516606, 4960109; 516603, 4960102; 516607, 4960099; 516611, 
4960101; 516614, 4960101; 516622, 4960100; 516623, 4960098; 516622, 
4960095; 516614, 4960093; 516608, 4960091; 516606, 4960088; 516603, 
4960084; 516605,

[[Page 302]]

4960079; 516607, 4960077; 516610, 4960080; 516614, 4960084; 516616, 
4960085; 516618, 4960083; 516616, 4960078; 516613, 4960074; 516610, 
4960074; 516608, 4960073; 516605, 4960072; 516605, 4960067; 516604, 
4960064; 516603, 4960058; 516600, 4960051; 516593, 4960046; 516592, 
4960043; 516595, 4960040; 516598, 4960033; 516594, 4960027; 516590, 
4960023; 516583, 4960023; 516574, 4960020; 516568, 4960017; 516560, 
4960012; 516555, 4960010; 516549, 4960011; 516546, 4960011; 516543, 
4960013; 516540, 4960018; 516535, 4960020; 516534, 4960021; 516533, 
4960028; 516535, 4960038; 516540, 4960043; 516544, 4960055; 516547, 
4960061; 516547, 4960066; 516547, 4960077; 516550, 4960087; 516552, 
4960092; 516552, 4960100; 516552, 4960101; 516554, 4960100; 516555, 
4960097; 516554, 4960092; 516553, 4960082; 516550, 4960071; 516551, 
4960067; 516554, 4960067; 516559, 4960070; 516563, 4960072; 516568, 
4960070; 516569, 4960071; 516572, 4960071; 516575, 4960068; 516578, 
4960064; 516583, 4960064; 516589, 4960066; 516589, 4960068; 516590, 
4960072; 516590, 4960080; 516588, 4960086; 516587, 4960086; 516585, 
4960088; 516583, 4960092; 516584, 4960095; 516589, 4960096; 516594, 
4960099; 516598, 4960102; 516599, 4960104; 516602, 4960104; 516604, 
4960110; 516604, 4960114; 516607, 4960114; 516606, 4960109; and 
excluding land bound by 516585, 4960037; 516586, 4960036; 516587, 
4960038; 516586, 4960040; 516585, 4960041; 516583, 4960040; 516584, 
4960039; 516585, 4960037; and excluding land bound by 516558, 4960022; 
516561, 4960022; 516562, 4960023; 516562, 4960025; 516559, 4960025; 
516557, 4960024; 516558, 4960022;
    (iii) See paragraph (10)(iii) for a map showing critical habitat 
unit 1B(2).
    (9) Unit 1B(3): South Stayton Pond, Linn County, Oregon.
    (i) This unit totals approximately 0.1 ha (0.2 ac), is located in 
Linn County, Oregon, and is owned by the Oregon Department of Fish and 
Wildlife (ODFW).
    (ii) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 515540, 4959144; 515536, 4959144; 515529, 4959146; 515522, 
4959149; 515513, 4959153; 515509, 4959158; 515507, 4959161; 515511, 
4959166; 515515, 4959169; 515522, 4959173; 515530, 4959177; 515536, 
4959180; 515540, 4959182; 515545, 4959180; 515546, 4959173; 515544, 
4959162; 515543, 4959153; 515543, 4959149; 515542, 4959147; 515540, 
4959144;
    (iii) See paragraph (10)(iii) for a map showing critical habitat 
unit 1B(3).
    (10) Unit 1B(4): Gray Slough, Marion County, Oregon.
    (i) This unit totals approximately 2.5 ha (6.2 ac), is privately 
owned, and is located in Marion County, Oregon.
    (ii) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 513857, 4957787; 513859, 4957785; 513856, 4957783; 513839, 
4957783; 513822, 4957784; 513807, 4957784; 513791, 4957786; 513775, 
4957786; 513772, 4957784; 513764, 4957785; 513748, 4957780; 513731, 
4957773; 513711, 4957767; 513689, 4957761; 513654, 4957755; 513630, 
4957749; 513605, 4957746; 513585, 4957742; 513558, 4957736; 513532, 
4957730; 513503, 4957727; 513480, 4957723; 513473, 4957717; 513468, 
4957712; 513460, 4957708; 513455, 4957707; 513443, 4957708; 513435, 
4957711; 513424, 4957713; 513415, 4957713; 513406, 4957709; 513397, 
4957703; 513378, 4957700; 513362, 4957696; 513353, 4957691; 513342, 
4957684; 513333, 4957683; 513324, 4957680; 513312, 4957678; 513300, 
4957674; 513286, 4957674; 513279, 4957671; 513270, 4957666; 513264, 
4957660; 513255, 4957658; 513247, 4957663; 513241, 4957662; 513237, 
4957651; 513229, 4957650; 513214, 4957648; 513202, 4957645; 513195, 
4957644; 513188, 4957644; 513181, 4957643; 513172, 4957640; 513161, 
4957637; 513152, 4957634; 513141, 4957631; 513132, 4957630; 513127, 
4957626; 513119, 4957623; 513111, 4957629; 513102, 4957630; 513094, 
4957626; 513084, 4957625; 513074, 4957622; 513066, 4957621; 513062, 
4957613; 513059, 4957610; 513053, 4957605; 513048, 4957598; 513044, 
4957601; 513043, 4957608; 513039, 4957613; 513035, 4957613; 513029, 
4957613; 513025, 4957609; 513021, 4957603; 513016, 4957599; 513011, 
4957591; 513004, 4957580; 512996, 4957571; 512989, 4957558; 512980, 
4957550; 512976, 4957539; 512972, 4957529; 512962, 4957517; 512955, 
4957514; 512948, 4957516; 512944, 4957524; 512948, 4957533; 512954, 
4957540; 512966, 4957547; 512969, 4957553; 512972, 4957564; 512977, 
4957573; 512980, 4957580; 512983, 4957587; 512991, 4957598; 513002, 
4957608; 513011, 4957616; 513022, 4957624; 513036, 4957633; 513045, 
4957636; 513052, 4957639; 513059, 4957645; 513067, 4957648; 513081, 
4957655; 513097, 4957664; 513108, 4957669; 513118, 4957673; 513133, 
4957679; 513148, 4957685; 513161, 4957690; 513178, 4957697; 513184, 
4957699; 513197, 4957703; 513214, 4957707; 513220, 4957709; 513233, 
4957712; 513247, 4957714; 513259, 4957717; 513268, 4957719; 513282, 
4957722; 513298, 4957725; 513310, 4957727; 513319, 4957727; 513332, 
4957730; 513350, 4957734; 513366, 4957734; 513379, 4957735; 513389, 
4957735; 513400, 4957735; 513418, 4957736; 513436, 4957737; 513449, 
4957738; 513461, 4957739; 513468, 4957739; 513497, 4957743; 513519, 
4957748; 513531, 4957752; 513539, 4957753; 513541, 4957752; 513540, 
4957750; 513533, 4957749; 513524, 4957746; 513508, 4957742; 513503, 
4957741; 513501, 4957738; 513505, 4957738; 513513, 4957740; 513522, 
4957742; 513531, 4957744; 513544, 4957748; 513556, 4957750; 513569, 
4957751; 513585, 4957754; 513599, 4957757; 513611, 4957757; 513627, 
4957759; 513639, 4957760; 513668, 4957768; 513700, 4957773; 513727, 
4957780; 513747, 4957787; 513769, 4957793; 513788, 4957791; 513801, 
4957791; 513814, 4957789; 513839, 4957788; 513857, 4957787;
    (iii) Map of Units 1B(2), 1B(3), and 1B(4) of critical habitat for 
the Oregon chub (Oregonichthys crameri) follows:

[[Page 303]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10MR10.003

    (11) Unit 1C: Foster Pullout Pond, Linn County, Oregon.
    (i) This unit totals 0.4 ha (1.0 ac), and is owned by the United 
States Army Corps of Engineers (USACE). The pond is located in Linn 
County, Oregon, on the north shore of Foster Reservoir in the South 
Santiam River drainage.
    (ii) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 529130, 4918726; 529115, 4918723; 529101, 4918725; 529089, 
4918735; 529094, 4918745; 529106, 4918755; 529122, 4918771; 529142, 
4918788; 529159, 4918805; 529175,

[[Page 304]]

4918821; 529175, 4918820; 529179, 4918819; 529180, 4918805; 529177, 
4918789; 529183, 4918787; 529183, 4918784; 529177, 4918778; 529172, 
4918767; 529168, 4918759; 529162, 4918746; 529153, 4918738; 529145, 
4918734; 529130, 4918726;
    (iii) Map of Unit 1C of critical habitat for the Oregon chub 
(Oregonichthys crameri) follows:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10MR10.004


[[Page 305]]


    (12) Unit 2A(1): Russell Pond, Lane County, Oregon.
    (i) This unit totals approximately 0.1 ha (0.1 ac), is privately 
owned, and is located in the Mohawk River drainage, Lane County, Oregon.
    (ii) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 514905, 4897668; 514916, 4897667; 514929, 4897668; 514939, 
4897667; 514952, 4897667; 514956, 4897667; 514959, 4897666; 514961, 
4897662; 514964, 4897661; 514969, 4897661; 514975, 4897662; 514976, 
4897659; 514970, 4897657; 514963, 4897656; 514960, 4897654; 514960, 
4897651; 514955, 4897650; 514945, 4897650; 514932, 4897650; 514917, 
4897650; 514908, 4897651; 514900, 4897651; 514898, 4897651; 514897, 
4897653; 514896, 4897656; 514895, 4897663; 514891, 4897663; 514884, 
4897662; 514878, 4897659; 514877, 4897660; 514883, 4897664; 514891, 
4897665; 514895, 4897666; 514897, 4897666; 514905, 4897668;
    (iii) See paragraph (13)(iii) for a map showing critical habitat 
unit 2A(1).
    (13) Unit 2A(2): Shetzline Pond, Lane County, Oregon.
    (i) This unit totals approximately 0.1 ha (0.3 ac), is privately 
owned, and is located in the Mohawk River drainage, Lane County, Oregon.
    (ii) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 515484, 4897250; 515477, 4897249; 515469, 4897250; 515464, 
4897252; 515461, 4897254; 515460, 4897259; 515462, 4897263; 515466, 
4897266; 515476, 4897267; 515485, 4897266; 515489, 4897265; 515493, 
4897262; 515494, 4897258; 515492, 4897254; 515489, 4897251; 515484, 
4897250;
    (iii) Map of Units 2A(1) and 2A(2) of critical habitat for the 
Oregon chub (Oregonichthys crameri) follows:

[[Page 306]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10MR10.005

    (14) Unit 2A(3): Big Island, Lane County, Oregon.
    (i) This unit totals 3.3 ha (8.2 ac), is owned by the McKenzie River 
Trust, and is located along the McKenzie River in Lane County, Oregon.
    (ii) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 507093, 4879404; 507095, 4879401; 507097, 4879400; 507099, 
4879398; 507099, 4879396; 507096, 4879397; 507091, 4879401; 507089, 
4879403; 507079, 4879395; 507071, 4879390; 507077, 4879388; 507081, 
4879386; 507085,

[[Page 307]]

4879384; 507091, 4879381; 507097, 4879378; 507099, 4879376; 507104, 
4879373; 507107, 4879371; 507112, 4879369; 507116, 4879368; 507121, 
4879365; 507127, 4879363; 507131, 4879360; 507136, 4879357; 507131, 
4879349; 507125, 4879353; 507120, 4879356; 507115, 4879358; 507110, 
4879360; 507103, 4879362; 507098, 4879366; 507092, 4879370; 507087, 
4879373; 507082, 4879375; 507078, 4879377; 507073, 4879380; 507069, 
4879381; 507064, 4879383; 507047, 4879368; 507030, 4879355; 507010, 
4879343; 507001, 4879338; 506986, 4879326; 506974, 4879317; 506961, 
4879310; 506960, 4879307; 506963, 4879303; 506970, 4879300; 506974, 
4879297; 506971, 4879293; 506965, 4879296; 506955, 4879303; 506946, 
4879298; 506943, 4879287; 506945, 4879279; 506949, 4879278; 506953, 
4879279; 506960, 4879276; 506961, 4879271; 506956, 4879265; 506944, 
4879261; 506929, 4879258; 506913, 4879255; 506902, 4879248; 506892, 
4879241; 506885, 4879236; 506891, 4879226; 506906, 4879239; 506922, 
4879240; 506930, 4879245; 506944, 4879252; 506955, 4879254; 506966, 
4879261; 506973, 4879275; 506982, 4879280; 506990, 4879284; 506999, 
4879289; 507009, 4879288; 507026, 4879290; 507042, 4879291; 507061, 
4879296; 507076, 4879295; 507081, 4879287; 507075, 4879279; 507053, 
4879277; 507035, 4879269; 507020, 4879267; 507013, 4879268; 506997, 
4879265; 506990, 4879259; 506998, 4879253; 507007, 4879251; 507015, 
4879247; 507031, 4879250; 507046, 4879252; 507062, 4879251; 507070, 
4879259; 507078, 4879257; 507084, 4879251; 507100, 4879247; 507111, 
4879242; 507120, 4879245; 507133, 4879246; 507145, 4879245; 507156, 
4879241; 507166, 4879239; 507171, 4879237; 507178, 4879231; 507184, 
4879222; 507190, 4879215; 507202, 4879194; 507202, 4879185; 507208, 
4879174; 507209, 4879156; 507212, 4879135; 507213, 4879127; 507211, 
4879118; 507206, 4879125; 507206, 4879135; 507203, 4879147; 507202, 
4879161; 507199, 4879175; 507193, 4879180; 507190, 4879172; 507189, 
4879166; 507186, 4879148; 507181, 4879137; 507171, 4879126; 507160, 
4879117; 507150, 4879110; 507138, 4879106; 507126, 4879110; 507125, 
4879117; 507133, 4879122; 507140, 4879122; 507147, 4879125; 507151, 
4879132; 507159, 4879140; 507166, 4879150; 507172, 4879157; 507173, 
4879166; 507173, 4879183; 507168, 4879192; 507161, 4879206; 507157, 
4879215; 507152, 4879226; 507145, 4879238; 507143, 4879242; 507136, 
4879243; 507126, 4879242; 507117, 4879241; 507111, 4879239; 507108, 
4879240; 507099, 4879244; 507094, 4879246; 507083, 4879248; 507081, 
4879250; 507077, 4879251; 507073, 4879250; 507068, 4879251; 507065, 
4879249; 507061, 4879247; 507049, 4879248; 507038, 4879247; 507025, 
4879244; 507019, 4879243; 507010, 4879243; 507001, 4879244; 506992, 
4879245; 506982, 4879245; 506983, 4879241; 506989, 4879241; 506999, 
4879237; 507007, 4879236; 507014, 4879233; 507021, 4879232; 507027, 
4879230; 507032, 4879230; 507042, 4879228; 507044, 4879226; 507042, 
4879224; 507033, 4879226; 507025, 4879227; 507018, 4879229; 507008, 
4879232; 506999, 4879233; 506989, 4879235; 506973, 4879236; 506961, 
4879233; 506940, 4879225; 506924, 4879221; 506903, 4879215; 506894, 
4879212; 506883, 4879212; 506869, 4879216; 506857, 4879229; 506843, 
4879242; 506830, 4879242; 506810, 4879244; 506792, 4879240; 506784, 
4879227; 506787, 4879205; 506795, 4879179; 506805, 4879165; 506816, 
4879148; 506817, 4879134; 506812, 4879116; 506826, 4879084; 506843, 
4879058; 506856, 4879043; 506846, 4879034; 506829, 4879053; 506821, 
4879069; 506813, 4879081; 506803, 4879105; 506795, 4879118; 506795, 
4879133; 506797, 4879145; 506796, 4879157; 506794, 4879165; 506790, 
4879173; 506787, 4879177; 506787, 4879174; 506789, 4879170; 506789, 
4879166; 506785, 4879164; 506783, 4879167; 506782, 4879173; 506781, 
4879177; 506780, 4879188; 506777, 4879197; 506774, 4879207; 506766, 
4879226; 506759, 4879234; 506750, 4879245; 506740, 4879250; 506722, 
4879253; 506707, 4879253; 506703, 4879258; 506703, 4879264; 506704, 
4879274; 506701, 4879282; 506699, 4879292; 506696, 4879293; 506688, 
4879290; 506677, 4879287; 506662, 4879284; 506651, 4879278; 506639, 
4879273; 506626, 4879266; 506618, 4879277; 506626, 4879282; 506637, 
4879288; 506649, 4879296; 506658, 4879300; 506669, 4879307; 506681, 
4879313; 506693, 4879320; 506707, 4879328; 506720, 4879335; 506731, 
4879339; 506740, 4879339; 506745, 4879338; 506748, 4879338; 506751, 
4879339; 506754, 4879341; 506756, 4879338; 506752, 4879336; 506749, 
4879332; 506745, 4879325; 506736, 4879319; 506728, 4879315; 506722, 
4879312; 506718, 4879307; 506710, 4879301; 506710, 4879296; 506719, 
4879287; 506730, 4879279; 506744, 4879278; 506755, 4879276; 506767, 
4879274; 506789, 4879276; 506804, 4879274; 506816, 4879274; 506826, 
4879273; 506834, 4879271; 506845, 4879272; 506853, 4879274; 506859, 
4879275; 506864, 4879279; 506869, 4879285; 506876, 4879290; 506884, 
4879296; 506892, 4879301; 506900, 4879307; 506910, 4879315; 506917, 
4879320; 506927, 4879328; 506936, 4879336; 506940, 4879340; 506946, 
4879344; 506953, 4879347; 506959, 4879348; 506957, 4879352; 506956, 
4879355; 506958, 4879357; 506961, 4879360; 506966, 4879360; 506970, 
4879356; 506973, 4879357; 506982, 4879361; 506991, 4879366; 507004, 
4879374; 507012, 4879378; 507020, 4879381; 507028, 4879385; 507044, 
4879392; 507055, 4879398; 507066, 4879405; 507075, 4879413; 507087, 
4879421; 507099, 4879426; 507107, 4879429; 507118, 4879430; 507122, 
4879430; 507121, 4879412; 507119, 4879411; 507111, 4879411; 507102, 
4879409; 507093, 4879406; 507093, 4879404; and excluding land bound by 
506890, 4879274; 506883, 4879269; 506872, 4879263; 506861, 4879256; 
506859, 4879253; 506869, 4879254; 506879, 4879260; 506890, 4879266; 
506902, 4879272; 506907, 4879278; 506907, 4879278; 506900, 4879277; 
506890, 4879274;
    Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates (E,N): 
507017, 4879310; 507023, 4879306; 507028, 4879308; 507030, 4879307; 
507028, 4879305; 507015, 4879299; 507008, 4879297; 507002, 4879296; 
506994, 4879293; 506981, 4879288; 506973, 4879286; 506968, 4879288; 
506970, 4879292; 506971, 4879293; 506974, 4879297; 506974, 4879298; 
506983, 4879301; 506991, 4879305; 506999, 4879310; 507009, 4879311; 
507017, 4879310;
    (iii) Map of Unit 2A(3) of critical habitat for the Oregon chub 
(Oregonichthys crameri) follows:

[[Page 308]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10MR10.006

    (15) Unit 2B(1): Ankeny Willow Marsh , Marion County, Oregon.
    (i) This unit totals 14.0 ha (34.5 ac), and is located in Marion 
County, Oregon, at the Ankeny National Wildlife Refuge.
    (ii) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 494301, 4959127; 494318, 4959124; 494328, 4959126; 494338, 
4959131; 494348, 4959134; 494359, 4959134; 494373, 4959127; 494386, 
4959104; 494396, 4959076; 494413, 4959050; 494434, 4959017; 494451, 
4958983; 494466,

[[Page 309]]

4958953; 494479, 4958932; 494498, 4958911; 494512, 4958896; 494530, 
4958884; 494528, 4958885; 494551, 4958869; 494585, 4958866; 494603, 
4958867; 494618, 4958861; 494628, 4958854; 494642, 4958838; 494675, 
4958818; 494703, 4958792; 494711, 4958776; 494719, 4958752; 494713, 
4958732; 494698, 4958720; 494693, 4958709; 494693, 4958703; 494698, 
4958689; 494705, 4958673; 494716, 4958660; 494718, 4958654; 494714, 
4958642; 494711, 4958623; 494710, 4958612; 494711, 4958605; 494720, 
4958591; 494718, 4958581; 494726, 4958576; 494732, 4958564; 494720, 
4958547; 494708, 4958530; 494696, 4958519; 494684, 4958527; 494670, 
4958544; 494652, 4958566; 494634, 4958589; 494619, 4958606; 494592, 
4958636; 494565, 4958665; 494541, 4958693; 494518, 4958718; 494498, 
4958738; 494465, 4958772; 494447, 4958788; 494420, 4958812; 494397, 
4958835; 494377, 4958859; 494360, 4958882; 494347, 4958900; 494326, 
4958927; 494310, 4958946; 494271, 4958996; 494234, 4959040; 494212, 
4959066; 494168, 4959117; 494144, 4959145; 494127, 4959161; 494091, 
4959202; 494073, 4959226; 494064, 4959244; 494056, 4959257; 494051, 
4959284; 494056, 4959320; 494056, 4959331; 494066, 4959344; 494080, 
4959353; 494094, 4959362; 494112, 4959373; 494123, 4959380; 494137, 
4959388; 494144, 4959387; 494153, 4959369; 494169, 4959341; 494182, 
4959326; 494200, 4959303; 494208, 4959293; 494242, 4959260; 494255, 
4959217; 494262, 4959174; 494278, 4959150; 494283, 4959143; 494301, 
4959127;
    (iii) Map of Unit 2B(1) of critical habitat for the Oregon chub 
(Oregonichthys crameri) follows:

[[Page 310]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10MR10.007

    (16) Unit 2B(2): Dunn Wetland, Benton County, Oregon.
    (i) This unit totals 6.1 ha (15.2 ac), is privately owned, and is 
located in Benton County, Oregon.
    (ii) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 470225, 4922333; 470235, 4922324; 470236, 4922329; 470238, 
4922344; 470241, 4922357; 470250, 4922355; 470246, 4922340; 470247, 
4922320; 470247, 4922297; 470249,

[[Page 311]]

4922269; 470238, 4922250; 470261, 4922225; 470284, 4922196; 470294, 
4922183; 470307, 4922160; 470331, 4922148; 470348, 4922122; 470353, 
4922112; 470369, 4922092; 470366, 4922064; 470362, 4922042; 470372, 
4922042; 470382, 4922035; 470385, 4922023; 470379, 4922013; 470370, 
4922010; 470364, 4922017; 470358, 4922021; 470350, 4922017; 470349, 
4921978; 470346, 4921960; 470347, 4921943; 470345, 4921932; 470341, 
4921931; 470335, 4921934; 470297, 4921958; 470272, 4921977; 470247, 
4921994; 470230, 4922005; 470217, 4922012; 470202, 4922022; 470188, 
4922033; 470179, 4922048; 470170, 4922062; 470170, 4922073; 470171, 
4922088; 470171, 4922100; 470164, 4922104; 470159, 4922102; 470145, 
4922085; 470137, 4922078; 470132, 4922078; 470129, 4922081; 470125, 
4922088; 470122, 4922098; 470115, 4922121; 470113, 4922135; 470115, 
4922143; 470110, 4922148; 470095, 4922149; 470078, 4922157; 470065, 
4922171; 470054, 4922186; 470056, 4922199; 470063, 4922207; 470082, 
4922221; 470099, 4922232; 470123, 4922248; 470154, 4922273; 470166, 
4922283; 470190, 4922305; 470205, 4922329; 470194, 4922349; 470204, 
4922362; 470212, 4922360; 470225, 4922333;
    (iii) Map of Unit 2B(2) of critical habitat for the Oregon chub 
(Oregonichthys crameri) follows:

[[Page 312]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10MR10.008

    (17) Unit 2B(3): Finley Display Pond, Benton County, Oregon.
    (i) This unit totals 1.0 ha (2.4 ac) and is located in Benton 
County, Oregon, on the William L. Finley National Wildlife Refuge.
    (ii) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 473297, 4917434; 473299, 4917431; 473303, 4917433; 473308, 
4917433; 473313, 4917430; 473317, 4917425; 473322, 4917418; 473323, 
4917413; 473320, 4917406; 473316, 4917390; 473310, 4917375; 473302, 
4917356; 473297,

[[Page 313]]

4917346; 473294, 4917333; 473287, 4917319; 473278, 4917310; 473273, 
4917315; 473266, 4917321; 473262, 4917328; 473257, 4917337; 473252, 
4917345; 473248, 4917354; 473244, 4917364; 473239, 4917372; 473237, 
4917380; 473232, 4917389; 473228, 4917397; 473226, 4917404; 473225, 
4917412; 473224, 4917424; 473223, 4917431; 473221, 4917445; 473222, 
4917459; 473226, 4917469; 473234, 4917475; 473240, 4917478; 473244, 
4917477; 473251, 4917474; 473260, 4917468; 473265, 4917467; 473274, 
4917462; 473284, 4917451; 473291, 4917445; 473296, 4917440; 473296, 
4917436; 473297, 4917434; and excluding land bound by 473238, 4917400; 
473246, 4917395; 473249, 4917396; 473252, 4917394; 473255, 4917393; 
473258, 4917392; 473260, 4917394; 473258, 4917397; 473258, 4917401; 
473254, 4917409; 473252, 4917413; 473245, 4917423; 473245, 4917425; 
473243, 4917428; 473242, 4917431; 473240, 4917433; 473238, 4917430; 
473236, 4917425; 473234, 4917419; 473233, 4917413; 473234, 4917406; 
473238, 4917400;
    (iii) See paragraph (19)(iii) for a map showing critical habitat 
unit 2B(3).
    (18) Unit 2B(4): Finley Cheadle Pond, Benton County, Oregon.
    (i) This unit totals 0.9 ha (2.3 ac) and is located in Benton 
County, Oregon, on the William L. Finley National Wildlife Refuge.
    (ii) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 475672, 4916089; 475679, 4916070; 475684, 4916056; 475685, 
4916053; 475690, 4916045; 475694, 4916035; 475699, 4916025; 475706, 
4916017; 475714, 4916012; 475725, 4916006; 475730, 4916004; 475735, 
4916003; 475741, 4916001; 475747, 4916003; 475752, 4916002; 475760, 
4916003; 475765, 4916001; 475766, 4915998; 475769, 4915995; 475768, 
4915987; 475768, 4915970; 475766, 4915960; 475763, 4915956; 475762, 
4915951; 475764, 4915947; 475765, 4915940; 475766, 4915931; 475766, 
4915917; 475761, 4915909; 475760, 4915904; 475757, 4915902; 475751, 
4915905; 475747, 4915910; 475741, 4915915; 475732, 4915925; 475721, 
4915937; 475708, 4915950; 475699, 4915960; 475699, 4915963; 475681, 
4915977; 475681, 4915982; 475674, 4915989; 475670, 4915996; 475669, 
4916001; 475666, 4916008; 475663, 4916019; 475661, 4916030; 475660, 
4916035; 475658, 4916041; 475653, 4916051; 475649, 4916056; 475642, 
4916055; 475638, 4916064; 475632, 4916075; 475636, 4916078; 475643, 
4916078; 475649, 4916080; 475654, 4916080; 475658, 4916080; 475657, 
4916087; 475654, 4916099; 475653, 4916104; 475661, 4916105; 475672, 
4916089;
    (iii) See paragraph (19)(iii) for a map showing critical habitat 
unit 2B(4).
    (19) Unit 2B(5): Finley Gray Creek Swamp, Benton County, Oregon.
    (i) This unit totals 3.0 ha (7.4 ac) and is located in Benton 
County, Oregon. Most of the unit is located on the southwest corner of 
the William L. Finley National Wildlife Refuge; however, a small portion 
of the unit is located on private property.
    (ii) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 472786, 4916068; 472780, 4916056; 472772, 4916045; 472756, 
4916036; 472735, 4916028; 472717, 4916022; 472704, 4916028; 472697, 
4916038; 472685, 4916041; 472670, 4916051; 472659, 4916056; 472650, 
4916059; 472641, 4916058; 472634, 4916052; 472627, 4916042; 472618, 
4916033; 472614, 4916026; 472608, 4916021; 472598, 4916017; 472581, 
4916015; 472564, 4916015; 472538, 4916017; 472514, 4916018; 472494, 
4916020; 472487, 4916013; 472474, 4916021; 472450, 4916023; 472428, 
4916026; 472408, 4916029; 472382, 4916034; 472353, 4916038; 472333, 
4916040; 472314, 4916045; 472306, 4916054; 472300, 4916065; 472293, 
4916072; 472282, 4916084; 472270, 4916086; 472259, 4916092; 472246, 
4916094; 472233, 4916092; 472223, 4916085; 472213, 4916085; 472212, 
4916094; 472218, 4916095; 472225, 4916100; 472232, 4916102; 472240, 
4916104; 472250, 4916105; 472255, 4916109; 472261, 4916109; 472266, 
4916105; 472266, 4916098; 472271, 4916096; 472277, 4916094; 472282, 
4916100; 472289, 4916102; 472300, 4916102; 472302, 4916104; 472307, 
4916108; 472312, 4916108; 472318, 4916104; 472323, 4916096; 472329, 
4916086; 472336, 4916074; 472339, 4916071; 472352, 4916068; 472377, 
4916065; 472388, 4916054; 472397, 4916050; 472408, 4916046; 472420, 
4916044; 472430, 4916044; 472440, 4916043; 472447, 4916044; 472460, 
4916046; 472467, 4916048; 472477, 4916050; 472489, 4916050; 472500, 
4916054; 472508, 4916054; 472515, 4916051; 472523, 4916052; 472536, 
4916060; 472545, 4916071; 472551, 4916078; 472559, 4916083; 472566, 
4916096; 472575, 4916098; 472587, 4916100; 472596, 4916113; 472611, 
4916123; 472631, 4916130; 472652, 4916133; 472670, 4916134; 472694, 
4916139; 472717, 4916139; 472738, 4916138; 472759, 4916136; 472763, 
4916133; 472770, 4916126; 472773, 4916124; 472772, 4916112; 472771, 
4916099; 472772, 4916077; 472780, 4916073; 472786, 4916068;
    (iii) Map of Units 2B(3), 2B(4), and 2B(5) of critical habitat for 
the Oregon chub (Oregonichthys crameri) follows:

[[Page 314]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10MR10.009

    (20) Unit 3A: Fall Creek Spillway Ponds, Lane County, Oregon.
    (i) This unit totals 1.5 ha (3.8 ac), is owned by the USACE, and is 
located in the overflow channel below Fall Creek Dam in Lane County, 
Oregon.
    (ii) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 519284, 4865517; 519298, 4865515; 519305, 4865515; 519311, 
4865508; 519313, 4865502; 519312, 4865488; 519309, 4865483; 519302, 
4865482; 519288, 4865486; 519270, 4865487; 519253, 4865487; 519243, 
4865488; 519236,

[[Page 315]]

4865490; 519225, 4865492; 519211, 4865494; 519193, 4865495; 519166, 
4865501; 519142, 4865506; 519112, 4865514; 519084, 4865520; 519069, 
4865524; 519057, 4865528; 519032, 4865534; 519009, 4865541; 518998, 
4865545; 518977, 4865553; 518959, 4865557; 518950, 4865560; 518928, 
4865565; 518911, 4865570; 518893, 4865575; 518875, 4865582; 518858, 
4865588; 518840, 4865594; 518833, 4865601; 518832, 4865607; 518834, 
4865612; 518841, 4865617; 518851, 4865619; 518874, 4865614; 518889, 
4865613; 518920, 4865605; 518956, 4865589; 518985, 4865579; 519034, 
4865569; 519074, 4865556; 519092, 4865547; 519129, 4865540; 519151, 
4865538; 519170, 4865530; 519195, 4865526; 519231, 4865523; 519243, 
4865519; 519284, 4865517;
    (iii) Map of Unit 3A of critical habitat for the Oregon chub 
(Oregonichthys crameri) follows:

[[Page 316]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10MR10.010

    (21) Unit 3B: Elijah Bristow State Park Berry Slough, Lane County, 
Oregon.
    (i) This unit totals 5.2 ha (12.7 ac) measured at the annual high-
water elevation, is owned by the Oregon Parks and Recreation Department 
(OPRD), and is located in Elijah Bristow State Park in Lane County, 
Oregon.
    (ii) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 513039, 4865406; 513039, 4865403; 513044, 4865400; 513049, 
4865395; 513057, 4865390; 513064, 4865385; 513074, 4865379; 513081, 
4865378; 513089, 4865378; 513099, 4865380; 513104, 4865383; 513105, 
4865388; 513107, 4865393; 513109, 4865396; 513113, 4865398; 513117,

[[Page 317]]

4865398; 513121, 4865396; 513123, 4865391; 513122, 4865387; 513117, 
4865377; 513106, 4865366; 513088, 4865355; 513080, 4865345; 513075, 
4865334; 513078, 4865315; 513080, 4865307; 513088, 4865290; 513090, 
4865267; 513098, 4865252; 513110, 4865242; 513123, 4865230; 513132, 
4865222; 513135, 4865219; 513146, 4865215; 513155, 4865213; 513155, 
4865218; 513154, 4865224; 513155, 4865226; 513158, 4865225; 513160, 
4865222; 513160, 4865215; 513159, 4865210; 513170, 4865206; 513190, 
4865204; 513229, 4865204; 513260, 4865194; 513281, 4865200; 513297, 
4865201; 513312, 4865204; 513329, 4865207; 513351, 4865210; 513363, 
4865214; 513371, 4865211; 513370, 4865207; 513365, 4865205; 513357, 
4865203; 513349, 4865201; 513337, 4865200; 513325, 4865199; 513312, 
4865196; 513298, 4865194; 513282, 4865188; 513261, 4865186; 513236, 
4865185; 513218, 4865181; 513193, 4865183; 513181, 4865190; 513163, 
4865196; 513137, 4865203; 513120, 4865211; 513113, 4865220; 513107, 
4865230; 513100, 4865225; 513100, 4865221; 513102, 4865215; 513109, 
4865205; 513118, 4865197; 513137, 4865183; 513160, 4865165; 513171, 
4865159; 513193, 4865152; 513205, 4865141; 513206, 4865125; 513210, 
4865118; 513209, 4865113; 513208, 4865095; 513206, 4865089; 513201, 
4865089; 513198, 4865102; 513196, 4865113; 513189, 4865123; 513182, 
4865135; 513173, 4865143; 513157, 4865151; 513143, 4865154; 513129, 
4865162; 513123, 4865168; 513106, 4865182; 513095, 4865192; 513088, 
4865204; 513084, 4865213; 513081, 4865223; 513073, 4865246; 513065, 
4865266; 513062, 4865273; 513055, 4865273; 513057, 4865265; 513057, 
4865258; 513052, 4865241; 513054, 4865232; 513057, 4865225; 513062, 
4865215; 513075, 4865198; 513083, 4865187; 513090, 4865177; 513091, 
4865171; 513083, 4865175; 513079, 4865180; 513072, 4865189; 513066, 
4865199; 513059, 4865209; 513051, 4865220; 513044, 4865231; 513037, 
4865223; 513030, 4865209; 513024, 4865198; 513016, 4865188; 513007, 
4865176; 513001, 4865169; 512994, 4865152; 512993, 4865124; 512993, 
4865117; 512996, 4865111; 512998, 4865104; 512998, 4865078; 513003, 
4865061; 513008, 4865048; 513001, 4865046; 512997, 4865056; 512989, 
4865066; 512983, 4865081; 512979, 4865105; 512979, 4865129; 512982, 
4865153; 512986, 4865165; 512995, 4865184; 513008, 4865202; 513023, 
4865226; 513031, 4865236; 513034, 4865248; 513035, 4865255; 513037, 
4865271; 513039, 4865286; 513042, 4865297; 513045, 4865307; 513049, 
4865314; 513051, 4865319; 513049, 4865330; 513040, 4865336; 513029, 
4865339; 513022, 4865342; 513015, 4865354; 513009, 4865367; 513000, 
4865383; 513001, 4865389; 513010, 4865399; 513023, 4865406; 513030, 
4865406; 513035, 4865405; 513035, 4865406; 513036, 4865408; 513037, 
4865409; 513039, 4865409; 513039, 4865408; 513039, 4865406; and 
excluding land bound by 513049, 4865347; 513054, 4865346; 513058, 
4865348; 513058, 4865353; 513058, 4865356; 513056, 4865362; 513051, 
4865366; 513043, 4865376; 513035, 4865387; 513029, 4865391; 513022, 
4865391; 513019, 4865386; 513022, 4865380; 513024, 4865375; 513030, 
4865369; 513035, 4865364; 513040, 4865358; 513044, 4865349; 513049, 
4865347;
    Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates (E,N): 
512811, 4865560; 512814, 4865555; 512827, 4865553; 512827, 4865554; 
512837, 4865553; 512857, 4865551; 512875, 4865548; 512890, 4865545; 
512908, 4865541; 512923, 4865533; 512932, 4865529; 512945, 4865526; 
512952, 4865527; 512958, 4865527; 512961, 4865529; 512963, 4865532; 
512966, 4865534; 512970, 4865533; 512970, 4865530; 512968, 4865527; 
512960, 4865523; 512947, 4865522; 512938, 4865523; 512926, 4865525; 
512929, 4865522; 512938, 4865520; 512949, 4865517; 512963, 4865512; 
512976, 4865510; 512989, 4865513; 513003, 4865515; 513019, 4865518; 
513034, 4865520; 513048, 4865524; 513060, 4865526; 513079, 4865532; 
513089, 4865531; 513110, 4865536; 513124, 4865542; 513125, 4865536; 
513119, 4865534; 513101, 4865528; 513087, 4865523; 513073, 4865520; 
513057, 4865517; 513032, 4865515; 513009, 4865511; 512993, 4865508; 
512982, 4865504; 512966, 4865503; 512956, 4865506; 512946, 4865510; 
512940, 4865513; 512936, 4865512; 512945, 4865505; 512958, 4865496; 
512977, 4865477; 512986, 4865467; 513007, 4865442; 513015, 4865429; 
513016, 4865423; 513006, 4865412; 512998, 4865404; 512995, 4865407; 
512997, 4865416; 512999, 4865422; 512984, 4865439; 512976, 4865453; 
512958, 4865467; 512940, 4865487; 512923, 4865500; 512905, 4865513; 
512889, 4865520; 512871, 4865522; 512851, 4865523; 512835, 4865523; 
512817, 4865524; 512801, 4865527; 512774, 4865532; 512756, 4865536; 
512741, 4865537; 512736, 4865537; 512730, 4865534; 512726, 4865534; 
512725, 4865533; 512726, 4865528; 512723, 4865528; 512723, 4865532; 
512722, 4865533; 512719, 4865534; 512718, 4865539; 512719, 4865543; 
512717, 4865547; 512706, 4865552; 512697, 4865559; 512702, 4865563; 
512706, 4865566; 512710, 4865565; 512715, 4865562; 512723, 4865559; 
512730, 4865557; 512735, 4865555; 512737, 4865557; 512737, 4865559; 
512733, 4865560; 512731, 4865565; 512735, 4865570; 512750, 4865573; 
512764, 4865573; 512790, 4865567; 512798, 4865565; 512811, 4865560; and 
excluding land bound by 512752, 4865557; 512753, 4865553; 512772, 
4865551; 512786, 4865548; 512793, 4865548; 512792, 4865553; 512782, 
4865556; 512769, 4865557; 512762, 4865558; 512756, 4865559; 512752, 
4865557;
    Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates (E,N): 
512517, 4866094; 512512, 4866079; 512511, 4866074; 512512, 4866071; 
512513, 4866068; 512512, 4866067; 512510, 4866069; 512509, 4866072; 
512506, 4866070; 512498, 4866067; 512489, 4866066; 512488, 4866055; 
512495, 4866045; 512506, 4866032; 512515, 4866022; 512524, 4866009; 
512534, 4865998; 512545, 4865989; 512553, 4865977; 512559, 4865964; 
512562, 4865956; 512567, 4865938; 512567, 4865930; 512568, 4865921; 
512572, 4865911; 512578, 4865902; 512580, 4865891; 512580, 4865878; 
512580, 4865864; 512582, 4865850; 512583, 4865827; 512584, 4865806; 
512593, 4865792; 512599, 4865783; 512602, 4865775; 512607, 4865764; 
512610, 4865755; 512612, 4865748; 512623, 4865738; 512629, 4865727; 
512635, 4865720; 512642, 4865712; 512645, 4865707; 512642, 4865701; 
512635, 4865699; 512632, 4865696; 512633, 4865695; 512636, 4865696; 
512641, 4865696; 512644, 4865694; 512651, 4865696; 512657, 4865703; 
512667, 4865715; 512676, 4865727; 512681, 4865731; 512686, 4865732; 
512683, 4865725; 512673, 4865713; 512661, 4865698; 512655, 4865689; 
512641, 4865681; 512630, 4865677; 512622, 4865670; 512621, 4865666; 
512623, 4865662; 512628, 4865661; 512635, 4865660; 512644, 4865658; 
512647, 4865655; 512646, 4865652; 512638, 4865653; 512626, 4865655; 
512621, 4865653; 512623, 4865645; 512629, 4865639; 512635, 4865630; 
512642, 4865625; 512651, 4865619; 512659, 4865610; 512667, 4865602; 
512674, 4865596; 512683, 4865590;

[[Page 318]]

512692, 4865582; 512700, 4865574; 512701, 4865572; 512698, 4865570; 
512693, 4865565; 512689, 4865568; 512678, 4865576; 512662, 4865586; 
512653, 4865595; 512642, 4865606; 512636, 4865610; 512626, 4865616; 
512618, 4865623; 512609, 4865635; 512600, 4865647; 512584, 4865649; 
512571, 4865658; 512570, 4865673; 512580, 4865682; 512579, 4865690; 
512572, 4865706; 512555, 4865727; 512543, 4865737; 512526, 4865749; 
512512, 4865758; 512501, 4865768; 512500, 4865773; 512504, 4865772; 
512515, 4865764; 512525, 4865756; 512539, 4865747; 512549, 4865739; 
512550, 4865739; 512563, 4865733; 512579, 4865724; 512589, 4865721; 
512594, 4865726; 512592, 4865735; 512589, 4865741; 512586, 4865748; 
512579, 4865754; 512572, 4865760; 512565, 4865770; 512557, 4865784; 
512553, 4865793; 512549, 4865816; 512550, 4865834; 512549, 4865851; 
512550, 4865873; 512552, 4865895; 512554, 4865899; 512555, 4865907; 
512555, 4865913; 512550, 4865924; 512541, 4865936; 512533, 4865951; 
512527, 4865963; 512522, 4865972; 512517, 4865981; 512509, 4865989; 
512501, 4866000; 512496, 4866005; 512490, 4866017; 512484, 4866027; 
512475, 4866039; 512468, 4866052; 512465, 4866067; 512420, 4866107; 
512388, 4866124; 512348, 4866132; 512319, 4866134; 512319, 4866146; 
512345, 4866144; 512388, 4866135; 512419, 4866125; 512445, 4866104; 
512465, 4866085; 512479, 4866085; 512496, 4866089; 512504, 4866099; 
512513, 4866123; 512523, 4866135; 512535, 4866144; 512541, 4866154; 
512541, 4866156; 512554, 4866153; 512551, 4866147; 512544, 4866138; 
512536, 4866131; 512531, 4866126; 512525, 4866119; 512523, 4866115; 
512518, 4866102; 512517, 4866094;
    (iii) See paragraph (23)(iii) for a map showing critical habitat 
unit 3B.
    (22) Unit 3C; Elijah Bristow State Park Northeast Slough, Lane 
County Oregon.
    (i) This unit totals 2.2 ha (5.4 ac), is owned by the OPRD, and is 
located in Elijah Bristow State Park in Lane County, Oregon.
    (ii) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 514970, 4864567; 514987, 4864557; 514999, 4864551; 515023, 
4864537; 515036, 4864528; 515054, 4864524; 515069, 4864515; 515092, 
4864496; 515116, 4864475; 515137, 4864447; 515154, 4864412; 515168, 
4864385; 515179, 4864364; 515191, 4864344; 515202, 4864316; 515216, 
4864293; 515229, 4864277; 515239, 4864261; 515245, 4864248; 515244, 
4864243; 515235, 4864243; 515219, 4864260; 515202, 4864285; 515185, 
4864311; 515175, 4864338; 515160, 4864364; 515147, 4864389; 515138, 
4864411; 515124, 4864438; 515108, 4864461; 515095, 4864474; 515081, 
4864487; 515063, 4864492; 515064, 4864482; 515066, 4864470; 515074, 
4864465; 515081, 4864461; 515088, 4864451; 515080, 4864455; 515069, 
4864461; 515057, 4864472; 515049, 4864483; 515044, 4864499; 515035, 
4864514; 515015, 4864525; 514990, 4864540; 514971, 4864551; 514955, 
4864559; 514947, 4864566; 514943, 4864559; 514947, 4864546; 514953, 
4864520; 514962, 4864502; 514983, 4864484; 514988, 4864475; 514997, 
4864459; 515007, 4864442; 515015, 4864432; 515025, 4864416; 515038, 
4864404; 515054, 4864391; 515064, 4864373; 515070, 4864353; 515075, 
4864332; 515079, 4864311; 515093, 4864315; 515105, 4864318; 515120, 
4864321; 515123, 4864317; 515116, 4864316; 515106, 4864314; 515098, 
4864311; 515088, 4864303; 515081, 4864299; 515085, 4864290; 515093, 
4864270; 515102, 4864250; 515108, 4864241; 515113, 4864232; 515119, 
4864213; 515125, 4864200; 515142, 4864194; 515156, 4864181; 515153, 
4864175; 515136, 4864189; 515126, 4864191; 515126, 4864188; 515129, 
4864174; 515136, 4864158; 515130, 4864155; 515126, 4864159; 515125, 
4864167; 515120, 4864181; 515113, 4864195; 515107, 4864211; 515099, 
4864235; 515093, 4864241; 515084, 4864263; 515074, 4864285; 515063, 
4864295; 515056, 4864314; 515054, 4864334; 515052, 4864338; 515046, 
4864354; 515044, 4864369; 515028, 4864384; 515012, 4864394; 515002, 
4864409; 514992, 4864422; 514986, 4864433; 514977, 4864442; 514967, 
4864461; 514956, 4864471; 514959, 4864474; 514944, 4864493; 514939, 
4864507; 514934, 4864522; 514927, 4864546; 514921, 4864559; 514909, 
4864572; 514902, 4864582; 514884, 4864597; 514879, 4864607; 514859, 
4864619; 514851, 4864630; 514837, 4864636; 514821, 4864648; 514813, 
4864656; 514799, 4864660; 514797, 4864675; 514809, 4864672; 514821, 
4864668; 514834, 4864666; 514845, 4864665; 514857, 4864664; 514873, 
4864650; 514886, 4864641; 514898, 4864625; 514909, 4864612; 514924, 
4864600; 514939, 4864590; 514959, 4864575; 514970, 4864567;
    (iii) See paragraph (23)(iii) for a map showing critical habitat 
unit 3C.
    (23) Unit 3D: Elijah Bristow Island Pond, Lane County, Oregon.
    (i) This unit totals 2.1 ha (5.2 ac), is owned by the OPRD, and is 
located in Elijah Bristow State Park in Lane County, Oregon.
    (ii) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 513941, 4864549; 513945, 4864542; 513958, 4864547; 513962, 
4864552; 513966, 4864555; 513973, 4864557; 513978, 4864556; 513982, 
4864554; 513989, 4864549; 513994, 4864543; 513996, 4864536; 513998, 
4864532; 514001, 4864519; 514004, 4864514; 514006, 4864512; 514019, 
4864508; 514030, 4864499; 514037, 4864494; 514047, 4864488; 514060, 
4864481; 514065, 4864482; 514067, 4864486; 514069, 4864489; 514071, 
4864491; 514075, 4864488; 514074, 4864485; 514072, 4864481; 514072, 
4864477; 514075, 4864470; 514082, 4864459; 514083, 4864448; 514080, 
4864429; 514075, 4864408; 514073, 4864391; 514072, 4864374; 514071, 
4864364; 514083, 4864365; 514084, 4864361; 514083, 4864349; 514081, 
4864341; 514072, 4864327; 514064, 4864318; 514055, 4864310; 514043, 
4864307; 514036, 4864310; 514021, 4864322; 514013, 4864327; 514008, 
4864340; 513999, 4864350; 513988, 4864362; 513979, 4864371; 513972, 
4864380; 513970, 4864388; 513974, 4864396; 513982, 4864404; 513991, 
4864414; 514006, 4864432; 514017, 4864442; 514020, 4864458; 514007, 
4864468; 513999, 4864466; 513993, 4864461; 513985, 4864465; 513986, 
4864475; 513985, 4864488; 513973, 4864496; 513963, 4864499; 513952, 
4864495; 513954, 4864489; 513963, 4864481; 513968, 4864475; 513978, 
4864466; 513982, 4864460; 513981, 4864455; 513976, 4864451; 513969, 
4864452; 513957, 4864458; 513953, 4864460; 513950, 4864466; 513950, 
4864473; 513945, 4864483; 513942, 4864493; 513937, 4864504; 513932, 
4864517; 513929, 4864519; 513920, 4864519; 513913, 4864518; 513904, 
4864523; 513892, 4864533; 513898, 4864552; 513907, 4864564; 513921, 
4864566; 513929, 4864576; 513936, 4864578; 513938, 4864556; 513941, 
4864549;
    (iii) Map of Units 3B, 3C, and 3D of critical habitat for the Oregon 
chub (Oregonichthys crameri) follows:

[[Page 319]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10MR10.011

    (24) Unit 3E: Dexter Reservoir RV Alcove DEX3, Lane County, Oregon.
    (i) This unit totals 0.4 ha (0.9 ac) and is owned by the USACE. The 
unit is located on the south side of Highway 58 off Dexter Reservoir 
next to a recreational vehicle (RV) park, in Lane County, Oregon.
    (ii) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 515412, 4862223; 515408, 4862221; 515405, 4862216; 515404, 
4862217; 515403, 4862220; 515402, 4862222; 515400,

[[Page 320]]

4862223; 515392, 4862221; 515388, 4862222; 515378, 4862227; 515374, 
4862237; 515364, 4862250; 515358, 4862257; 515352, 4862262; 515344, 
4862272; 515334, 4862285; 515323, 4862300; 515314, 4862311; 515304, 
4862315; 515297, 4862329; 515292, 4862335; 515285, 4862340; 515286, 
4862342; 515293, 4862339; 515299, 4862333; 515303, 4862327; 515313, 
4862322; 515320, 4862314; 515329, 4862311; 515335, 4862306; 515346, 
4862295; 515353, 4862291; 515364, 4862282; 515376, 4862274; 515388, 
4862267; 515399, 4862261; 515410, 4862255; 515420, 4862250; 515427, 
4862248; 515434, 4862246; 515436, 4862243; 515433, 4862239; 515429, 
4862235; 515425, 4862230; 515422, 4862226; 515419, 4862223; 515412, 
4862223;
    (iii) See paragraph (25)(iii) for a map showing critical habitat 
unit 3E.
    (25) Unit 3F: Dexter Reservoir Alcove PIT1, Lane County, Oregon.
    (i) This unit totals 0.1 ha (0.3 ac) measured at the annual high-
water elevation, and is owned by the USACE. The unit is located on the 
south side of Highway 58 off Dexter Reservoir, in Lane County, Oregon.
    (ii) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 517131, 4861681; 517127, 4861680; 517127, 4861680; 517128, 
4861683; 517130, 4861693; 517128, 4861699; 517128, 4861703; 517127, 
4861711; 517123, 4861719; 517123, 4861722; 517123, 4861722; 517126, 
4861721; 517129, 4861719; 517135, 4861717; 517145, 4861712; 517153, 
4861708; 517158, 4861705; 517164, 4861702; 517173, 4861699; 517179, 
4861695; 517182, 4861692; 517182, 4861689; 517181, 4861689; 517171, 
4861688; 517165, 4861686; 517159, 4861685; 517154, 4861684; 517138, 
4861684; 517131, 4861681;
    (iii) Map of Units 3E and 3F of critical habitat for the Oregon chub 
(Oregonichthys crameri) follows:

[[Page 321]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10MR10.012

    (26) Unit 3G: East Fork Minnow Creek Pond, Lane County, Oregon.
    (i) This unit totals 1.3 ha (3.3 ac), is owned by the ODOT, and is a 
large beaver pond located on a small tributary to Minnow Creek that 
drains into Lookout Point Reservoir in Lane County, Oregon.
    (ii) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 521267, 4859872; 521270, 4859868; 521272, 4859872; 521279, 
4859877; 521283, 4859872; 521287, 4859862; 521293,

[[Page 322]]

4859852; 521305, 4859841; 521312, 4859841; 521329, 4859825; 521340, 
4859819; 521345, 4859817; 521350, 4859811; 521354, 4859800; 521347, 
4859790; 521337, 4859797; 521330, 4859794; 521326, 4859791; 521324, 
4859781; 521320, 4859757; 521303, 4859756; 521296, 4859770; 521292, 
4859784; 521283, 4859789; 521262, 4859789; 521243, 4859788; 521224, 
4859785; 521210, 4859776; 521193, 4859770; 521181, 4859777; 521169, 
4859784; 521152, 4859792; 521134, 4859800; 521139, 4859809; 521149, 
4859814; 521161, 4859812; 521165, 4859821; 521173, 4859824; 521177, 
4859826; 521189, 4859838; 521197, 4859843; 521208, 4859850; 521218, 
4859851; 521225, 4859850; 521232, 4859850; 521234, 4859850; 521234, 
4859855; 521231, 4859857; 521226, 4859864; 521223, 4859870; 521227, 
4859875; 521237, 4859876; 521248, 4859866; 521254, 4859873; 521259, 
4859874; 521253, 4859879; 521250, 4859887; 521246, 4859895; 521250, 
4859899; 521254, 4859890; 521258, 4859888; 521260, 4859882; 521267, 
4859872;
    (iii) Map of Unit 3G of critical habitat for the Oregon chub 
(Oregonichthys crameri) follows:

[[Page 323]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10MR10.013

    (27) Unit 3H: Hospital Pond, Lane County, Oregon.
    (i) This unit totals 0.5 ha (1.1 ac), is owned by the USACE, and is 
located on the north side of the gravel road on the north shore of 
Lookout Point Reservoir in Lane County, Oregon.
    (ii) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 533030, 4851782; 533047, 4851779; 533065, 4851779; 533078, 
4851772; 533093, 4851767; 533109, 4851767; 533120,

[[Page 324]]

4851766; 533135, 4851762; 533147, 4851755; 533157, 4851743; 533164, 
4851732; 533169, 4851722; 533173, 4851709; 533175, 4851702; 533174, 
4851698; 533167, 4851699; 533163, 4851705; 533150, 4851705; 533139, 
4851715; 533130, 4851720; 533117, 4851725; 533105, 4851732; 533096, 
4851735; 533079, 4851748; 533067, 4851753; 533050, 4851760; 533027, 
4851769; 533017, 4851777; 533022, 4851781; 533030, 4851782;
    (iii) Map of Unit 3H of critical habitat for the Oregon chub 
(Oregonichthys crameri) follows:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10MR10.014


[[Page 325]]


    (28) Unit 3I: Shady Dell Pond, Lane County, Oregon.
    (i) This unit totals 1.1 ha (2.8 ac), is owned by the United States 
Forest Service (USFS), and is located in a USFS campground at the far 
southeast end of Lookout Point Reservoir along the south side of State 
Highway 58 in Lane County, Oregon.
    (ii) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 536587, 4848720; 536593, 4848709; 536589, 4848707; 536583, 
4848718; 536580, 4848713; 536581, 4848701; 536587, 4848687; 536597, 
4848678; 536612, 4848659; 536628, 4848646; 536647, 4848637; 536649, 
4848637; 536670, 4848619; 536685, 4848593; 536697, 4848576; 536699, 
4848573; 536706, 4848563; 536716, 4848550; 536722, 4848532; 536730, 
4848513; 536726, 4848496; 536727, 4848475; 536718, 4848472; 536725, 
4848456; 536732, 4848443; 536746, 4848432; 536762, 4848423; 536778, 
4848418; 536799, 4848397; 536797, 4848392; 536786, 4848395; 536766, 
4848401; 536746, 4848410; 536732, 4848424; 536720, 4848433; 536706, 
4848439; 536691, 4848455; 536687, 4848463; 536684, 4848474; 536680, 
4848493; 536681, 4848515; 536684, 4848529; 536685, 4848543; 536683, 
4848563; 536673, 4848570; 536653, 4848574; 536626, 4848570; 536612, 
4848573; 536612, 4848580; 536618, 4848579; 536625, 4848578; 536632, 
4848579; 536641, 4848580; 536638, 4848589; 536634, 4848601; 536630, 
4848611; 536624, 4848619; 536607, 4848638; 536591, 4848651; 536573, 
4848674; 536562, 4848694; 536560, 4848716; 536562, 4848735; 536563, 
4848747; 536567, 4848753; 536572, 4848743; 536576, 4848736; 536587, 
4848720; and excluding land bound by 536675, 4848580; 536681, 4848577; 
536687, 4848573; 536685, 4848579; 536683, 4848582; 536679, 4848588; 
536675, 4848593; 536672, 4848598; 536669, 4848602; 536666, 4848607; 
536662, 4848614; 536658, 4848617; 536654, 4848622; 536650, 4848625; 
536645, 4848628; 536640, 4848626; 536638, 4848623; 536640, 4848618; 
536643, 4848613; 536647, 4848605; 536652, 4848596; 536655, 4848590; 
536657, 4848586; 536663, 4848584; 536669, 4848582; 536675, 4848580;
    (iii) See paragraph (29)(iii) for a map showing critical habitat 
unit 3I.
    (29) Unit 3J: Buckhead Creek, Lane County, Oregon.
    (i) This unit totals 3.8 ha (9.3 ac) and is owned by the USFS. 
Buckhead Creek is a tributary flowing into the Middle Fork Willamette 
River at the northeast end of Lookout Point Reservoir in Lane County, 
Oregon.
    (ii) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 538138, 4847044; 538137, 4847035; 538128, 4847039; 538122, 
4847041; 538118, 4847040; 538109, 4847040; 538105, 4847038; 538106, 
4847032; 538113, 4847031; 538119, 4847032; 538126, 4847029; 538129, 
4847025; 538128, 4847013; 538123, 4847001; 538120, 4846985; 538113, 
4846970; 538108, 4846947; 538102, 4846919; 538092, 4846888; 538081, 
4846854; 538071, 4846816; 538061, 4846782; 538055, 4846782; 538052, 
4846787; 538055, 4846802; 538053, 4846821; 538047, 4846811; 538041, 
4846802; 538044, 4846781; 538049, 4846775; 538046, 4846764; 538037, 
4846768; 538031, 4846763; 538033, 4846775; 538033, 4846793; 538033, 
4846807; 538038, 4846822; 538041, 4846834; 538049, 4846855; 538056, 
4846894; 538051, 4846903; 538053, 4846916; 538058, 4846927; 538065, 
4846941; 538066, 4846946; 538061, 4846944; 538056, 4846942; 538048, 
4846936; 538038, 4846933; 538033, 4846933; 538022, 4846937; 538016, 
4846936; 538011, 4846935; 538007, 4846937; 538003, 4846941; 538004, 
4846947; 538007, 4846951; 538011, 4846954; 538015, 4846953; 538022, 
4846950; 538028, 4846952; 538036, 4846955; 538045, 4846958; 538053, 
4846959; 538061, 4846963; 538067, 4846970; 538072, 4846980; 538077, 
4846990; 538080, 4847000; 538080, 4847013; 538081, 4847018; 538082, 
4847040; 538082, 4847055; 538099, 4847055; 538112, 4847055; 538120, 
4847055; 538134, 4847048; 538138, 4847044;
    Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates (E,N): 
537853, 4848143; 537863, 4848139; 537873, 4848135; 537889, 4848129; 
537907, 4848123; 537925, 4848116; 537946, 4848106; 537968, 4848096; 
537985, 4848085; 537996, 4848080; 538021, 4848066; 538035, 4848057; 
538048, 4848049; 538058, 4848042; 538068, 4848035; 538078, 4848030; 
538089, 4848023; 538102, 4848014; 538112, 4848007; 538120, 4847996; 
538124, 4847987; 538133, 4847973; 538147, 4847961; 538159, 4847947; 
538168, 4847928; 538179, 4847913; 538194, 4847901; 538208, 4847884; 
538215, 4847877; 538237, 4847852; 538253, 4847837; 538266, 4847827; 
538281, 4847806; 538297, 4847786; 538308, 4847767; 538311, 4847761; 
538305, 4847754; 538281, 4847743; 538264, 4847737; 538251, 4847756; 
538229, 4847789; 538198, 4847830; 538185, 4847854; 538178, 4847877; 
538171, 4847890; 538160, 4847902; 538149, 4847918; 538139, 4847935; 
538129, 4847948; 538118, 4847956; 538109, 4847971; 538102, 4847984; 
538096, 4847990; 538083, 4848000; 538064, 4848010; 538045, 4848021; 
538040, 4848031; 538032, 4848038; 538023, 4848044; 538013, 4848051; 
538003, 4848048; 537985, 4848058; 537966, 4848067; 537959, 4848065; 
537948, 4848069; 537936, 4848076; 537921, 4848083; 537903, 4848092; 
537885, 4848098; 537872, 4848103; 537859, 4848107; 537846, 4848114; 
537837, 4848120; 537827, 4848126; 537820, 4848134; 537822, 4848142; 
537827, 4848146; 537833, 4848143; 537840, 4848140; 537842, 4848142; 
537841, 4848146; 537837, 4848149; 537839, 4848152; 537845, 4848149; 
537849, 4848147; 537853, 4848143;
    Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates (E,N): 
537076, 4848628; 537077, 4848624; 537075, 4848621; 537064, 4848624; 
537055, 4848627; 537050, 4848626; 537047, 4848623; 537041, 4848625; 
537036, 4848629; 537031, 4848631; 537025, 4848638; 537030, 4848648; 
537037, 4848649; 537048, 4848647; 537056, 4848643; 537063, 4848638; 
537076, 4848628;
    Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates (E,N): 
537131, 4848537; 537127, 4848528; 537121, 4848532; 537119, 4848556; 
537116, 4848587; 537112, 4848619; 537111, 4848643; 537102, 4848662; 
537091, 4848676; 537068, 4848696; 537045, 4848721; 537022, 4848739; 
537013, 4848747; 537000, 4848763; 536993, 4848769; 536999, 4848773; 
537010, 4848767; 537024, 4848761; 537067, 4848723; 537103, 4848689; 
537116, 4848670; 537127, 4848647; 537128, 4848621; 537131, 4848596; 
537131, 4848576; 537131, 4848537;
    Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates (E,N): 
536751, 4848812; 536749, 4848809; 536747, 4848809; 536732, 4848812; 
536719, 4848818; 536712, 4848820; 536695, 4848827; 536692, 4848831; 
536694, 4848834; 536704, 4848839;

[[Page 326]]

536714, 4848838; 536727, 4848837; 536734, 4848831; 536739, 4848830; 
536747, 4848821; 536749, 4848817; 536751, 4848812;
    (iii) Map of Units 3I and 3J of critical habitat for the Oregon chub 
(Oregonichthys crameri) follows:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10MR10.015


[[Page 327]]


    (30) Unit 3K: Wicopee Pond, Lane County, Oregon.
    (i) This unit totals 1.4 ha (3.3 ac) and is owned by the USFS. The 
pond, a former borrow pit adjacent to Salt Creek in the upper Middle 
Fork Willamette River drainage, was created when a bridge crossing was 
constructed on a small logging road that crosses Salt Creek, along 
Highway 58 in Lane County, Oregon.
    (ii) Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD83 coordinates 
(E,N): 557923, 4838857; 557919, 4838854; 557919, 4838854; 557926, 
4838841; 557935, 4838835; 557951, 4838829; 557948, 4838819; 557955, 
4838814; 557958, 4838820; 557963, 4838824; 557971, 4838825; 557977, 
4838824; 557982, 4838823; 557984, 4838817; 557978, 4838822; 557972, 
4838823; 557970, 4838823; 557966, 4838816; 557963, 4838813; 557968, 
4838803; 557970, 4838793; 557978, 4838789; 557977, 4838786; 557983, 
4838780; 557994, 4838777; 557996, 4838772; 557997, 4838771; 558006, 
4838770; 558018, 4838760; 558021, 4838741; 558026, 4838725; 558037, 
4838714; 558041, 4838701; 558040, 4838682; 558058, 4838684; 558080, 
4838674; 558079, 4838673; 558077, 4838674; 558068, 4838675; 558058, 
4838674; 558049, 4838677; 558038, 4838677; 558037, 4838684; 558032, 
4838695; 558022, 4838698; 558019, 4838705; 558006, 4838709; 558004, 
4838715; 557997, 4838708; 557990, 4838708; 557986, 4838710; 557978, 
4838715; 557976, 4838722; 557971, 4838727; 557965, 4838732; 557959, 
4838742; 557954, 4838754; 557952, 4838763; 557956, 4838770; 557951, 
4838778; 557947, 4838769; 557948, 4838766; 557935, 4838767; 557924, 
4838776; 557918, 4838781; 557904, 4838782; 557898, 4838786; 557890, 
4838791; 557877, 4838800; 557865, 4838811; 557859, 4838814; 557851, 
4838819; 557846, 4838827; 557840, 4838832; 557834, 4838837; 557833, 
4838844; 557834, 4838850; 557842, 4838858; 557854, 4838868; 557869, 
4838875; 557878, 4838880; 557887, 4838885; 557902, 4838897; 557913, 
4838905; 557919, 4838906; 557922, 4838902; 557923, 4838891; 557918, 
4838889; 557920, 4838884; 557926, 4838876; 557923, 4838863; 557923, 
4838857; and excluding land bound by 557921, 4838792; 557923, 4838788; 
557932, 4838789; 557932, 4838793; 557931, 4838796; 557933, 4838803; 
557929, 4838808; 557925, 4838805; 557922, 4838800; 557922, 4838796; 
557922, 4838793; 557921, 4838792; and excluding land bound by 557990, 
4838734; 557995, 4838729; 558006, 4838731; 558006, 4838730; 558009, 
4838724; 558014, 4838720; 558022, 4838721; 558018, 4838722; 558015, 
4838728; 558012, 4838742; 558007, 4838749; 557993, 4838754; 557987, 
4838754; 557984, 4838747; 557986, 4838741; 557990, 4838734;
    (iii) Map of Unit 3K of critical habitat for the Oregon chub 
(Oregonichthys crameri) follows:

[[Page 328]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10MR10.016

                  Owens Tui Chub (Gila bicolor snyderi)

    California, Mono County.
    1. Hot Creek, adjacent springs and their outflows in the vicinity of 
Hot Creek Hatchery, and 50 feet of riparian habitat on all sides of the 
creek and springs in T3S, R28E, SW\1/4\ Section 35.
    Note: Map follows:

[[Page 329]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.089

    2. Owens River, and 50 feet on both sides of the river, from Long 
Valley Dam downstream for 8 stream miles in T4S, R30E, Sections 19, 20, 
21, 22, 23, 24, 25, and 3
    Note: Map follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.090
    
    Known constituent elements include high quality, cool water with 
adequate cover in the form of rocks, undercut banks, or aquatic 
vegetation and a sufficient insect food base.

                Slender Chub (Erimystax=(Hybopsis) cahni)

    Tennessee. Claiborne and Hancock Counties. Powell River, main 
channel from backwaters of Norris Lake upstream to the Tennessee-
Virginia State line. Clinch River, main channel from backwaters of 
Norris Lake upstream to the Tennessee-Virginia State line.
    Virginia. Lee and Scott Counties. Powell River, main channel from 
the Tennessee-Virginia State line upstream through Lee County, Va. 
Clinch River, main channel from the Tennessee-Virginia State line 
upstream through Scott County, Va.
    Note: Map follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.091
    

[[Page 330]]



                       Sonora Chub (Gila ditaenia)

    Arizona, Santa Cruz County. An area of land and water in the 
Coronado National Forest, consisting of the following:
    1. Sycamore Creek, and a riparian zone 25 feet wide along each side 
of the creek, from Yank's Spring downstream approximately 5 stream miles 
to the International Border with Mexico within sections 14, 22, 23, 27, 
33, and 34, T. 23 S.; R. 11 E.
    2. Yank's Spring in the SE\1/4\ of the NW\1/4\ of sec. 14, T. 23 S.; 
R. 11 E.
    3. Penasco Creek, including a riparian zone 25 feet wide along each 
side of the creek, from its confluence with Sycamore Creek (SW\1/4\ of 
the SW\1/4\ of sec. 23, T. 23 S.; R. 11 E.) upstream approximately 1\1/
4\ miles to the east boundary of sec. 26, T. 23 S. R. 11 E.;
    4. An unnamed tributary to Sycamore Creek, from its confluence with 
Sycamore Creek (SW\1/4\ of the NW\1/4\ of sec. 23, T. 23 S.; R. 11 E.) 
upstream approximately \1/4\ mile to the west boundary of the NE\1/4\ of 
the SE\1/4\ of the NE\1/4\ sec. 22, T. 23 S.; R. 11 E.
    Note: Map follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.092
    
    Known primary constituent elements include clean permanent water 
with pools and intermediate riffle areas and/or intermittent pools 
maintained by bedrock or by subsurface flow in areas shaded by canyon 
walls.

                    Spotfin Chub (Erimonax monachus)

    North Carolina. Macon and Swain Counties. Little Tennessee River, 
main channel from the backwaters of Fontana Lake upstream to the North 
Carolina-Georgia State line.
    Note: Map follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.093
    
    Tennessee. Cumberland, Fentress, and Morgan Counties. Emory and Obed 
Rivers and Clear and Daddys Creek in Morgan County. Clear Creek in 
Fentress County. Obed River upstream to U.S. Interstate Highway 40, 
Clear Creek upstream to U.S. Interstate Highway 40 and Daddys Creek 
upstream to U.S. Highway 127 in Cumberland County.
    Note: Map follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.094
    
    Tennessee. Hawkins and Sullivan Counties. North Fork Holston, main 
channel upstream from junction with South Fork Holston River to the 
Tennessee-Virginia State line.
    Virginia. Scott and Washington Counties. North Fork Holston River, 
main channel from the Virginia-Tennessee State line upstream through 
Scott and Washington Counties.
    Note: Map follows:

[[Page 331]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.095

                    Virgin River Chub (Gila seminuda)

    Legal descriptions for St. George (Utah-Arizona) and Littlefield 
(Arizona) were obtained from the 1987 Bureau of Land Management (BLM) 
maps (Surface Management Status 30x60 Minute Quadrangle). Legal 
descriptions for Overton (Nevada-Arizona) were obtained from the 1989 
BLM maps (Surface Management Status 30x60 Minute Quadrangle). The 100-
year floodplain for many areas is detailed in Flood Insurance Rate Maps 
(FIRM) published by and available through the Federal Emergency 
Management Agency (FEMA). In areas where a FIRM is not available, the 
presence of alluvium soils or known high water marks can be used to 
determine the extent of the floodplain. Only areas of floodplain 
containing at least one of the constituent elements are considered 
critical habitat. Critical habitat designated for the Virgin River chub 
is as follows:
    Utah, Washington County; Arizona, Mohave County; Nevada, Clark 
County. The Virgin River and its 100-year floodplain from its confluence 
with La Verkin Creek, Utah in T.41S., R.13W., sec.23 (Salt Lake Base and 
Meridian) to Halfway Wash, Nevada T.15S., R.69E., sec.6 (Salt Lake Base 
and Meridian).
    The primary constituent elements of critical habitat determined 
necessary for the survival and recovery of these Virgin River fishes are 
water, physical habitat, and biological environment. The desired 
conditions for each of these elements are further discussed below.
    Water--A sufficient quantity and quality of water (i.e., 
temperature, dissolved oxygen, contaminants, nutrients, turbidity, etc.) 
that is delivered to a specific location in accordance with a hydrologic 
regime that is identified for the particular life stage for each 
species. This includes the following:
    1. Water quality characterized by natural seasonally variable 
temperature, turbidity, and conductivity;
    2. hydrologic regime characterized by the duration, magnitude, and 
frequency of flow events capable of forming and maintaining channel and 
instream habitat necessary for particular life stages at certain times 
of the year; and
    3. flood events inundating the floodplain necessary to provide the 
organic matter that provides or supports the nutrient and food sources 
for the listed fishes.
    Physical Habitat--Areas of the Virgin River that are inhabited or 
potentially habitable by a particular life stage for each species, for 
use in spawning, nursing, feeding, and rearing, or corridors between 
such areas:
    1. River channels, side channels, secondary channels, backwaters, 
and springs, and other areas which provide access to these habitats; and
    2. areas with slow to moderate velocities, within deep runs or 
pools, with predominately sand substrates, particularly habitats which 
contain boulders or other instream cover.
    Biological Environment--Food supply, predation, and competition are 
important elements of the biological environment and are considered 
components of this constituent element. Food supply is a function of 
nutrient supply, productivity, and availability to each life stage of 
the species. Predation and competition, although considered normal 
components of this environment, are out of balance due to nonnative fish 
species in many areas. Fourteen introduced species, including red shiner 
(Cyprinella lutrensis), black bullhead (Ameiurus melas), channel catfish 
(Ictalurus punctatus), and largemouth bass (Micropterus salmoides), 
compete with or prey upon the listed fishes. Of these, the red shiner is 
the most numerous and has been the most problematic for the listed 
fishes. Red shiners compete for food and available habitats and are 
known to prey on the eggs and early life stages of the listed fishes. 
Components of this constituent element include the following:
    1. Seasonally flooded areas that contribute to the biological 
productivity of the river system by producing allochthonous (humus, 
silt, organic detritus, colloidal matter, and plants and animals 
produced outside the river and brought into the river) organic matter 
which provides and supports much of the food base of the listed fishes; 
and
    2. few or no predatory or competitive nonnative species in occupied 
Virgin River fishes' habitats or potential reestablishment sites.

[[Page 332]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR26JA00.000

                       Yaqui Chub (Gila purpurea)

    Arizona, Cochise County. All aquatic habitats of San Bernardino NWR 
in S\1/2\ Sec. 11; Sec. 14; S\1/2\ and NE\1/4\ Sec. 15; T24S, R30E. 
Known constituent elements include clean permanent water with deep pools 
and intermediate areas with riffles, areas of detritus or heavily 
overgrown cut banks in the Rio Yaqui drainage, and the absence of 
introduced exotic fishes.
    Note: Map follows:

[[Page 333]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.096

       Ash Meadows Speckled Dace (Rhinichthys osculus nevadensis)

    Nevada, Nye County: Each of the following springs and outflows plus 
surrounding land areas for a distance of 50 meters (164 feet) from these 
springs and outflows:
    Bradford Springs in Section 11, T18S, R50E, and their outflows for a 
distance of 300 meters (984 feet) from the springs.
    Jack Rabbit Spring and its outflow flowing southwest to the boundary 
between Section 24 in T18S, R50E and Section 19, T18S, R51E.
    Big Spring and its outflow to the boundary between Section 19, T18S, 
R51E and Section 24, T18S, R50E.
    Note: Map follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.097
    
    Known constituent elements include warm-water springs and their 
outflows and surrounding land areas that provide vegetation for cover 
and habitat for insects and other invertebrates on which the species 
feeds.

                     Desert Dace (Eremichthys acros)

    Nevada, Humboldt County. Thermal springs and their outflows plus 
surrounding riparian areas for a distance of 50 feet from these springs 
and outflows in T40N, R25E, SW\1/4\ Section 5, NW\1/4\NW\1/4\ Section 8, 
W\1/2\ Section 18, W\1/2\SW\1/4\ Section 19; T40N, R24E, Section 23, 
N\1/2\SE\1/4\ and S\1/2\NE\1/4\ Section 24, SE\1/4\ Section 25, N\1/2\ 
Section 25, and N\1/2\ Section 26.
    Note: Map follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.098
    
    Primary constituent elements of the habitat are considered to be 
quantity, and thermal and chemical quality of water in headpools and 
spring outflow streams; presence of a stable, natural substrate 
supporting food plants for the fish; and length of outflow streams; 
adequate for seasonal movements in response to changes of water 
temperature.

                    Amber Darter (Percina antesella)

    Tennessee and Georgia: Conasauga River from the U.S. Route 411 
bridge in Polk County, Tennesee, downstream approximately 33.5 miles 
through Bradley County, Tennessee and Murray and Whitfield Counties, 
Georgia, to the Tibbs Bridge Road bridge (Murray County Road 109 and 
Whitfield County Road 100).
    Constituent elements include high quality water, riffle areas (free 
of silt) composed of sand, gravel, and cobble, which becomes vegetated 
primarily with Podostemum during the summer.
    Note: Map follows:

[[Page 334]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.099

                 Fountain Darter (Etheostoma fonticola)

    Texas, Hays County; Spring Lake and its outflow, the San Marcos 
River, downstream approximately 0.5 miles below Interstate Highway 35 
bridge.
    Note: Map follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.100
    
                   Leopard Darter (Percina pantherina)

    Oklahoma. McCurtain and Pushmataha Counties. Little River, main 
channel in Pushmataha County from mouth of Cloudy Creek (T. 3 S.; R. 20 
E.; Section 3) upstream to the Pushmataha-Le Flore County line. Black 
Fork Creek in McCurtain County from its junction with Little River (T. 1 
S.; R. 20 E.; Section 22) upstream to Oklahoma Highway 144 crossing (T. 
1 S.; R. 19 E.; Section 12). Glover Creek, main channel in McCurtain 
County from Oklahoma Highway 7 crossing (T. 5 S.; R. 23 E.; Section 28) 
upstream to the junction of the East Fork and West Fork of Glover Creek. 
East Fork and West Fork of Glover Creek. East Fork of Glover Creek, main 
channel in Pushmataha County from its junction with the West Fork Glover 
Creek (T. 3 S.; R. 23 E.; Section 7) upstream to 4 air miles north-
northeast of the community of Bethel (T. 2 S.; R. 24 E.; Section 5). 
West Fork Glover Creek, main channel in McCurtain County from its 
junction with the East Fork Glover Creek upstream to the community of 
Battiest (T. 2 S.; R. 23 E.; Section 7). Mountain Fork Creek, main 
channel in McCurtain County, from mouth of Boktukola Creek (T. 2 S.; R. 
25 E.; Section 9), 6 air miles south-southwest of Smithville, upstream 
to the Oklahoma-Arkansas State line.
    Arkansas. Polk County. Mountain Fork Creek, main channel from the 
Arkansas-Oklahoma State line upstream to the community of Mountain Fork 
(T. 1 S.; R. 32 W.; Section 29).
    Note: Map follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.101
    
                  Maryland Darter (Etheostoma sellare)

    Maryland (Harford County): (1) Deer Creek main channel from the 
junction with Elbow Branch thence downstream to the junction with the 
Susquehanna River. (2) Gasheys Run (also known as Gasheys Creek) main 
channels of east and west forks from their overcrossing by old Penn 
Central Railroad (presently titled to National Railroad Passenger 
Corporation, Amtrak) south to their confluence, thence south to the 
confluence with Swan Creek.
    Note: Map follows:

[[Page 335]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.102

    Constituent elements of this habitat are considered to be quality 
and permanence of streamflow in shallow areas of the streams (riffles), 
and presence of unsilted rocky crevices for shelter and production of 
aquatic insects and snails for food.

                  Niangua Darter (Etheostoma nianguae)

    Missouri. Big Tavern Creek, Miller County. Big Tavern Creek and 50 
feet along each side of the creek from Highway 52 upstream to Highway 
17.
    Note: Map follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.103
    
    Missouri. Niangua River, Dallas County. Niangua River and 50 feet on 
each side of the river from county road K upstream to 1 mile beyond 
county road M to the Webster County line.
    Missouri. Pomme de Terre River, Greene County. Pomme de Terre River 
and 50 feet on each side of the river from Highway 65 upstream to the 
Webster County line.
    Note: Map follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.104
    
    Missouri. Brush Creek, Cedar, and St. Clair Counties. Brush Creek 
and 50 feet on each side of the creek from 1000 feet upstream of county 
road J to the boundary of Sections 34 and 35, Township 36 N, Range 25 W.
    Note: Map follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.105
    
    Missouri. Little Niangua River, Camden, Dallas, and Hickory 
Counties. Little Niangua River and 50 feet on each side of the river 
from 1 mile below (downstream of) Highway 54, Camden County, to county 
road E, Dallas County.
    Note: Map follows:

[[Page 336]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.106

    Constituent elements, for all areas designated as critical habitat, 
consist of medium-sized creeks with silt-free pools and riffles and 
moderately clear water draining hilly areas underlain by chert and 
dolomite. Water ranges from 8 to 46 inches in depth over gravel with 
scattered rubble.

                Slackwater Darter (Etheostoma boschungi)

    Alabama. Lauderdale County. All permanent and intermittent streams 
with flowing water from December to June tributary to Cypress Creek and 
its tributaries upstream from the junction of Burcham Creek, including 
Burcham Creek, excluding Threet Creek and its tributaries.
    Tennessee. Wayne County. All permanent and intermittent streams with 
flowing water from December to June tributary to Cypress and Middle 
Cypress Creek drainage.
    Note: Maps follow.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.107
    
    Tennessee. Lawrence County, Buffalo River and its tributaries in 
Lawrence County, Tenn.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.108

                 San Marcos Gambusia (Gambusia georgei)

    Texas, Hays County; San Marcos River from Highway 12 bridge 
downstream to approximately 0.5 miles below Interstate Highway 35 
bridge.
    Note: Map follows:

[[Page 337]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.109

                Tidewater goby (Eucyclogobius newberryi)

    (1) Critical habitat units are depicted for Del Norte, Humboldt, 
Mendocino, Sonoma, Marin, San Mateo, Santa Cruz, Monterey, San Luis 
Obispo, Santa Barbara, Ventura, and Los Angeles Counties, California, on 
the maps below.
    (2) The primary constituent elements of critical habitat for the 
tidewater goby are the habitat components that provide:
    (i) Persistent, shallow (in the range of about 0.1 to 2 m), still-
to-slow-moving aquatic habitat most commonly ranging in salinity from 
less than 0.5 ppt to about 10 to 12 ppt;
    (ii) Substrates (e.g., sand, silt, mud) suitable for the 
construction of burrows for reproduction;
    (iii) Submerged and emergent aquatic vegetation, such as Potamogeton 
pectinatus and Ruppia maritima, that provides protection from predators; 
and
    (iv) Presence of a sandbar(s) across the mouth of a lagoon or 
estuary during the late spring, summer, and fall that closes or 
partially closes the lagoon or estuary, thereby providing relatively 
stable water levels and salinity.
    (3) Critical habitat does not include man-made structures (such as 
buildings, aqueducts, airports, and roads, and the land on which such 
structures are located) existing on the effective date of this rule and 
not containing one or more of the PCEs.
    (4) Critical habitat map units. Boundaries of critical habitat were 
defined for most units using National Wetlands Inventory (NWI) data 
(both published data available over the internet and in-publication 
provisional data). Where NWI data was lacking, unit boundaries were 
digitized directly on imagery from the Department of Agriculture's 
National Aerial Imagery Program data (NAIP) acquired in 2005. NAIP and 
NWI data were projected to Universal Transverse Mercator (UTM), zones 10 
and 11, on the North American Datum of 1983.
    (5) Index to maps of critical habitat for tidewater goby.
    (i) Note: Map 1 of Index to maps of critical habitat for tidewater 
goby follows.

[[Page 338]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31JA08.000

    (ii) Note: Map 2 of Index to maps of critical habitat for tidewater 
goby follows.

[[Page 339]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31JA08.001

    (6) Unit DN-1; Del Norte County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Crescent City. Land bounded 
by the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 398215, 4631301; 
398219, 4631313; 398228, 4631341; 398279, 4631340; 398325, 4631324; 
398371, 4631334; 398505, 4631467; 398579, 4631522; 398623,

[[Page 340]]

4631595; 398624, 4631645; 398600, 4631737; 398603, 4631783; 398665, 
4631868; 398689, 4631921; 398709, 4631944; 398773, 4631963; 398796, 
4631999; 398808, 4632080; 398826, 4632118; 398947, 4632241; 398965, 
4632271; 398963, 4632327; 398939, 4632408; 398882, 4632465; 398859, 
4632511; 398866, 4632625; 398895, 4632716; 398906, 4632726; 399042, 
4632686; 399052, 4632691; 399053, 4632760; 399066, 4632775; 399135, 
4632782; 399133, 4632845; 399118, 4632863; 399124, 4632921; 399193, 
4632933; 399216, 4632958; 399222, 4633001; 399245, 4633026; 399286, 
4633023; 399404, 4632945; 399553, 4632890; 399608, 4632831; 399638, 
4632823; 399700, 4632835; 399800, 4632920; 399905, 4632967; 399943, 
4632974; 399958, 4632972; 399988, 4632969; 400004, 4632968; 400113, 
4632943; 400184, 4632937; 400229, 4632899; 400302, 4632852; 400410, 
4632749; 400447, 4632700; 400513, 4632666; 400579, 4632657; 400763, 
4632563; 401092, 4632485; 401201, 4632486; 401217, 4632506; 401290, 
4632508; 401308, 4632531; 401307, 4632604; 401277, 4632648; 401244, 
4632839; 401238, 4632974; 401205, 4633104; 401178, 4633167; 401164, 
4633284; 401140, 4633371; 401108, 4633446; 401110, 4633494; 401081, 
4633570; 401052, 4633650; 401017, 4633717; 400970, 4633771; 400929, 
4633861; 400957, 4633954; 400911, 4634017; 400907, 4634099; 400909, 
4634177; 400889, 4634229; 400864, 4634308; 400869, 4634386; 400832, 
4634422; 400925, 4634573; 400940, 4634708; 400911, 4634810; 400810, 
4635094; 400815, 4635251; 400789, 4635356; 400797, 4635462; 400870, 
4635486; 401038, 4635437; 401156, 4635368; 401124, 4635266; 401076, 
4635197; 401062, 4635148; 401147, 4635126; 401131, 4635003; 401194, 
4634989; 401214, 4634885; 401247, 4634833; 401329, 4634850; 401350, 
4634841; 401294, 4634706; 401211, 4634613; 401249, 4634557; 401305, 
4634526; 401355, 4634518; 401421, 4634511; 401410, 4634429; 401464, 
4634365; 401552, 4634320; 401699, 4634412; 401744, 4634384; 401696, 
4634244; 401608, 4634146; 401566, 4634111; 401536, 4634084; 401504, 
4634063; 401480, 4634029; 401490, 4634000; 401575, 4633987; 401577, 
4633949; 401510, 4633917; 401508, 4633894; 401621, 4633845; 401671, 
4633798; 401683, 4633704; 401705, 4633678; 401728, 4633675; 401779, 
4633693; 401809, 4633674; 401885, 4633650; 401889, 4633719; 401924, 
4633721; 402038, 4633671; 402126, 4633606; 402151, 4633606; 402175, 
4633667; 402208, 4633671; 402241, 4633633; 402253, 4633584; 402355, 
4633459; 402377, 4633415; 402380, 4633385; 402402, 4633341; 402477, 
4633241; 402534, 4633187; 402574, 4633105; 402580, 4633018; 402563, 
4632904; 402548, 4632859; 402506, 4632806; 402500, 4632743; 402503, 
4632199; 402497, 4632166; 402429, 4632027; 402352, 4631932; 402346, 
4631909; 402376, 4631845; 402431, 4631783; 402433, 4631707; 402453, 
4631684; 402483, 4631531; 402483, 4631491; 402431, 4631415; 402425, 
4631372; 402433, 4631344; 402463, 4631303; 402465, 4631283; 402368, 
4630918; 402298, 4630820; 402160, 4630568; 402153, 4630383; 402182, 
4630308; 402237, 4630049; 402272, 4629980; 402302, 4629971; 402324, 
4629943; 402324, 4629915; 402255, 4629848; 402170, 4629795; 402002, 
4629757; 401859, 4629698; 401756, 4629646; 401669, 4629581; 401487, 
4629467; 401449, 4629435; 401397, 4629351; 401315, 4629337; 401292, 
4629300; 401210, 4629270; 401102, 4629203; 400998, 4629189; 400952, 
4629170; 400921, 4629129; 400814, 4629118; 400781, 4629103; 400701, 
4629023; 400622, 4629001; 400517, 4628950; 400306, 4628930; 400291, 
4628915; 400280, 4628884; 400262, 4628882; 400214, 4628900; 400161, 
4628906; 400059, 4628872; 399968, 4628873; 399952, 4628853; 399882, 
4628547; 399858, 4628519; 399838, 4628512; 399839, 4628588; 399861, 
4628702; 399862, 4628758; 399850, 4628796; 399879, 4628908; 399870, 
4628984; 399874, 4629121; 399885, 4629134; 399902, 4629134; 399950, 
4629087; 400012, 4628967; 400040, 4628951; 400108, 4628963; 400168, 
4629013; 400169, 4629089; 400069, 4629222; 400024, 4629304; 399990, 
4629406; 399918, 4629514; 399917, 4629649; 399944, 4629714; 399942, 
4629798; 399981, 4629859; 400033, 4629970; 400107, 4629994; 400118, 
4630030; 400130, 4630189; 400096, 4630259; 400067, 4630361; 400015, 
4630443; 400010, 4630473; 399975, 4630535; 399933, 4630632; 399939, 
4630685; 399958, 4630728; 399953, 4630918; 399976, 4630964; 400002, 
4630981; 400068, 4630996; 400135, 4631045; 400326, 4631134; 400399, 
4631220; 400430, 4631267; 400453, 4631280; 400519, 4631292; 400550, 
4631309; 400550, 4631345; 400488, 4631409; 400461, 4631516; 400446, 
4631547; 400440, 4631608; 400423, 4631666; 400336, 4631835; 400337, 
4631866; 400371, 4631952; 400398, 4632068; 400384, 4632144; 400359, 
4632208; 400292, 4632357; 400242, 4632535; 400177, 4632645; 400165, 
4632699; 400130, 4632750; 400063, 4632825; 400037, 4632838; 400007, 
4632841; 399956, 4632826; 399884, 4632792; 399853, 4632766; 399831, 
4632723; 399812, 4632678; 399823, 4632561; 399856, 4632388; 399859, 
4632210; 399781, 4632145; 399737, 4632049; 399631, 4631947; 399601, 
4631929; 399540, 4631945; 399500, 4631997; 399431, 4632158; 399416, 
4632165; 399362, 4632153; 399223, 4632011; 399210, 4631980; 399209, 
4631924; 399226, 4631861; 399225, 4631787; 399181, 4631696; 399145, 
4631514; 399117, 4631451; 399021, 4631353; 398972, 4631262; 398879, 
4631164; 398707, 4631027; 398691, 4631002; 398688, 4630959; 398678, 
4630944; 398644, 4630929; 398561, 4630930; 398561, 4630950; 398620, 
4630993; 398585, 4631026; 398570, 4631077; 398538, 4631108; 398454, 
4631109; 398313, 4631043; 398283, 4631063; 398241, 4631163; 398237, 
4631252; returning to 398215, 4631301; excluding land bounded by: 
399568, 4632334; 399524, 4632296; 399527, 4632273; 399577, 4632222; 
399640, 4632198; 399676, 4632205; 399727, 4632260; 399748, 4632318; 
399744, 4632344; 399716, 4632362; 399655, 4632360; 399645, 4632357; 
returning to 399568, 4632334.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit DNT-1 follows.

[[Page 341]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31JA08.002

    (7) Unit HUM-1; Humboldt County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles Orick and Rodgers Peak. 
Land bounded by the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 
407547, 4566545; 407550, 4566573; 407596, 4566611; 407600, 4566697; 
407685, 4566848; 407746, 4567008; 407759, 4567078; 407799, 4567202;

[[Page 342]]

407828, 4567303; 407832, 4567384; 407974, 4567789; 408015, 4567860; 
408016, 4567903; 408008, 4567923; 408024, 4567944; 408042, 4567946; 
408057, 4567930; 408084, 4567895; 408094, 4567849; 408121, 4567815; 
408131, 4567787; 408140, 4567691; 408114, 4567594; 408068, 4567595; 
408070, 4567519; 408081, 4567450; 408094, 4567424; 408157, 4567386; 
408316, 4567335; 408524, 4567320; 408565, 4567299; 408605, 4567256; 
408669, 4567113; 408674, 4567067; 408700, 4566955; 408701, 4566818; 
408646, 4566722; 408641, 4566689; 408681, 4566625; 408738, 4566495; 
408790, 4566408; 408830, 4566364; 408890, 4566326; 408963, 4566238; 
408983, 4566187; 408997, 4566116; 409047, 4566042; 409059, 4566011; 
409061, 4565942; 409087, 4565790; 409147, 4565687; 409151, 4565626; 
409115, 4565540; 409114, 4565492; 409134, 4565454; 409153, 4565319; 
409156, 4565200; 409114, 4565098; 409104, 4565050; 409102, 4564916; 
409066, 4564881; 409023, 4564863; 408982, 4564859; 408936, 4564880; 
408858, 4564883; 408751, 4564857; 408484, 4564842; 408402, 4564830; 
408359, 4564805; 408321, 4564806; 408230, 4564835; 408217, 4564848; 
408220, 4564881; 408282, 4564984; 408311, 4565057; 408327, 4565146; 
408385, 4565293; 408380, 4565326; 408314, 4565466; 408304, 4565505; 
408271, 4565548; 408223, 4565572; 408130, 4565596; 408084, 4565629; 
408087, 4565660; 408174, 4565699; 408190, 4565717; 408201, 4565793; 
408222, 4565849; 408220, 4565955; 408181, 4566037; 408164, 4566124; 
408132, 4566175; 407982, 4566169; 407939, 4566197; 407930, 4566266; 
407815, 4566445; 407722, 4566523; 407580, 4566519; returning to 407547, 
4566545.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit HUM-1 follows.

[[Page 343]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31JA08.003

    (8) Unit HUM-2; Humboldt County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles Rodgers Peak and Trinidad. 
Land bounded by the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 
405094, 4557688; 405100, 4557744; 405129, 4557807; 405137, 4557852; 
405179, 4557936; 405195, 4558006; 405266, 4558196; 405272, 4558252;

[[Page 344]]

405332, 4558393; 405341, 4558464; 405397, 4558649; 405479, 4558879; 
405535, 4559074; 405569, 4559137; 405627, 4559309; 405708, 4559498; 
405732, 4559592; 405763, 4559632; 405847, 4559862; 405850, 4559913; 
405893, 4560073; 405961, 4560234; 405995, 4560300; 406053, 4560459; 
406099, 4560535; 406102, 4560586; 406176, 4560803; 406180, 4560862; 
406260, 4561023; 406274, 4561099; 406336, 4561175; 406349, 4561258; 
406368, 4561312; 406382, 4561388; 406416, 4561524; 406461, 4561618; 
406471, 4561671; 406526, 4561805; 406550, 4561835; 406578, 4561908; 
406600, 4562053; 406611, 4562071; 406639, 4562294; 406643, 4562408; 
406674, 4562489; 406675, 4562563; 406661, 4562616; 406664, 4562654; 
406680, 4562702; 406698, 4562730; 406731, 4562742; 406758, 4562714; 
406780, 4562645; 406770, 4562399; 406752, 4562226; 406782, 4562132; 
406784, 4562089; 406791, 4562079; 406790, 4561964; 406769, 4561896; 
406730, 4561655; 406742, 4561541; 406749, 4561535; 406795, 4561316; 
406817, 4561265; 406857, 4561214; 406872, 4561178; 406871, 4561145; 
406812, 4561055; 406799, 4561024; 406827, 4560877; 406829, 4560546; 
406853, 4560442; 406885, 4560365; 406918, 4560162; 406914, 4560030; 
406935, 4559890; 406950, 4559857; 406957, 4559816; 407017, 4559729; 
407016, 4559635; 407005, 4559581; 407052, 4559464; 407051, 4559439; 
407038, 4559396; 407059, 4559261; 407178, 4559173; 407255, 4559081; 
407305, 4558973; 407340, 4558759; 407348, 4558538; 407367, 4558454; 
407377, 4558449; 407418, 4558456; 407423, 4558245; 407432, 4558207; 
407475, 4558133; 407474, 4558077; 407451, 4558021; 407401, 4557943; 
407260, 4557821; 407078, 4557703; 407035, 4557668; 407006, 4557623; 
406988, 4557555; 406934, 4557532; 406874, 4557490; 406915, 4557415; 
406916, 4557415; 407112, 4557533; 407219, 4557613; 407252, 4557597; 
407310, 4557530; 407325, 4557479; 407362, 4557428; 407458, 4557351; 
407472, 4557318; 407468, 4557163; 407457, 4557112; 407427, 4557125; 
407402, 4557125; 407353, 4557085; 407296, 4556997; 407267, 4556924; 
407259, 4556860; 407276, 4556792; 407310, 4556730; 407310, 4556712; 
407284, 4556690; 407224, 4556719; 407201, 4556711; 407193, 4556688; 
407150, 4556679; 407129, 4556649; 407083, 4556634; 406936, 4556631; 
406840, 4556662; 406792, 4556683; 406726, 4556699; 406686, 4556735; 
406587, 4556795; 406428, 4556840; 406337, 4556884; 406292, 4556946; 
406280, 4557002; 406285, 4557027; 406306, 4557047; 406833, 4557365; 
406795, 4557435; 406716, 4557380; 406588, 4557316; 406361, 4557184; 
406292, 4557149; 406261, 4557149; 406239, 4557173; 406219, 4557239; 
406215, 4557313; 406191, 4557404; 406186, 4557407; 406277, 4557408; 
406168, 4557710; 405948, 4557797; 405948, 4557648; 405763, 4557689; 
405752, 4557707; 405737, 4557738; 405728, 4557779; 405728, 4557810; 
405732, 4557839; 405741, 4557861; 405733, 4557944; 405655, 4557962; 
405615, 4557924; 405524, 4557946; 405456, 4557939; 405392, 4557897; 
405297, 4557858; 405264, 4557828; 405238, 4557790; 405208, 4557684; 
405170, 4557664; 405146, 4557603; 405126, 4557611; returning to 405094, 
4557688.
    (ii) Note: HUM-2 included on map with unit HUM-1.
    (9) Unit HUM-3; Humboldt County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles Tyee City. Land bounded by 
the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 405066, 4529314; 
405079, 4529311; 405089, 4529308; 405101, 4529303; 405111, 4529297; 
405117, 4529288; 405122, 4529288; 405124, 4529293; 405127, 4529303; 
405131, 4529315; 405139, 4529323; 405140, 4529328; 405134, 4529335; 
405126, 4529339; 405121, 4529352; 405117, 4529353; 405108, 4529355; 
405110, 4529361; 405121, 4529366; 405136, 4529367; 405141, 4529362; 
405137, 4529354; 405137, 4529349; 405146, 4529341; 405158, 4529336; 
405161, 4529328; 405161, 4529322; 405154, 4529315; 405146, 4529308; 
405141, 4529295; 405139, 4529273; 405130, 4529262; 405112, 4529252; 
405099, 4529259; 405090, 4529274; 405089, 4529294; 405085, 4529296; 
405075, 4529300; 405070, 4529307; returning to 405066, 4529314.
    (ii) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Arcata North. Land bounded 
by the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 405163, 4529039; 
405174, 4529059; 405184, 4529079; 405184, 4529091; 405185, 4529106; 
405204, 4529103; 405209, 4529111; 405220, 4529135; 405232, 4529158; 
405248, 4529168; 405248, 4529155; 405236, 4529137; 405231, 4529113; 
405221, 4529095; 405206, 4529084; 405200, 4529062; 405188, 4529041; 
405185, 4529031; 405213, 4529004; 405244, 4528990; 405259, 4528982; 
405264, 4528990; 405264, 4529004; 405264, 4529023; 405265, 4529041; 
405265, 4529051; 405253, 4529072; 405261, 4529119; 405275, 4529150; 
405283, 4529165; 405296, 4529172; 405310, 4529192; 405332, 4529201; 
405349, 4529201; 405375, 4529219; 405402, 4529231; 405429, 4529227; 
405452, 4529225; 405492, 4529233; 405515, 4529233; 405530, 4529228; 
405554, 4529232; 405574, 4529237; 405595, 4529237; 405595, 4529225; 
405579, 4529223; 405543, 4529213; 405523, 4529208; 405493, 4529217; 
405469, 4529212; 405442, 4529206; 405413, 4529209; 405397, 4529204; 
405355, 4529185; 405343, 4529181; 405327, 4529178; 405295, 4529154; 
405268, 4529082; 405275, 4529064; 405288, 4529045; 405283, 4529028; 
405280, 4529011; 405279, 4528980; 405272, 4528968; 405257, 4528962; 
405253, 4528929; 405240, 4528913; 405237, 4528921; 405237, 4528934; 
405239, 4528952; 405244, 4528972; 405216, 4528981; 405180, 4529007; 
405166, 4529027; returning to 405163, 4529039.
    (iii) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles Tyee City. Land bounded 
by the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 404239, 4528501; 
404247, 4528509; 404275, 4528506; 404290, 4528506; 404312, 4528520; 
404312, 4528532; 404306, 4528550; 404312, 4528567; 404326, 4528569; 
404326, 4528564; 404334, 4528571; 404347, 4528584; 404355, 4528593; 
404368, 4528597; 404393, 4528612; 404430, 4528623; 404444, 4528632; 
404466, 4528628; 404475, 4528623; 404493, 4528623; 404523, 4528629; 
404550, 4528646; 404569, 4528670; 404586, 4528686; 404612, 4528692; 
404660, 4528695; 404679, 4528708; 404694, 4528719; 404707, 4528724; 
404716, 4528726; 404730, 4528744; 404746, 4528757; 404758, 4528770; 
404781, 4528786; 404791, 4528795; 404796, 4528807; 404795, 4528829; 
404775, 4528866; 404761, 4528885; 404740, 4528891; 404724, 4528891; 
404710, 4528879; 404700, 4528869; 404686, 4528869; 404676, 4528879; 
404676, 4528897; 404677, 4528912; 404686, 4528912; 404689, 4528899; 
404691, 4528885; 404698, 4528885; 404712, 4528897; 404730, 4528904; 
404753, 4528903; 404772, 4528897; 404790, 4528871; 404814, 4528822; 
404815, 4528806; 404812, 4528789; 404809, 4528776; 404810, 4528770; 
404834, 4528767; 404854, 4528766; 404885, 4528756; 404905, 4528756; 
404918, 4528767;

[[Page 345]]

404924, 4528788; 404923, 4528837; 404931, 4528838; 404935, 4528832; 
404934, 4528784; 404928, 4528761; 404918, 4528749; 404906, 4528743; 
404887, 4528744; 404861, 4528751; 404846, 4528754; 404822, 4528756; 
404803, 4528757; 404795, 4528762; 404783, 4528753; 404772, 4528745; 
404755, 4528741; 404743, 4528735; 404732, 4528727; 404722, 4528712; 
404708, 4528701; 404696, 4528695; 404682, 4528686; 404672, 4528683; 
404638, 4528679; 404618, 4528675; 404605, 4528672; 404585, 4528658; 
404563, 4528639; 404540, 4528624; 404505, 4528612; 404475, 4528609; 
404448, 4528608; 404417, 4528603; 404385, 4528592; 404358, 4528571; 
404346, 4528562; 404333, 4528544; 404323, 4528518; 404304, 4528498; 
404291, 4528492; 404244, 4528496; returning to 404239, 4528501.
    (iv) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Tyee City. Land bounded by 
the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 404741, 4528632; 
404748, 4528640; 404760, 4528654; 404791, 4528683; 404812, 4528695; 
404832, 4528699; 404854, 4528694; 404890, 4528667; 404915, 4528656; 
404934, 4528658; 404965, 4528679; 404970, 4528702; 404988, 4528718; 
405013, 4528721; 405032, 4528722; 405060, 4528734; 405082, 4528734; 
405098, 4528734; 405123, 4528745; 405151, 4528769; 405173, 4528774; 
405201, 4528780; 405218, 4528778; 405236, 4528789; 405247, 4528774; 
405235, 4528764; 405205, 4528758; 405182, 4528758; 405154, 4528745; 
405127, 4528725; 405103, 4528715; 405076, 4528715; 405055, 4528713; 
405032, 4528702; 405020, 4528698; 404989, 4528681; 404981, 4528648; 
404969, 4528632; 404966, 4528569; 404977, 4528534; 404981, 4528503; 
405000, 4528469; 404998, 4528459; 404981, 4528430; 404980, 4528349; 
404978, 4528329; 404968, 4528332; 404961, 4528355; 404958, 4528423; 
404964, 4528439; 404980, 4528463; 404980, 4528471; 404964, 4528502; 
404961, 4528524; 404945, 4528567; 404945, 4528603; 404945, 4528628; 
404942, 4528638; 404934, 4528623; 404925, 4528616; 404906, 4528626; 
404899, 4528639; 404896, 4528644; 404855, 4528670; 404841, 4528679; 
404828, 4528682; 404811, 4528677; 404782, 4528651; 404762, 4528624; 
404746, 4528624; returning to 404741, 4528632.
    (v) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Tyee City. Land bounded by 
the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 404557, 4528121; 
404567, 4528121; 404584, 4528095; 404593, 4528061; 404619, 4528067; 
404641, 4528069; 404679, 4528071; 404796, 4528068; 404850, 4528078; 
404855, 4528072; 404850, 4528061; 404836, 4528050; 404597, 4528047; 
404575, 4528051; 404572, 4528060; 404572, 4528077; 404572, 4528089; 
404561, 4528100; returning to 404557, 4528121.
    (vi) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Tyee City. Land bounded by 
the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 404115, 4527638; 
404116, 4527670; 404128, 4527680; 404140, 4527673; 404158, 4527668; 
404170, 4527663; 404187, 4527670; 404202, 4527681; 404214, 4527700; 
404220, 4527733; 404225, 4527780; 404234, 4527849; 404259, 4527931; 
404267, 4528007; 404277, 4528012; 404277, 4527958; 404274, 4527924; 
404256, 4527839; 404254, 4527797; 404247, 4527738; 404235, 4527688; 
404227, 4527644; 404207, 4527596; 404180, 4527555; 404165, 4527561; 
404157, 4527577; 404140, 4527591; 404126, 4527611; returning to 404115, 
4527638.
    (vii) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles Tyee City and Arcata 
North. Land bounded by the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, 
N): 404279, 4526903; 404312, 4526977; 404324, 4527086; 404336, 4527131; 
404384, 4527228; 404452, 4527291; 404497, 4527349; 404526, 4527410; 
404563, 4527503; 404609, 4527598; 404671, 4527686; 404788, 4527856; 
404817, 4527901; 404826, 4527940; 404847, 4527983; 404873, 4528016; 
404887, 4528014; 404896, 4528008; 404856, 4527955; 404842, 4527932; 
404842, 4527916; 404837, 4527882; 404819, 4527851; 404790, 4527825; 
404742, 4527759; 404680, 4527670; 404630, 4527603; 404600, 4527558; 
404537, 4527403; 404534, 4527370; 404518, 4527333; 404457, 4527269; 
404397, 4527213; 404379, 4527179; 404351, 4527124; 404339, 4527084; 
404327, 4526981; 404321, 4526967; 404298, 4526905; 404327, 4526903; 
404341, 4526889; 404351, 4526900; 404369, 4526926; 404391, 4526964; 
404418, 4526978; 404439, 4526978; 404452, 4526972; 404473, 4526947; 
404504, 4526949; 404627, 4526966; 404662, 4526983; 404677, 4527004; 
404688, 4527018; 404747, 4527109; 404745, 4527165; 404685, 4527227; 
404623, 4527306; 404628, 4527389; 404668, 4527473; 404794, 4527545; 
404869, 4527609; 404960, 4527661; 404964, 4527713; 404988, 4527771; 
404995, 4527812; 405007, 4527819; 405021, 4527842; 405025, 4527833; 
405015, 4527813; 405003, 4527799; 404993, 4527744; 404981, 4527718; 
404980, 4527666; 405017, 4527667; 405053, 4527647; 405075, 4527630; 
405089, 4527631; 405140, 4527709; 405183, 4527846; 405171, 4527916; 
405165, 4527959; 405167, 4527974; 405187, 4527977; 405209, 4527851; 
405177, 4527710; 405127, 4527653; 405125, 4527623; 405111, 4527606; 
405082, 4527599; 405059, 4527606; 405032, 4527634; 404997, 4527646; 
404900, 4527594; 404727, 4527447; 404675, 4527395; 404678, 4527319; 
404705, 4527257; 404782, 4527192; 404804, 4527136; 404722, 4526997; 
404675, 4526945; 404679, 4526927; 404667, 4526923; 404652, 4526934; 
404460, 4526897; 404410, 4526865; 404386, 4526854; 404360, 4526812; 
404342, 4526814; 404333, 4526799; 404319, 4526753; 404312, 4526708; 
404318, 4526686; 404318, 4526661; 404310, 4526651; 404300, 4526658; 
404296, 4526671; 404303, 4526730; 404304, 4526761; 404313, 4526807; 
404311, 4526834; 404292, 4526877; returning to 404279, 4526903.
    (viii) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Tyee City. Land bounded 
by the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 404211, 4526342; 
404305, 4526400; 404370, 4526424; 404419, 4526445; 404531, 4526530; 
404556, 4526562; 404582, 4526596; 404653, 4526642; 404689, 4526689; 
404692, 4526707; 404698, 4526708; 404702, 4526697; 404712, 4526692; 
404706, 4526673; 404684, 4526646; 404686, 4526636; 404696, 4526634; 
404696, 4526627; 404659, 4526616; 404649, 4526603; 404623, 4526592; 
404602, 4526569; 404580, 4526538; 404553, 4526514; 404480, 4526458; 
404482, 4526444; 404473, 4526441; 404463, 4526441; 404430, 4526420; 
404380, 4526402; 404379, 4526385; 404431, 4526403; 404471, 4526421; 
404521, 4526433; 404589, 4526432; 404677, 4526433; 404727, 4526440; 
404741, 4526453; 404749, 4526473; 404752, 4526500; 404759, 4526512; 
404794, 4526550; 404867, 4526594; 404884, 4526635; 404921, 4526646; 
404977, 4526653; 405047, 4526650; 405064, 4526657; 405082, 4526616; 
405098, 4526574; 405131, 4526543; 405195, 4526490; 405193, 4526462; 
405185, 4526451; 405171, 4526459; 405160, 4526473; 405138, 4526510; 
405115, 4526532; 405089, 4526556; 405070, 4526580; 405057, 4526621; 
405045, 4526633; 404986, 4526635;

[[Page 346]]

404909, 4526622; 404893, 4526599; 404871, 4526577; 404806, 4526526; 
404781, 4526503; 404770, 4526471; 404762, 4526439; 404750, 4526427; 
404732, 4526416; 404682, 4526413; 404635, 4526415; 404599, 4526410; 
404542, 4526411; 404509, 4526401; 404453, 4526381; 404403, 4526348; 
404328, 4526296; 404283, 4526260; 404271, 4526261; 404247, 4526282; 
404245, 4526300; 404255, 4526304; 404271, 4526300; 404362, 4526375; 
404362, 4526395; 404326, 4526384; 404297, 4526363; 404266, 4526349; 
404242, 4526333; 404234, 4526307; 404217, 4526318; returning to 404211, 
4526342.
    (ix) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Tyee City. Land bounded by 
the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 404159, 4525734; 
404159, 4525748; 404181, 4525799; 404211, 4525818; 404249, 4525862; 
404248, 4525896; 404237, 4525939; 404229, 4525979; 404240, 4525997; 
404240, 4526016; 404226, 4526037; 404220, 4526056; 404230, 4526065; 
404248, 4526069; 404248, 4526063; 404241, 4526050; 404244, 4526042; 
404256, 4526003; 404262, 4526012; 404270, 4526030; 404279, 4526052; 
404291, 4526063; 404294, 4526077; 404303, 4526076; 404302, 4526065; 
404290, 4526049; 404282, 4526037; 404277, 4526013; 404298, 4526005; 
404305, 4526023; 404313, 4526030; 404321, 4526042; 404330, 4526047; 
404341, 4526048; 404352, 4526038; 404366, 4526040; 404382, 4526033; 
404406, 4526019; 404403, 4526008; 404365, 4526029; 404345, 4526025; 
404340, 4526034; 404331, 4526038; 404324, 4526024; 404312, 4526015; 
404311, 4526001; 404303, 4525992; 404289, 4525994; 404275, 4525995; 
404270, 4525978; 404275, 4525948; 404271, 4525923; 404286, 4525920; 
404294, 4525897; 404257, 4525843; 404257, 4525835; 404213, 4525801; 
404177, 4525751; 404197, 4525737; 404215, 4525718; 404207, 4525706; 
404183, 4525724; returning to 404159, 4525734.
    (x) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles Tyee City, Eureka, Arcata 
North, and Arcata South. Land bounded by the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 
coordinates (E, N): 404222, 4525621; 404233, 4525683; 404286, 4525666; 
404326, 4525712; 404420, 4525729; 404517, 4525742; 404587, 4525721; 
404625, 4525721; 404653, 4525750; 404660, 4525799; 404660, 4525831; 
404655, 4525869; 404666, 4525908; 404691, 4525984; 404736, 4526033; 
404768, 4526042; 404840, 4526076; 404891, 4526105; 404946, 4526120; 
405021, 4526120; 405078, 4526116; 405104, 4526101; 405138, 4526037; 
405133, 4526008; 405133, 4525984; 405140, 4525965; 405155, 4525938; 
405161, 4525918; 405161, 4525897; 405148, 4525861; 405118, 4525844; 
405087, 4525840; 405050, 4525852; 405027, 4525887; 405012, 4525903; 
404984, 4525903; 404942, 4525899; 404900, 4525884; 404861, 4525838; 
404844, 4525797; 404847, 4525731; 404844, 4525704; 404823, 4525661; 
404813, 4525610; 404819, 4525561; 404863, 4525511; 404947, 4525462; 
404975, 4525451; 405013, 4525446; 405041, 4525430; 405084, 4525392; 
405116, 4525387; 405179, 4525398; 405229, 4525398; 405282, 4525379; 
405323, 4525359; 405372, 4525355; 405445, 4525370; 405490, 4525363; 
405570, 4525337; 405605, 4525357; 405637, 4525391; 405686, 4525416; 
405704, 4525443; 405706, 4525469; 405682, 4525524; 405643, 4525569; 
405569, 4525625; 405567, 4525680; 405586, 4525707; 405602, 4525704; 
405589, 4525674; 405589, 4525642; 405610, 4525629; 405663, 4525580; 
405702, 4525537; 405725, 4525478; 405733, 4525427; 405680, 4525385; 
405645, 4525354; 405617, 4525322; 405577, 4525312; 405532, 4525317; 
405474, 4525339; 405428, 4525345; 405365, 4525332; 405310, 4525339; 
405242, 4525366; 405191, 4525370; 405111, 4525358; 405064, 4525369; 
405033, 4525402; 404986, 4525428; 404936, 4525443; 404906, 4525449; 
404819, 4525502; 404800, 4525527; 404781, 4525585; 404783, 4525632; 
404798, 4525678; 404819, 4525704; 404823, 4525725; 404821, 4525768; 
404823, 4525810; 404838, 4525852; 404868, 4525886; 404897, 4525920; 
404950, 4525935; 405018, 4525944; 405031, 4525933; 405046, 4525908; 
405059, 4525872; 405084, 4525861; 405112, 4525863; 405131, 4525874; 
405144, 4525904; 405137, 4525933; 405114, 4525961; 405097, 4525986; 
405103, 4526024; 405106, 4526050; 405080, 4526080; 405052, 4526090; 
405025, 4526092; 404980, 4526093; 404959, 4526078; 404933, 4526069; 
404893, 4526054; 404808, 4526027; 404749, 4525997; 404713, 4525944; 
404708, 4525918; 404708, 4525833; 404693, 4525734; 404687, 4525710; 
404638, 4525676; 404604, 4525665; 404572, 4525680; 404521, 4525702; 
404451, 4525693; 404375, 4525672; 404356, 4525644; 404345, 4525631; 
404288, 4525608; returning to 404222, 4525621.
    (xi) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles Tyee City, Eureka, and 
Arcata South. Land bounded by the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 
coordinates (E, N): 403248, 4524430; 403254, 4524438; 403270, 4524435; 
403311, 4524427; 403363, 4524406; 403440, 4524395; 403519, 4524392; 
403550, 4524407; 403578, 4524414; 403649, 4524397; 403727, 4524374; 
403760, 4524362; 403801, 4524371; 403818, 4524385; 403839, 4524397; 
403868, 4524417; 403906, 4524432; 403937, 4524432; 404026, 4524424; 
404037, 4524434; 404034, 4524448; 404014, 4524465; 404004, 4524475; 
403985, 4524495; 403978, 4524505; 403957, 4524512; 403930, 4524520; 
403899, 4524527; 403879, 4524535; 403857, 4524558; 403840, 4524573; 
403801, 4524577; 403771, 4524569; 403751, 4524558; 403732, 4524534; 
403712, 4524518; 403707, 4524513; 403674, 4524492; 403626, 4524490; 
403588, 4524495; 403564, 4524514; 403549, 4524543; 403543, 4524563; 
403554, 4524565; 403572, 4524537; 403590, 4524514; 403608, 4524509; 
403643, 4524506; 403680, 4524512; 403707, 4524533; 403737, 4524561; 
403751, 4524575; 403793, 4524591; 403829, 4524591; 403854, 4524581; 
403875, 4524566; 403897, 4524545; 403923, 4524539; 403969, 4524525; 
403996, 4524508; 404007, 4524492; 404020, 4524482; 404045, 4524470; 
404057, 4524469; 404069, 4524482; 404089, 4524511; 404101, 4524542; 
404100, 4524557; 404113, 4524580; 404138, 4524619; 404184, 4524650; 
404217, 4524650; 404271, 4524642; 404311, 4524664; 404344, 4524685; 
404367, 4524687; 404407, 4524678; 404459, 4524688; 404527, 4524713; 
404546, 4524740; 404544, 4524779; 404518, 4524800; 404511, 4524828; 
404516, 4524851; 404544, 4524873; 404586, 4524886; 404625, 4524873; 
404667, 4524862; 404677, 4524870; 404677, 4524886; 404667, 4524918; 
404670, 4524951; 404662, 4524970; 404604, 4525008; 404534, 4525037; 
404513, 4525052; 404507, 4525060; 404504, 4525110; 404494, 4525124; 
404466, 4525133; 404442, 4525147; 404373, 4525195; 404355, 4525211; 
404332, 4525234; 404324, 4525265; 404319, 4525287; 404290, 4525327; 
404263, 4525354; 404260, 4525385; 404268, 4525421; 404273, 4525461; 
404268, 4525495; 404275, 4525525; 404294, 4525552; 404284, 4525597; 
404298, 4525599; 404304, 4525589; 404306, 4525557; 404302, 4525537; 
404288, 4525504; 404294, 4525476; 404287, 4525438; 404280, 4525390; 
404280, 4525359;

[[Page 347]]

404309, 4525331; 404339, 4525280; 404351, 4525244; 404372, 4525214; 
404388, 4525205; 404419, 4525184; 404451, 4525160; 404493, 4525144; 
404514, 4525134; 404523, 4525116; 404523, 4525094; 404527, 4525068; 
404539, 4525059; 404563, 4525045; 404608, 4525031; 404659, 4525002; 
404673, 4524991; 404684, 4524976; 404691, 4524948; 404691, 4524914; 
404698, 4524892; 404704, 4524872; 404695, 4524849; 404680, 4524844; 
404653, 4524845; 404615, 4524858; 404589, 4524863; 404575, 4524863; 
404545, 4524849; 404537, 4524835; 404538, 4524823; 404553, 4524803; 
404575, 4524782; 404575, 4524741; 404542, 4524694; 404488, 4524671; 
404440, 4524659; 404393, 4524657; 404361, 4524661; 404343, 4524661; 
404306, 4524635; 404266, 4524619; 404233, 4524626; 404187, 4524622; 
404153, 4524602; 404137, 4524567; 404134, 4524524; 404114, 4524497; 
404086, 4524451; 404086, 4524421; 404113, 4524410; 404159, 4524406; 
404188, 4524404; 404239, 4524406; 404298, 4524397; 404339, 4524371; 
404371, 4524338; 404389, 4524322; 404426, 4524306; 404455, 4524291; 
404464, 4524291; 404479, 4524303; 404514, 4524330; 404558, 4524348; 
404604, 4524344; 404646, 4524336; 404698, 4524337; 404746, 4524364; 
404770, 4524375; 404805, 4524378; 404841, 4524369; 404875, 4524354; 
404921, 4524354; 404955, 4524367; 404965, 4524382; 404963, 4524392; 
404954, 4524399; 404942, 4524406; 404881, 4524439; 404862, 4524464; 
404862, 4524510; 404865, 4524531; 404858, 4524550; 404839, 4524570; 
404831, 4524598; 404832, 4524614; 404824, 4524618; 404808, 4524614; 
404802, 4524627; 404818, 4524632; 404843, 4524629; 404857, 4524632; 
404877, 4524655; 404901, 4524663; 404936, 4524664; 404945, 4524669; 
404946, 4524688; 404959, 4524678; 404953, 4524659; 404933, 4524653; 
404907, 4524655; 404893, 4524649; 404849, 4524610; 404850, 4524587; 
404878, 4524551; 404884, 4524524; 404881, 4524471; 404890, 4524452; 
404963, 4524418; 404979, 4524410; 404993, 4524403; 405008, 4524430; 
405017, 4524454; 405013, 4524466; 404989, 4524509; 404968, 4524546; 
404968, 4524575; 404980, 4524588; 404991, 4524577; 404986, 4524560; 
404997, 4524535; 405014, 4524501; 405031, 4524481; 405041, 4524464; 
405040, 4524442; 405058, 4524433; 405071, 4524428; 405084, 4524439; 
405100, 4524465; 405115, 4524482; 405136, 4524488; 405152, 4524500; 
405169, 4524525; 405190, 4524538; 405215, 4524544; 405230, 4524555; 
405233, 4524571; 405238, 4524593; 405245, 4524597; 405267, 4524597; 
405280, 4524594; 405296, 4524601; 405309, 4524598; 405319, 4524591; 
405312, 4524570; 405310, 4524559; 405304, 4524560; 405303, 4524573; 
405301, 4524584; 405293, 4524589; 405279, 4524584; 405254, 4524584; 
405249, 4524577; 405246, 4524558; 405237, 4524542; 405222, 4524531; 
405202, 4524526; 405188, 4524522; 405174, 4524505; 405155, 4524485; 
405139, 4524477; 405121, 4524471; 405110, 4524463; 405110, 4524459; 
405102, 4524434; 405081, 4524418; 405058, 4524415; 405034, 4524431; 
405018, 4524421; 405006, 4524379; 404979, 4524358; 404969, 4524347; 
404940, 4524331; 404886, 4524327; 404848, 4524340; 404827, 4524351; 
404791, 4524355; 404768, 4524347; 404692, 4524306; 404645, 4524303; 
404601, 4524310; 404558, 4524306; 404520, 4524289; 404495, 4524264; 
404499, 4524247; 404511, 4524206; 404511, 4524183; 404506, 4524140; 
404517, 4524107; 404537, 4524060; 404573, 4524020; 404604, 4524002; 
404615, 4524013; 404645, 4524034; 404664, 4524042; 404687, 4524042; 
404704, 4524034; 404712, 4524025; 404736, 4523999; 404735, 4523971; 
404729, 4523945; 404723, 4523923; 404729, 4523910; 404746, 4523900; 
404781, 4523899; 404815, 4523913; 404910, 4523952; 404993, 4523987; 
405015, 4524006; 405013, 4524028; 405001, 4524048; 405000, 4524051; 
404990, 4524069; 404993, 4524095; 405012, 4524110; 405042, 4524111; 
405069, 4524120; 405087, 4524145; 405121, 4524173; 405160, 4524231; 
405194, 4524272; 405211, 4524279; 405249, 4524290; 405304, 4524301; 
405331, 4524318; 405340, 4524314; 405307, 4524285; 405281, 4524281; 
405225, 4524264; 405198, 4524249; 405168, 4524199; 405142, 4524158; 
405099, 4524129; 405082, 4524102; 405051, 4524090; 405026, 4524089; 
405014, 4524078; 405015, 4524066; 405016, 4524060; 405017, 4524060; 
405038, 4524045; 405041, 4523996; 405025, 4523983; 404984, 4523964; 
404843, 4523902; 404795, 4523884; 404751, 4523877; 404718, 4523888; 
404702, 4523910; 404699, 4523933; 404709, 4523955; 404714, 4523982; 
404701, 4524000; 404684, 4524010; 404663, 4524010; 404638, 4524002; 
404621, 4523976; 404634, 4523965; 404642, 4523948; 404642, 4523938; 
404631, 4523913; 404618, 4523881; 404617, 4523851; 404624, 4523820; 
404646, 4523781; 404680, 4523746; 404669, 4523736; 404650, 4523746; 
404614, 4523799; 404600, 4523847; 404603, 4523886; 404622, 4523951; 
404596, 4523978; 404541, 4524025; 404518, 4524070; 404496, 4524114; 
404492, 4524150; 404495, 4524199; 404490, 4524232; 404431, 4524286; 
404361, 4524319; 404347, 4524336; 404306, 4524369; 404273, 4524378; 
404215, 4524383; 404087, 4524388; 403988, 4524403; 403896, 4524407; 
403867, 4524388; 403825, 4524351; 403773, 4524341; 403722, 4524350; 
403647, 4524375; 403575, 4524386; 403543, 4524375; 403495, 4524367; 
403447, 4524371; 403378, 4524372; 403334, 4524386; 403266, 4524414; 
returning to 403248, 4524430.
    (xii) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles Tyee City and Eureka. 
Land bounded by the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 
403498, 4525062; 403498, 4525079; 403514, 4525102; 403531, 4525112; 
403552, 4525117; 403569, 4525115; 403688, 4525069; 403706, 4525077; 
403704, 4525089; 403602, 4525135; 403597, 4525155; 403612, 4525163; 
403633, 4525198; 403653, 4525213; 403683, 4525229; 403701, 4525262; 
403704, 4525297; 403693, 4525338; 403698, 4525363; 403780, 4525436; 
403881, 4525538; 403921, 4525619; 403929, 4525657; 403982, 4525672; 
404020, 4525647; 404101, 4525626; 404167, 4525609; 404147, 4525593; 
404127, 4525586; 404127, 4525571; 404137, 4525558; 404152, 4525530; 
404144, 4525495; 404124, 4525469; 404091, 4525452; 404045, 4525462; 
403992, 4525474; 403962, 4525474; 403926, 4525467; 403891, 4525444; 
403777, 4525310; 403772, 4525279; 403782, 4525241; 403792, 4525201; 
403800, 4525178; 403790, 4525125; 403780, 4525089; 403749, 4525056; 
403714, 4525034; 403681, 4525034; 403567, 4525072; 403544, 4525072; 
403536, 4525056; 403514, 4525041; returning to 403498, 4525062.
    (xiii) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Eureka. Land bounded by 
the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 403167, 4524519; 
403174, 4524547; 403189, 4524560; 403207, 4524568; 403265, 4524580; 
403301, 4524595; 403334, 4524631; 403357, 4524692; 403362, 4524742; 
403341, 4524811; 403336, 4524899; 403357, 4524993; 403367, 4525029; 
403402, 4525079; 403407, 4525059; 403415, 4525034; 403427, 4525011; 
403453, 4525001; 403476, 4524996; 403486, 4525021; 403498, 4525031; 
403519, 4525029; 403529, 4525013; 403521, 4524988; 403503,

[[Page 348]]

4524960; 403473, 4524950; 403445, 4524955; 403420, 4524968; 403389, 
4524988; 403379, 4524958; 403369, 4524917; 403362, 4524861; 403367, 
4524841; 403405, 4524839; 403430, 4524846; 403458, 4524882; 403493, 
4524920; 403544, 4524935; 403584, 4524917; 403600, 4524872; 403572, 
4524826; 403521, 4524798; 403511, 4524818; 403559, 4524851; 403572, 
4524874; 403564, 4524899; 403552, 4524912; 403526, 4524904; 403508, 
4524889; 403478, 4524869; 403453, 4524826; 403430, 4524816; 403402, 
4524808; 403369, 4524811; 403377, 4524783; 403384, 4524735; 403382, 
4524689; 403367, 4524644; 403336, 4524590; 403306, 4524565; 403275, 
4524557; 403222, 4524545; 403197, 4524527; 403192, 4524509; 403197, 
4524484; 403174, 4524487; returning to 403167, 4524519.
    (xiv) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Arcata South. Land bounded 
by the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 405091, 4523686; 
405091, 4523709; 405111, 4523708; 405126, 4523698; 405147, 4523680; 
405150, 4523697; 405144, 4523708; 405138, 4523722; 405133, 4523735; 
405133, 4523753; 405151, 4523772; 405181, 4523791; 405207, 4523807; 
405232, 4523807; 405254, 4523814; 405263, 4523828; 405260, 4523853; 
405253, 4523885; 405241, 4523894; 405226, 4523911; 405217, 4523931; 
405217, 4523961; 405219, 4523992; 405220, 4524014; 405220, 4524028; 
405234, 4524029; 405235, 4524000; 405239, 4523951; 405241, 4523926; 
405260, 4523906; 405272, 4523886; 405281, 4523851; 405285, 4523831; 
405276, 4523807; 405256, 4523791; 405231, 4523782; 405209, 4523780; 
405164, 4523755; 405160, 4523735; 405167, 4523716; 405173, 4523691; 
405163, 4523666; 405195, 4523635; 405207, 4523605; 405232, 4523526; 
405242, 4523483; 405253, 4523471; 405273, 4523471; 405276, 4523486; 
405276, 4523510; 405287, 4523533; 405294, 4523563; 405295, 4523580; 
405301, 4523597; 405320, 4523610; 405348, 4523623; 405369, 4523641; 
405376, 4523663; 405381, 4523685; 405391, 4523700; 405416, 4523723; 
405423, 4523745; 405428, 4523785; 405428, 4523806; 405417, 4523823; 
405412, 4523847; 405412, 4523867; 405412, 4523886; 405419, 4523906; 
405432, 4523932; 405448, 4523944; 405451, 4523966; 405448, 4523985; 
405444, 4524004; 405451, 4524020; 405454, 4524037; 405470, 4524053; 
405488, 4524054; 405509, 4524054; 405523, 4524062; 405525, 4524076; 
405525, 4524092; 405516, 4524097; 405503, 4524085; 405487, 4524084; 
405472, 4524087; 405460, 4524092; 405457, 4524081; 405448, 4524060; 
405435, 4524042; 405426, 4524042; 405422, 4524060; 405438, 4524075; 
405444, 4524095; 405457, 4524116; 405472, 4524116; 405481, 4524106; 
405487, 4524107; 405504, 4524116; 405522, 4524116; 405538, 4524107; 
405551, 4524107; 405562, 4524117; 405581, 4524126; 405587, 4524137; 
405594, 4524135; 405594, 4524116; 405576, 4524098; 405548, 4524081; 
405544, 4524050; 405516, 4524035; 405488, 4524031; 405472, 4524019; 
405469, 4524000; 405473, 4523969; 405473, 4523947; 405459, 4523925; 
405438, 4523904; 405432, 4523878; 405432, 4523850; 405444, 4523823; 
405448, 4523788; 405440, 4523745; 405437, 4523716; 405410, 4523688; 
405397, 4523660; 405378, 4523623; 405385, 4523613; 405406, 4523595; 
405388, 4523583; 405369, 4523564; 405341, 4523549; 405329, 4523545; 
405307, 4523526; 405294, 4523501; 405292, 4523469; 405313, 4523466; 
405338, 4523446; 405366, 4523414; 405398, 4523386; 405442, 4523349; 
405469, 4523333; 405515, 4523367; 405543, 4523389; 405566, 4523396; 
405584, 4523411; 405601, 4523429; 405607, 4523452; 405593, 4523471; 
405581, 4523483; 405579, 4523492; 405591, 4523495; 405618, 4523505; 
405649, 4523513; 405672, 4523535; 405687, 4523545; 405683, 4523559; 
405682, 4523573; 405682, 4523588; 405685, 4523599; 405684, 4523616; 
405678, 4523640; 405678, 4523661; 405688, 4523672; 405703, 4523686; 
405707, 4523706; 405708, 4523716; 405717, 4523707; 405715, 4523685; 
405699, 4523660; 405695, 4523638; 405698, 4523610; 405702, 4523591; 
405700, 4523572; 405704, 4523560; 405706, 4523548; 405707, 4523546; 
405722, 4523535; 405741, 4523529; 405741, 4523508; 405754, 4523483; 
405763, 4523464; 405763, 4523442; 405752, 4523421; 405740, 4523407; 
405740, 4523383; 405740, 4523360; 405746, 4523339; 405753, 4523324; 
405744, 4523318; 405729, 4523338; 405719, 4523368; 405719, 4523395; 
405724, 4523427; 405728, 4523454; 405722, 4523483; 405721, 4523505; 
405699, 4523485; 405699, 4523469; 405687, 4523448; 405669, 4523433; 
405666, 4523420; 405654, 4523401; 405631, 4523396; 405609, 4523393; 
405578, 4523370; 405554, 4523367; 405537, 4523351; 405515, 4523336; 
405488, 4523318; 405525, 4523282; 405551, 4523246; 405587, 4523208; 
405632, 4523173; 405669, 4523120; 405704, 4523062; 405726, 4523043; 
405759, 4523043; 405790, 4523045; 405788, 4523065; 405782, 4523087; 
405779, 4523114; 405769, 4523129; 405771, 4523145; 405788, 4523139; 
405797, 4523118; 405797, 4523098; 405806, 4523076; 405827, 4523084; 
405841, 4523083; 405863, 4523071; 405877, 4523082; 405893, 4523093; 
405919, 4523101; 405943, 4523108; 405975, 4523165; 405996, 4523207; 
405987, 4523227; 405952, 4523282; 405928, 4523282; 405905, 4523282; 
405899, 4523276; 405890, 4523263; 405868, 4523252; 405846, 4523252; 
405846, 4523267; 405859, 4523276; 405872, 4523286; 405878, 4523311; 
405878, 4523333; 405891, 4523349; 405915, 4523342; 405952, 4523327; 
405978, 4523302; 406003, 4523260; 406027, 4523245; 406037, 4523232; 
406037, 4523214; 406022, 4523192; 406003, 4523168; 405952, 4523080; 
405930, 4523076; 405910, 4523076; 405902, 4523064; 405875, 4523049; 
405850, 4523052; 405834, 4523058; 405818, 4523059; 405810, 4523034; 
405872, 4523029; 405938, 4523029; 405994, 4523057; 406052, 4523115; 
406087, 4523161; 406156, 4523245; 406171, 4523263; 406178, 4523291; 
406186, 4523313; 406172, 4523324; 406156, 4523330; 406137, 4523317; 
406100, 4523302; 406069, 4523292; 406046, 4523292; 406027, 4523307; 
406010, 4523321; 405988, 4523327; 405983, 4523341; 405984, 4523361; 
405993, 4523383; 406013, 4523383; 406022, 4523396; 406036, 4523414; 
406074, 4523420; 406096, 4523433; 406124, 4523445; 406150, 4523433; 
406153, 4523404; 406153, 4523368; 406169, 4523354; 406193, 4523351; 
406217, 4523330; 406217, 4523302; 406219, 4523286; 406258, 4523317; 
406283, 4523349; 406296, 4523379; 406328, 4523421; 406367, 4523439; 
406415, 4523473; 406436, 4523520; 406417, 4523526; 406378, 4523534; 
406347, 4523558; 406334, 4523581; 406321, 4523599; 406307, 4523619; 
406302, 4523636; 406288, 4523648; 406264, 4523645; 406235, 4523637; 
406211, 4523638; 406177, 4523651; 406166, 4523660; 406162, 4523677; 
406144, 4523695; 406110, 4523711; 406079, 4523722; 406056, 4523728; 
406046, 4523726; 406043, 4523737; 406043, 4523748; 406057, 4523748; 
406084, 4523740; 406107, 4523737; 406144, 4523718; 406181, 4523695; 
406193, 4523675; 406217, 4523661; 406246, 4523666; 406269, 4523673; 
406294, 4523670; 406318, 4523655; 406333, 4523630; 406334, 4523610; 
406344, 4523594; 406346, 4523592; 406350,

[[Page 349]]

4523595; 406357, 4523608; 406376, 4523635; 406382, 4523657; 406382, 
4523684; 406364, 4523705; 406323, 4523722; 406312, 4523728; 406304, 
4523739; 406287, 4523761; 406280, 4523772; 406274, 4523776; 406264, 
4523773; 406255, 4523764; 406242, 4523753; 406224, 4523755; 406219, 
4523766; 406219, 4523780; 406220, 4523794; 406213, 4523802; 406203, 
4523804; 406184, 4523805; 406170, 4523807; 406162, 4523816; 406157, 
4523831; 406160, 4523852; 406166, 4523867; 406166, 4523879; 406148, 
4523892; 406110, 4523909; 406088, 4523918; 406077, 4523938; 406067, 
4523952; 406066, 4523963; 406070, 4523971; 406079, 4523965; 406083, 
4523950; 406092, 4523936; 406105, 4523927; 406133, 4523913; 406155, 
4523905; 406176, 4523889; 406180, 4523873; 406175, 4523856; 406170, 
4523835; 406176, 4523822; 406188, 4523818; 406206, 4523816; 406226, 
4523813; 406235, 4523802; 406236, 4523789; 406237, 4523777; 406246, 
4523779; 406257, 4523787; 406273, 4523795; 406290, 4523783; 406309, 
4523763; 406323, 4523751; 406324, 4523750; 406324, 4523751; 406355, 
4523742; 406383, 4523729; 406400, 4523714; 406411, 4523685; 406403, 
4523642; 406387, 4523613; 406384, 4523589; 406403, 4523573; 406434, 
4523579; 406445, 4523607; 406424, 4523635; 406427, 4523669; 406440, 
4523694; 406439, 4523708; 406431, 4523732; 406431, 4523754; 406431, 
4523770; 406445, 4523791; 406465, 4523791; 406477, 4523772; 406458, 
4523758; 406458, 4523732; 406477, 4523705; 406478, 4523689; 406498, 
4523679; 406526, 4523667; 406551, 4523682; 406580, 4523682; 406601, 
4523663; 406633, 4523670; 406626, 4523698; 406586, 4523710; 406546, 
4523728; 406533, 4523755; 406528, 4523783; 406527, 4523813; 406517, 
4523838; 406502, 4523853; 406462, 4523869; 406440, 4523886; 406428, 
4523920; 406428, 4523959; 406428, 4523991; 406428, 4524010; 406428, 
4524031; 406446, 4524045; 406464, 4524045; 406467, 4524031; 406456, 
4524012; 406470, 4524007; 406496, 4524006; 406520, 4523989; 406545, 
4523978; 406557, 4523993; 406558, 4523999; 406564, 4524013; 406581, 
4524021; 406598, 4524025; 406620, 4524027; 406638, 4524039; 406679, 
4524126; 406694, 4524154; 406710, 4524198; 406722, 4524218; 406734, 
4524261; 406736, 4524292; 406718, 4524309; 406714, 4524325; 406729, 
4524324; 406733, 4524317; 406751, 4524302; 406755, 4524289; 406753, 
4524253; 406742, 4524212; 406720, 4524175; 406717, 4524153; 406703, 
4524130; 406716, 4524128; 406721, 4524120; 406711, 4524106; 406703, 
4524101; 406689, 4524100; 406666, 4524051; 406653, 4524022; 406637, 
4524011; 406619, 4524009; 406600, 4524008; 406585, 4524003; 406573, 
4523983; 406559, 4523962; 406527, 4523962; 406502, 4523970; 406480, 
4523984; 406458, 4523982; 406453, 4523966; 406456, 4523945; 406475, 
4523919; 406500, 4523901; 406543, 4523879; 406559, 4523867; 406584, 
4523870; 406587, 4523854; 406564, 4523823; 406571, 4523783; 406578, 
4523754; 406608, 4523742; 406658, 4523753; 406696, 4523748; 406734, 
4523733; 406780, 4523775; 406854, 4523829; 406949, 4523886; 407018, 
4523898; 407135, 4523914; 407136, 4523939; 407107, 4523979; 407085, 
4524004; 407064, 4524038; 407018, 4524047; 407005, 4524066; 406998, 
4524106; 406998, 4524137; 407011, 4524157; 407032, 4524173; 407046, 
4524195; 407039, 4524228; 407026, 4524251; 407026, 4524291; 407052, 
4524322; 407083, 4524328; 407051, 4524376; 407014, 4524379; 406995, 
4524407; 406998, 4524438; 407026, 4524465; 407033, 4524490; 407046, 
4524502; 407102, 4524463; 407105, 4524434; 407120, 4524404; 407138, 
4524362; 407161, 4524347; 407191, 4524326; 407201, 4524306; 407202, 
4524279; 407195, 4524254; 407174, 4524234; 407141, 4524209; 407132, 
4524188; 407138, 4524175; 407164, 4524168; 407204, 4524154; 407217, 
4524132; 407227, 4524076; 407292, 4523931; 407308, 4523926; 407339, 
4523879; 407367, 4523825; 407428, 4523817; 407531, 4523786; 407597, 
4523778; 407597, 4523916; 407613, 4523923; 407851, 4523920; 407854, 
4523907; 407840, 4523903; 407616, 4523901; 407616, 4523788; 407611, 
4523757; 407538, 4523766; 407491, 4523776; 407429, 4523795; 407375, 
4523806; 407350, 4523814; 407333, 4523850; 407297, 4523891; 407279, 
4523884; 407241, 4523875; 407208, 4523882; 407152, 4523885; 407079, 
4523881; 406982, 4523856; 406908, 4523819; 406832, 4523773; 406759, 
4523704; 406712, 4523660; 406654, 4523636; 406570, 4523626; 406524, 
4523611; 406505, 4523592; 406490, 4523567; 406467, 4523524; 406445, 
4523469; 406415, 4523433; 406384, 4523405; 406352, 4523376; 406318, 
4523338; 406284, 4523304; 406252, 4523276; 406218, 4523257; 406183, 
4523227; 406141, 4523190; 406105, 4523140; 406065, 4523092; 406034, 
4523058; 405985, 4523032; 405947, 4523009; 405924, 4523004; 405880, 
4523008; 405818, 4523012; 405759, 4523021; 405715, 4523027; 405690, 
4523045; 405669, 4523076; 405635, 4523132; 405598, 4523168; 405557, 
4523211; 405531, 4523239; 405507, 4523270; 405481, 4523296; 405453, 
4523316; 405422, 4523338; 405388, 4523361; 405366, 4523386; 405337, 
4523417; 405313, 4523444; 405285, 4523449; 405250, 4523452; 405226, 
4523470; 405209, 4523519; 405194, 4523558; 405185, 4523594; 405170, 
4523617; 405133, 4523658; 405097, 4523683; returning to 405091, 4523686.
    (xv) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Arcata South. Land bounded 
by the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 407456, 4523277; 
407456, 4523282; 407462, 4523297; 407483, 4523331; 407472, 4523341; 
407469, 4523345; 407465, 4523351; 407463, 4523357; 407468, 4523361; 
407475, 4523359; 407480, 4523354; 407484, 4523357; 407515, 4523395; 
407526, 4523407; 407540, 4523413; 407563, 4523419; 407577, 4523412; 
407587, 4523403; 407599, 4523398; 407614, 4523398; 407624, 4523392; 
407636, 4523390; 407643, 4523387; 407658, 4523381; 407669, 4523375; 
407677, 4523367; 407686, 4523368; 407702, 4523369; 407724, 4523369; 
407740, 4523370; 407751, 4523369; 407765, 4523368; 407777, 4523364; 
407790, 4523358; 407797, 4523348; 407796, 4523343; 407791, 4523337; 
407802, 4523332; 407810, 4523339; 407820, 4523340; 407832, 4523337; 
407838, 4523331; 407844, 4523326; 407848, 4523326; 407858, 4523326; 
407873, 4523320; 407927, 4523299; 407971, 4523284; 407973, 4523278; 
407971, 4523270; 407954, 4523252; 407927, 4523223; 407879, 4523151; 
407856, 4523115; 407830, 4523105; 407808, 4523105; 407776, 4523107; 
407756, 4523116; 407754, 4523121; 407746, 4523126; 407736, 4523125; 
407641, 4523175; 407640, 4523181; 407629, 4523190; 407609, 4523202; 
407602, 4523203; 407591, 4523200; 407582, 4523201; 407509, 4523240; 
407479, 4523254; 407465, 4523269; returning to 407456, 4523277.
    (xvi) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Arcata South. Land bounded 
by the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 408209, 4523323; 
408215, 4523326; 408243, 4523285; 408271, 4523261; 408326, 4523212; 
408327, 4523400; 408335, 4523400; 408335, 4523243; 408349, 4523245; 
408359, 4523246; 408363, 4523249; 408367,

[[Page 350]]

4523266; 408369, 4523282; 408376, 4523297; 408387, 4523315; 408394, 
4523328; 408393, 4523345; 408385, 4523353; 408382, 4523361; 408386, 
4523369; 408393, 4523381; 408397, 4523389; 408405, 4523390; 408410, 
4523396; 408411, 4523400; 408408, 4523404; 408404, 4523411; 408401, 
4523423; 408403, 4523432; 408396, 4523441; 408359, 4523464; 408353, 
4523470; 408353, 4523477; 408363, 4523475; 408373, 4523466; 408410, 
4523443; 408413, 4523435; 408412, 4523428; 408417, 4523421; 408424, 
4523421; 408428, 4523427; 408435, 4523433; 408443, 4523434; 408455, 
4523436; 408465, 4523431; 408474, 4523421; 408481, 4523417; 408486, 
4523421; 408488, 4523433; 408483, 4523445; 408476, 4523452; 408467, 
4523461; 408460, 4523463; 408456, 4523469; 408456, 4523476; 408444, 
4523491; 408435, 4523501; 408433, 4523510; 408431, 4523521; 408444, 
4523532; 408457, 4523537; 408464, 4523547; 408468, 4523557; 408468, 
4523567; 408470, 4523574; 408479, 4523568; 408481, 4523558; 408474, 
4523549; 408470, 4523541; 408470, 4523531; 408463, 4523528; 408453, 
4523523; 408446, 4523517; 408444, 4523510; 408448, 4523505; 408459, 
4523492; 408471, 4523476; 408482, 4523467; 408497, 4523456; 408503, 
4523443; 408503, 4523433; 408503, 4523422; 408498, 4523415; 408491, 
4523406; 408483, 4523402; 408483, 4523396; 408489, 4523390; 408500, 
4523389; 408507, 4523393; 408514, 4523400; 408521, 4523407; 408532, 
4523411; 408537, 4523410; 408549, 4523411; 408556, 4523415; 408562, 
4523421; 408564, 4523430; 408565, 4523437; 408565, 4523443; 408565, 
4523457; 408562, 4523465; 408570, 4523468; 408579, 4523468; 408589, 
4523468; 408597, 4523465; 408603, 4523463; 408609, 4523463; 408609, 
4523467; 408609, 4523475; 408613, 4523478; 408616, 4523473; 408616, 
4523465; 408613, 4523455; 408602, 4523455; 408597, 4523458; 408584, 
4523460; 408572, 4523457; 408572, 4523450; 408572, 4523441; 408570, 
4523430; 408568, 4523419; 408563, 4523410; 408554, 4523404; 408542, 
4523401; 408544, 4523395; 408549, 4523368; 408547, 4523366; 408539, 
4523366; 408534, 4523358; 408544, 4523351; 408553, 4523338; 408549, 
4523333; 408543, 4523336; 408532, 4523345; 408525, 4523355; 408521, 
4523359; 408511, 4523363; 408502, 4523364; 408492, 4523363; 408474, 
4523363; 408467, 4523366; 408462, 4523372; 408459, 4523377; 408453, 
4523380; 408444, 4523380; 408428, 4523378; 408411, 4523376; 408408, 
4523364; 408407, 4523346; 408407, 4523332; 408408, 4523322; 408404, 
4523311; 408396, 4523296; 408385, 4523283; 408383, 4523267; 408384, 
4523244; 408383, 4523219; 408383, 4523207; 408393, 4523195; 408401, 
4523194; 408413, 4523196; 408408, 4523189; 408402, 4523180; 408385, 
4523189; 408378, 4523175; 408367, 4523172; 408494, 4523054; 408508, 
4523063; 408520, 4523064; 408532, 4523063; 408543, 4523056; 408548, 
4523039; 408547, 4523026; 408537, 4523018; 408526, 4523017; 408519, 
4523024; 408473, 4523064; 408360, 4523167; 408288, 4523233; 408250, 
4523270; 408232, 4523289; 408216, 4523311; returning to 408209, 4523323.
    (xvii) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Arcata South. Land 
bounded by the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 408660, 
4523204; 408667, 4523217; 408668, 4523242; 408674, 4523231; 408673, 
4523202; 408676, 4523194; 408689, 4523183; 408689, 4523172; 408682, 
4523153; 408675, 4523137; 408676, 4523121; 408681, 4523107; 408687, 
4523095; 408694, 4523080; 408694, 4523067; 408701, 4523051; 408713, 
4523039; 408728, 4523031; 408712, 4523031; 408685, 4523046; 408676, 
4523063; 408681, 4523085; 408671, 4523106; 408664, 4523140; 408674, 
4523161; 408674, 4523180; 408662, 4523195; returning to 408660, 4523204.
    (xviii) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Arcata South. Land 
bounded by the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 408793, 
4522282; 408793, 4522296; 408825, 4522296; 408833, 4522299; 408837, 
4522310; 408836, 4522332; 408837, 4522391; 408835, 4522418; 408840, 
4522429; 408844, 4522442; 408852, 4522450; 408863, 4522457; 408866, 
4522470; 408865, 4522485; 408865, 4522489; 408856, 4522499; 408848, 
4522510; 408848, 4522523; 408844, 4522556; 408840, 4522588; 408833, 
4522611; 408835, 4522635; 408833, 4522645; 408834, 4522681; 408842, 
4522682; 408844, 4522664; 408849, 4522639; 408875, 4522638; 408897, 
4522641; 408914, 4522643; 408919, 4522662; 408924, 4522681; 408935, 
4522701; 408951, 4522718; 408950, 4522738; 408940, 4522755; 408926, 
4522768; 408912, 4522791; 408910, 4522816; 408912, 4522838; 408923, 
4522862; 408938, 4522878; 408950, 4522895; 408967, 4522927; 408965, 
4522951; 408965, 4522982; 408968, 4522998; 408979, 4523015; 408980, 
4523030; 408969, 4523034; 408948, 4523039; 408931, 4523045; 408918, 
4523056; 408911, 4523066; 408911, 4523088; 408918, 4523111; 408918, 
4523134; 408916, 4523154; 408922, 4523173; 408933, 4523186; 408942, 
4523195; 408947, 4523213; 408939, 4523225; 408935, 4523238; 408933, 
4523254; 408936, 4523273; 408946, 4523297; 408946, 4523315; 408948, 
4523329; 408963, 4523352; 408962, 4523356; 408949, 4523354; 408920, 
4523357; 408907, 4523372; 408907, 4523396; 408918, 4523417; 408923, 
4523428; 408919, 4523434; 408905, 4523431; 408886, 4523431; 408866, 
4523447; 408862, 4523480; 408865, 4523500; 408862, 4523514; 408859, 
4523536; 408867, 4523548; 408872, 4523517; 408876, 4523505; 408877, 
4523483; 408877, 4523453; 408895, 4523446; 408921, 4523451; 408941, 
4523444; 408948, 4523432; 408943, 4523418; 408933, 4523396; 408926, 
4523383; 408931, 4523375; 408950, 4523375; 408960, 4523378; 408976, 
4523375; 408988, 4523365; 408988, 4523353; 408984, 4523343; 408973, 
4523331; 408965, 4523310; 408960, 4523286; 408956, 4523255; 408955, 
4523244; 408959, 4523233; 408966, 4523221; 408967, 4523207; 408965, 
4523192; 408959, 4523182; 408950, 4523172; 408941, 4523161; 408938, 
4523147; 408938, 4523133; 408939, 4523118; 408936, 4523097; 408938, 
4523075; 408945, 4523064; 408966, 4523064; 408988, 4523062; 409003, 
4523050; 409010, 4523037; 409011, 4523020; 409002, 4523004; 408992, 
4522992; 408988, 4522978; 408987, 4522960; 408991, 4522950; 409012, 
4522962; 409018, 4522973; 409015, 4522988; 409016, 4523007; 409029, 
4523016; 409037, 4523024; 409046, 4523024; 409053, 4523037; 409051, 
4523054; 409043, 4523075; 409030, 4523083; 409013, 4523089; 409002, 
4523098; 408994, 4523110; 408992, 4523125; 408998, 4523139; 409021, 
4523155; 409041, 4523166; 409043, 4523178; 409034, 4523189; 409035, 
4523198; 409043, 4523198; 409049, 4523191; 409056, 4523176; 409049, 
4523158; 409035, 4523147; 409018, 4523138; 409007, 4523124; 409007, 
4523115; 409020, 4523101; 409031, 4523096; 409047, 4523088; 409057, 
4523072; 409067, 4523046; 409064, 4523034; 409094, 4523071; 409208, 
4523215; 409257, 4523257; 409260, 4523264; 409271, 4523270; 409272, 
4523284; 409272, 4523312; 409284, 4523305; 409284, 4523266; 409277, 
4523258; 409269, 4523250; 409216, 4523202; 409191,

[[Page 351]]

4523170; 409111, 4523070; 409042, 4522982; 409290, 4523125; 409523, 
4523257; 409534, 4523249; 409430, 4523189; 409262, 4523087; 409267, 
4523076; 409267, 4523062; 409267, 4523049; 409270, 4523031; 409278, 
4523026; 409286, 4523022; 409299, 4523016; 409305, 4523023; 409309, 
4523035; 409310, 4523047; 409314, 4523062; 409319, 4523062; 409325, 
4523062; 409326, 4523068; 409324, 4523074; 409326, 4523079; 409331, 
4523070; 409331, 4523055; 409326, 4523041; 409331, 4523025; 409341, 
4523014; 409356, 4523005; 409366, 4522997; 409375, 4522973; 409379, 
4522960; 409379, 4522943; 409374, 4522934; 409375, 4522929; 409383, 
4522929; 409381, 4522921; 409376, 4522914; 409381, 4522905; 409389, 
4522905; 409396, 4522901; 409395, 4522895; 409384, 4522891; 409375, 
4522880; 409367, 4522874; 409359, 4522878; 409353, 4522872; 409343, 
4522872; 409333, 4522882; 409336, 4522900; 409331, 4522916; 409318, 
4522917; 409308, 4522930; 409288, 4522927; 409281, 4522907; 409282, 
4522874; 409278, 4522827; 409272, 4522806; 409270, 4522792; 409267, 
4522783; 409261, 4522773; 409312, 4522791; 409388, 4522813; 409447, 
4522839; 409449, 4522830; 409433, 4522821; 409377, 4522797; 409326, 
4522785; 409326, 4522778; 409325, 4522764; 409318, 4522747; 409309, 
4522736; 409298, 4522731; 409284, 4522732; 409282, 4522740; 409275, 
4522747; 409271, 4522747; 409263, 4522748; 409261, 4522752; 409253, 
4522757; 409247, 4522744; 409227, 4522732; 409213, 4522730; 409208, 
4522722; 409206, 4522699; 409203, 4522689; 409175, 4522660; 409162, 
4522658; 409141, 4522658; 409128, 4522655; 409115, 4522647; 409102, 
4522644; 409092, 4522645; 409084, 4522652; 409081, 4522663; 409081, 
4522672; 409083, 4522680; 409085, 4522691; 409081, 4522698; 409077, 
4522700; 409068, 4522698; 409058, 4522692; 409041, 4522685; 409030, 
4522687; 409023, 4522697; 409020, 4522709; 409012, 4522717; 409001, 
4522721; 408988, 4522718; 408970, 4522704; 408959, 4522696; 408950, 
4522696; 408939, 4522677; 408937, 4522662; 408930, 4522636; 408931, 
4522628; 408939, 4522622; 408945, 4522613; 408944, 4522606; 408936, 
4522607; 408924, 4522616; 408916, 4522622; 408912, 4522615; 408920, 
4522609; 408930, 4522597; 408925, 4522587; 408916, 4522581; 408902, 
4522571; 408891, 4522563; 408882, 4522531; 408886, 4522522; 408888, 
4522499; 408893, 4522473; 408893, 4522450; 408882, 4522436; 408874, 
4522429; 408859, 4522417; 408859, 4522411; 408855, 4522403; 408853, 
4522386; 408851, 4522340; 408852, 4522302; 408850, 4522288; 408852, 
4522282; 408851, 4522258; 408850, 4522228; 408861, 4522228; 408868, 
4522228; 408875, 4522225; 408876, 4522219; 408881, 4522206; 408895, 
4522209; 408901, 4522209; 408910, 4522223; 408920, 4522239; 408935, 
4522253; 408950, 4522264; 408965, 4522271; 408986, 4522273; 408995, 
4522273; 409002, 4522279; 409010, 4522288; 409012, 4522309; 409017, 
4522342; 409024, 4522357; 409035, 4522364; 409051, 4522372; 409062, 
4522384; 409073, 4522400; 409089, 4522424; 409098, 4522436; 409115, 
4522443; 409127, 4522439; 409137, 4522426; 409138, 4522418; 409141, 
4522409; 409144, 4522395; 409149, 4522388; 409168, 4522386; 409179, 
4522387; 409195, 4522391; 409217, 4522400; 409234, 4522417; 409240, 
4522433; 409250, 4522455; 409266, 4522463; 409290, 4522467; 409320, 
4522476; 409339, 4522493; 409350, 4522514; 409362, 4522525; 409381, 
4522526; 409396, 4522525; 409411, 4522512; 409417, 4522499; 409417, 
4522487; 409428, 4522476; 409441, 4522476; 409457, 4522473; 409464, 
4522471; 409470, 4522467; 409470, 4522461; 409467, 4522462; 409461, 
4522458; 409455, 4522432; 409464, 4522418; 409496, 4522388; 409501, 
4522381; 409499, 4522376; 409494, 4522378; 409456, 4522418; 409449, 
4522428; 409452, 4522446; 409457, 4522458; 409450, 4522468; 409438, 
4522470; 409424, 4522470; 409417, 4522472; 409412, 4522489; 409406, 
4522505; 409398, 4522515; 409386, 4522519; 409374, 4522519; 409362, 
4522515; 409351, 4522499; 409335, 4522475; 409318, 4522464; 409295, 
4522459; 409271, 4522456; 409259, 4522446; 409255, 4522432; 409252, 
4522419; 409235, 4522397; 409212, 4522383; 409199, 4522379; 409170, 
4522372; 409142, 4522377; 409135, 4522388; 409127, 4522410; 409127, 
4522424; 409119, 4522429; 409112, 4522431; 409104, 4522428; 409098, 
4522419; 409090, 4522403; 409081, 4522387; 409070, 4522374; 409058, 
4522363; 409049, 4522355; 409039, 4522346; 409032, 4522336; 409029, 
4522319; 409030, 4522301; 409028, 4522281; 409034, 4522278; 409055, 
4522276; 409062, 4522270; 409078, 4522260; 409096, 4522248; 409111, 
4522236; 409121, 4522233; 409126, 4522237; 409137, 4522252; 409140, 
4522259; 409142, 4522255; 409140, 4522244; 409134, 4522233; 409121, 
4522225; 409110, 4522227; 409096, 4522239; 409075, 4522253; 409061, 
4522263; 409051, 4522269; 409041, 4522269; 409018, 4522269; 409008, 
4522264; 408990, 4522258; 408971, 4522255; 408956, 4522249; 408933, 
4522237; 408922, 4522220; 408909, 4522203; 408899, 4522190; 408886, 
4522178; 408877, 4522178; 408874, 4522193; 408871, 4522209; 408869, 
4522210; 408869, 4522202; 408871, 4522179; 408869, 4522171; 408868, 
4522165; 408861, 4522160; 408848, 4522160; 408846, 4522175; 408838, 
4522180; 408838, 4522185; 408846, 4522194; 408842, 4522201; 408835, 
4522214; 408838, 4522224; 408841, 4522233; 408841, 4522243; 408841, 
4522269; 408840, 4522281; 408834, 4522284; 408827, 4522283; 408812, 
4522283; returning to 408793, 4522282.
    (xix) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Arcata South. Land bounded 
by the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 408827, 4521822; 
408829, 4521942; 408843, 4521954; 408843, 4521975; 408843, 4522009; 
408845, 4522060; 408845, 4522106; 408851, 4522108; 408854, 4522062; 
408853, 4522015; 408853, 4521970; 408853, 4521951; 408872, 4521939; 
408924, 4521913; 408962, 4521881; 409011, 4521849; 409066, 4521844; 
409121, 4521841; 409164, 4521843; 409207, 4521848; 409259, 4521862; 
409305, 4521866; 409322, 4521839; 409379, 4521833; 409431, 4521840; 
409461, 4521827; 409545, 4521805; 409543, 4521570; 409520, 4521641; 
409490, 4521729; 409460, 4521729; 409406, 4521743; 409376, 4521785; 
409317, 4521785; 409291, 4521799; 409279, 4521824; 409249, 4521818; 
409223, 4521781; 409178, 4521760; 409135, 4521759; 409101, 4521756; 
409063, 4521752; 409020, 4521786; 408982, 4521820; 408911, 4521823; 
408880, 4521831; returning to 408827, 4521822.
    (xx) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Arcata South. Land bounded 
by the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 408824, 4521590; 
408824, 4521640; 408825, 4521658; 408832, 4521672; 408843, 4521692; 
408856, 4521723; 408874, 4521738; 408899, 4521738; 408914, 4521726; 
408927, 4521705; 408940, 4521678; 408949, 4521649; 408959, 4521631; 
408969, 4521621; 408982, 4521615; 409005, 4521615; 409027, 4521604; 
409016,

[[Page 352]]

4521599; 408839, 4521613; 408835, 4521597; returning to 408824, 4521590.
    (xxi) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Arcata South. Land bounded 
by the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 405365, 4517762; 
405372, 4517778; 405520, 4517852; 405888, 4518096; 406038, 4518193; 
406162, 4518274; 406251, 4518332; 406342, 4518391; 406487, 4518485; 
406790, 4518682; 406988, 4518812; 407152, 4518919; 407287, 4519007; 
407490, 4519140; 407589, 4519191; 407724, 4519261; 407788, 4519302; 
407816, 4519302; 407839, 4519293; 407861, 4519261; 407859, 4519254; 
407846, 4519259; 407820, 4519286; 407805, 4519292; 407786, 4519287; 
407728, 4519246; 407596, 4519179; 407526, 4519144; 407446, 4519099; 
407284, 4518991; 407182, 4518928; 407085, 4518861; 406976, 4518791; 
406930, 4518760; 406804, 4518673; 406819, 4518664; 406839, 4518649; 
406862, 4518632; 406882, 4518617; 406906, 4518595; 406933, 4518577; 
406955, 4518580; 406974, 4518587; 406998, 4518591; 407032, 4518590; 
407062, 4518581; 407073, 4518570; 407089, 4518568; 407115, 4518574; 
407140, 4518584; 407153, 4518587; 407162, 4518582; 407176, 4518568; 
407193, 4518534; 407204, 4518516; 407223, 4518499; 407243, 4518482; 
407263, 4518464; 407273, 4518444; 407298, 4518423; 407312, 4518402; 
407317, 4518372; 407325, 4518329; 407331, 4518317; 407336, 4518304; 
407343, 4518293; 407357, 4518273; 407374, 4518266; 407404, 4518252; 
407421, 4518239; 407439, 4518209; 407447, 4518186; 407447, 4518177; 
407434, 4518179; 407422, 4518204; 407407, 4518230; 407387, 4518243; 
407364, 4518250; 407347, 4518259; 407331, 4518280; 407318, 4518308; 
407315, 4518325; 407315, 4518326; 407307, 4518361; 407297, 4518405; 
407291, 4518416; 407271, 4518434; 407255, 4518457; 407235, 4518479; 
407206, 4518502; 407190, 4518516; 407173, 4518546; 407166, 4518563; 
407160, 4518572; 407152, 4518574; 407139, 4518574; 407123, 4518566; 
407097, 4518558; 407077, 4518556; 407055, 4518566; 407043, 4518576; 
407033, 4518579; 407022, 4518580; 407005, 4518577; 406979, 4518570; 
406961, 4518559; 406935, 4518554; 406950, 4518530; 406956, 4518505; 
406957, 4518488; 406951, 4518476; 406942, 4518448; 406939, 4518411; 
406948, 4518390; 406974, 4518363; 406995, 4518331; 407002, 4518333; 
407012, 4518348; 407019, 4518360; 407027, 4518365; 407023, 4518349; 
407011, 4518328; 406997, 4518319; 406997, 4518309; 407009, 4518286; 
407032, 4518269; 407065, 4518260; 407085, 4518248; 407099, 4518223; 
407127, 4518197; 407148, 4518183; 407172, 4518173; 407199, 4518158; 
407213, 4518150; 407224, 4518129; 407224, 4518109; 407218, 4518079; 
407217, 4518055; 407231, 4518032; 407240, 4518018; 407253, 4518005; 
407275, 4517983; 407289, 4517972; 407303, 4517953; 407309, 4517939; 
407303, 4517939; 407287, 4517957; 407276, 4517974; 407257, 4517984; 
407239, 4518003; 407223, 4518026; 407217, 4518032; 407209, 4518051; 
407204, 4518076; 407210, 4518108; 407208, 4518134; 407194, 4518150; 
407170, 4518165; 407143, 4518173; 407105, 4518198; 407085, 4518223; 
407063, 4518244; 407040, 4518255; 407009, 4518263; 406994, 4518277; 
406980, 4518307; 406966, 4518336; 406937, 4518373; 406921, 4518398; 
406917, 4518433; 406922, 4518459; 406920, 4518497; 406912, 4518536; 
406879, 4518572; 406841, 4518609; 406786, 4518639; 406773, 4518656; 
406729, 4518626; 406710, 4518614; 406679, 4518595; 406634, 4518565; 
406634, 4518555; 406633, 4518533; 406630, 4518504; 406617, 4518472; 
406612, 4518442; 406611, 4518423; 406632, 4518403; 406660, 4518394; 
406673, 4518388; 406678, 4518380; 406661, 4518378; 406632, 4518388; 
406599, 4518414; 406604, 4518442; 406606, 4518480; 406617, 4518524; 
406622, 4518549; 406622, 4518560; 406568, 4518527; 406391, 4518410; 
406184, 4518272; 406069, 4518197; 406045, 4518180; 405987, 4518146; 
405924, 4518102; 405894, 4518085; 405652, 4517922; 405530, 4517839; 
405381, 4517766; 405379, 4517746; 405385, 4517689; 405476, 4517633; 
405482, 4517619; 405462, 4517594; 405463, 4517627; 405374, 4517679; 
405370, 4517729; returning to 405365, 4517762.
    (xxii) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Arcata South. Land 
bounded by the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 406574, 
4517557; 406583, 4517571; 406601, 4517590; 406623, 4517598; 406653, 
4517604; 406676, 4517602; 406693, 4517598; 406706, 4517594; 406715, 
4517590; 406735, 4517588; 406757, 4517604; 406755, 4517624; 406734, 
4517661; 406722, 4517698; 406731, 4517723; 406751, 4517753; 406765, 
4517773; 406786, 4517793; 406795, 4517794; 406800, 4517782; 406800, 
4517768; 406790, 4517749; 406796, 4517748; 406807, 4517765; 406825, 
4517775; 406843, 4517776; 406861, 4517775; 406875, 4517775; 406897, 
4517765; 406883, 4517749; 406888, 4517737; 406909, 4517734; 406932, 
4517733; 406941, 4517726; 406917, 4517719; 406891, 4517714; 406873, 
4517728; 406852, 4517739; 406845, 4517716; 406861, 4517718; 406875, 
4517717; 406872, 4517707; 406862, 4517704; 406851, 4517693; 406862, 
4517689; 406883, 4517678; 406901, 4517666; 406909, 4517655; 406926, 
4517654; 406946, 4517644; 406960, 4517629; 406974, 4517625; 406986, 
4517617; 406983, 4517601; 406991, 4517593; 406994, 4517571; 406994, 
4517555; 407006, 4517562; 407007, 4517579; 407019, 4517593; 407044, 
4517603; 407049, 4517596; 407040, 4517581; 407040, 4517568; 407041, 
4517549; 407040, 4517530; 407028, 4517525; 407029, 4517498; 407014, 
4517484; 407018, 4517468; 407008, 4517462; 407007, 4517444; 407007, 
4517432; 407013, 4517414; 407011, 4517402; 407013, 4517396; 407030, 
4517396; 407052, 4517392; 407062, 4517389; 407067, 4517377; 407067, 
4517361; 407060, 4517343; 407035, 4517339; 407012, 4517338; 406986, 
4517338; 406971, 4517344; 406959, 4517357; 406962, 4517371; 406972, 
4517383; 406978, 4517403; 406978, 4517424; 406978, 4517444; 406978, 
4517462; 406983, 4517469; 406980, 4517483; 406966, 4517494; 406949, 
4517493; 406932, 4517500; 406924, 4517505; 406910, 4517499; 406889, 
4517499; 406867, 4517515; 406848, 4517523; 406840, 4517512; 406825, 
4517501; 406811, 4517518; 406810, 4517539; 406795, 4517555; 406784, 
4517551; 406763, 4517556; 406752, 4517556; 406765, 4517517; 406783, 
4517446; 406794, 4517410; 406817, 4517384; 406896, 4517344; 406983, 
4517309; 407020, 4517310; 407049, 4517333; 407053, 4517329; 407051, 
4517319; 407025, 4517299; 407010, 4517295; 406988, 4517297; 406944, 
4517309; 406861, 4517348; 406820, 4517367; 406799, 4517382; 406785, 
4517400; 406775, 4517428; 406763, 4517475; 406755, 4517511; 406735, 
4517560; 406708, 4517585; 406683, 4517591; 406652, 4517593; 406614, 
4517582; 406591, 4517558; 406581, 4517551; returning to 406574, 4517557.
    (xxiii) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Arcata South. Land 
bounded by the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 406455, 
4517395; 406458, 4517402; 406470,

[[Page 353]]

4517401; 406477, 4517392; 406493, 4517382; 406512, 4517379; 406525, 
4517388; 406537, 4517407; 406545, 4517421; 406551, 4517452; 406551, 
4517470; 406552, 4517498; 406558, 4517527; 406568, 4517544; 406574, 
4517541; 406567, 4517521; 406562, 4517477; 406563, 4517451; 406554, 
4517421; 406547, 4517391; 406533, 4517368; 406506, 4517361; 406483, 
4517370; 406464, 4517382; returning to 406455, 4517395.
    (xxiv) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Arcata South. Land 
bounded by the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 406478, 
4517065; 406493, 4517065; 406523, 4517064; 406555, 4517073; 406576, 
4517093; 406592, 4517123; 406597, 4517143; 406596, 4517164; 406584, 
4517198; 406558, 4517223; 406546, 4517240; 406543, 4517267; 406549, 
4517293; 406562, 4517308; 406581, 4517318; 406595, 4517335; 406612, 
4517374; 406622, 4517410; 406625, 4517451; 406627, 4517498; 406638, 
4517514; 406652, 4517518; 406669, 4517502; 406684, 4517464; 406699, 
4517394; 406709, 4517355; 406741, 4517320; 406802, 4517291; 406869, 
4517272; 406912, 4517261; 406937, 4517250; 406978, 4517233; 407002, 
4517232; 407048, 4517243; 407079, 4517253; 407111, 4517276; 407135, 
4517306; 407151, 4517349; 407154, 4517391; 407154, 4517429; 407155, 
4517456; 407176, 4517471; 407205, 4517471; 407229, 4517460; 407260, 
4517439; 407279, 4517399; 407288, 4517331; 407300, 4517248; 407313, 
4517232; 407335, 4517233; 407360, 4517241; 407377, 4517245; 407389, 
4517249; 407391, 4517242; 407370, 4517231; 407341, 4517222; 407320, 
4517206; 407322, 4517183; 407332, 4517164; 407334, 4517151; 407333, 
4517135; 407344, 4517115; 407361, 4517098; 407379, 4517089; 407394, 
4517089; 407425, 4517099; 407463, 4517107; 407540, 4517113; 407594, 
4517110; 407635, 4517099; 407671, 4517083; 407702, 4517056; 407724, 
4517032; 407744, 4516996; 407745, 4516952; 407743, 4516874; 407757, 
4516822; 407763, 4516772; 407761, 4516749; 407753, 4516735; 407729, 
4516726; 407682, 4516720; 407634, 4516720; 407585, 4516717; 407551, 
4516713; 407522, 4516703; 407494, 4516678; 407476, 4516634; 407471, 
4516597; 407469, 4516597; 407459, 4516598; 407458, 4516598; 407459, 
4516618; 407473, 4516664; 407489, 4516693; 407512, 4516715; 407551, 
4516727; 407614, 4516734; 407646, 4516737; 407705, 4516738; 407729, 
4516741; 407743, 4516745; 407749, 4516757; 407745, 4516787; 407729, 
4516865; 407725, 4516894; 407723, 4516934; 407725, 4516975; 407729, 
4516996; 407713, 4517029; 407681, 4517059; 407645, 4517083; 407601, 
4517094; 407531, 4517100; 407450, 4517092; 407441, 4517082; 407418, 
4517074; 407395, 4517071; 407363, 4517068; 407345, 4517078; 407336, 
4517095; 407328, 4517113; 407319, 4517147; 407317, 4517164; 407304, 
4517209; 407290, 4517244; 407283, 4517287; 407272, 4517352; 407264, 
4517401; 407241, 4517444; 407219, 4517456; 407197, 4517459; 407178, 
4517457; 407167, 4517442; 407164, 4517418; 407162, 4517370; 407152, 
4517322; 407135, 4517290; 407108, 4517260; 407069, 4517239; 407026, 
4517226; 406997, 4517222; 406971, 4517224; 406944, 4517236; 406919, 
4517245; 406886, 4517254; 406836, 4517271; 406788, 4517286; 406747, 
4517305; 406721, 4517321; 406709, 4517337; 406695, 4517358; 406685, 
4517388; 406677, 4517426; 406672, 4517460; 406666, 4517483; 406655, 
4517498; 406649, 4517503; 406643, 4517498; 406639, 4517485; 406637, 
4517461; 406637, 4517439; 406636, 4517409; 406627, 4517381; 406612, 
4517344; 406598, 4517321; 406580, 4517306; 406563, 4517294; 406556, 
4517278; 406557, 4517259; 406559, 4517246; 406577, 4517227; 406596, 
4517204; 406608, 4517174; 406611, 4517165; 406700, 4517169; 406731, 
4517156; 406762, 4517147; 406795, 4517118; 406789, 4517107; 406775, 
4517117; 406750, 4517138; 406695, 4517155; 406612, 4517154; 406610, 
4517149; 406605, 4517131; 406619, 4517116; 406645, 4517091; 406657, 
4517069; 406672, 4517055; 406693, 4517041; 406694, 4517034; 406675, 
4517036; 406659, 4517045; 406635, 4517046; 406629, 4517036; 406625, 
4517018; 406631, 4516990; 406648, 4516971; 406655, 4516958; 406676, 
4516951; 406713, 4516946; 406733, 4516939; 406755, 4516934; 406769, 
4516924; 406781, 4516910; 406793, 4516879; 406798, 4516835; 406795, 
4516791; 406800, 4516758; 406806, 4516740; 406806, 4516724; 406802, 
4516696; 406797, 4516654; 406799, 4516635; 406810, 4516612; 406836, 
4516567; 406845, 4516531; 406848, 4516509; 406840, 4516482; 406836, 
4516462; 406843, 4516463; 406855, 4516477; 406862, 4516495; 406877, 
4516495; 406893, 4516493; 406895, 4516488; 406884, 4516485; 406876, 
4516488; 406867, 4516484; 406857, 4516465; 406838, 4516449; 406841, 
4516437; 406839, 4516409; 406841, 4516371; 406850, 4516359; 406872, 
4516355; 406899, 4516342; 406914, 4516336; 406914, 4516326; 406904, 
4516328; 406891, 4516335; 406878, 4516342; 406860, 4516346; 406842, 
4516351; 406844, 4516330; 406853, 4516301; 406866, 4516282; 406883, 
4516266; 406888, 4516257; 406900, 4516231; 406906, 4516214; 406921, 
4516200; 406946, 4516179; 406970, 4516165; 407007, 4516160; 407016, 
4516156; 407013, 4516147; 407000, 4516150; 406978, 4516150; 406958, 
4516154; 406932, 4516177; 406921, 4516189; 406900, 4516203; 406891, 
4516202; 406884, 4516196; 406884, 4516183; 406899, 4516157; 406919, 
4516121; 406939, 4516087; 406941, 4516059; 406943, 4516019; 406952, 
4515994; 406970, 4515973; 406990, 4515953; 407006, 4515939; 407013, 
4515912; 407024, 4515896; 407042, 4515875; 407049, 4515854; 407044, 
4515852; 407034, 4515872; 407016, 4515890; 407003, 4515910; 406989, 
4515931; 406977, 4515953; 406959, 4515966; 406939, 4515990; 406928, 
4516027; 406927, 4516065; 406917, 4516102; 406891, 4516141; 406869, 
4516180; 406851, 4516194; 406830, 4516216; 406803, 4516263; 406782, 
4516304; 406770, 4516324; 406748, 4516344; 406732, 4516349; 406708, 
4516352; 406684, 4516345; 406660, 4516329; 406631, 4516318; 406613, 
4516318; 406602, 4516326; 406583, 4516348; 406577, 4516372; 406583, 
4516403; 406591, 4516423; 406615, 4516445; 406637, 4516461; 406666, 
4516468; 406686, 4516472; 406692, 4516481; 406689, 4516489; 406678, 
4516496; 406658, 4516500; 406649, 4516508; 406651, 4516515; 406664, 
4516513; 406678, 4516511; 406695, 4516511; 406714, 4516525; 406721, 
4516525; 406718, 4516517; 406710, 4516500; 406713, 4516485; 406707, 
4516468; 406690, 4516456; 406676, 4516451; 406658, 4516449; 406640, 
4516444; 406622, 4516430; 406604, 4516413; 406593, 4516380; 406593, 
4516355; 406613, 4516335; 406624, 4516331; 406645, 4516335; 406672, 
4516353; 406696, 4516366; 406740, 4516362; 406769, 4516344; 406798, 
4516315; 406818, 4516261; 406845, 4516218; 406867, 4516202; 406879, 
4516207; 406884, 4516221; 406876, 4516243; 406867, 4516256; 406849, 
4516270; 406835, 4516294; 406823, 4516326; 406818, 4516360; 406819, 
4516387; 406822, 4516413; 406817, 4516452; 406817, 4516483; 406824, 
4516511; 406824, 4516534; 406815, 4516559; 406804, 4516582; 406781, 
4516618; 406772, 4516637; 406774, 4516674; 406784, 4516719; 406781,

[[Page 354]]

4516743; 406771, 4516779; 406771, 4516816; 406772, 4516865; 406757, 
4516892; 406750, 4516913; 406737, 4516914; 406689, 4516924; 406648, 
4516940; 406625, 4516968; 406609, 4516995; 406604, 4517015; 406614, 
4517036; 406617, 4517063; 406616, 4517093; 406596, 4517100; 406581, 
4517078; 406541, 4517057; 406503, 4517053; 406480, 4517058; returning to 
406478, 4517065.
    (xxv) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Arcata South. Land bounded 
by the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 405813, 4517245; 
405816, 4517250; 405826, 4517237; 405837, 4517224; 405928, 4517186; 
405951, 4517171; 405959, 4517164; 405976, 4517143; 406004, 4517145; 
406019, 4517149; 406019, 4517135; 406010, 4517105; 406005, 4517086; 
405999, 4517070; 405992, 4517046; 405992, 4517030; 406004, 4517019; 
406022, 4517018; 406045, 4517021; 406064, 4517034; 406084, 4517044; 
406114, 4517049; 406132, 4517051; 406145, 4517046; 406162, 4517035; 
406188, 4517013; 406198, 4516996; 406210, 4516994; 406211, 4516980; 
406203, 4516973; 406200, 4516934; 406203, 4516879; 406201, 4516860; 
406223, 4516835; 406234, 4516805; 406230, 4516793; 406248, 4516768; 
406282, 4516711; 406319, 4516696; 406408, 4516682; 406449, 4516663; 
406518, 4516641; 406574, 4516627; 406599, 4516602; 406609, 4516562; 
406591, 4516501; 406570, 4516455; 406459, 4516384; 406401, 4516334; 
406356, 4516286; 406348, 4516251; 406353, 4516233; 406403, 4516214; 
406401, 4516206; 406350, 4516216; 406339, 4516232; 406334, 4516249; 
406335, 4516276; 406345, 4516297; 406359, 4516315; 406398, 4516354; 
406447, 4516400; 406522, 4516450; 406553, 4516470; 406586, 4516555; 
406587, 4516581; 406574, 4516603; 406538, 4516619; 406437, 4516647; 
406397, 4516665; 406322, 4516677; 406282, 4516687; 406257, 4516711; 
406225, 4516768; 406216, 4516782; 406211, 4516778; 406202, 4516774; 
406193, 4516776; 406191, 4516782; 406193, 4516790; 406178, 4516812; 
406168, 4516825; 406164, 4516834; 406144, 4516876; 406139, 4516879; 
406132, 4516879; 406130, 4516884; 406134, 4516888; 406137, 4516893; 
406134, 4516914; 406134, 4516927; 406142, 4516972; 406142, 4516990; 
406137, 4516996; 406131, 4516991; 406124, 4516995; 406126, 4517003; 
406116, 4517012; 406099, 4517013; 406084, 4517013; 406074, 4517010; 
406067, 4516999; 406050, 4516988; 406034, 4516986; 406012, 4516985; 
405990, 4516991; 405979, 4517003; 405968, 4517017; 405966, 4517031; 
405972, 4517062; 405979, 4517082; 405979, 4517087; 405986, 4517107; 
405986, 4517131; 405977, 4517133; 405969, 4517139; 405949, 4517164; 
405921, 4517183; 405885, 4517194; 405834, 4517218; 405824, 4517227; 
returning to 405813, 4517245.
    (xxvi) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Arcata South. Land 
bounded by the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 407085, 
4515505; 407087, 4515512; 407130, 4515530; 407145, 4515540; 407173, 
4515552; 407184, 4515539; 407203, 4515520; 407223, 4515509; 407236, 
4515491; 407238, 4515481; 407244, 4515471; 407268, 4515463; 407278, 
4515449; 407282, 4515436; 407272, 4515442; 407265, 4515454; 407245, 
4515461; 407231, 4515476; 407226, 4515491; 407211, 4515506; 407190, 
4515513; 407169, 4515516; 407155, 4515518; 407152, 4515510; 407139, 
4515507; 407127, 4515502; 407113, 4515499; 407106, 4515498; 407099, 
4515496; 407097, 4515490; 407098, 4515483; 407094, 4515481; 407088, 
4515485; 407088, 4515490; 407088, 4515498; returning to 407085, 4515505.
    (xxvii) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles Eureka and Fields 
Landing. Land bounded by the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, 
N): 399065, 4511443; 399073, 4511482; 399088, 4511516; 399110, 4511539; 
399153, 4511567; 399203, 4511583; 399264, 4511622; 399286, 4511651; 
399296, 4511673; 399356, 4511801; 399406, 4511839; 399422, 4511844; 
399444, 4511846; 399672, 4511791; 399693, 4511796; 399721, 4511806; 
399736, 4511816; 399738, 4511835; 399733, 4511864; 399717, 4511910; 
399781, 4511918; 399776, 4511662; 399738, 4511155; 399643, 4511079; 
399235, 4511068; 399406, 4511265; 399422, 4511318; 399429, 4511358; 
399388, 4511425; 399364, 4511436; 399325, 4511440; 399315, 4511444; 
399149, 4511407; 399109, 4511407; 399080, 4511422; returning to 399065, 
4511443.
    (xxviii) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Fields Landing. Land 
bounded by the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 396204, 
4504399; 396220, 4504485; 396333, 4504495; 396700, 4504525; 396964, 
4504736; 396961, 4504902; 396868, 4504978; 396753, 4505018; 396680, 
4505107; 396673, 4505269; 396855, 4505633; 396706, 4505904; 396637, 
4506093; 396657, 4506149; 396973, 4506376; 397092, 4506339; 397457, 
4506666; 397761, 4506800; 397765, 4506657; 397817, 4506487; 397978, 
4506317; 398219, 4506049; 398235, 4505961; 398020, 4506037; 397955, 
4505986; 397823, 4505633; 397955, 4505312; 398163, 4505180; 397980, 
4504676; 397910, 4504693; 397854, 4504693; 397547, 4504641; 398043, 
4503896; 398135, 4503602; 398020, 4503486; 397810, 4503449; 397646, 
4503052; 397527, 4503096; 397464, 4503316; 397212, 4503386; 397193, 
4503531; 396973, 4503537; 396872, 4503619; 396708, 4503606; 396425, 
4503934; 396513, 4504185; 396488, 4504244; 396369, 4504280; 396266, 
4504313; returning to 396204, 4504399.
    (xxix) Note: Map of Unit HUM-3 follows.

[[Page 355]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31JA08.004

    (10) Unit HUM-4; Humboldt County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles, Cannibal Island. Land 
bounded by the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 393052, 
4504207; 393102, 4504275; 393146, 4504303; 393119, 4504226; 393143, 
4504186; 393184, 4504123; 393203, 4504065; 393203, 4504037; 393158,

[[Page 356]]

4503967; 393129, 4503919; 393122, 4503876; 393131, 4503835; 393167, 
4503811; 393283, 4503811; 393324, 4503806; 393374, 4503784; 393408, 
4503743; 393412, 4503698; 393412, 4503618; 393412, 4503570; 393441, 
4503549; 393583, 4503585; 393593, 4503570; 393403, 4503501; 393396, 
4503534; 393374, 4503575; 393369, 4503628; 393372, 4503678; 393360, 
4503719; 393324, 4503755; 393290, 4503772; 393158, 4503767; 393117, 
4503765; 393081, 4503782; 393062, 4503823; 393054, 4503864; 393062, 
4503909; 393090, 4503967; 393136, 4504008; 393167, 4504058; 393090, 
4504198; 393074, 4504198; returning to 393052, 4504207.
    (ii) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles, Cannibal Island. Land 
bounded by the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 392678, 
4504120; 392705, 4504134; 392705, 4504156; 392716, 4504160; 392724, 
4504145; 392751, 4504139; 392780, 4504123; 392788, 4504107; 392780, 
4504083; 392770, 4504058; 392772, 4504035; 392799, 4503999; 392824, 
4503999; 392850, 4504003; 392874, 4504002; 392882, 4503994; 392885, 
4503976; 392874, 4503937; 392859, 4503937; 392867, 4503967; 392859, 
4503981; 392839, 4503978; 392797, 4503978; 392767, 4503994; 392749, 
4504026; 392743, 4504048; 392746, 4504067; 392759, 4504091; 392761, 
4504105; 392727, 4504120; 392714, 4504107; 392684, 4504099; returning to 
392678, 4504120.
    (iii) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles, Cannibal Island. Land 
bounded by the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 392357, 
4503825; 392357, 4503890; 392427, 4503892; 392410, 4503830; 392408, 
4503789; 392432, 4503765; 392470, 4503770; 392492, 4503799; 392504, 
4503842; 392526, 4503890; 392562, 4503919; 392603, 4503933; 392631, 
4503928; 392720, 4503892; 392773, 4503890; 392819, 4503885; 392845, 
4503871; 392869, 4503844; 392879, 4503806; 392874, 4503765; 392860, 
4503715; 392862, 4503691; 392869, 4503664; 392884, 4503654; 392908, 
4503645; 392949, 4503659; 392982, 4503676; 393030, 4503683; 393066, 
4503674; 393102, 4503654; 393126, 4503621; 393131, 4503582; 393117, 
4503532; 393098, 4503498; 393090, 4503469; 393090, 4503433; 393074, 
4503407; 393030, 4503359; 393002, 4503368; 392970, 4503361; 392893, 
4503479; 392824, 4503481; 392790, 4503469; 392761, 4503462; 392742, 
4503424; 392768, 4503390; 392773, 4503373; 392773, 4503277; 392716, 
4503140; 392696, 4503143; 392696, 4503152; 392752, 4503275; 392756, 
4503306; 392747, 4503373; 392723, 4503414; 392737, 4503465; 392752, 
4503484; 392792, 4503496; 392807, 4503513; 392913, 4503486; 392934, 
4503457; 392961, 4503419; 392999, 4503402; 393045, 4503414; 393054, 
4503450; 393069, 4503501; 393093, 4503556; 393088, 4503594; 393062, 
4503626; 393011, 4503635; 392937, 4503614; 392869, 4503597; 392824, 
4503640; 392809, 4503681; 392824, 4503734; 392833, 4503789; 392814, 
4503823; 392788, 4503849; 392728, 4503859; 392636, 4503876; 392588, 
4503876; 392562, 4503847; 392528, 4503779; 392497, 4503734; 392451, 
4503722; 392410, 4503727; 392381, 4503743; 392360, 4503775; returning to 
392357, 4503825.
    (iv) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles, Cannibal Island. Land 
bounded by the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 391919, 
4503618; 391946, 4503641; 391966, 4503662; 391975, 4503643; 391991, 
4503633; 392018, 4503619; 392046, 4503599; 392061, 4503604; 392084, 
4503608; 392108, 4503598; 392129, 4503596; 392146, 4503583; 392175, 
4503547; 392209, 4503507; 392263, 4503444; 392272, 4503416; 392267, 
4503402; 392246, 4503386; 392224, 4503371; 392207, 4503350; 392213, 
4503321; 392224, 4503286; 392232, 4503240; 392232, 4503208; 392243, 
4503184; 392252, 4503171; 392271, 4503171; 392296, 4503177; 392314, 
4503191; 392331, 4503204; 392355, 4503207; 392381, 4503201; 392404, 
4503193; 392432, 4503184; 392448, 4503173; 392467, 4503152; 392467, 
4503138; 392453, 4503144; 392434, 4503165; 392408, 4503175; 392380, 
4503185; 392361, 4503193; 392346, 4503193; 392331, 4503184; 392306, 
4503162; 392278, 4503153; 392243, 4503154; 392231, 4503171; 392212, 
4503205; 392209, 4503255; 392188, 4503311; 392185, 4503342; 392189, 
4503363; 392227, 4503398; 392246, 4503412; 392244, 4503432; 392134, 
4503560; 392112, 4503567; 392082, 4503584; 392042, 4503575; 392023, 
4503584; 391962, 4503625; 391942, 4503619; 391920, 4503608; returning to 
391919, 4503618.
    (v) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles, Cannibal Island. Land 
bounded by the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 391651, 
4503288; 391674, 4503278; 391699, 4503243; 391720, 4503213; 391720, 
4503176; 391720, 4503121; 391768, 4503087; 391773, 4503064; 391763, 
4503029; 391780, 4502984; 391830, 4502950; 391850, 4502901; 391879, 
4502858; 391909, 4502870; 391954, 4502856; 391976, 4502860; 391981, 
4502893; 391991, 4502922; 392026, 4502928; 392053, 4502927; 392071, 
4502901; 392071, 4502868; 392080, 4502840; 392105, 4502829; 392121, 
4502843; 392141, 4502885; 392130, 4502901; 392106, 4502901; 392071, 
4502918; 392051, 4502942; 392036, 4502980; 392036, 4503020; 392049, 
4503032; 392059, 4503015; 392058, 4502987; 392069, 4502953; 392100, 
4502925; 392133, 4502920; 392155, 4502918; 392168, 4502890; 392150, 
4502846; 392118, 4502803; 392074, 4502803; 392044, 4502835; 392041, 
4502873; 392039, 4502896; 392019, 4502895; 392006, 4502870; 391991, 
4502821; 391961, 4502821; 391924, 4502835; 391885, 4502829; 391848, 
4502828; 391803, 4502920; 391788, 4502933; 391746, 4502963; 391726, 
4503019; 391730, 4503061; 391701, 4503084; 391676, 4503121; 391684, 
4503169; 391683, 4503211; 391654, 4503240; returning to 391651, 4503288.
    (vi) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles, Cannibal Island. Land 
bounded by the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 392724, 
4502551; 392748, 4502590; 392799, 4502607; 392846, 4502615; 392877, 
4502593; 392901, 4502547; 392935, 4502527; 392974, 4502527; 393001, 
4502544; 393003, 4502602; 393028, 4502675; 393064, 4502717; 393118, 
4502770; 393193, 4502821; 393242, 4502836; 393356, 4502865; 393407, 
4502855; 393448, 4502814; 393436, 4502794; 393404, 4502804; 393392, 
4502826; 393365, 4502838; 393273, 4502821; 393178, 4502780; 393127, 
4502760; 393096, 4502704; 393052, 4502668; 393028, 4502576; 393025, 
4502530; 393016, 4502515; 392955, 4502498; 392921, 4502510; 392884, 
4502527; 392836, 4502593; 392807, 4502588; 392768, 4502571; 392756, 
4502544; 392758, 4502508; 392768, 4502474; 392787, 4502440; 392826, 
4502411; 392914, 4502386; 392940, 4502372; 392955, 4502338; 392955, 
4502306; 392943, 4502253; 392909, 4502192; 392877, 4502136; 392860, 
4502085; 392880, 4502051; 392875, 4502015; 392790, 4502019; 392785, 
4502053; 392826, 4502078; 392853, 4502160; 392880, 4502202; 392916,

[[Page 357]]

4502306; 392909, 4502350; 392833, 4502381; 392765, 4502403; 392741, 
4502454; returning to 392724, 4502551.
    (vii) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles, Cannibal Island. Land 
bounded by the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 393154, 
4501798; 393227, 4501791; 393249, 4501813; 393285, 4501830; 393312, 
4501808; 393317, 4501830; 393382, 4501791; 393548, 4501791; 393611, 
4501786; 393672, 4501755; 393701, 4501711; 393730, 4501568; 393749, 
4501521; 393761, 4501487; 393795, 4501456; 393832, 4501434; 393871, 
4501429; 393922, 4501451; 393968, 4501568; 393985, 4501633; 393980, 
4501665; 393970, 4501684; 393953, 4501704; 393744, 4501810; 393718, 
4501830; 393698, 4501878; 393693, 4501920; 393715, 4502002; 393825, 
4502187; 393861, 4502228; 393995, 4502311; 394048, 4502323; 394206, 
4502289; 394225, 4502250; 394245, 4502214; 394274, 4502189; 394289, 
4502153; 394289, 4502124; 394272, 4502112; 394240, 4502129; 394216, 
4502158; 394216, 4502192; 394213, 4502214; 394170, 4502238; 394106, 
4502262; 394046, 4502272; 394002, 4502248; 393929, 4502211; 393859, 
4502163; 393774, 4502002; 393759, 4501956; 393749, 4501915; 393764, 
4501871; 393934, 4501781; 394000, 4501738; 394034, 4501689; 394031, 
4501638; 393987, 4501439; 393961, 4501402; 393880, 4501380; 393793, 
4501393; 393727, 4501434; 393691, 4501478; 393664, 4501541; 393652, 
4501616; 393628, 4501701; 393572, 4501725; 393409, 4501721; 393305, 
4501716; 393161, 4501696; returning to 393154, 4501798.
    (viii) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles, Cannibal Island. Land 
bounded by the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 392754, 
4500850; 392754, 4500887; 392781, 4500908; 392815, 4500908; 392872, 
4500908; 392953, 4500871; 392987, 4500820; 392994, 4500793; 393011, 
4500756; 393034, 4500736; 393068, 4500702; 393068, 4500645; 393027, 
4500604; 393017, 4500581; 393041, 4500574; 393081, 4500614; 393149, 
4500689; 393196, 4500716; 393243, 4500716; 393287, 4500658; 393290, 
4500601; 393277, 4500537; 393284, 4500496; 393368, 4500507; 393381, 
4500446; 393324, 4500453; 393274, 4500453; 393250, 4500456; 393236, 
4500480; 393236, 4500540; 393250, 4500591; 393247, 4500631; 393230, 
4500648; 393182, 4500648; 393135, 4500594; 393081, 4500544; 393044, 
4500520; 393004, 4500520; 392967, 4500520; 392947, 4500557; 392947, 
4500598; 392960, 4500638; 393000, 4500648; 393017, 4500672; 393000, 
4500689; 392980, 4500695; 392960, 4500726; 392940, 4500773; 392923, 
4500813; 392879, 4500840; 392852, 4500864; 392829, 4500864; 392791, 
4500850; returning to 392754, 4500850.
    (ix) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles, Cannibal Island. Land 
bounded by the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 390162, 
4501488; 390181, 4501544; 390239, 4501544; 390239, 4501568; 390250, 
4501613; 390277, 4501632; 390311, 4501632; 390346, 4501592; 390375, 
4501549; 390389, 4501514; 390423, 4501541; 390469, 4501533; 390437, 
4501429; 390421, 4501365; 390434, 4501333; 390477, 4501288; 390514, 
4501237; 390570, 4501240; 390607, 4501245; 390650, 4501245; 390677, 
4501216; 390709, 4501179; 390762, 4501109; 390802, 4501069; 390839, 
4501064; 390850, 4501117; 390863, 4501184; 390909, 4501219; 390964, 
4501227; 391021, 4501232; 391053, 4501240; 391053, 4501296; 391116, 
4501323; 391180, 4501315; 391191, 4501256; 391180, 4501208; 391223, 
4501179; 391284, 4501131; 391276, 4501067; 391258, 4501016; 391258, 
4500931; 391215, 4500877; 391146, 4500816; 391077, 4500768; 391002, 
4500717; 390994, 4500640; 391123, 4500560; 391196, 4500393; 391183, 
4500150; 391103, 4500023; 390997, 4500083; 390759, 4500488; 390701, 
4500616; 390656, 4500728; 390658, 4500824; 390610, 4500832; 390581, 
4500904; 390538, 4501008; 390511, 4501053; 390490, 4501008; 390450, 
4500997; 390410, 4501019; 390410, 4501059; 390389, 4501107; 390349, 
4501139; 390349, 4501165; 390346, 4501197; 390354, 4501251; 390314, 
4501285; 390301, 4501325; 390303, 4501363; 390319, 4501416; 390319, 
4501474; 390295, 4501485; 390277, 4501458; 390226, 4501458; returning to 
390162, 4501488.
    (x) Note: Map of Unit HUM-4 follows.

[[Page 358]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31JA08.005

    (11) Unit MEN-1; Mendocino County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles Inglenook and Covelo. Land 
bounded by the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 434019, 
4378674; 434159, 4378526; 434233, 4378461; 434247, 4378280; 434478, 
4378076; 434692, 4377937; 434979, 4377882; 435336, 4377548; 435424,

[[Page 359]]

4377344; 435480, 4377126; 435688, 4376927; 435897, 4376996; 435707, 
4377288; 435693, 4377376; 435721, 4377427; 435563, 4377645; 435549, 
4377742; 435633, 4377784; 435878, 4377831; 435915, 4378132; 435976, 
4378169; 436337, 4378053; 436458, 4378136; 436536, 4378048; 436921, 
4377849; 437014, 4377900; 437158, 4377844; 437408, 4377905; 437501, 
4378007; 437644, 4378085; 437667, 4378039; 437348, 4377793; 437144, 
4377798; 437009, 4377817; 436930, 4377784; 436731, 4377835; 436453, 
4378039; 436332, 4378007; 436235, 4378053; 436179, 4378007; 435999, 
4378104; 435925, 4377789; 435748, 4377742; 435619, 4377696; 435721, 
4377571; 435813, 4377423; 435813, 4377293; 436003, 4376968; 435985, 
4376913; 436031, 4376815; 435976, 4376774; 435855, 4376755; 435832, 
4376802; 435938, 4376839; 435887, 4376885; 435781, 4376866; 435605, 
4376857; 435424, 4376899; 435262, 4377015; 435169, 4377140; 435132, 
4377219; 435095, 4377376; 434979, 4377390; 434854, 4377455; 434594, 
4377687; 434427, 4377905; 434288, 4378016; 434159, 4378169; 434103, 
4378280; 434024, 4378489; returning to 434019, 4378674.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit MEN-1 follows.

[[Page 360]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31JA08.006

    (12) Unit MEN-2; Mendocino County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Fort Bragg. Land bounded by 
the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 430656, 4369380; 
430767, 4369639; 430910, 4369479; 430972, 4369449; 430976, 4369468; 
431094, 4369506; 431096, 4369479; 431000, 4369454; 431000, 4369421;

[[Page 361]]

430989, 4369407; 430950, 4369412; 430899, 4369412; 430865, 4369388; 
returning to 430656, 4369380.
    (ii) Note: MEN-2 included on map with unit MEN-1.
    (13) Unit MEN-3; Mendocino County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Fort Bragg. Land bounded by 
the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 430347, 4368031; 
430419, 4368232; 430587, 4367989;430582, 4367872; 430631, 4367632; 
430657, 4367494; 430697, 4367505; 430797, 4367598; 430912, 4367562; 
430873, 4367497; 430797, 4367486; 430664, 4367452; 430595, 4367459; 
430535, 4367532; 430524, 4367693; 430519, 4367942; returning to 430347, 
4368031.
    (ii) Note: MEN-3 included on map with unit MEN-1.
    (14) Unit MEN-4; Mendocino County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Point Arena. Land bounded by 
the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 439145, 4316147; 
439192, 4316229; 439254, 4316165; 439256, 4316086; 439350, 4316041; 
439362, 4316012; 439390, 4316024; 439513, 4316022; 439550, 4316105; 
439639, 4316044; 439513, 4315901; 439409, 4315918; 439385, 4315866; 
439323, 4315822; 439232, 4315851; 439219, 4315807; 439348, 4315686; 
439345, 4315644; 439279, 4315654; 439168, 4315782; 439190, 4316105; 
returning to 439145, 4316147.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit MEN-4 follows.

[[Page 362]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31JA08.007

    (15) Unit SON-1; Sonoma County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Bodega Head. Land bounded by 
the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 494029, 4245091; 
494029, 4245106; 494036, 4245131; 494041, 4245198; 494050, 4245233; 
494073, 4245274; 494080, 4245308; 494081, 4245316; 494073, 4245356;

[[Page 363]]

494213, 4245202; 494304, 4245147; 494330, 4245161; 494341, 4245148; 
494426, 4245084; 494451, 4245051; 494457, 4245031; 494458, 4245013; 
494444, 4244966; 494449, 4244941; 494461, 4244924; 494471, 4244920; 
494485, 4244921; 494549, 4244956; 494562, 4244956; 494569, 4244952; 
494592, 4244913; 494602, 4244907; 494608, 4244931; 494609, 4244954; 
494600, 4245040; 494601, 4245099; 494607, 4245125; 494623, 4245134; 
494628, 4245199; 494625, 4245218; 494629, 4245237; 494620, 4245265; 
494594, 4245320; 494593, 4245331; 494605, 4245344; 494628, 4245343; 
494677, 4245310; 494703, 4245301; 494715, 4245302; 494746, 4245315; 
494781, 4245340; 494815, 4245357; 494875, 4245365; 494881, 4245417; 
494889, 4245435; 494907, 4245440; 494925, 4245435; 494924, 4245474; 
494906, 4245525; 494897, 4245563; 494898, 4245597; 494905, 4245625; 
494916, 4245639; 494931, 4245646; 494959, 4245647; 494969, 4245645; 
494979, 4245653; 494988, 4245663; 495013, 4245674; 495036, 4245678; 
495061, 4245677; 495081, 4245671; 495164, 4245635; 495262, 4245628; 
495332, 4245612; 495382, 4245613; 495458, 4245624; 495476, 4245621; 
495496, 4245673; 495503, 4245680; 495533, 4245699; 495573, 4245702; 
495727, 4245656; 495813, 4245627; 495827, 4245616; 495853, 4245586; 
495900, 4245620; 495918, 4245629; 495989, 4245658; 496042, 4245675; 
496042, 4245667; 496033, 4245648; 495976, 4245573; 495937, 4245541; 
495896, 4245514; 495879, 4245508; 495861, 4245505; 495846, 4245507; 
495814, 4245522; 495787, 4245547; 495781, 4245562; 495759, 4245564; 
495748, 4245571; 495723, 4245577; 495679, 4245569; 495661, 4245569; 
495613, 4245587; 495591, 4245589; 495524, 4245584; 495468, 4245561; 
495408, 4245529; 495372, 4245517; 495333, 4245519; 495313, 4245525; 
495276, 4245527; 495243, 4245538; 495213, 4245553; 495155, 4245570; 
495099, 4245606; 495033, 4245614; 495010, 4245623; 494990, 4245635; 
494977, 4245628; 494961, 4245596; 494954, 4245561; 494956, 4245494; 
494973, 4245403; 494973, 4245381; 494964, 4245333; 494949, 4245307; 
494935, 4245291; 494922, 4245282; 494901, 4245243; 494864, 4245207; 
494847, 4245196; 494810, 4245178; 494803, 4245154; 494785, 4245119; 
494774, 4245104; 494779, 4245101; 494765, 4245074; 494755, 4245029; 
494729, 4245001; 494720, 4244984; 494721, 4244960; 494740, 4244928; 
494751, 4244917; 494797, 4244925; 494807, 4244920; 494817, 4244908; 
494831, 4244855; 494837, 4244846; 494851, 4244836; 494864, 4244832; 
494875, 4244821; 494871, 4244811; 494858, 4244803; 494856, 4244797; 
494858, 4244786; 494877, 4244749; 494885, 4244717; 494864, 4244697; 
494852, 4244674; 494830, 4244664; 494822, 4244665; 494811, 4244673; 
494800, 4244698; 494798, 4244738; 494783, 4244774; 494769, 4244837; 
494761, 4244845; 494743, 4244848; 494733, 4244860; 494722, 4244859; 
494697, 4244843; 494687, 4244843; 494676, 4244847; 494645, 4244892; 
494637, 4244898; 494613, 4244856; 494585, 4244822; 494556, 4244807; 
494537, 4244790; 494454, 4244761; 494407, 4244738; 494377, 4244733; 
494344, 4244733; 494300, 4244747; 494282, 4244762; 494224, 4244795; 
494181, 4244836; 494164, 4244901; 494122, 4244924; 494104, 4244921; 
494098, 4244912; 494092, 4244885; 494085, 4244825; 494042, 4244824; 
494037, 4244931; 494037, 4245018; returning to 494029, 4245091.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit SON-1 follows.

[[Page 364]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31JA08.008

    (16) Unit MAR-1; Marin County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles Bodega Head and Valley 
Ford. Land bounded by the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, 
N): 499504, 4238760; 499508, 4238800; 499544, 4238796; 499614, 4238765; 
499677, 4238749; 499701, 4238735; 499736, 4238762; 499804, 4238825; 
499878, 4238873; 499903, 4238902; 499936, 4238909;

[[Page 365]]

500005, 4238953; 500027, 4238964; 500062, 4238972; 500063, 4238985; 
500072, 4238994; 500100, 4239010; 500161, 4239021; 500178, 4239034; 
500184, 4239047; 500198, 4239059; 500220, 4239069; 500240, 4239071; 
500280, 4239066; 500327, 4239054; 500356, 4239032; 500372, 4239015; 
500401, 4239022; 500461, 4239056; 500481, 4239078; 500498, 4239106; 
500507, 4239129; 500505, 4239157; 500488, 4239281; 500455, 4239440; 
500447, 4239534; 500437, 4239556; 500385, 4239650; 500373, 4239685; 
500370, 4239722; 500370, 4239741; 500381, 4239770; 500400, 4239802; 
500413, 4239834; 500423, 4239848; 500435, 4239857; 500442, 4239859; 
500443, 4239878; 500452, 4239910; 500464, 4239937; 500475, 4239950; 
500488, 4239952; 500503, 4239946; 500514, 4239928; 500526, 4239920; 
500570, 4239933; 500596, 4239933; 500608, 4239929; 500623, 4239921; 
500628, 4239914; 500637, 4239890; 500673, 4239876; 500707, 4239844; 
500730, 4239829; 500749, 4239824; 500758, 4239816; 500773, 4239811; 
500798, 4239818; 500819, 4239834; 500849, 4239869; 500906, 4239912; 
500936, 4239957; 500954, 4239973; 500970, 4239994; 500983, 4240021; 
500996, 4240042; 501030, 4240066; 501062, 4240083; 501083, 4240087; 
501104, 4240080; 501184, 4240091; 501238, 4240117; 501251, 4240132; 
501253, 4240151; 501270, 4240163; 501277, 4240172; 501286, 4240190; 
501287, 4240205; 501325, 4240204; 501341, 4240219; 501359, 4240245; 
501384, 4240271; 501430, 4240315; 501465, 4240370; 501486, 4240380; 
501517, 4240388; 501575, 4240419; 501609, 4240427; 501636, 4240412; 
501655, 4240406; 501738, 4240407; 501777, 4240401; 501811, 4240400; 
501881, 4240411; 501960, 4240413; 502040, 4240423; 502095, 4240446; 
502106, 4240461; 502129, 4240476; 502144, 4240499; 502160, 4240550; 
502173, 4240630; 502180, 4240746; 502176, 4240765; 502158, 4240809; 
502119, 4240886; 502104, 4240923; 502098, 4240980; 502114, 4240991; 
502136, 4240976; 502169, 4240898; 502220, 4240806; 502244, 4240731; 
502265, 4240626; 502278, 4240594; 502293, 4240580; 502315, 4240584; 
502326, 4240599; 502327, 4240626; 502320, 4240691; 502322, 4240700; 
502338, 4240702; 502371, 4240621; 502400, 4240576; 502405, 4240557; 
502399, 4240509; 502399, 4240489; 502413, 4240468; 502434, 4240452; 
502450, 4240428; 502466, 4240397; 502495, 4240363; 502519, 4240346; 
502537, 4240338; 502557, 4240342; 502584, 4240363; 502595, 4240388; 
502602, 4240418; 502605, 4240470; 502611, 4240479; 502718, 4240572; 
502725, 4240593; 502723, 4240624; 502747, 4240642; 502754, 4240651; 
502758, 4240669; 502767, 4240688; 502777, 4240705; 502797, 4240718; 
502794, 4240800; 502795, 4240867; 502798, 4240896; 502808, 4240933; 
502821, 4240957; 502873, 4240992; 502884, 4241002; 502891, 4241014; 
502911, 4241029; 502933, 4241039; 502970, 4241050; 502985, 4241060; 
503052, 4241081; 503082, 4241096; 503092, 4241105; 503148, 4241109; 
503171, 4241106; 503196, 4241111; 503252, 4241107; 503260, 4241117; 
503306, 4241118; 503358, 4241139; 503404, 4241121; 503447, 4241049; 
503487, 4241012; 503527, 4240985; 503593, 4240965; 503689, 4240957; 
503712, 4240949; 503723, 4240932; 503726, 4240904; 503748, 4240861; 
503776, 4240796; 503793, 4240777; 503845, 4240733; 503901, 4240690; 
503854, 4240598; 503832, 4240606; 503760, 4240646; 503716, 4240677; 
503695, 4240688; 503642, 4240678; 503618, 4240683; 503600, 4240693; 
503594, 4240691; 503576, 4240744; 503558, 4240771; 503515, 4240790; 
503496, 4240806; 503469, 4240838; 503463, 4240852; 503463, 4240865; 
503405, 4240913; 503397, 4240906; 503384, 4240904; 503351, 4240912; 
503293, 4240922; 503255, 4240935; 503212, 4240946; 503163, 4240942; 
503094, 4240925; 503034, 4240899; 503007, 4240876; 502992, 4240860; 
502956, 4240784; 502952, 4240757; 502968, 4240700; 502981, 4240553; 
502979, 4240509; 502974, 4240477; 502975, 4240464; 502952, 4240418; 
502940, 4240408; 502929, 4240403; 502891, 4240364; 502871, 4240362; 
502855, 4240349; 502840, 4240302; 502819, 4240265; 502790, 4240237; 
502768, 4240229; 502751, 4240182; 502735, 4240168; 502708, 4240157; 
502680, 4240126; 502668, 4240105; 502656, 4240106; 502633, 4240099; 
502615, 4240079; 502587, 4240057; 502546, 4240046; 502506, 4240050; 
502469, 4240064; 502368, 4240139; 502323, 4240192; 502289, 4240214; 
502257, 4240244; 502227, 4240264; 502205, 4240291; 502195, 4240299; 
502180, 4240298; 502165, 4240287; 502136, 4240228; 502114, 4240207; 
502103, 4240203; 502083, 4240207; 502049, 4240229; 501943, 4240211; 
501923, 4240214; 501862, 4240241; 501805, 4240273; 501697, 4240287; 
501618, 4240289; 501585, 4240280; 501564, 4240264; 501552, 4240243; 
501547, 4240214; 501547, 4240185; 501553, 4240163; 501554, 4240137; 
501549, 4240107; 501528, 4240059; 501501, 4239941; 501502, 4239930; 
501510, 4239922; 501526, 4239886; 501540, 4239833; 501544, 4239784; 
501530, 4239776; 501472, 4239756; 501450, 4239758; 501427, 4239768; 
501398, 4239791; 501386, 4239793; 501365, 4239788; 501343, 4239779; 
501329, 4239789; 501320, 4239805; 501313, 4239853; 501323, 4239877; 
501301, 4239910; 501160, 4239932; 501112, 4239952; 501083, 4239959; 
501064, 4239952; 501020, 4239893; 500941, 4239832; 500923, 4239812; 
500907, 4239788; 500882, 4239732; 500853, 4239686; 500819, 4239653; 
500803, 4239642; 500779, 4239634; 500746, 4239629; 500732, 4239634; 
500695, 4239671; 500631, 4239724; 500592, 4239779; 500583, 4239790; 
500563, 4239803; 500548, 4239805; 500519, 4239790; 500512, 4239790; 
500512, 4239787; 500487, 4239769; 500481, 4239732; 500484, 4239711; 
500498, 4239665; 500510, 4239647; 500534, 4239627; 500555, 4239571; 
500568, 4239495; 500569, 4239439; 500588, 4239379; 500606, 4239340; 
500613, 4239309; 500628, 4239185; 500629, 4239095; 500623, 4239078; 
500620, 4239047; 500608, 4239036; 500519, 4239007; 500496, 4238993; 
500476, 4238973; 500456, 4238963; 500416, 4238961; 500331, 4238943; 
500280, 4238939; 500261, 4238934; 500243, 4238921; 500189, 4238905; 
500107, 4238872; 500056, 4238858; 500052, 4238862; 500051, 4238835; 
500054, 4238810; 500019, 4238752; 499983, 4238705; 499974, 4238679; 
499937, 4238635; 499925, 4238595; 499913, 4238583; 499903, 4238578; 
499888, 4238558; 499870, 4238552; 499844, 4238552; 499852, 4238518; 
499804, 4238427; 499803, 4238428; 499795, 4238445; 499785, 4238485; 
499775, 4238512; 499746, 4238551; 499704, 4238593; 499689, 4238612; 
499666, 4238642; 499664, 4238654; 499620, 4238686; 499608, 4238692; 
499558, 4238730; returning to 499504, 4238760.
    (ii) Note: MAR-1 included on map with unit SON-1.
    (17) Unit MAR-2; Marin County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Valley Ford. Land bounded by 
the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 501844, 4235816; 
501869, 4235829; 501901, 4235841; 501952, 4235843; 501975, 4235847; 
502011, 4235864; 502034, 4235869; 502045, 4235867; 502058, 4235854; 
502094, 4235857; 502155, 4235838; 502166, 4235832;

[[Page 366]]

502185, 4235799; 502195, 4235787; 502209, 4235779; 502227, 4235790; 
502243, 4235803; 502264, 4235828; 502260, 4235848; 502249, 4235874; 
502238, 4235889; 502232, 4235915; 502237, 4235926; 502247, 4235933; 
502257, 4235980; 502256, 4236020; 502264, 4236059; 502279, 4236074; 
502285, 4236075; 502294, 4236087; 502311, 4236103; 502370, 4236146; 
502433, 4236217; 502476, 4236246; 502492, 4236265; 502505, 4236290; 
502517, 4236302; 502541, 4236310; 502566, 4236312; 502597, 4236307; 
502617, 4236298; 502639, 4236278; 502660, 4236266; 502678, 4236265; 
502726, 4236249; 502763, 4236251; 502786, 4236244; 502820, 4236221; 
502854, 4236206; 502885, 4236185; 502899, 4236169; 502916, 4236138; 
502922, 4236113; 502924, 4236033; 502954, 4235919; 502987, 4235904; 
503034, 4235892; 503094, 4235861; 503142, 4235831; 503162, 4235831; 
503169, 4235826; 503182, 4235792; 503185, 4235721; 503181, 4235680; 
503167, 4235654; 503148, 4235640; 503132, 4235639; 503121, 4235623; 
503090, 4235589; 503084, 4235575; 503083, 4235547; 503086, 4235533; 
503098, 4235529; 503114, 4235528; 503137, 4235533; 503147, 4235538; 
503150, 4235551; 503168, 4235574; 503201, 4235589; 503217, 4235593; 
503267, 4235588; 503320, 4235567; 503338, 4235553; 503363, 4235519; 
503369, 4235498; 503372, 4235469; 503382, 4235452; 503417, 4235436; 
503435, 4235434; 503450, 4235439; 503484, 4235464; 503498, 4235485; 
503517, 4235531; 503520, 4235579; 503457, 4235629; 503421, 4235649; 
503398, 4235676; 503391, 4235697; 503386, 4235757; 503391, 4235822; 
503401, 4235854; 503452, 4235951; 503458, 4235990; 503453, 4236015; 
503426, 4236053; 503411, 4236053; 503397, 4236064; 503392, 4236074; 
503390, 4236108; 503395, 4236119; 503407, 4236128; 503413, 4236128; 
503452, 4236228; 503469, 4236249; 503487, 4236266; 503520, 4236286; 
503557, 4236296; 503561, 4236310; 503582, 4236325; 503594, 4236340; 
503616, 4236424; 503645, 4236420; 503664, 4236395; 503682, 4236381; 
503722, 4236372; 503735, 4236366; 503742, 4236358; 503755, 4236305; 
503769, 4236280; 503754, 4236250; 503758, 4236236; 503780, 4236212; 
503809, 4236187; 503841, 4236174; 503847, 4236126; 503871, 4236121; 
503909, 4236129; 503925, 4236140; 503987, 4236215; 504003, 4236228; 
504043, 4236285; 504055, 4236311; 504077, 4236343; 504097, 4236363; 
504139, 4236392; 504153, 4236397; 504170, 4236395; 504184, 4236416; 
504201, 4236467; 504217, 4236496; 504254, 4236533; 504290, 4236560; 
504326, 4236578; 504330, 4236597; 504346, 4236625; 504363, 4236642; 
504432, 4236677; 504471, 4236682; 504504, 4236676; 504530, 4236696; 
504546, 4236721; 504555, 4236721; 504543, 4236680; 504532, 4236598; 
504554, 4236596; 504566, 4236592; 504567, 4236647; 504576, 4236685; 
504602, 4236760; 504618, 4236767; 504641, 4236767; 504678, 4236742; 
504735, 4236729; 504793, 4236721; 504804, 4236713; 504863, 4236692; 
504887, 4236680; 504910, 4236676; 504929, 4236666; 504957, 4236659; 
504991, 4236641; 505002, 4236627; 505042, 4236595; 505080, 4236573; 
505091, 4236558; 505100, 4236531; 505101, 4236511; 505091, 4236502; 
505080, 4236484; 505076, 4236463; 505083, 4236421; 505099, 4236388; 
505102, 4236369; 505100, 4236348; 505086, 4236314; 505064, 4236296; 
505030, 4236286; 505011, 4236268; 505015, 4236246; 505038, 4236204; 
505059, 4236193; 505078, 4236186; 505096, 4236190; 505122, 4236211; 
505142, 4236209; 505203, 4236170; 505228, 4236139; 505242, 4236138; 
505261, 4236028; 505202, 4236006; 505148, 4236000; 505092, 4236005; 
505048, 4236022; 505012, 4236055; 504974, 4236101; 504934, 4236137; 
504925, 4236150; 504915, 4236176; 504902, 4236219; 504899, 4236245; 
504886, 4236289; 504868, 4236337; 504863, 4236360; 504862, 4236421; 
504870, 4236478; 504870, 4236492; 504866, 4236505; 504856, 4236527; 
504833, 4236558; 504806, 4236588; 504779, 4236609; 504732, 4236630; 
504711, 4236629; 504639, 4236597; 504582, 4236580; 504502, 4236569; 
504448, 4236572; 504430, 4236570; 504411, 4236573; 504400, 4236571; 
504384, 4236563; 504385, 4236542; 504375, 4236517; 504337, 4236457; 
504298, 4236426; 504219, 4236346; 504201, 4236315; 504183, 4236293; 
504173, 4236272; 504167, 4236249; 504168, 4236222; 504173, 4236197; 
504205, 4236146; 504236, 4236076; 504315, 4235970; 504353, 4235929; 
504369, 4235918; 504395, 4235892; 504417, 4235851; 504409, 4235842; 
504360, 4235869; 504323, 4235875; 504306, 4235882; 504277, 4235922; 
504198, 4236053; 504159, 4236097; 504137, 4236114; 504091, 4236117; 
504064, 4236104; 504018, 4236049; 504006, 4236040; 503995, 4236025; 
503979, 4236011; 503938, 4236007; 503929, 4236000; 503921, 4235982; 
503903, 4235971; 503890, 4235970; 503870, 4235977; 503825, 4236018; 
503808, 4236039; 503778, 4236065; 503757, 4236078; 503658, 4236217; 
503631, 4236246; 503606, 4236256; 503573, 4236228; 503559, 4236211; 
503533, 4236121; 503531, 4236101; 503542, 4236018; 503539, 4236000; 
503530, 4235984; 503514, 4235972; 503498, 4235963; 503491, 4235963; 
503446, 4235819; 503443, 4235770; 503445, 4235736; 503467, 4235678; 
503485, 4235657; 503540, 4235615; 503572, 4235573; 503579, 4235542; 
503580, 4235509; 503574, 4235466; 503565, 4235442; 503551, 4235421; 
503532, 4235401; 503483, 4235367; 503454, 4235355; 503430, 4235353; 
503415, 4235346; 503401, 4235330; 503397, 4235312; 503382, 4235287; 
503371, 4235284; 503354, 4235364; 503342, 4235403; 503321, 4235425; 
503289, 4235476; 503277, 4235483; 503246, 4235490; 503158, 4235460; 
503131, 4235445; 503119, 4235445; 503109, 4235448; 503085, 4235473; 
503065, 4235505; 503050, 4235514; 503047, 4235537; 503083, 4235627; 
503099, 4235711; 503070, 4235762; 503058, 4235774; 503036, 4235782; 
502983, 4235785; 502924, 4235801; 502911, 4235812; 502896, 4235831; 
502880, 4235869; 502871, 4235883; 502860, 4235892; 502843, 4235896; 
502832, 4235910; 502823, 4235964; 502827, 4235986; 502815, 4236004; 
502772, 4236040; 502764, 4236044; 502734, 4236097; 502725, 4236106; 
502696, 4236096; 502678, 4236097; 502660, 4236103; 502612, 4236131; 
502589, 4236133; 502545, 4236128; 502484, 4236109; 502462, 4236112; 
502448, 4236101; 502411, 4236068; 502401, 4236052; 502383, 4235959; 
502374, 4235940; 502316, 4235858; 502293, 4235812; 502255, 4235765; 
502239, 4235754; 502200, 4235744; 502143, 4235737; 502105, 4235743; 
502095, 4235731; 502060, 4235723; 502055, 4235715; 502056, 4235698; 
502069, 4235647; 502067, 4235625; 502057, 4235578; 502048, 4235556; 
502013, 4235524; 501971, 4235525; 501983, 4235546; 501982, 4235568; 
501977, 4235587; 501953, 4235616; 501906, 4235700; 501885, 4235727; 
returning to 501844, 4235816.
    (ii) Note: MAR-2 included on map with unit SON-1.
    (18) Unit MAR-3; Marin County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Inverness. Land bounded by 
the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 513514, 4216097; 
513604, 4216208; 513584, 4216239; 513583, 4216271; 513625, 4216303; 
513631, 4216312; 513619,

[[Page 367]]

4216354; 513565, 4216417; 513558, 4216445; 513563, 4216473; 513569, 
4216476; 513611, 4216470; 513644, 4216503; 513772, 4216500; 513830, 
4216473; 513917, 4216413; 513956, 4216410; 513973, 4216431; 513982, 
4216471; 513991, 4216493; 514025, 4216527; 514042, 4216554; 514108, 
4216683; 514150, 4216742; 514170, 4216757; 514220, 4216753; 514364, 
4216710; 514436, 4216662; 514458, 4216654; 514485, 4216622; 514695, 
4216634; 514738, 4216644; 514826, 4216626; 514851, 4216613; 514891, 
4216579; 514929, 4216557; 514938, 4216548; 514941, 4216524; 514889, 
4216463; 514891, 4216417; 514873, 4216385; 514953, 4216265; 514968, 
4216251; 514978, 4216230; 515061, 4216173; 515095, 4216115; 515134, 
4216070; 515170, 4216051; 515245, 4216023; 515278, 4216002; 515326, 
4215955; 515348, 4215915; 515357, 4215910; 515373, 4215919; 515394, 
4215921; 515420, 4215916; 515450, 4215900; 515490, 4215873; 515512, 
4215854; 515537, 4215818; 515553, 4215809; 515579, 4215809; 515596, 
4215817; 515627, 4215839; 515653, 4215869; 515678, 4215877; 515696, 
4215877; 515718, 4215866; 515731, 4215855; 515739, 4215838; 515738, 
4215757; 515677, 4215581; 515666, 4215529; 515667, 4215492; 515683, 
4215444; 515684, 4215427; 515677, 4215392; 515656, 4215367; 515622, 
4215340; 515612, 4215229; 515597, 4215195; 515552, 4215127; 515552, 
4215119; 515559, 4215114; 515623, 4215129; 515640, 4215129; 515656, 
4215117; 515666, 4215100; 515664, 4215074; 515658, 4215068; 515640, 
4215065; 515584, 4215079; 515501, 4215090; 515466, 4215081; 515409, 
4215031; 515388, 4215023; 515353, 4215016; 515283, 4215038; 515250, 
4215036; 515241, 4215024; 515236, 4214961; 515237, 4214923; 515228, 
4214865; 515219, 4214836; 515229, 4214794; 515261, 4214764; 515281, 
4214753; 515297, 4214737; 515368, 4214697; 515456, 4214653; 515538, 
4214613; 515597, 4214608; 515658, 4214608; 515698, 4214618; 515733, 
4214623; 515761, 4214626; 515839, 4214617; 515871, 4214614; 515928, 
4214605; 515990, 4214594; 516035, 4214580; 516084, 4214559; 516115, 
4214546; 516151, 4214529; 516178, 4214500; 516248, 4214402; 516261, 
4214304; 516251, 4214239; 516237, 4214171; 516220, 4214124; 516202, 
4214086; 516207, 4213985; 516216, 4213934; 516245, 4213826; 516255, 
4213737; 516284, 4213721; 516329, 4213708; 516419, 4213704; 516441, 
4213694; 516470, 4213674; 516509, 4213674; 516549, 4213676; 516587, 
4213676; 516625, 4213683; 516626, 4213696; 516616, 4213734; 516605, 
4213779; 516613, 4213820; 516638, 4213856; 516667, 4213844; 516668, 
4213799; 516667, 4213744; 516668, 4213721; 516661, 4213677; 516632, 
4213669; 516591, 4213664; 516521, 4213656; 516474, 4213655; 516446, 
4213669; 516428, 4213682; 516402, 4213685; 516366, 4213679; 516328, 
4213674; 516290, 4213681; 516259, 4213703; 516235, 4213723; 516227, 
4213780; 516212, 4213839; 516212, 4213862; 516201, 4213911; 516187, 
4213972; 516182, 4214029; 516185, 4214073; 516186, 4214098; 516201, 
4214132; 516216, 4214174; 516225, 4214210; 516236, 4214278; 516173, 
4214318; 516046, 4214400; 516005, 4214397; 515781, 4214163; 515747, 
4214145; 515698, 4214161; 515670, 4214206; 515660, 4214235; 515656, 
4214293; 515655, 4214361; 515655, 4214386; 515663, 4214423; 515689, 
4214459; 515699, 4214483; 515689, 4214504; 515631, 4214517; 515578, 
4214524; 515532, 4214541; 515493, 4214573; 515444, 4214589; 515398, 
4214612; 515362, 4214632; 515325, 4214648; 515293, 4214662; 515275, 
4214667; 515264, 4214666; 515262, 4214646; 515262, 4214614; 515273, 
4214568; 515279, 4214541; 515293, 4214508; 515404, 4214354; 515390, 
4214333; 515389, 4214323; 515399, 4214299; 515449, 4214256; 515561, 
4214120; 515604, 4214099; 515634, 4214095; 515641, 4214099; 515677, 
4214055; 515694, 4214014; 515718, 4213982; 515741, 4213926; 515743, 
4213895; 515731, 4213839; 515733, 4213786; 515742, 4213684; 515739, 
4213627; 515736, 4213538; 515733, 4213476; 515733, 4213327; 515735, 
4213209; 515737, 4213103; 515750, 4212984; 515751, 4212902; 515769, 
4212854; 515789, 4212837; 515824, 4212829; 515881, 4212834; 515998, 
4212859; 516059, 4212849; 516226, 4212838; 516244, 4212851; 516393, 
4212852; 516460, 4212877; 516519, 4212934; 516543, 4212968; 516626, 
4213020; 516655, 4213052; 516693, 4213077; 516759, 4213090; 516828, 
4213090; 516889, 4213077; 517008, 4213030; 517030, 4213025; 517082, 
4213024; 517131, 4213030; 517228, 4213069; 517236, 4213065; 517267, 
4213072; 517287, 4213086; 517322, 4213135; 517351, 4213143; 517365, 
4213108; 517316, 4213056; 517237, 4213017; 517120, 4212997; 517067, 
4212999; 517030, 4213000; 516972, 4213009; 516909, 4213047; 516846, 
4213069; 516808, 4213071; 516695, 4213054; 516642, 4213015; 516612, 
4212980; 516593, 4212954; 516603, 4212933; 516600, 4212930; 516526, 
4212877; 516486, 4212856; 516462, 4212851; 516423, 4212833; 516302, 
4212826; 516255, 4212827; 516159, 4212807; 516043, 4212816; 515868, 
4212806; 515827, 4212805; 515777, 4212820; 515745, 4212837; 515734, 
4212869; 515720, 4212959; 515700, 4213067; 515695, 4213091; 515651, 
4213155; 515634, 4213216; 515632, 4213261; 515602, 4213448; 515588, 
4213495; 515577, 4213506; 515564, 4213552; 515555, 4213566; 515545, 
4213621; 515513, 4213672; 515507, 4213692; 515511, 4213703; 515509, 
4213713; 515480, 4213765; 515438, 4213793; 515418, 4213785; 515398, 
4213786; 515294, 4213951; 515257, 4213989; 515218, 4214009; 515126, 
4214013; 515083, 4214053; 515032, 4214113; 514826, 4214370; 514792, 
4214415; 514768, 4214464; 514737, 4214497; 514724, 4214532; 514719, 
4214565; 514703, 4214575; 514694, 4214605; 514653, 4214687; 514544, 
4214841; 514516, 4214870; 514488, 4214908; 514454, 4214930; 514425, 
4215011; 514427, 4215025; 514438, 4215029; 514430, 4215069; 514375, 
4215180; 514361, 4215201; 514290, 4215270; 514261, 4215310; 514252, 
4215309; 514238, 4215299; 514228, 4215308; 514225, 4215328; 514231, 
4215413; 514221, 4215453; 514210, 4215469; 514194, 4215488; 514165, 
4215499; 514121, 4215508; 514017, 4215512; 513988, 4215551; 513970, 
4215628; 513965, 4215636; 513933, 4215641; 513870, 4215664; 513872, 
4215685; 513878, 4215691; 513920, 4215712; 513924, 4215719; 513922, 
4215741; 513903, 4215786; 513903, 4215802; 513905, 4215825; 513920, 
4215877; 513919, 4215910; 513904, 4215922; 513884, 4215922; 513765, 
4215908; 513738, 4215900; 513682, 4215900; 513653, 4215910; 513577, 
4215954; 513558, 4215989; 513534, 4216071; returning to 513514, 4216097.
    (ii) Note: MAR-3 included on map with unit SON-1.
    (19) Unit MAR-4; Marin County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Point Bonita. Land bounded 
by the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 540461, 4187256; 
540478, 4187263; 540497, 4187265; 540522, 4187261; 540558, 4187249; 
540606, 4187242; 540637, 4187227; 540692, 4187224; 540716, 4187211; 
540738, 4187212; 540797, 4187198; 540841, 4187197; 540908, 4187177; 
540933, 4187165; 540960, 4187172;

[[Page 368]]

541012, 4187168; 541039, 4187176; 541116, 4187175; 541129, 4187180; 
541157, 4187206; 541177, 4187219; 541199, 4187225; 541320, 4187238; 
541372, 4187230; 541384, 4187231; 541435, 4187247; 541521, 4187268; 
541564, 4187257; 541591, 4187261; 541605, 4187268; 541649, 4187308; 
541658, 4187309; 541669, 4187303; 541677, 4187291; 541702, 4187235; 
541718, 4187190; 541716, 4187182; 541698, 4187171; 541614, 4187164; 
541520, 4187142; 541501, 4187142; 541483, 4187137; 541407, 4187061; 
541393, 4187058; 541379, 4187060; 541367, 4187056; 541315, 4187050; 
541277, 4187033; 541269, 4187022; 541254, 4187011; 541227, 4187001; 
541195, 4186993; 541106, 4186984; 541072, 4186990; 541049, 4186990; 
541017, 4186963; 540991, 4186948; 540940, 4186941; 540927, 4186948; 
540922, 4186958; 540907, 4187027; 540893, 4187060; 540879, 4187076; 
540838, 4187110; 540823, 4187139; 540776, 4187161; 540758, 4187164; 
540691, 4187189; 540644, 4187199; 540628, 4187211; 540619, 4187155; 
540594, 4187167; 540557, 4187191; 540546, 4187209; 540521, 4187230; 
540490, 4187247; returning to 540461, 4187256.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit MAR-4 follows.

[[Page 369]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31JA08.009

    (20) Unit SM-1; San Mateo County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle San Gregorio. Land bounded 
by the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 552769, 4130764; 
552784, 4130813; 552806, 4130800; 552837, 4130766; 552869, 4130686; 
552884, 4130681; 552903, 4130686; 552920, 4130694; 552922, 4130709;

[[Page 370]]

552911, 4130785; 552902, 4130822; 552922, 4130836; 552970, 4130825; 
553001, 4130812; 553002, 4130822; 553007, 4130831; 553023, 4130833; 
553044, 4130845; 553055, 4130845; 553062, 4130833; 553033, 4130773; 
553019, 4130747; 552990, 4130725; 552984, 4130712; 552986, 4130699; 
552996, 4130680; 552994, 4130669; 553045, 4130645; 553053, 4130658; 
553042, 4130666; 553031, 4130662; 553018, 4130666; 553014, 4130673; 
553014, 4130685; 553029, 4130715; 553082, 4130729; 553095, 4130737; 
553114, 4130758; 553104, 4130777; 553074, 4130796; 553064, 4130807; 
553070, 4130823; 553087, 4130854; 553098, 4130853; 553127, 4130841; 
553134, 4130834; 553164, 4130795; 553180, 4130782; 553192, 4130766; 
553191, 4130751; 553175, 4130728; 553151, 4130709; 553105, 4130698; 
553092, 4130688; 553065, 4130685; 553055, 4130679; 553064, 4130660; 
553067, 4130638; 553129, 4130636; 553186, 4130647; 553246, 4130652; 
553343, 4130671; 553365, 4130689; 553384, 4130713; 553395, 4130732; 
553402, 4130752; 553430, 4130800; 553435, 4130825; 553429, 4130884; 
553430, 4130910; 553441, 4130936; 553453, 4130944; 553467, 4130948; 
553502, 4130945; 553508, 4130973; 553528, 4130987; 553549, 4130991; 
553571, 4131006; 553586, 4131011; 553605, 4131002; 553659, 4130945; 
553667, 4130948; 553723, 4130945; 553737, 4130947; 553753, 4130942; 
553768, 4130928; 553780, 4130897; 553784, 4130877; 553777, 4130834; 
553779, 4130818; 553776, 4130791; 553818, 4130733; 553862, 4130714; 
553887, 4130720; 553893, 4130736; 553893, 4130747; 553919, 4130794; 
553919, 4130845; 553929, 4130866; 553957, 4130889; 553968, 4130919; 
553968, 4130976; 553972, 4131011; 553977, 4131026; 553974, 4131044; 
553980, 4131056; 553980, 4131066; 553976, 4131079; 553951, 4131094; 
553947, 4131102; 553959, 4131114; 553985, 4131130; 553993, 4131115; 
553993, 4131101; 553988, 4131093; 553990, 4131079; 554001, 4131070; 
554018, 4131066; 554040, 4131090; 554062, 4131105; 554119, 4131109; 
554269, 4131178; 554316, 4131182; 554333, 4131195; 554351, 4131198; 
554351, 4131196; 554335, 4131192; 554317, 4131179; 554288, 4131168; 
554267, 4131164; 554208, 4131138; 554147, 4131083; 554077, 4131038; 
554060, 4131018; 554043, 4130994; 554019, 4130938; 553999, 4130900; 
553966, 4130851; 553964, 4130761; 553940, 4130687; 553915, 4130651; 
553885, 4130640; 553858, 4130640; 553825, 4130650; 553796, 4130668; 
553782, 4130691; 553778, 4130741; 553774, 4130763; 553739, 4130802; 
553689, 4130875; 553674, 4130880; 553655, 4130880; 553595, 4130860; 
553571, 4130860; 553542, 4130867; 553528, 4130882; 553496, 4130890; 
553483, 4130887; 553469, 4130877; 553458, 4130860; 553466, 4130828; 
553466, 4130811; 553525, 4130783; 553526, 4130769; 553516, 4130741; 
553478, 4130715; 553457, 4130694; 553430, 4130682; 553407, 4130693; 
553406, 4130691; 553427, 4130681; 553393, 4130665; 553379, 4130655; 
553201, 4130593; 553153, 4130581; 553106, 4130582; 553063, 4130589; 
552978, 4130631; 552944, 4130637; 552870, 4130605; 552858, 4130583; 
552836, 4130558; 552806, 4130534; 552796, 4130562; 552814, 4130572; 
552831, 4130587; 552845, 4130628; 552848, 4130683; 552812, 4130742; 
552795, 4130760; 552781, 4130745; returning to 552769, 4130764.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit SM-1 follows.

[[Page 371]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31JA08.010

    (21) Unit SM-2; San Mateo County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle San Gregorio. Land bounded 
by the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 552093, 4124660; 
552152, 4124706; 552208, 4124607; 552227, 4124591; 552243, 4124592; 
552325, 4124545; 552363, 4124496; 552398, 4124421; 552447, 4124421;

[[Page 372]]

552455, 4124442; 552467, 4124459; 552488, 4124471; 552450, 4124533; 
552377, 4124608; 552346, 4124657; 552335, 4124723; 552321, 4124759; 
552323, 4124841; 552354, 4124844; 552378, 4124827; 552397, 4124804; 
552407, 4124755; 552427, 4124731; 552597, 4124774; 552629, 4124773; 
552719, 4124759; 552869, 4124762; 552893, 4124753; 552993, 4124703; 
553029, 4124682; 553080, 4124628; 553127, 4124563; 553153, 4124520; 
553167, 4124484; 553187, 4124393; 553202, 4124352; 553210, 4124314; 
553217, 4124262; 553193, 4124183; 553219, 4124140; 553217, 4124107; 
553244, 4124048; 553299, 4123975; 553291, 4123974; 553283, 4123980; 
553247, 4124020; 553193, 4124079; 553160, 4124113; 553090, 4124253; 
553059, 4124264; 553043, 4124264; 553015, 4124246; 552988, 4124239; 
552956, 4124241; 552929, 4124251; 552910, 4124268; 552904, 4124290; 
552879, 4124333; 552822, 4124365; 552750, 4124346; 552794, 4124318; 
552923, 4124211; 552939, 4124187; 552949, 4124149; 553065, 4123962; 
553146, 4123962; 553167, 4123910; 553011, 4123777; 553011, 4123740; 
553008, 4123719; 552983, 4123672; 552957, 4123643; 552869, 4123570; 
552848, 4123540; 552830, 4123498; 552782, 4123479; 552779, 4123446; 
552755, 4123403; 552782, 4123375; 552764, 4123347; 552691, 4123276; 
552643, 4123214; 552613, 4123228; 552596, 4123246; 552575, 4123285; 
552556, 4123361; 552537, 4123392; 552532, 4123420; 552548, 4123460; 
552514, 4123531; 552519, 4123555; 552546, 4123582; 552538, 4123656; 
552519, 4123697; 552511, 4123732; 552439, 4123832; 552435, 4123848; 
552437, 4123872; 552479, 4123937; 552486, 4123961; 552533, 4124099; 
552484, 4124100; 552447, 4124107; 552422, 4124127; 552410, 4124150; 
552382, 4124180; 552343, 4124217; 552325, 4124244; 552294, 4124280; 
552279, 4124320; 552239, 4124387; 552218, 4124395; 552203, 4124420; 
552187, 4124528; 552156, 4124540; 552144, 4124553; 552149, 4124572; 
552134, 4124599; 552104, 4124618; returning to 552093, 4124660.
    (ii) Note: SM-2 included on map with unit SM-1.
    (22) Unit SM-3; San Mateo County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Pigeon Point. Land bounded 
by the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 552371, 4119927; 
552402, 4119965; 552411, 4119992; 552409, 4120039; 552436, 4120046; 
552446, 4120041; 552461, 4120039; 552483, 4120043; 552490, 4120040; 
552498, 4120036; 552507, 4120016; 552533, 4120028; 552537, 4120034; 
552560, 4120032; 552569, 4120040; 552589, 4120043; 552606, 4120035; 
552637, 4119992; 552655, 4119973; 552683, 4120024; 552688, 4120146; 
552701, 4120157; 552725, 4120160; 552741, 4120157; 552744, 4120134; 
552741, 4120114; 552729, 4120090; 552723, 4119997; 552717, 4119970; 
552724, 4119920; 552712, 4119843; 552702, 4119832; 552699, 4119819; 
552690, 4119819; 552665, 4119838; 552657, 4119853; 552653, 4119871; 
552624, 4119887; 552596, 4119949; 552581, 4119953; 552563, 4119975; 
552548, 4120000; 552519, 4119990; 552522, 4119981; 552529, 4119976; 
552532, 4119967; 552532, 4119958; 552529, 4119953; 552507, 4119957; 
552477, 4119953; 552450, 4119940; 552444, 4119914; 552440, 4119907; 
552423, 4119907; 552413, 4119910; 552398, 4119928; 552390, 4119932; 
returning to 552371, 4119927.
    (ii) Note: SM-3 included on map with unit SM-1.
    (23) Unit SC-1; Santa Cruz County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Santa Cruz. Land bounded by 
the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 575050, 4093349; 
575122, 4093391; 575122, 4093392; 575142, 4093406; 575179, 4093428; 
575186, 4093431; 575194, 4093426; 575207, 4093421; 575221, 4093430; 
575228, 4093440; 575233, 4093453; 575226, 4093467; 575203, 4093491; 
575189, 4093516; 575180, 4093533; 575177, 4093546; 575175, 4093575; 
575172, 4093616; 575172, 4093657; 575174, 4093688; 575437, 4093542; 
575447, 4093510; 575461, 4093501; 575468, 4093490; 575471, 4093482; 
575471, 4093452; 575471, 4093430; 575469, 4093412; 575462, 4093384; 
575451, 4093363; 575429, 4093350; 575408, 4093342; 575379, 4093334; 
575356, 4093328; 575341, 4093320; 575330, 4093309; 575312, 4093295; 
575303, 4093272; 575287, 4093241; 575274, 4093224; 575264, 4093209; 
575251, 4093203; 575235, 4093206; 575231, 4093207; 575220, 4093204; 
575213, 4093197; 575207, 4093172; 575189, 4093186; 575186, 4093200; 
575167, 4093210; 575139, 4093240; 575068, 4093327; returning to 575050, 
4093349.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit SC-1 follows.

[[Page 373]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31JA08.011

    (24) Unit SC-2; Santa Cruz County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Santa Cruz. Land bounded by 
the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 577882, 4091692; 
577882, 4091713; 577882, 4091737; 577886, 4091758; 577894, 4091784; 
577904, 4091804; 577908, 4091830; 577906, 4091840; 577903, 4091858;

[[Page 374]]

577905, 4091866; 577913, 4091867; 577922, 4091862; 577922, 4091865; 
577927, 4091871; 577933, 4091876; 577958, 4091870; 577982, 4091859; 
577997, 4091852; 578011, 4091846; 578028, 4091831; 578063, 4091813; 
578083, 4091801; 578108, 4091775; 578122, 4091750; 578126, 4091742; 
578129, 4091738; 578130, 4091726; 578126, 4091708; 578116, 4091686; 
578103, 4091670; 578083, 4091655; 578068, 4091641; 578063, 4091620; 
578073, 4091597; 578080, 4091577; 578083, 4091568; 578084, 4091569; 
578087, 4091564; 578094, 4091561; 578105, 4091570; 578111, 4091578; 
578117, 4091583; 578126, 4091580; 578137, 4091574; 578147, 4091568; 
578143, 4091563; 578141, 4091553; 578141, 4091542; 578142, 4091530; 
578147, 4091513; 578151, 4091504; 578159, 4091444; 578158, 4091445; 
578076, 4091483; 577988, 4091509; 577974, 4091504; 577961, 4091520; 
577961, 4091536; 577966, 4091552; 577968, 4091571; 577965, 4091588; 
577956, 4091603; 577941, 4091617; 577923, 4091635; 577910, 4091641; 
577896, 4091659; 577885, 4091673; returning to 577882, 4091692.
    (ii) Note: SC-2 included on map with unit SC-1.
    (25) Unit SC-3; Santa Cruz County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Soquel. Land bounded by the 
following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 590179, 4090901; 590236, 
4090929; 590236, 4090930; 590282, 4090945; 590313, 4090956; 590335, 
4090952; 590350, 4090945; 590362, 4090937; 590375, 4090930; 590378, 
4090927; 590380, 4090934; 590391, 4090956; 590400, 4090976; 590411, 
4090978; 590412, 4090977; 590420, 4090993; 590424, 4091004; 590423, 
4091011; 590425, 4091018; 590424, 4091018; 590423, 4091049; 590423, 
4091065; 590425, 4091074; 590426, 4091079; 590429, 4091087; 590437, 
4091096; 590448, 4091112; 590464, 4091125; 590480, 4091138; 590489, 
4091143; 590497, 4091150; 590518, 4091158; 590549, 4091161; 590573, 
4091153; 590581, 4091147; 590587, 4091146; 590601, 4091147; 590611, 
4091146; 590620, 4091149; 590623, 4091152; 590629, 4091168; 590631, 
4091183; 590643, 4091197; 590660, 4091205; 590683, 4091207; 590701, 
4091194; 590718, 4091184; 590745, 4091164; 590763, 4091166; 590776, 
4091162; 590791, 4091175; 590795, 4091180; 590800, 4091192; 590809, 
4091208; 590817, 4091231; 590829, 4091245; 590855, 4091265; 590889, 
4091279; 590909, 4091283; 590935, 4091291; 590950, 4091295; 590968, 
4091298; 590984, 4091301; 591003, 4091304; 591012, 4091305; 591015, 
4091305; 591021, 4091304; 591025, 4091302; 591027, 4091299; 591028, 
4091294; 591027, 4091289; 591024, 4091284; 591018, 4091272; 591014, 
4091260; 591005, 4091248; 590999, 4091240; 590990, 4091234; 590973, 
4091227; 590957, 4091222; 590947, 4091218; 590938, 4091211; 590929, 
4091206; 590919, 4091196; 590912, 4091188; 590905, 4091177; 590890, 
4091164; 590878, 4091145; 590873, 4091136; 590865, 4091127; 590859, 
4091118; 590854, 4091110; 590842, 4091096; 590836, 4091087; 590827, 
4091080; 590819, 4091073; 590804, 4091062; 590794, 4091057; 590785, 
4091053; 590755, 4091042; 590739, 4091039; 590719, 4091037; 590699, 
4091033; 590672, 4091029; 590653, 4091024; 590636, 4091018; 590619, 
4091011; 590604, 4091005; 590582, 4090991; 590566, 4090982; 590554, 
4090977; 590542, 4090972; 590532, 4090972; 590524, 4090973; 590507, 
4090980; 590496, 4090986; 590477, 4090999; 590468, 4091002; 590457, 
4091003; 590446, 4091004; 590436, 4091010; 590428, 4091003; 590427, 
4090993; 590425, 4090970; 590427, 4090970; 590460, 4090956; 590495, 
4090941; 590530, 4090892; 590533, 4090873; 590502, 4090842; 590465, 
4090818; 590459, 4090810; 590474, 4090794; 590480, 4090791; 590477, 
4090718; 590430, 4090743; 590366, 4090776; 590323, 4090794; 590283, 
4090828; 590242, 4090855; 590204, 4090874; returning to 590179, 4090901.
    (ii) Note: SC-3 included on map with unit SC-1.
    (26) Unit SC-4; Santa Cruz County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Soquel. Land bounded by the 
following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 597246, 4092023; 597317, 
4092033; 597320, 4092041; 597331, 4092080; 597348, 4092134; 597363, 
4092174; 597373, 4092199; 597378, 4092211; 597386, 4092225; 597396, 
4092249; 597406, 4092262; 597412, 4092279; 597423, 4092294; 597429, 
4092282; 597416, 4092251; 597402, 4092211; 597389, 4092165; 597381, 
4092140; 597372, 4092109; 597361, 4092080; 597359, 4092059; 597359, 
4092049; 597358, 4092042; 597360, 4092040; 597373, 4091945; 597351, 
4091956; 597327, 4091965; 597310, 4091976; 597273, 4092007; returning to 
597246, 4092023.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit SC-4 follows.

[[Page 375]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31JA08.012

    (27) Unit SC-5; Santa Cruz and Monterey Counties, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles Watsonville West and Moss 
Landing. Land bounded by the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, 
N): 605911, 4079111; 606162, 4079236; 606226, 4079281; 606361, 4079366; 
606416, 4079419; 606517, 4079467; 606577, 4079500;

[[Page 376]]

606717, 4079591; 606758, 4079610; 606799, 4079640; 606872, 4079760; 
606899, 4079887; 606895, 4079983; 606875, 4080067; 606845, 4080174; 
606820, 4080259; 606672, 4080641; 606643, 4080737; 606629, 4080919; 
606631, 4080943; 606662, 4081020; 606737, 4081107; 606879, 4081225; 
607000, 4081337; 607128, 4081485; 607218, 4081624; 607254, 4081690; 
607346, 4081878; 607382, 4081974; 607445, 4082127; 607474, 4082175; 
607528, 4082251; 607556, 4082275; 607765, 4082472; 607861, 4082567; 
608079, 4082792; 608147, 4082847; 608282, 4082921; 608395, 4082922; 
608595, 4082775; 608783, 4082658; 608883, 4082624; 609077, 4082620; 
609255, 4082657; 609368, 4082708; 609375, 4082666; 609278, 4082633; 
609137, 4082597; 608957, 4082582; 608884, 4082583; 608799, 4082604; 
608730, 4082648; 608623, 4082704; 608418, 4082820; 608332, 4082826; 
608241, 4082819; 608098, 4082739; 608020, 4082648; 607992, 4082604; 
607858, 4082457; 607748, 4082360; 607606, 4082244; 607551, 4082207; 
607554, 4082147; 607512, 4082084; 607476, 4082012; 607382, 4081813; 
607334, 4081708; 607165, 4081477; 607075, 4081361; 607035, 4081316; 
606828, 4081128; 606753, 4081051; 606698, 4080981; 606661, 4080886; 
606657, 4080844; 606664, 4080807; 606743, 4080589; 606791, 4080489; 
606893, 4080276; 606950, 4080145; 606963, 4080070; 606955, 4079974; 
606947, 4079787; 606932, 4079740; 606900, 4079696; 606815, 4079589; 
606672, 4079474; 606516, 4079318; 606445, 4079230; 606343, 4079151; 
606304, 4079085; 606413, 4078742; 606426, 4078716; 606465, 4078622; 
606499, 4078532; 606527, 4078444; 606525, 4078404; 606510, 4078342; 
606420, 4078101; 606395, 4078140; 606354, 4078244; 606255, 4078416; 
606218, 4078509; 606137, 4078641; 606080, 4078773; 605983, 4078937; 
605936, 4079066; returning to 605911, 4079111.
    (ii) Note: SC-5 included on map with unit SC-4.
    (28) Unit MN-1; Monterey County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Moss Landing. Land bounded 
by the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 607479, 4076078; 
607484, 4076090; 607498, 4076089; 607529, 4076051; 607548, 4076043; 
607563, 4076019; 607614, 4076009; 607664, 4075939; 607690, 4075882; 
607715, 4075845; 607729, 4075835; 607765, 4075780; 607782, 4075742; 
607812, 4075704; 607871, 4075651; 607909, 4075602; 607954, 4075586; 
607997, 4075559; 608003, 4075571; 608095, 4075612; 608137, 4075638; 
608191, 4075683; 608295, 4075738; 608324, 4075749; 608380, 4075742; 
608433, 4075743; 608480, 4075770; 608516, 4075767; 608595, 4075832; 
608670, 4075851; 608730, 4075908; 608780, 4075917; 608883, 4075966; 
608963, 4075985; 609014, 4076006; 609042, 4076037; 609037, 4076049; 
609013, 4076060; 609044, 4076094; 609091, 4076103; 609112, 4076082; 
609143, 4076090; 609157, 4076088; 609189, 4076107; 609209, 4076135; 
609217, 4076139; 609244, 4076120; 609275, 4076145; 609305, 4076143; 
609358, 4076120; 609383, 4076127; 609404, 4076121; 609432, 4076149; 
609503, 4076272; 609517, 4076283; 609538, 4076279; 609555, 4076242; 
609578, 4076223; 609706, 4076239; 609760, 4076224; 609779, 4076203; 
609772, 4076170; 609753, 4076155; 609723, 4076168; 609685, 4076167; 
609634, 4076122; 609612, 4076120; 609599, 4076111; 609506, 4076108; 
609466, 4076097; 609458, 4076097; 609442, 4076119; 609421, 4076115; 
609420, 4076100; 609370, 4076068; 609357, 4076066; 609330, 4076024; 
609311, 4076009; 609343, 4075983; 609352, 4075945; 609253, 4075939; 
609243, 4075925; 609243, 4075893; 609227, 4075876; 609161, 4075881; 
609129, 4075874; 609059, 4075870; 609031, 4075875; 608941, 4075867; 
608898, 4075846; 608822, 4075769; 608732, 4075714; 608647, 4075693; 
608547, 4075694; 608506, 4075687; 608402, 4075693; 608353, 4075656; 
608310, 4075612; 608290, 4075582; 608286, 4075529; 608272, 4075483; 
608276, 4075466; 608265, 4075456; 608242, 4075392; 608231, 4075376; 
608212, 4075371; 608190, 4075328; 608188, 4075271; 608202, 4075096; 
608174, 4074988; 608165, 4074913; 608166, 4074872; 608185, 4074802; 
608203, 4074780; 608226, 4074768; 608242, 4074744; 608258, 4074610; 
608252, 4074570; 608269, 4074527; 608281, 4074517; 608171, 4074429; 
608104, 4074419; 608100, 4074483; 608083, 4074522; 608056, 4074561; 
608053, 4074583; 608078, 4074657; 608074, 4074686; 608032, 4074719; 
607975, 4074748; 607977, 4074840; 607971, 4074920; 607954, 4075047; 
607939, 4075108; 607952, 4075166; 607977, 4075198; 608060, 4075233; 
608126, 4075235; 608142, 4075229; 608140, 4075250; 608116, 4075255; 
608060, 4075248; 607991, 4075229; 607968, 4075216; 607945, 4075190; 
607915, 4075141; 607899, 4075150; 607880, 4075203; 607852, 4075240; 
607821, 4075335; 607810, 4075348; 607763, 4075361; 607751, 4075370; 
607720, 4075398; 607707, 4075421; 607704, 4075490; 607715, 4075546; 
607696, 4075565; 607696, 4075616; 607674, 4075642; 607667, 4075662; 
607669, 4075707; 607619, 4075744; 607571, 4075762; 607582, 4075819; 
607578, 4075867; 607549, 4075918; 607530, 4075928; 607502, 4075961; 
607490, 4076020; 607493, 4076054; returning to 607479, 4076078.
    (ii) Note: MN-1 included on map with unit SC-4.
    (29) Unit SLO-1; San Luis Obispo County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Piedras Blancas. Land 
bounded by the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 654950, 
3950321; 654974, 3950315; 654982, 3950312; 654990, 3950310; 654996, 
3950309; 654997, 3950309; 654998, 3950309; 654998, 3950310; 654999, 
3950310; 655014, 3950305; 655018, 3950303; 655018, 3950310; 655014, 
3950319; 655017, 3950328; 655026, 3950331; 655031, 3950331; 655039, 
3950328; 655065, 3950249; 655066, 3950238; 655058, 3950233; 655048, 
3950227; 655043, 3950217; 655042, 3950199; 655044, 3950183; 655048, 
3950169; 655053, 3950162; 655057, 3950157; 655061, 3950151; 655065, 
3950138; 655068, 3950128; 655076, 3950120; 655081, 3950111; 655081, 
3950090; 655081, 3950083; 655068, 3950080; 655058, 3950077; 655052, 
3950072; 655047, 3950069; 655041, 3950056; 655036, 3950067; 655032, 
3950077; 655028, 3950090; 655025, 3950104; 655020, 3950111; 655020, 
3950118; 655018, 3950124; 655018, 3950131; 655007, 3950129; 655006, 
3950130; 655005, 3950130; 655004, 3950130; 655003, 3950130; 654997, 
3950121; 654996, 3950121; 654996, 3950120; 654996, 3950115; 654994, 
3950108; 654990, 3950103; 654990, 3950105; 654983, 3950122; 654985, 
3950133; 654987, 3950145; 654985, 3950156; 654982, 3950192; 654978, 
3950211; 654974, 3950231; 654973, 3950246; 654958, 3950299; returning to 
654950, 3950321.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit SLO-1 follows.

[[Page 377]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31JA08.013

    (30) Unit SLO-2; San Luis Obispo County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle San Simeon. Land bounded by 
the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 661106, 3946736; 
661136, 3946762; 661138, 3946761; 661154, 3946765; 661163, 3946776; 
661162, 3946822; 661160, 3946859; 661160, 3946860; 661165, 3946889;

[[Page 378]]

661168, 3946920; 661171, 3946938; 661172, 3946939; 661172, 3946940; 
661173, 3946940; 661174, 3946940; 661175, 3946940; 661176, 3946940; 
661176, 3946939; 661177, 3946939; 661177, 3946938; 661178, 3946946; 
661187, 3946945; 661187, 3946940; 661190, 3946912; 661190, 3946884; 
661192, 3946849; 661193, 3946836; 661194, 3946826; 661195, 3946809; 
661200, 3946789; 661205, 3946777; 661207, 3946759; 661208, 3946746; 
661205, 3946734; 661200, 3946728; 661198, 3946727; 661194, 3946723; 
661191, 3946717; 661190, 3946711; 661193, 3946705; 661197, 3946699; 
661197, 3946695; 661194, 3946690; 661195, 3946685; 661196, 3946682; 
661182, 3946684; 661133, 3946718; returning to 661106, 3946736.
    (ii) Note: SLO-2 included on map with unit SLO-1.
    (31) Unit SLO-3; San Luis Obispo County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle San Simeon. Land bounded by 
the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 666127, 3944901; 
666136, 3944903; 666152, 3944900; 666193, 3944908; 666235, 3944880; 
666260, 3944893; 666263, 3944905; 666258, 3944930; 666258, 3944937; 
666297, 3944877; 666294, 3944848; 666275, 3944773; 666254, 3944801; 
666226, 3944828; 666172, 3944870; 666152, 3944892; returning to 666127, 
3944901.
    (ii) Note: SLO-3 included on map with unit SLO-1.
    (32) Unit SLO-4; San Luis Obispo County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles Pico Creek and Cambria. 
Land bounded by the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 
669487, 3940858; 669537, 3940865; 669549, 3940860; 669550, 3940860; 
669551, 3940861; 669551, 3940862; 669551, 3940863; 669558, 3940865; 
669574, 3940868; 669596, 3940871; 669606, 3940872; 669615, 3940872; 
669625, 3940869; 669635, 3940866; 669641, 3940863; 669648, 3940859; 
669655, 3940853; 669662, 3940850; 669669, 3940846; 669676, 3940839; 
669685, 3940832; 669694, 3940814; 669705, 3940798; 669720, 3940774; 
669737, 3940755; 669748, 3940744; 669753, 3940740; 669756, 3940738; 
669765, 3940735; 669776, 3940736; 669785, 3940735; 669801, 3940730; 
669815, 3940738; 669819, 3940742; 669823, 3940747; 669826, 3940754; 
669830, 3940758; 669836, 3940761; 669840, 3940764; 669847, 3940765; 
669851, 3940765; 669859, 3940765; 669864, 3940767; 669868, 3940768; 
669885, 3940776; 669895, 3940780; 669904, 3940778; 669916, 3940781; 
669926, 3940784; 669937, 3940786; 669948, 3940784; 669958, 3940779; 
669969, 3940773; 669980, 3940763; 669989, 3940756; 670000, 3940750; 
670012, 3940746; 670031, 3940741; 670041, 3940734; 670052, 3940727; 
670069, 3940719; 670090, 3940712; 670098, 3940704; 670107, 3940697; 
670113, 3940691; 670118, 3940683; 670126, 3940676; 670135, 3940668; 
670137, 3940659; 670136, 3940652; 670135, 3940646; 670140, 3940642; 
670144, 3940636; 670147, 3940629; 670154, 3940620; 670152, 3940618; 
670152, 3940616; 670151, 3940613; 670131, 3940620; 670120, 3940628; 
670120, 3940629; 670112, 3940625; 670102, 3940623; 670082, 3940627; 
670069, 3940637; 670060, 3940645; 670050, 3940648; 670042, 3940658; 
670040, 3940667; 670031, 3940666; 670022, 3940657; 670005, 3940658; 
669988, 3940665; 669979, 3940674; 669973, 3940681; 669965, 3940681; 
669943, 3940680; 669929, 3940684; 669913, 3940680; 669904, 3940670; 
669900, 3940657; 669894, 3940653; 669881, 3940659; 669872, 3940670; 
669861, 3940680; 669853, 3940680; 669860, 3940645; 669865, 3940630; 
669871, 3940615; 669882, 3940606; 669886, 3940598; 669885, 3940590; 
669886, 3940583; 669894, 3940570; 669914, 3940559; 669928, 3940548; 
669935, 3940540; 669933, 3940533; 669923, 3940536; 669916, 3940542; 
669908, 3940546; 669898, 3940551; 669889, 3940557; 669879, 3940562; 
669876, 3940568; 669871, 3940577; 669866, 3940594; 669865, 3940613; 
669860, 3940628; 669854, 3940643; 669850, 3940659; 669844, 3940675; 
669842, 3940680; 669842, 3940681; 669842, 3940682; 669842, 3940683; 
669843, 3940684; 669838, 3940694; 669828, 3940703; 669819, 3940707; 
669810, 3940703; 669809, 3940703; 669804, 3940697; 669800, 3940691; 
669796, 3940683; 669779, 3940659; 669769, 3940648; 669753, 3940628; 
669743, 3940614; 669743, 3940602; 669743, 3940595; 669745, 3940584; 
669744, 3940577; 669743, 3940570; 669731, 3940561; 669705, 3940611; 
669665, 3940672; 669651, 3940695; 669651, 3940696; 669640, 3940712; 
669586, 3940765; 669537, 3940814; 669504, 3940842; returning to 669487, 
3940858.
    (ii) Note: SLO-4 included on map with unit SLO-1.
    (33) Unit SLO-5; San Luis Obispo County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Cayucos. Land bounded by the 
following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 683953, 3926198; 683960, 
3926205; 683980, 3926215; 683989, 3926218; 684058, 3926215; 684072, 
3926209; 684105, 3926205; 684129, 3926198; 684168, 3926177; 684195, 
3926145; 684206, 3926138; 684229, 3926116; 684237, 3926088; 684228, 
3926074; 684232, 3926054; 684232, 3926033; 684224, 3926020; 684280, 
3925950; 684232, 3925959; 684197, 3925958; 684178, 3925954; 684167, 
3925958; 684135, 3925976; 684115, 3925983; 684106, 3925983; 684109, 
3926014; 684123, 3926021; 684155, 3926025; 684180, 3926034; 684182, 
3926053; 684170, 3926109; 684162, 3926125; 684124, 3926123; 684108, 
3926128; 684097, 3926146; 684096, 3926185; 684062, 3926201; 684018, 
3926207; 683993, 3926207; 683962, 3926192; returning to 683953, 3926198.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit SLO-5 follows.

[[Page 379]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31JA08.014

    (34) Unit SLO-6; San Luis Obispo County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Cayucos. Land bounded by the 
following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 687453, 3924653; 687454, 
3924656; 687457, 3924661; 687465, 3924675; 687477, 3924685; 687487, 
3924688; 687483, 3924691; 687479, 3924691; 687482, 3924700;

[[Page 380]]

687481, 3924701; 687481, 3924702; 687480, 3924702; 687481, 3924703; 
687478, 3924708; 687475, 3924719; 687473, 3924731; 687473, 3924738; 
687474, 3924744; 687475, 3924745; 687476, 3924748; 687476, 3924749; 
687484, 3924762; 687485, 3924762; 687490, 3924765; 687504, 3924774; 
687517, 3924796; 687526, 3924818; 687527, 3924824; 687528, 3924826; 
687529, 3924827; 687530, 3924828; 687531, 3924828; 687532, 3924827; 
687533, 3924826; 687533, 3924825; 687533, 3924824; 687533, 3924823; 
687532, 3924817; 687532, 3924816; 687522, 3924793; 687526, 3924794; 
687530, 3924798; 687532, 3924805; 687534, 3924812; 687537, 3924813; 
687536, 3924802; 687535, 3924794; 687535, 3924789; 687535, 3924785; 
687532, 3924782; 687528, 3924784; 687525, 3924783; 687524, 3924778; 
687522, 3924774; 687521, 3924770; 687519, 3924766; 687514, 3924765; 
687509, 3924764; 687504, 3924761; 687500, 3924757; 687493, 3924753; 
687484, 3924744; 687481, 3924741; 687480, 3924732; 687482, 3924723; 
687485, 3924719; 687489, 3924715; 687494, 3924710; 687501, 3924707; 
687506, 3924703; 687510, 3924698; 687513, 3924691; 687508, 3924690; 
687503, 3924690; 687500, 3924689; 687510, 3924687; 687523, 3924678; 
687531, 3924666; 687532, 3924663; 687533, 3924657; 687534, 3924651; 
687534, 3924650; 687536, 3924646; 687536, 3924645; 687537, 3924643; 
687534, 3924643; 687519, 3924641; 687499, 3924649; 687475, 3924655; 
687456, 3924653; returning to 687453, 3924653.
    (ii) Note: SLO-6 included on map with unit SLO-5.
    (35) Unit SLO-7; San Luis Obispo County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Pismo Beach. Land bounded by 
the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 714995, 3890262; 
715095, 3890271; 715104, 3890261; 715109, 3890252; 715120, 3890240; 
715127, 3890233; 715138, 3890227; 715149, 3890213; 715148, 3890223; 
715145, 3890233; 715140, 3890238; 715136, 3890243; 715134, 3890254; 
715132, 3890272; 715129, 3890286; 715125, 3890297; 715119, 3890324; 
715116, 3890338; 715112, 3890351; 715108, 3890361; 715100, 3890375; 
715095, 3890385; 715088, 3890392; 715082, 3890396; 715076, 3890399; 
715069, 3890401; 715065, 3890405; 715061, 3890408; 715060, 3890415; 
715058, 3890429; 715056, 3890444; 715053, 3890455; 715051, 3890473; 
715048, 3890488; 715045, 3890504; 715042, 3890521; 715039, 3890539; 
715035, 3890553; 715033, 3890566; 715032, 3890574; 715031, 3890588; 
715031, 3890606; 715033, 3890623; 715033, 3890645; 715034, 3890667; 
715041, 3890681; 715046, 3890692; 715055, 3890706; 715062, 3890722; 
715067, 3890730; 715070, 3890736; 715074, 3890743; 715082, 3890752; 
715093, 3890762; 715101, 3890768; 715119, 3890786; 715130, 3890799; 
715145, 3890809; 715163, 3890821; 715178, 3890830; 715194, 3890837; 
715205, 3890845; 715221, 3890859; 715236, 3890869; 715252, 3890885; 
715262, 3890891; 715268, 3890896; 715276, 3890902; 715283, 3890912; 
715289, 3890922; 715296, 3890932; 715305, 3890943; 715310, 3890953; 
715317, 3890972; 715318, 3890984; 715319, 3891005; 715323, 3891027; 
715326, 3891034; 715335, 3891032; 715336, 3891031; 715342, 3891028; 
715347, 3891021; 715345, 3891004; 715340, 3890985; 715331, 3890962; 
715321, 3890938; 715310, 3890916; 715296, 3890885; 715287, 3890864; 
715277, 3890859; 715272, 3890854; 715258, 3890837; 715241, 3890825; 
715232, 3890816; 715226, 3890810; 715212, 3890802; 715200, 3890802; 
715186, 3890801; 715179, 3890795; 715169, 3890778; 715154, 3890761; 
715142, 3890751; 715133, 3890737; 715127, 3890720; 715122, 3890708; 
715117, 3890704; 715109, 3890684; 715103, 3890669; 715099, 3890654; 
715092, 3890642; 715084, 3890623; 715080, 3890608; 715077, 3890585; 
715075, 3890559; 715079, 3890539; 715083, 3890515; 715090, 3890484; 
715097, 3890454; 715105, 3890425; 715111, 3890398; 715118, 3890380; 
715129, 3890356; 715141, 3890327; 715153, 3890297; 715164, 3890254; 
715170, 3890229; 715174, 3890208; 715177, 3890185; 715178, 3890165; 
715176, 3890142; 715177, 3890130; 715176, 3890123; 715183, 3890106; 
715187, 3890085; 715189, 3890067; 715193, 3890044; 715200, 3890028; 
715137, 3889924; 715128, 3889946; 715121, 3889965; 715115, 3889981; 
715110, 3889994; 715106, 3890007; 715102, 3890018; 715095, 3890036; 
715090, 3890049; 715082, 3890067; 715076, 3890080; 715069, 3890095; 
715062, 3890111; 715052, 3890126; 715044, 3890146; 715034, 3890166; 
715029, 3890185; 715022, 3890203; 715013, 3890222; 715004, 3890241; 
returning to 714995, 3890262.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit SLO-7 follows.

[[Page 381]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31JA08.015

    (36) Unit SB-1; Santa Barbara County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles Point Sal and Guadalupe. 
Land bounded by the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 
714486, 3872122; 714493, 3872165; 714530, 3872230; 714539, 3872329; 
714554, 3872389; 714594, 3872480; 714613, 3872646; 714626, 3872708;

[[Page 382]]

714651, 3872747; 714689, 3872903; 714703, 3873025; 714969, 3872560; 
714988, 3872467; 715039, 3872436; 715055, 3872488; 715175, 3872451; 
715237, 3872326; 715354, 3872192; 715434, 3872073; 715583, 3871865; 
715637, 3871734; 715713, 3871614; 715807, 3871544; 715939, 3871505; 
716019, 3871535; 716044, 3871566; 716102, 3871589; 716153, 3871603; 
716222, 3871602; 716268, 3871649; 716299, 3871655; 716334, 3871652; 
716452, 3871607; 716526, 3871594; 716558, 3871593; 716701, 3871615; 
716807, 3871341; 716785, 3871204; 716542, 3870984; 716348, 3870951; 
716245, 3870930; 716125, 3870887; 716029, 3870923; 715975, 3870952; 
715899, 3870968; 715803, 3871010; 715682, 3871109; 715600, 3871122; 
715455, 3871112; 715304, 3871140; 715197, 3871101; 715115, 3871098; 
715046, 3871108; 714985, 3871140; 714935, 3871180; 714908, 3871224; 
714839, 3871547; 714773, 3871548; 714762, 3871579; 714753, 3871608; 
714720, 3871626; 714713, 3871685; 714656, 3871775; 714650, 3871830; 
714624, 3871908; 714676, 3871989; 714646, 3872058; returning to 714486, 
3872122.
    (ii) Note: SB-1 included on map with unit SLO-7.
    (37) Unit SB-2; Santa Barbara County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Point Conception. Land 
bounded by the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 744289, 
3816310; 744302, 3816318; 744310, 3816324; 744314, 3816329; 744320, 
3816334; 744322, 3816336; 744326, 3816338; 744320, 3816343; 744314, 
3816346; 744311, 3816351; 744310, 3816356; 744308, 3816361; 744308, 
3816366; 744307, 3816371; 744306, 3816376; 744305, 3816383; 744304, 
3816387; 744307, 3816387; 744312, 3816379; 744313, 3816373; 744314, 
3816366; 744315, 3816359; 744315, 3816356; 744317, 3816352; 744320, 
3816347; 744325, 3816346; 744330, 3816344; 744336, 3816342; 744339, 
3816341; 744350, 3816340; 744358, 3816339; 744369, 3816340; 744373, 
3816338; 744377, 3816336; 744383, 3816336; 744391, 3816337; 744397, 
3816339; 744402, 3816338; 744407, 3816337; 744373, 3816328; 744350, 
3816322; 744343, 3816320; 744335, 3816318; 744308, 3816313; 744298, 
3816310; returning to 744289, 3816310.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit SB-2 follows.

[[Page 383]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31JA08.016

    (38) Unit SB-3; Santa Barbara County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Point Conception. Land 
bounded by the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 747310, 
3817233; 747358, 3817279; 747376, 3817283; 747396, 3817298; 747384, 
3817307; 747357, 3817311; 747334, 3817326; 747324, 3817337; 747314,

[[Page 384]]

3817372; 747318, 3817391; 747323, 3817394; 747338, 3817375; 747376, 
3817348; 747386, 3817331; 747413, 3817305; 747435, 3817265; 747509, 
3817255; 747522, 3817247; 747556, 3817236; 747588, 3817216; 747550, 
3817228; 747506, 3817229; 747494, 3817235; 747346, 3817239; returning to 
747310, 3817233.
    (ii) Note: SB-3 included on map with unit SB-2.
    (39) Unit SB-4; Santa Barbara County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Point Conception. Land 
bounded by the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 750530, 
3817616; 750546, 3817669; 750554, 3817688; 750582, 3817711; 750595, 
3817736; 750602, 3817758; 750608, 3817758; 750598, 3817712; 750570, 
3817678; 750570, 3817666; 750559, 3817649; 750559, 3817614; 750565, 
3817606; 750567, 3817590; 750580, 3817583; 750585, 3817577; 750588, 
3817572; 750582, 3817557; 750602, 3817534; 750563, 3817537; 750547, 
3817533; 750553, 3817561; 750542, 3817580; 750540, 3817593; returning to 
750530, 3817616.
    (ii) Note: Unit SB-4 included on map with unit SB-2.
    (40) Unit SB-5; Santa Barbara County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Point Conception. Land 
bounded by the following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 752340, 
3817567; 752343, 3817589; 752347, 3817598; 752351, 3817624; 752351, 
3817636; 752357, 3817675; 752353, 3817702; 752366, 3817705; 752370, 
3817675; 752364, 3817634; 752364, 3817623; 752360, 3817595; 752353, 
3817577; 752354, 3817544; 752362, 3817533; 752363, 3817528; 752366, 
3817524; 752380, 3817515; 752388, 3817512; 752427, 3817506; 752442, 
3817500; 752435, 3817500; 752388, 3817494; 752363, 3817498; 752345, 
3817533; 752341, 3817543; returning to 752340, 3817567.
    (ii) Note: SB-5 included on map with unit SB-2.
    (41) Unit SB-6; Santa Barbara County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Gaviota. Land bounded by the 
following UTM zone 10 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 754473, 3818173; 754487, 
3818216; 754512, 3818201; 754519, 3818189; 754526, 3818145; 754537, 
3818130; 754567, 3818121; 754588, 3818106; 754643, 3818104; 754672, 
3818114; 754733, 3818115; 754752, 3818107; 754778, 3818058; 754782, 
3818039; 754797, 3818005; 754793, 3817977; 754787, 3817954; 754777, 
3817948; 754768, 3817931; 754759, 3817922; 754756, 3817901; 754735, 
3817880; 754733, 3817870; 754727, 3817868; 754718, 3817855; 754606, 
3817863; 754568, 3817859; 754534, 3817850; 754531, 3817853; 754571, 
3817881; 754575, 3817891; 754586, 3817901; 754597, 3817906; 754626, 
3817916; 754643, 3817913; 754654, 3817916; 754687, 3817910; 754709, 
3817914; 754707, 3817922; 754727, 3817941; 754703, 3817949; 754680, 
3817949; 754669, 3817954; 754665, 3817960; 754666, 3817978; 754657, 
3817995; 754655, 3818033; 754643, 3818075; 754629, 3818079; 754624, 
3818085; 754625, 3818089; 754618, 3818091; 754564, 3818094; 754541, 
3818104; 754479, 3818161; 754480, 3818169; returning to 754473, 3818173.
    (ii) Note: Unit SB-6 included on map with unit SB-2.
    (42) Unit SB-7; Santa Barbara County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Dos Pueblos Canyon. Land 
bounded by the following UTM zone 11 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 232224, 
3813614; 232337, 3813596; 232345, 3813600; 232348, 3813614; 232342, 
3813631; 232314, 3813641; 232303, 3813652; 232297, 3813683; 232307, 
3813732; 232313, 3813743; 232321, 3813769; 232323, 3813789; 232318, 
3813850; 232320, 3813928; 232340, 3813983; 232370, 3813973; 232363, 
3813947; 232346, 3813948; 232329, 3813927; 232329, 3813905; 232339, 
3813898; 232350, 3813875; 232355, 3813835; 232366, 3813794; 232370, 
3813748; 232359, 3813698; 232353, 3813689; 232345, 3813688; 232363, 
3813651; 232357, 3813646; 232363, 3813625; 232373, 3813614; 232373, 
3813605; 232360, 3813572; 232383, 3813490; 232287, 3813570; returning to 
232224, 3813614.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit SB-7 follows.

[[Page 385]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31JA08.017

    (43) Unit SB-8; Santa Barbara County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Santa Barbara. Land bounded 
by the following UTM zone 11 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 247839, 3810209; 
247844, 3810255; 247848, 3810256; 247841, 3810295; 247851, 3810332; 
247867, 3810357; 247884, 3810364; 247967, 3810388; 247988,

[[Page 386]]

3810390; 248001, 3810387; 248032, 3810399; 248051, 3810400; 248079, 
3810406; 248097, 3810417; 248108, 3810428; 248117, 3810441; 248118, 
3810451; 248124, 3810453; 248122, 3810439; 248113, 3810425; 248100, 
3810412; 248082, 3810401; 248068, 3810396; 248033, 3810393; 248002, 
3810381; 247988, 3810384; 247969, 3810383; 247885, 3810357; 247877, 
3810347; 247868, 3810332; 247876, 3810282; 247893, 3810265; 247900, 
3810237; 247897, 3810226; 247933, 3810166; returning to 247839, 3810209.
    (ii) Note: SB-8 included on map with unit SB-7.
    (44) Unit SB-9; Santa Barbara County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Santa Barbara. Land bounded 
by the following UTM zone 11 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 252846, 3811168; 
252864, 3811187; 252923, 3811193; 252975, 3811204; 253049, 3811235; 
253166, 3811297; 253182, 3811299; 253183, 3811277; 253187, 3811278; 
253202, 3811303; 253199, 3811317; 253207, 3811319; 253209, 3811311; 
253445, 3811254; 253412, 3811247; 253337, 3811217; 253311, 3811202; 
253275, 3811190; 253256, 3811174; 253236, 3811170; 253226, 3811163; 
253219, 3811147; 253195, 3811137; 253122, 3811115; 253088, 3811099; 
252918, 3811155; 252928, 3811169; 252923, 3811172; 252908, 3811174; 
returning to 252846, 3811168.
    (ii) Note: Unit SB-9 included on map with unit SB-7.
    (45) Unit VEN-1; Ventura County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Ventura. Land bounded by the 
following UTM zone 11 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 287223, 3795128; 287297, 
3795133; 287329, 3795156; 287356, 3795190; 287377, 3795209; 287407, 
3795228; 287424, 3795254; 287428, 3795275; 287423, 3795289; 287371, 
3795326; 287361, 3795337; 287356, 3795349; 287354, 3795362; 287365, 
3795411; 287383, 3795461; 287376, 3795489; 287364, 3795493; 287349, 
3795520; 287341, 3795563; 287347, 3795595; 287357, 3795620; 287385, 
3795609; 287392, 3795618; 287391, 3795629; 287398, 3795650; 287405, 
3795682; 287419, 3795720; 287424, 3795745; 287423, 3795766; 287442, 
3795795; 287436, 3795813; 287435, 3795806; 287423, 3795804; 287419, 
3795818; 287379, 3795831; 287372, 3795843; 287571, 3795810; 287572, 
3795798; 287586, 3795788; 287590, 3795779; 287581, 3795765; 287580, 
3795748; 287569, 3795726; 287556, 3795683; 287576, 3795664; 287578, 
3795617; 287588, 3795605; 287602, 3795595; 287634, 3795581; 287634, 
3795510; 287632, 3795455; 287626, 3795410; 287625, 3795362; 287618, 
3795309; 287632, 3795287; 287630, 3795263; 287632, 3795216; 287627, 
3795163; 287626, 3795106; 287622, 3795028; 287625, 3794917; 287577, 
3794954; 287470, 3795013; 287404, 3795023; 287293, 3795067; returning to 
287223, 3795128.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit VEN-1 follows.

[[Page 387]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31JA08.018

    (46) Unit VEN-2; Ventura County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Oxnard. Land bounded by the 
following UTM zone 11 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 291159, 3789957; 291223, 
3790506; 291369, 3790503; 291384, 3790685; 291387, 3790730; 291415, 
3790767; 291412, 3790821; 291419, 3790906; 291669, 3790758; 291809,

[[Page 388]]

3790713; 291890, 3790691; 291995, 3790673; 292105, 3790669; 292514, 
3790691; 292880, 3790694; 293336, 3790700; 293629, 3790695; 293448, 
3790404; 292910, 3790378; 292682, 3790364; 292456, 3790341; 292380, 
3790320; 292284, 3790262; 292160, 3790123; 292097, 3790078; 292034, 
3790039; 292005, 3789999; 291995, 3789923; 291937, 3789922; 291862, 
3789890; 291823, 3789847; 291809, 3789796; 291814, 3789722; 291781, 
3789705; 291689, 3789886; 291558, 3789684; 291564, 3789160; 291272, 
3789495; 291176, 3789721; returning to 291159, 3789957.
    (ii) Note: Unit VEN-2 included on map with unit VEN-1.
    (47) Unit VEN-3; Ventura County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Oxnard. Land bounded by the 
following UTM zone 11 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 298163, 3779838; 298231, 
3779920; 298245, 3779905; 298274, 3779893; 298310, 3779870; 298354, 
3779843; 298335, 3779822; 298379, 3779795; 298443, 3779754; 298494, 
3779730; 298528, 3779695; 298555, 3779675; 298592, 3779644; 298678, 
3779570; 298699, 3779579; 298578, 3779686; 298385, 3779845; 298325, 
3779874; 298289, 3779897; 298267, 3779918; 298269, 3779922; 298290, 
3779914; 298338, 3779882; 298379, 3779865; 298393, 3779856; 298562, 
3779713; 298614, 3779669; 298798, 3779514; 298880, 3779430; 299009, 
3779320; 299029, 3779318; 299028, 3779279; 299001, 3779300; 298958, 
3779309; 298863, 3779394; 298792, 3779416; 298790, 3779357; 299022, 
3779125; 299018, 3779003; 298939, 3779085; 298884, 3779132; 298659, 
3779308; 298603, 3779365; 298638, 3779430; 298164, 3779790; returning to 
298163, 3779838.
    (ii) Note: Unit VEN-3 included on map with unit VEN-1.
    (48) Unit LA-1; Los Angeles County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Malibu Beach. Land bounded 
by the following UTM zone 11 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 343854, 3769197; 
343855, 3769238; 343878, 3769230; 343927, 3769201; 343954, 3769178; 
343968, 3769157; 343970, 3769141; 343966, 3769111; 343979, 3769096; 
343980, 3769072; 344025, 3768898; 344034, 3768802; 344047, 3768729; 
344054, 3768697; 344071, 3768661; 344079, 3768650; 344134, 3768608; 
344162, 3768595; 344209, 3768580; 344224, 3768555; 344259, 3768529; 
344278, 3768520; 344300, 3768489; 344324, 3768469; 344335, 3768450; 
344393, 3768395; 344431, 3768343; 344499, 3768273; 344516, 3768245; 
344552, 3768200; 344595, 3768138; 344644, 3768041; 344671, 3767978; 
344710, 3767877; 344715, 3767848; 344735, 3767804; 344738, 3767775; 
344745, 3767750; 344727, 3767736; 344724, 3767686; 344715, 3767665; 
344675, 3767601; 344657, 3767564; 344613, 3767516; 344605, 3767490; 
344605, 3767470; 344606, 3767425; 344613, 3767401; 344663, 3767338; 
344688, 3767314; 344709, 3767297; 344732, 3767260; 344754, 3767249; 
344787, 3767242; 344795, 3767231; 344811, 3767219; 344835, 3767224; 
344861, 3767204; 344868, 3767186; 344886, 3767171; 344912, 3767158; 
345030, 3767154; 345032, 3767118; 345025, 3767101; 344993, 3767067; 
344983, 3767048; 344967, 3767027; 344926, 3766990; 344900, 3766951; 
344815, 3766930; 344784, 3766918; 344753, 3766885; 344670, 3766849; 
344660, 3766846; 344681, 3766899; 344724, 3766933; 344722, 3766964; 
344680, 3766974; 344629, 3767002; 344606, 3767012; 344589, 3767003; 
344548, 3767011; 344503, 3767018; 344449, 3767035; 344427, 3767050; 
344414, 3767071; 344417, 3767121; 344431, 3767168; 344492, 3767156; 
344536, 3767136; 344562, 3767136; 344597, 3767140; 344607, 3767146; 
344581, 3767201; 344587, 3767205; 344612, 3767184; 344640, 3767179; 
344650, 3767181; 344639, 3767234; 344617, 3767298; 344596, 3767334; 
344579, 3767376; 344563, 3767443; 344567, 3767500; 344565, 3767521; 
344556, 3767534; 344551, 3767568; 344554, 3767606; 344549, 3767633; 
344545, 3767683; 344557, 3767730; 344577, 3767833; 344594, 3767899; 
344599, 3767949; 344599, 3767985; 344592, 3768023; 344593, 3768082; 
344574, 3768100; 344545, 3768164; 344527, 3768194; 344497, 3768232; 
344481, 3768259; 344413, 3768328; 344375, 3768381; 344352, 3768405; 
344310, 3768439; 344301, 3768439; 344276, 3768447; 344250, 3768468; 
344220, 3768505; 344210, 3768511; 344198, 3768511; 344169, 3768497; 
344152, 3768492; 344122, 3768500; 344105, 3768509; 344062, 3768572; 
344040, 3768628; 344043, 3768668; 344032, 3768690; 344028, 3768708; 
344011, 3768799; 344002, 3768895; 343975, 3768996; 343956, 3769033; 
343941, 3769077; 343946, 3769149; 343936, 3769163; 343914, 3769182; 
343886, 3769197; 343863, 3769200; returning to 343854, 3769197.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit LA-1 follows.

[[Page 389]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31JA08.019

    (49) Unit LA-2; Los Angeles County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Topanga. Land bounded by the 
following UTM zone 11 NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 353851, 3767575; 353859, 
3767610; 353860, 3767654; 353855, 3767659; 353856, 3767672; 353860, 
3767720; 353880, 3767768; 353908, 3767818; 353919, 3767829;

[[Page 390]]

353921, 3767837; 353942, 3767845; 354016, 3767844; 354041, 3767856; 
354080, 3767864; 354109, 3767861; 354127, 3767851; 354139, 3767850; 
354166, 3767854; 354179, 3767883; 354179, 3767917; 354187, 3767930; 
354186, 3767938; 354203, 3767945; 354205, 3767873; 354198, 3767851; 
354181, 3767831; 354156, 3767825; 354134, 3767824; 354088, 3767836; 
354071, 3767836; 354051, 3767831; 354024, 3767819; 353969, 3767820; 
353945, 3767792; 353933, 3767786; 353918, 3767769; 353904, 3767745; 
353894, 3767733; 353876, 3767699; 353873, 3767653; 353875, 3767609; 
353881, 3767598; 353879, 3767586; 353889, 3767512; 353906, 3767526; 
353936, 3767510; 353887, 3767481; 353856, 3767475; 353856, 3767503; 
353867, 3767505; 353862, 3767528; 353856, 3767538; 353857, 3767554; 
returning to 353851, 3767575.
    (ii) Note: Unit LA-2 included on map with unit LA-1.

                  Conasauga Logperch (Percina jenkinsi)

    Tennessee and Georgia: Conasauga River from the confluence of 
Halfway Branch with the Conasauga River in Polk County, Tennessee, 
downstream approximately 11 miles to the Georgia State Highway 2 Bridge, 
Murray County, Georgia.
    Constituent elements include high quality water, pool areas with 
flowing water and silt free riffles with gravel and rubble substrate, 
and fast riffle areas and deeper chutes with gravel and small rubble.
    Note: Map follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.110
    
                     Smoky Madtom (Noturus baileyi)

    Tennessee, Monroe County, Citico Creek, Cherokee National Forest. 
Citico Creek from the Cherokee National Forest boundary at upper Citico 
Bridge on Mountain Settlement Road (approximately creek mile 4.3) 
upstream to the confluence of Citico Creek with Barkcamp Branch 
(approximately creek mile 10.8).
    Constituent elements of the critical habitat include the present 
good water quality in Citico Creek and run/pool areas with relatively 
silt-free pea-size gravel substrate containing scattered large flat 
rocks for breeding habitat. The species utilizes palm-size slab rocks 
for cover and relatively silt-free riffle areas during other times of 
the year. The area designated as critical habitat provides the smoky 
madtom with all of the necessary constituent elements for completion of 
its life cycle.
    Note: Map follows:

[[Page 391]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.111

                 Yellowfin Madtom (Noturus flavipinnis)

    Tennessee. Claiborne and Hancock Counties. Powell River, main 
channel from backwaters of Norris Lake upstream to the Tennessee-
Virginia State line.
    Virginia. Lee, Scott, and Russell Counties. Powell River, main 
channel from the Virginia-Tennessee State line upstream through Lee 
County. Copper Creek, main channel from its junction with Clinch River 
upstream through Scott County and upstream in Russell County to 
Dickensonville.
    Note: Map follows:

[[Page 392]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.112

                  Devils River Minnow (Dionda diaboli)

    (1) Critical habitat units are depicted for Val Verde County and 
Kinney County, Texas, on the maps below.
    (2) The primary constituent elements of critical habitat for the 
Devils River minnow are the following habitat components:
    (i) Streams characterized by:
    (A) Areas with slow to moderate water velocities between 10 and 40 
cm/second (4 and 16 in/second) in shallow to moderate water depths 
between approximately 10 cm (4 in) and 1.5 m (4.9 ft), near vegetative 
structure, such as emergent or submerged vegetation or stream bank 
riparian vegetation that overhangs into the water column;
    (B) Gravel and cobble substrates ranging in diameter between 2 and 
10 cm (0.8 and 4 in) with low or moderate amounts of fine sediment (less 
than 65 percent stream bottom coverage) and low or moderate amounts of 
substrate embeddedness; and
    (C) Pool, riffle, run, and backwater components free of artificial 
instream structures that would prevent movement of fish upstream or 
downstream.
    (ii) High-quality water provided by permanent, natural flows from 
groundwater spring and seeps characterized by:
    (A) Temperature ranging between 17 [deg]C and 29 [deg]C (63 [deg]F 
and 84 [deg]F);
    (B) Dissolved oxygen levels greater than 5.0 mg/l;
    (C) Neutral pH ranging between 7.0 and 8.2;
    (D) Conductivity less than 0.7 mS/cm and salinity less than 1 ppt;
    (E) Ammonia levels less than 0.4 mg/l; and
    (F) No or minimal pollutant levels for copper, arsenic, mercury, and 
cadmium; human and animal waste products; pesticides; fertilizers; 
suspended sediments; and petroleum compounds and gasoline or diesel 
fuels.
    (iii) An abundant aquatic food base consisting of algae attached to 
stream substrates and other microorganisms associated with stream 
substrates.
    (iv) Aquatic stream habitat either devoid of nonnative aquatic 
species (including fish, plants, and invertebrates) or in which such 
nonnative aquatic species are at levels that allow for healthy 
populations of Devils River minnows.
    (v) Areas within stream courses that may be periodically dewatered 
for short time periods, during seasonal droughts, but otherwise serve as 
connective corridors between occupied or seasonally occupied areas 
through which the species moves when the area is wetted.
    (3) Critical habitat does not include manmade structures (such as 
buildings, aqueducts, airports, roads, and other paved areas) and the 
land on which they are located existing on the effective date of this 
rule and not containing one or more of the primary constituent elements.
    (4) Critical habitat map units. Data layers defining map units were 
created in ArcGIS using the National Hydrography Dataset and 7.5' 
topographic quadrangle maps obtained from U.S. Geological Survey to 
approximate stream channels and calculate distances (stream km and 
stream mi). We made some minor adjustments to stream channels using the 
2004 National Agriculture Imagery Program digital orthophotos obtained 
from the Texas Natural Resources Information System. For each critical 
habitat unit, the upstream and downstream boundaries are described as 
paired geographic coordinates X, Y (meters E, meters N, UTM Zone 14, 
referenced to North American Horizontal Datum 1983). Additionally, 
critical habitat areas include the stream channels within the

[[Page 393]]

identified stream reaches and areas within these reaches up to the 
bankfull width.
    (5) Note: Index map of critical habitat units for the Devils River 
minnow follows:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR12AU08.000

    (6) Unit 2: San Felipe Creek, Val Verde County, Texas.
    (i) Unit 2 consists of approximately 7.9 stream km (4.9 stream mi) 
on San Felipe

[[Page 394]]

Creek, 0.8 stream km (0.5 stream mi) of the outflow of San Felipe 
Springs West, and 0.3 stream km (0.2 stream mi) of the outflow of San 
Felipe Springs East. The upstream boundary on San Felipe Creek is the 
Head Springs (UTM 318813E, 3253702N) located about 1.1 stream km (0.7 
stream mi) upstream of the Jap Lowe Bridge crossing. The downstream 
boundary on San Felipe Creek is in the City of Del Rio 0.8 stream km 
(0.5 stream mi) downstream of the Academy Street Bridge crossing (UTM 
316317E, 3248147N). This unit includes the outflow channels from the 
origin of the two springs, San Felipe Springs West (UTM 317039E, 
3250850N) and San Felipe Springs East (UTM 317212E, 250825N), downstream 
to the confluence with San Felipe Creek. Including all three streams, 
the total distance in Unit 2 is approximately 9.0 stream km (5.6 stream 
mi).
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit 2, San Felipe Creek Unit, follows:

[[Page 395]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR12AU08.001

    (7) Unit 3: Pinto Creek, Kinney County, Texas.
    (i) Unit 3 consists of approximately 17.5 stream km (10.9 stream mi) 
on Pinto Creek. The upstream boundary is Pinto Springs (UTM 359372E, 
3254422N). The downstream boundary is 100 m (330 ft) upstream of the 
Highway 90 Bridge crossing of Pinto Creek (UTM 351163E, 3246179N).
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit 3, Pinto Creek Unit, follows:

[[Page 396]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR12AU08.002

                     Loach Minnow (Tiaroga Cobitis)

    (1) Critical habitat units are depicted for Apache, Graham, 
Greenlee, and Pinal Counties, Arizona; and Catron, Grant, and Hidalgo 
Counties, New Mexico, on the maps and as described below.
    (2) Within these areas, the primary constituent elements of critical 
habitat for loach minnow are the following:
    (i) Permanent, flowing water with no or low levels of pollutants, 
including:

[[Page 397]]

    (A) Living areas for adult loach minnow with moderate to swift flow 
velocities between 9.0 to 32.0 in/second (24 to 80 cm/second) in shallow 
water between approximately 1.0 to 30 inches (3 cm to 75 cm) in depth, 
with gravel, cobble, and rubble substrates;
    (B) Living areas for juvenile loach minnow with moderate to swift 
flow velocities between 1.0 and 34 in/second (3.0 and 85.0 cm/second) in 
shallow water between approximately 1.0 to 30 inches (3 cm to 75 cm) in 
depth with sand, gravel, cobble, and rubble substrates;
    (C) Living areas for larval loach minnow with slow to moderate 
velocities between 3.0 and 20.0 in/second (9.0 to 50.0 cm/second) in 
shallow water with sand, gravel, and cobble substrates;
    (D) Spawning areas with slow to swift flow velocities in shallow 
water where cobble and rubble and the spaces between them are not filled 
in by fine dirt or sand; and
    (E) Water with dissolved oxygen levels greater than 3.5 cc/l and no 
or minimal pollutant levels for pollutants such as copper, arsenic, 
mercury, and cadmium; human and animal waste products; pesticides; 
suspended sediments; and gasoline or diesel fuels.
    (ii) Sand, gravel, and cobble substrates with low or moderate 
amounts of fine sediment and substrate embeddedness. Suitable levels of 
embeddedness are generally maintained by a natural, unregulated 
hydrograph that allows for periodic flooding or, if flows are modified 
or regulated, a hydrograph that allows for adequate river functions, 
such as flows capable of transporting sediments.
    (iii) Streams that have:
    (A) Low gradients of less than approximately 2.5 percent;
    (B) Water temperatures in the approximate range of 35 to 86 [deg]F 
(1.7 to 30.0 [deg]C) (with additional natural daily and seasonal 
variation);
    (C) Pool, riffle, run, and backwater components; and
    (D) An abundant aquatic insect food base consisting of mayflies, 
true flies, black flies, caddisflies, stoneflies, and dragonflies.
    (iv) Habitat devoid of nonnative aquatic species or habitat in which 
nonnative aquatic species are at levels that allow persistence of loach 
minnow.
    (v) Areas within perennial, interrupted stream courses that are 
periodically dewatered but that serve as connective corridors between 
occupied or seasonally occupied habitat and through which the species 
may move when the habitat is wetted.
    (3) Each stream segment includes a lateral component that consists 
of 300 feet (91.4 meters) on either side of the stream channel measured 
from the stream edge at bank full discharge. This lateral component of 
critical habitat contains and contributes to the physical and biological 
features essential to the loach minnow and is intended as a surrogate 
for the 100-year floodplain.
    (4) Critical habitat map areas. Data layers defining map areas, and 
mapping of critical habitat areas, was done using Arc GIS and verifying 
with USGS 7.5[foot] quadrangles. Legal descriptions for New Mexico and 
Arizona are based on the Public Lands Survey System (PLSS). Within this 
system, all coordinates reported for New Mexico are in the New Mexico 
Principal Meridian (NMPM), while those in Arizona are in the Gila and 
Salt River Meridian (GSRM). All mileage calculations were performed 
using GIS.
    (5) Note: Index map of critical habitat units for loach minnow (Map 
1) follows:

[[Page 398]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR21MR07.000

    (6) Complex 2--Black River, Apache and Greenlee Counties, Arizona.
    (i) East Fork Black River--12.2 mi (19.7 km) of river extending from 
the confluence with the West Fork Black River at Township 4 North, Range 
28 East, section 11 upstream to the confluence with unnamed tributary 
approximately 0.51 mi (0.82 km) downstream of the Boneyard Creek 
confluence at Township 5 North, Range 29 East, section 5. Land 
ownership: U.S. Forest Service (Apache--Sitgreaves National Forest).

[[Page 399]]

    (ii) North Fork East Fork Black River--4.4 mi (7.1 km) of river 
extending from the confluence with East Fork Black River at Township 5 
North, Range 29 East, section 5 upstream to the confluence with an 
unnamed tributary at Township 6 North, Range 29 East, section 30. Land 
ownership: U.S. Forest Service (Apache--Sitgreaves National Forest).
    (iii) Boneyard Creek--1.4 mi (2.3 km) of creek extending from the 
confluence with the East Fork Black River at Township 5 North, Range 29 
East, section 5 upstream to the confluence with an unnamed tributary at 
Township 6 North, Range 29 East, section 32. Land ownership: U.S. Forest 
Service (Apache--Sitgreaves National Forest).
    (iv) Note: Map of Complex 2 (Black River) of loach minnow critical 
habitat (Map 2) follows:

[[Page 400]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR21MR07.001

    (7) Complex 3--Middle Gila/Lower San Pedro/Aravaipa Creek, Pinal and 
Graham Counties, Arizona.
    (i) Aravaipa Creek--28.1 mi (45.3 km) of creek extending from the 
confluence with the San Pedro River at Township 7 South, Range 16 East, 
section 9 upstream to the confluence with Stowe Gulch at Township 6 
South, Range 19 East, section 35. Land ownership: Bureau of Land 
Management, Tribal, and State lands.

[[Page 401]]

    (ii) Turkey Creek--2.7 mi (4.3 km) of creek extending from the 
confluence with Aravaipa Creek at Township 6 South, Range 19 East, 
section 19 upstream to the confluence with Oak Grove Canyon at Township 
6 South, Range 19 East, section 32. Land ownership: Bureau of Land 
Management.
    (iii) Deer Creek--2.3 mi (3.6 km) of creek extending from the 
confluence with Aravaipa Creek at Township 6 South, Range 18 East, 
section 14 upstream to the boundary of the Aravaipa Wilderness at 
Township 6 South, Range 19 East, section 18. Land ownership: Bureau of 
Land Management.
    (iv) Note: Map of Complex 3 (Aravaipa Creek) of loach minnow 
critical habitat (Map 3) follows:

[[Page 402]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR21MR07.002

    (8) Complex 4--San Francisco and Blue Rivers, Pinal and Graham 
Counties, Arizona, and Catron County, New Mexico.
    (i) Eagle Creek--17.7 mi (28.5 km) of creek extending from the 
Phelps--Dodge Diversion Dam at Township 4 South, Range 28 East, section 
23 upstream to the confluence of Dry Prong and East Eagle Creeks at 
Township 2 North, Range 28 East, section 29, excluding portions of the 
San Carlos Reservation. Land ownership: U.S. Forest Service (Apache--
Sitgreaves National Forest), and private lands.

[[Page 403]]

    (ii) San Francisco River--126.5 mi (203.5 km) of river extending 
from the confluence with the Gila River at Township 5 South, Range 29 
East, section 21 upstream to the mouth of The Box, a canyon above the 
town of Reserve, at Township 6 South, Range 19 West, section 2. Land 
ownership: Bureau of Land Management, U.S. Forest Service (Apache-
Sitgreaves National Forest), State, and private lands in Arizona, and 
U.S. Forest Service (Gila National Forest) and private lands in New 
Mexico.
    (iii) Tularosa River--18.6 mi (30.0 km) of river extending from the 
confluence with the San Francisco River at Township 7 South, Range 19 
West, section 23 upstream to the town of Cruzville at Township 6 South, 
Range 18 West, section 12. Land ownership: U.S. Forest Service (Gila 
National Forest) and private lands.
    (iv) Negrito Creek--4.2 mi (6.8 km) of creek extending from the 
confluence with the Tularosa River at Township 7 South, Range 18 West, 
section 19 upstream to the confluence with Cerco Canyon at Township 7 
South, Range 18 West, section 21. Land ownership: U.S. Forest Service 
(Gila National Forest), and private lands.
    (v) Whitewater Creek--1.1 mi (1.8 km) of creek extending from the 
confluence with the San Francisco River at Township 11 South, Range 20 
West, section 27 upstream to the confluence with the Little Whitewater 
Creek at Township 11 South, Range 20 West, section 23. Land ownership: 
private lands.
    (vi) Blue River--51.1 mi (82.2 km) of river extending from the 
confluence with the San Francisco River at Township 2 South, Range 31 
East, section 31 upstream to the confluence of Campbell Blue and Dry 
Blue Creeks at Township 6 South, Range 20 West, section 6. Land 
ownership: U.S. Forest Service (Apache-Sitgreaves National Forest) and 
private lands in Arizona; U.S. Forest Service (Gila National Forest) in 
New Mexico.
    (vii) Campbell Blue Creek--8.1 mi (13.1 km) of creek extending from 
the confluence of Dry Blue and Campbell Blue Creeks at Township 6 South, 
Range 20 West, section 6 in New Mexico upstream to the confluence with 
Coleman Canyon at Township 4 North, Range 31 East, section 32 in 
Arizona. Land ownership: U.S. Forest Service (Apache-Sitgreaves National 
Forest) and private lands in Arizona; U.S. Forest Service (Gila National 
Forest) in New Mexico.
    (viii) Dry Blue Creek--3.0 mile (4.8 km) of creek extending from the 
confluence with Campbell Blue Creek at Township 7 South, Range 21 West, 
section 6 upstream to the confluence with Pace Creek at Township 6 
South, Range 21 West, section 28. Land ownership: U.S. Forest Service 
(Gila National Forest).
    (ix) Pace Creek--0.8 mile (1.2 km) of creek extending from the 
confluence with Dry Blue Creek at Township 6 South, Range 21 West, 
section 28 upstream to a barrier falls at Township 6 South, Range 21 
West, section 29. Land ownership: U.S. Forest Service (Gila National 
Forest).
    (x) Frieborn Creek--1.1 mi (1.8 km) of creek extending from the 
confluence with Dry Blue Creek at Township 7 South, Range 21 West, 
section 6 upstream to an unnamed tributary at Township 7 South, range 21 
West, section 8. Land ownership: U.S. Forest Service (Gila National 
Forest).
    (xi) Little Blue Creek--2.8 mi (4.5 km) of creek extending from the 
confluence with the Blue River at Township 1 South, range 31 East, 
section 5 upstream to the mouth of a canyon at Township 1 North, Range 
31 East, section 29. Land ownership: U.S. Forest Service (Apache-
Sitgreaves National Forest).
    (xii) Note: Map of Complex 4 (San Francisco and Blue Rivers) of 
loach minnow critical habitat (Map 4) follows:

[[Page 404]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR21MR07.003

    (9) Complex 5--Upper Gila River Complex, Catron, Grant, and Hidalgo 
Counties, New Mexico.
    (i) Upper Gila River--94.9 mi (152.7 km) of river extending from the 
confluence with Moore Canyon (near the Arizona/New Mexico border) at 
Township 18 South, Range 21 West, section 32 upstream to the confluence 
of the East and West Forks of the Gila River at Township 13 South, Range 
13 West, section 8. Land ownership: Bureau of Land Management, U.S. 
Forest Service (Gila National Forest), State, and private lands.

[[Page 405]]

    (ii) East Fork Gila River--26.1 mi (42.0 km) of river extending from 
the confluence with the West Fork Gila River at Township 11 South, Range 
12 West, section 17 upstream to the confluence of Beaver and Taylor 
creeks at Township 13 South, Range 13 West, section 8. Land ownership: 
U.S. Forest Service (Gila National Forest) and private lands.
    (iii) Middle Fork Gila River--11.9 mi (19.1 km) of river extending 
from the confluence with the West Fork Gila River at Township 12 South, 
Range 14 West, section 25 upstream to the confluence with Brothers West 
Canyon at Township 11 South, Range 14 West, section 33. Land ownership: 
U.S. Forest Service (Gila National Forest) and private lands.
    (iv) West Fork Gila River--7.7 mi (12.4 km) of river extending from 
the confluence with the East Fork Gila River at Township 13 South, Range 
13 West, section 8 upstream to the confluence with EE Canyon at Township 
12 South, Range 14 West, section 22. Land ownership: U.S. Forest Service 
(Gila National Forest), National Park Service, and private lands.
    (v) Note: Map of Complex 5 (Upper Gila River Complex) of loach 
minnow critical habitat (Map 5) follows:

[[Page 406]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR21MR07.004

             Rio Grande Silvery Minnow (Hybognathus amarus)

    (1) Designated critical habitat is depicted for Socorro, Valencia, 
Bernalillo, and Sandoval Counties, New Mexico, on the map and as 
described below.
    (2) For each river reach, the upstream and downstream boundaries are 
described below. Critical habitat includes the stream channels within 
the identified river reaches and areas within these reaches included 
within the existing levees, or if no levees are

[[Page 407]]

present, then within a lateral distance of 300 ft (91.4 m) on each side 
of the river width at bankfull stage. Bankfull stage is the flow at 
which water begins to leave the channel and move into the floodplain. 
The bankfull stage is not defined by water, and can be determined by 
visual or physical indicators, including: The top of the highest 
depositional features (e.g., point bars), staining of rocks, exposed 
root hairs, and other features.
    (3) Within these areas the primary constituent elements include, but 
are not limited to, those habitat components that are essential for the 
primary biological needs of foraging, sheltering, and reproduction. 
These elements include the following:
    (i) A hydrologic regime that provides sufficient flowing water with 
low to moderate currents capable of forming and maintaining a diversity 
of aquatic habitats, such as, but not limited to the following: 
Backwaters (a body of water connected to the main channel, but with no 
appreciable flow), shallow side channels, pools (that portion of the 
river that is deep with relatively little velocity compared to the rest 
of the channel), eddies (a pool with water moving opposite to that in 
the river channel), and runs (flowing water in the river channel without 
obstructions) of varying depth and velocity--all of which are necessary 
for each of the particular silvery minnow life-history stages in 
appropriate seasons (e.g., the silvery minnow requires habitat with 
sufficient flows from early spring (March) to early summer (June) to 
trigger spawning, flows in the summer (June) and fall (October) that do 
not increase prolonged periods of low or no flow, and a relatively 
constant winter flow (November through February));
    (ii) The presence of eddies created by debris piles, pools, or 
backwaters, or other refuge habitat (e.g., connected oxbows or braided 
channels) within unimpounded stretches of flowing water of sufficient 
length (i.e., river miles) that provide a variation of habitats with a 
wide range of depth and velocities;
    (iii) Substrates of predominantly sand or silt; and
    (iv) Water of sufficient quality to maintain natural, daily, and 
seasonally variable water temperatures in the approximate range of 
greater than 1 [deg]C (35 [deg]F) and less than 30 [deg]C (85 [deg]F) 
and reduce degraded conditions (e.g., decreased dissolved oxygen, 
increased pH).
    (4) The Pueblo lands of Santo Domingo, Santa Ana, Sandia, and Isleta 
are not designated.
    (5) Designated critical habitat is depicted on the following map for 
the middle Rio Grande, which includes the area from Cochiti Reservoir 
downstream to the utility line crossing the Rio Grande just east of the 
Bosque Well as demarcated on USGS Paraje Well 7.5 minute quadrangle 
(1980), with the Universal Transverse Mercator (UTM) coordinates of UTM 
Zone 13: 311474 E, 3719722 N (as referenced with the 1927 North American 
Datum (NAD27)), Sandoval, Bernalillo, Valencia, and Socorro Counties, 
New Mexico. The designation also includes the upper section of the 
tributary Jemez River from Jemez Canyon Dam to the upstream boundary of 
Santa Ana Pueblo, Sandoval County. The river reaches in the middle Rio 
Grande include:
    (i) Jemez Canyon Reach--1 mi (1.6 km) of the Jemez River immediately 
downstream of Jemez Canyon Dam to the upstream boundary Santa Ana 
Pueblo;
    (ii) Cochiti Diversion Dam to Angostura Diversion Dam (Cochiti 
Reach)--21 mi (34 km) of river immediately downstream of Cochiti 
Reservoir to the Angostura Diversion Dam;
    (iii) Angostura Diversion Dam to Isleta Diversion Dam (Angostura 
Reach)--38 mi (61 km) of river immediately downstream of the Angostura 
Diversion Dam to the Isleta Diversion Dam;
    (iv) Isleta Diversion Dam to San Acacia Diversion Dam (Isleta 
Reach)--56 mi (90 km) of river immediately downstream of the Isleta 
Diversion Dam to the San Acacia Diversion Dam; and
    (v) San Acacia Diversion Dam to the Elephant Butte Dam (San Acacia 
Reach)--92 mi (147 km) of river immediately downstream of the San Acacia 
Diversion Dam to the utility line crossing the Rio Grande just east of 
the Bosque Well demarcated on USGS Paraje Well 7.5 minute quadrangle 
(1980) with UTM coordinates of UTM Zone 13: 311474 E, 3719722 N.
    (vi) Map Follows:

[[Page 408]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR19FE03.000

    (6) This designation does not include the ephemeral or perennial 
irrigation canals and ditches outside of natural stream channels, 
including the low flow conveyance channel that is adjacent to a portion 
of the river reach within the middle Rio Grande (i.e., downstream of the 
southern boundary of Bosque del Apache National Wildlife Refuge to the 
Elephant Butte Dam).

[[Page 409]]

    (7) Lands located within the exterior boundaries of the critical 
habitat designation (i.e., within the existing levees, or if no levees 
are present, then within a lateral distance of 300 ft (91.4 m) on each 
side of the stream width at bankfull discharge) that are not considered 
critical habitat and are therefore excluded by definition, include: 
Developed flood control facilities; existing paved roads; bridges; 
parking lots; dikes; levees; diversion structures; railroad tracks; 
railroad trestles; water diversion and irrigation canals outside of 
natural stream channels; the low flow conveyance channel; active gravel 
pits; cultivated agricultural land; and residential, commercial, and 
industrial developments.

     Ash Meadows Amargosa Pupfish (Cyprinodon nevadensis mionectes)

    Nevada, Nye County: Each of the following springs and outflows plus 
surrounding land areas for a distance of 50 meters (164 feet) from these 
springs and ouflows:
    Fairbanks Spring and its outflow to the boundary between Sections 9 
and 10, T17S, R50E.
    Rogers Spring and its outflows to the boundary between Sections 15 
and 16, T17S, R50E.
    Longstreet Spring and its outflow to the boundary between Sections 
15 and 22, T17S, R50E.
    Three unnamed springs in the northwest corner of Section 23, T17S, 
R50E, and each of their outflows for a distance of 75 meters (246 feet) 
from the spring.
    Crystal Pool and its outflow for a distance of 400 meters (1,312 
feet) from the pool.
    Bradford Springs in Section 11, T18S, R50E, and their outflows for a 
distance of 300 meters (984 feet) from the springs.
    Jack Rabbit Spring and its outflow flowing southwest to the boundary 
between Section 24, T18S, R50E and Section 19, T18S, R51E.
    Big Spring and its outflow to the boundary between Section 19, T18S, 
R51E and Section 24, T18S, R50E.
    Point of Rocks Springs and their entire outflows within Section 7, 
T18S, R51E.
    Note: Map follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.115
    
    Known constituent elements include warm-water springs and their 
outflows and surrounding land areas that provide vegetation for cover 
and habitat for insects and other invertebrates on which this species 
feeds.

                 Desert Pupfish (Cyprinodon macularius)

    Arizona: Pima County. 1. Quitobaquito Spring, approximately 25 miles 
WNW Lukeville, Arizona in Organ Pipe Cactus National Monument, in T17S 
R8N; and a 100-foot riparian buffer zone around the spring.
    Note: Map follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.116
    
California: Imperial County.
    1. San Felipe Creek. Approximately 8\1/2\ stream miles and 100 feet 
on either side of San Felipe Creek or the stream channel commencing at 
the State Highway 86 bridge crossing (approximately \1/4\ mile south of

[[Page 410]]

intersection of Hwy. 78 and Hwy. 86) upstream to the eastern boundary of 
Section 31, T12S; R10E; including those areas of the stream channel in: 
T12S; R11E; Section 17, 18, and 19; T12S; R10E; Section 22, 23, 24, 26, 
27, 28, 29, and 32.
    2. Carrizo Wash. Approximately 1\3/4\ stream miles and 100 feet on 
either side of or the stream channel commencing at the confluence of 
Carrizo Wash with San Felipe Creek upstream to the southern boundary of 
N\1/2\ Section 33; T12S; R10E; including those areas of the stream 
channel in T12S; R10E; Section 27, 28, and N\1/2\ Section 33.
    3. Fish Creek Wash. Approximately three-fourths of one stream mile 
and 100 feet on either side of the stream channel from the confluence of 
Fish Creek Wash with San Felipe Creek upstream to the southern boundary 
of N\1/2\ Section 32; T12S; R10E; including those areas of the stream 
channel in T12S; R10E; Section 29 and N\1/2\ Section 32.
    Note: Map follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.117
    
Constituent elements for all four areas designated as critical habitat 
include clean unpolluted water that is relatively free of exotic 
organisms, especially exotic fishes, in small slow-moving desert streams 
and spring pools with marshy backwater areas.

                Leon Springs Pupfish (Cyprindon bovinus)

    Texas, Pecos County. Diamond Y Spring and its outflow stream, Loen 
Creek; from the head of Diamond Y Spring downstream in Leon Creek to a 
point 1 mile northeast of the Texas Highway 18 crossing, approximately 
10 miles north of Fort Stockton.
    Note: Map follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.118
    
                Arkansas River Shiner (Notropis girardi)

    (1) Critical habitat units are depicted for Clark, Comanche, Meade, 
and Seward Counties, Kansas; and Beaver, Blaine, Caddo, Canadian, 
Cleveland, Custer, Grady, Harper, Hughes, Kingfisher, Logan, Major, 
McClain, McIntosh, Pittsburg, Pontotoc, Pottawatomie, Seminole, Woods 
and Woodward Counties, Oklahoma, on the maps and as described below.
    (2) Critical habitat includes the stream channels within the 
identified stream reaches indicated on the map below, and includes a 
lateral distance of 91.4 m (300 ft) on each side of the stream width at 
bankfull discharge. Bankfull discharge is the flow at which water begins 
to leave the channel and move into the floodplain and generally occurs 
with a frequency of every 1 to 2 years.
    (3) Within these areas, the primary constituent elements include, 
but are not limited to, those habitat components that are essential for 
the primary biological needs of foraging, sheltering, and reproduction. 
These elements include the following--(i) a natural, unregulated 
hydrologic regime complete with episodes of flood and drought or, if 
flows are modified or regulated, a hydrologic regime characterized by 
the duration, magnitude, and frequency of flow events capable of forming 
and maintaining channel and instream habitat necessary for particular 
Arkansas River shiner life-stages in appropriate seasons; (ii) a 
complex, braided channel with pool, riffle (shallow area in a streambed 
causing ripples), run, and backwater components that provide a suitable 
variety of depths and current velocities in appropriate seasons; (iii) a 
suitable

[[Page 411]]

unimpounded stretch of flowing water of sufficient length to allow 
hatching and development of the larvae; (iv) a river bed of 
predominantly sand, with some patches of gravel and cobble; (v) water 
quality characterized by low concentrations of contaminants and natural, 
daily and seasonally variable temperature, turbidity, conductivity, 
dissolved oxygen, and pH; (vi) suitable reaches of aquatic habitat, as 
defined by primary constituent elements (i) through (v) above, and 
adjacent riparian habitat sufficient to support an abundant terrestrial, 
semiaquatic, and aquatic invertebrate food base; and (vii) few or no 
predatory or competitive non-native fish species present.
    (4) Developed areas, such as buildings, roads, bridges, parking 
lots, railroad tracks, other paved areas, and the lands that support 
these features are excluded from this designation. They are not 
designated as critical habitat and Federal actions limited to these 
areas would not trigger a section 7 consultation, unless they affect 
protected or restricted habitat and one or more of the primary 
constituent elements in adjacent critical habitat.
    (5) Kansas (Sixth Principal Meridian (SPM)) and Oklahoma (Indian 
Meridian (IM)): Areas of land and water as follows (physical features 
were identified using USGS 7.5[min] quadrangle maps; river reach 
distances were derived from digital data obtained from USGS National 
Atlas data set for river reaches, roads, and county boundaries.
    (6) Critical habitat units for the Arkansas River shiner are 
described below.
    (i) Unit 1b. Canadian River--approximately 396 km (246 mi), 
extending from the State Highway 33 bridge near Thomas, Oklahoma (IM 
T.15 N., R. 14 W., SW\1/4\ SE\1/4\ Sec. 15) downstream to Indian Nation 
Turnpike bridge northwest of McAlester, Oklahoma (IM T.8N., R.13E., 
SE\1/4\ SW\1/4\ SE\1/4\ Sec. 23).
    (ii) Unit 3. Cimarron River--approximately 460 km (286 mi), 
extending from U.S. Highway 54 bridge in Seward County, Kansas (SPM, T. 
33 S., R. 32 W., Sec. 25) downstream to U.S. Highway 77 bridge in Logan 
County, Oklahoma (IM, T. 17 N., R. 2 W., Sec. 29).
    (iii) Note: Map of critical habitat units follows:

[[Page 412]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR13OC05.000

                  Beautiful Shiner (Notropis formosus)

    Arizona, Cochise County. All aquatic habitats of San Bernardino NWR 
in S\1/2\ Sec. 11; Sec. 14; S\1/2\ and NE\1/4\ Sec. 15; T24S, R30E. 
Known constituent elements include small permanent streams with riffles, 
or intermittent creeks with pools and riffles in the Rio Yaqui drainage 
with clean unpolluted water. These waters should be free of introduced 
exotic fishes.
    Note: Map follows:

[[Page 413]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.119

                Cape Fear Shiner (Notropis mekistocholas)

    (1) North Carolina. Chatham County. Approximately 4.1 river miles of 
the Rocky River from North Carolina State Highway 902 Bridge downstream 
to Chatham County Road 1010 Bridge;
    (2) North Carolina. Chatham and Lee Counties. Approximately 0.5 
river mile of Bear Creek, from Chatham County Road 2156 Bridge 
downstream to the Rocky River, then downstream in the Rocky River 
(approximately 4.2 river miles) to the Deep River, then downstream in 
the Deep River (approximately 2.6 river miles) to a point 0.3 river mile 
below the Moncure, North Carolina, U.S. Geological Survey Gaging 
Station; and
    (3) North Carolina. Randolph and Moore Counties. Approximately 1.5 
river miles of Fork Creek, from a point 0.1 river mile upstream of 
Randolph County Road 2873 Bridge downstream to the Deep River then 
downstream approximately 4.1 river miles of the Deep River in Randolph 
and Moore Counties, North Carolina, to a point 2.5 river miles below 
Moore County Road 1456 Bridge.
    Note: Map follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.120
    

[[Page 414]]



           Pecos Bluntnose Shiner (Notropis simus pecosensis).

    1. New Mexico: De Baca and Chaves Counties. Pecos River from point 
at the north boundary of NE \1/4\ Sec. 2; T1N; R26E (approximately 10 
mi. (16 km.) south of Fort Sumner) extending downstream approximately 64 
mi. (103 km.) to a point at the south boundary SW \1/4\ Sec. 35; T5S; 
R25E.
    Note: Map follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.121
    
    2. New Mexico. Chaves and Eddy Counties. Pecos River from the west 
boundary NW \1/4\ Sec. 7; T14S; R27E, extending downstream approximately 
37 mi. (60 km.) to the NW \1/4\ Sec. 18; T17S; R27E (to the U.S. highway 
82 bridge near Artesia).
    Note: Map follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.122
    
Constituent elements include clean, permanent water; a main river 
channel habitat with sandy substrate; and a low velocity flow.

                     Topeka Shiner (Notropis topeka)

    (1) Critical habitat is depicted for Calhoun, Carroll, Dallas, 
Greene, Hamilton, Lyon, Osceola, Sac, Webster, and Wright Counties, 
Iowa; Lincoln, Murray, Nobles, Pipestone, and Rock Counties, Minnesota; 
and Madison County, Nebraska, on the maps and as described below.
    (2) Critical habitat includes all stream channels up to the bankfull 
discharge elevation. Additionally, in Iowa and Minnesota, the off-
channel, side-channel, and oxbow pools at elevations at or below the 
bankfull discharge elevation. Bankfull discharge is the flow at which 
water begins to leave the channel and move into the floodplain and 
generally occurs with a frequency of every 1 to 2 years.
    (3) The primary constituent elements of critical habitat for the 
Topeka shiner consist of:
    (i) Streams most often with permanent flow, but that can become 
intermittent during dry periods;

[[Page 415]]

    (ii) Side-channel pools and oxbows either seasonally connected to a 
stream or maintained by groundwater inputs, at a surface elevation equal 
to or lower than the bank-full discharge stream elevation. The bankfull 
discharge is the flow at which water begins leaving the channel and 
flowing into the floodplain; this level is generally attained every 1 to 
2 years. Bankfull discharge, while a function of the size of the stream, 
is a fairly constant feature related to the formation, maintenance, and 
dimensions of the stream channel;
    (iii) Streams and side-channel pools with water quality necessary 
for unimpaired behavior, growth, and viability of all life stages. (The 
water quality components include--temperature, turbidity, conductivity, 
salinity, dissolved oxygen, pH, chemical contaminants, and other 
chemical characteristics.);
    (iv) Living and spawning areas for adult Topeka shiner with pools or 
runs with water velocities less than 0.5 meters/second (approx. 20 
inches/second) and depths ranging from 0.1-2.0 meters (approx. 4-80 
inches);
    (v) Living areas for juvenile Topeka shiner with water velocities 
less than 0.5 meters/second (approx. 20 inches/second) with depths less 
than 0.25 meters (approx. 10 inches) and moderate amounts of instream 
aquatic cover, such as woody debris, overhanging terrestrial vegetation, 
and aquatic plants;
    (vi) Sand, gravel, cobble, and silt substrates with amounts of fine 
sediment and substrate embeddedness that allow for nest building and 
maintenance of nests and eggs by native Lepomis sunfishes (green 
sunfish, orangespotted sunfish, longear sunfish) and Topeka shiner as 
necessary for reproduction, unimpaired behavior, growth, and viability 
of all life stages;
    (vii) An adequate terrestrial, semiaquatic, and aquatic invertebrate 
food base that allows for unimpaired growth, reproduction, and survival 
of all life stages;
    (viii) A hydrologic regime capable of forming, maintaining, or 
restoring the flow periodicity, channel morphology, fish community 
composition, off-channel habitats, and habitat components described in 
the other primary constituent elements; and
    (ix) Few or no nonnative predatory or nonnative competitive species 
present.

                       Critical Habitat Map Units

    (4) Critical habitat was identified using the Fifth Principal 
Meridian in Iowa and Minnesota; the Sixth Principal Meridian in 
Nebraska; U.S. Geological Survey 30- x 60-minute (1:100,000) quadrangle 
maps; the National Hydrography Dataset (1:100,000) for hydrology; and 
Digital Line Graph (1:2,000,000) for county and State boundaries.
    (5) Unit 1: North Raccoon River Watershed--Calhoun, Carroll, Dallas, 
Greene, Sac and Webster Counties, Iowa.
    (i) Reach 1a. Indian Creek from its confluence with the North 
Raccoon River (T87N, R36W, Sec. 24), upstream through T87N, R36W, Sec. 
29.
    (ii) Reach 1b. Tributary to Indian Creek (Ditch 57), from their 
confluence (T87N, R36W, Sec. 23), upstream to the confluence with the 
outlet creek from Black Hawk Lake (T86N, R36W, Sec. 1).
    (iii) Reach 1c. Outlet Creek from Black Hawk Lake from its 
confluence with Ditch 57 (T86N, R36W, Sec. 1), upstream to lake outlet 
(T87N, R35W, Sec. 35).
    (iv) Reach 2a. Camp Creek from its confluence with the North Raccoon 
River (T86N, R34W, Sec. 7), upstream through T87N, R34W, Sec. 8.
    (v) Reach 2b. West Fork Camp Creek from its confluence with Camp 
Creek (T87N, R34W, Sec. 8), upstream through T88N, R34W, Sec. 32.
    (vi) Reach 3. Prairie Creek from its confluence with the North 
Raccoon River (T86N, R34W, Sec. 16), upstream through T87N, R34W, Sec. 
35.
    (vii) Reach 4. Lake Creek from its confluence with the North Raccoon 
River (T86N, R34W, Sec. 23), upstream through T87N, R33W, Sec. 25.
    (viii) Reach 5. Purgatory Creek from its confluence with the North 
Raccoon River (T84N, R33W, Sec. 11), upstream through T86N, R32W, Sec. 
17.
    (ix) Reach 6a. Cedar Creek from its confluence with the North 
Raccoon River (T85N, R32W, Sec. 33), upstream to the confluence of West 
Cedar Creek and East Cedar Creek (T87N, R31W, Sec. 31).
    (x) Reach 6b. West Cedar Creek from its confluence with East Cedar 
Creek (T87N, R31W, Sec. 31), upstream to a point 2,000 feet west of the 
east section line of T87N, R31W, Sec. 18.
    (xi) Reach 6c. East Cedar Creek from its confluence with West Cedar 
Creek (T87N, R31W, Sec. 31), upstream through T87N, R31W, Sec. 9.
    (xii) Reach 7. Short Creek from its confluence with the North 
Raccoon River (T84N, R31W, Sec. 33), upstream through T84N, R31W, Sec. 
28.
    (xiii) Reach 8. Hardin Creek from its confluence with the North 
Raccoon River (T83N, R30W, Sec. 23), upstream through T85N, R31W, Sec. 
27.
    (xiv) Reach 9a. Buttrick Creek from its confluence with the North 
Raccoon River (T83N, R30W, Sec. 26), upstream to the confluence of West 
Buttrick Creek and East Buttrick Creek (T84N, R30W, Sec. 25).
    (xv) Reach 9b. West Buttrick Creek, from its confluence with East 
Buttrick Creek (T84N, R30W, Sec. 25), upstream through T86N, R30W, Sec. 
3.
    (xvi) Reach 9c. East Buttrick Creek, from its confluence with West 
Buttrick Creek

[[Page 416]]

(T84N, R30W, Sec. 25), upstream through T85N, R29W, Sec. 20.
    (xvii) Reach 10a. Elm Branch from its confluence with the North 
Raccoon River (T81N, R28W, Sec. 28), upstream to its confluence with 
Swan Lake Branch T81N, R28W, Sec. 28.
    (xviii) Reach 10b. Swan Lake Branch from its confluence with Elm 
Branch (T81N, R28W, Sec. 28), upstream through T80N, R28W, Sec. 4.
    (xix) Reach 11. Off-channel and side-channel pools (that meet the 
previously described criteria) adjacent to the North Raccoon River from 
U.S. Highway 6 (T79N, R27W, Sec. 32), upstream to U.S. Highway 20 (T88N, 
R36W, Sec. 24).
    (6) Note: Unit 1 (Map 1) follows.

[[Page 417]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR25MR05.114

    (7) Unit 2: Boone River Watershed--Wright and Hamilton Counties, 
Iowa.
    (i) Reach 12. Eagle Creek from its confluence with the Boone River 
(T89N, R25W, Sec. 6), upstream through T91N, R25W, Sec. 30.

                      Ditch 3 and Ditch 19 Complex

    (ii) Reach 13a. Ditch 3 from its confluence with the Boone River 
(T91N, R26W, Sec. 32), upstream through T91N, R26W, Sec. 30.

[[Page 418]]

    (iii) Reach 13b. Ditch 19 from its confluence with Ditch 3 (T91N, 
R26W, Sec. 31), upstream through T91N, R26W, Sec. 31.
    (8) Note: Unit 2 (Map 2) follows.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR25MR05.115
    
    (9) Unit 3: Rock River Watershed--Lyon and Osceola Counties, Iowa.

                           Rock River Complex

    (i) Reach 14. Rock River from its confluence with Kanaranzi Creek 
(T100N, R45W,

[[Page 419]]

Sec. 28), upstream to the Iowa/Minnesota State border (T100N, R45W, Sec. 
8).
    (ii) Reach 15. Kanaranzi Creek from its confluence with the Rock 
River (T100N, R45W, Sec. 28), upstream to the Iowa/Minnesota State 
border (T100N, R45W, Sec. 11).

                        Little Rock River Complex

    (iii) Reach 16. Little Rock River from State Highway 9 (T100N, R43W, 
Sec. 34), upstream to the Iowa/Minnesota State border (T100N, R42W, Sec. 
7).
    (10) Note: Unit 3 (Map 3) follows.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR25MR05.116
    
    (11) Unit 4: Big Sioux River Watershed--Lincoln, Pipestone and Rock, 
Counties, Minnesota; and Rock River Watershed--Murray, Nobles, Pipestone 
and Rock Counties, Minnesota.

                          Medary Creek Complex

    (i) Reach 1a. Medary Creek from the Minnesota/South Dakota State 
border (T109N, R47W, Sec. 13), upstream through T110N, R46W, Sec. 21.
    (ii) Reach 1b. Unnamed tributary to Medary Creek, from their 
confluence (T109N,

[[Page 420]]

R46W, Sec. 18), upstream through T110N, R46W, Sec. 30.

                         Flandreau Creek Complex

    (iii) Reach 2a. Flandreau Creek from the Minnesota/South Dakota 
State border (T107N, R47W, Sec. 14), upstream through T109N, R45W, Sec. 
31.
    (iv) Reach 2b. Unnamed tributary to Flandreau Creek, from their 
confluence (T108N, R46W, Sec. 11), upstream through T108N, R45W, Sec. 6.
    (v) Reach 2c. East Branch Flandreau Creek from its confluence with 
Flandreau Creek (T108N, R46W, Sec. 14), upstream through T108N, R45W, 
Sec. 4.
    (vi) Reach 2d. Willow Creek from its confluence with Flandreau Creek 
(T107N, R46W, Sec. 6), upstream through T108N, R46W, Sec. 3.

                Split Rock/Pipestone/Beaver Creek Complex

    (vii) Reach 3a. Pipestone Creek from the Minnesota/South Dakota 
State border (T106N, R47W, Sec. 23), upstream through T106N, R46W, Sec. 
1.
    (viii) Reach 3b. Unnamed tributary to Pipestone Creek, from their 
confluence (T106N, R47W, Sec. 24), upstream through T106N, R46W, Sec. 
19.
    (ix) Reach 3c. Unnamed tributary to Pipestone Creek, from the 
Minnesota/South Dakota State border (T105N, R47W, Sec. 2), upstream 
through T105N, R46W, Sec. 1.
    (x) Reach 3d. North Branch Pipestone Creek from its confluence with 
Pipestone Creek (T106N, R46W, Sec. 5), upstream through T107N, R45W, 
Sec. 4.
    (xi) Reach 3e. Unnamed tributary to North Branch Pipestone Creek, 
from their confluence (T107N, R45W, Sec. 4), upstream through T108N, 
R45W, Sec. 23.
    (xii) Reach 3f. Split Rock Creek from the Minnesota/South Dakota 
State border (T103N, R47W, Sec. 2), upstream to Split Rock Lake Outlet 
(T105N, R46W, Sec. 22).
    (xiii) Reach 3g. Unnamed tributary to Split Rock Creek from the 
Minnesota/South Dakota State border (T103N, R47W, Sec. 23), upstream 
through T103N, R46W, Sec. 29.
    (xiv) Reach 3h. Unnamed tributary to Split Rock Creek, from their 
confluence (T103N, R47W, Sec. 2), upstream through T103N, R46W, Sec. 8.
    (xv) Reach 3i. Unnamed tributary to Split Rock Creek, from their 
confluence (T104N, R47W, Sec. 25), upstream through T104N, R46W, Sec. 
19.
    (xvi) Reach 3j. Pipestone Creek from its confluence with Split Rock 
Creek (T104N, R47W, Sec. 23), upstream to the Minnesota/South Dakota 
State border T104N, R47W, Sec. 22.
    (xvii) Reach 3k. Unnamed tributary to Split Rock Creek, from their 
confluence (T104N, R46W, Sec. 6), upstream through T105N, R46W, Sec. 36.
    (xviii) Reach 3l. Split Rock Creek from the headwater of Split Rock 
Lake (T105N, R46W, Sec. 15), upstream through T106N, R46W, Sec. 35.
    (xix) Reach 3m. Unnamed tributary to Split Rock Creek, from their 
confluence (T105N, R46W, Sec. 3), upstream through T105N, R46W, Sec. 2.
    (xx) Reach 3n. Beaver Creek from the Minnesota/South Dakota State 
border (T102N, R47W, Sec. 34), upstream through T104N, R45W, Sec. 20.
    (xxi) Reach 3o. Springwater Creek from the Minnesota/South Dakota 
border (T102N, R47W, Sec. 34), upstream through T102N, R46W, Sec. 6.
    (xxii) Reach 3p. Little Beaver Creek from its confluence with Beaver 
Creek (T102N, R46W, Sec. 12), upstream through T103N, R45W, Sec. 9.
    (xxiii) Reach 3q. Unnamed tributary to Beaver Creek, from their 
confluence (T102N, R46W, Sec. 1), upstream through T103N, R46W, Sec. 35.
    (xxiv) Reach 3r. Unnamed tributary to Beaver Creek, from their 
confluence (T103N, R45W, Sec. 18), upstream through T104N, R46W, Sec. 
36.

                           Rock River Complex

    (xxv) Reach 4a. Rock River from the Minnesota/Iowa State border 
(T101N, R45W, Sec. 36), upstream through T107N, R44W, Sec. 7.
    (xxvi) Reach 4b. Kanaranzi Creek from the Minnesota/Iowa State 
border (T101N, R44W, Sec. 33), upstream through T103N, R42W, Sec. 7).
    (xxvii) Reach 4c. Norwegian Creek from its confluence with Kanaranzi 
Creek (T101N, R44W, Sec. 25), upstream through T101N, R43W, Sec. 21.
    (xxviii) Reach 4d. Unnamed tributary to Norwegian Creek, from their 
confluence (T101N, R44W, Sec. 20), upstream through T101N, R44W, Sec. 
16.
    (xxix) Reach 4e. East Branch Kanaranzi Creek from its confluence 
with Kanaranzi Creek (T102N, R42W, Sec. 5), upstream through T102N, 
R41W, Sec. 5.
    (xxx) Reach 4f. Unnamed tributary to East Branch Kanaranzi Creek, 
from their confluence (T102N, R42W, Sec. 9), upstream through T102N, 
R42W, Sec. 22.
    (xxxi) Reach 4g. Unnamed tributary to East Branch Kanaranzi Creek, 
from their confluence (T102N, R42W, Sec. 5), upstream through T102N, 
R42W, Sec. 5.
    (xxxii) Reach 4h. Unnamed tributary to Kanaranzi Creek, from their 
confluence (T102N, R43W, Sec. 31), upstream through T102N, R43W, Sec. 
27.
    (xxxiii) Reach 4i. Ash Creek from its confluence with the Rock River 
(T101N, R45W, Sec. 24), upstream through T101N, R45W, Sec. 14.

[[Page 421]]

    (xxxiv) Reach 4j. Elk Creek from its confluence with the Rock River 
(T102N, R45W, Sec. 36), upstream through T103N, R43W, Sec. 22.
    (xxxv) Reach 4k. Unnamed tributary to Elk Creek, from their 
confluence (T102N, R44W, Sec. 16), upstream through T102N, R44W, Sec. 9.
    (xxxvi) Reach 4l. Champepadan Creek from its confluence with the 
Rock River (T103N, R44W, Sec. 29), upstream through T104N, R43W, Sec. 
14.
    (xxxvii) Reach 4m. Unnamed tributary to Champepadan Creek, from 
their confluence (T104N, R43W, Sec. 14), upstream through T104N, R43W, 
Sec. 13.
    (xxxviii) Reach 4n. Unnamed tributary to Champepadan Creek, from 
their confluence (T103N, R44W, Sec. 23), upstream through T103N, R44W, 
Sec. 24.
    (xxxix) Reach 4o. Unnamed tributary to Champepadan Creek, from their 
confluence (T103N, R44W, Sec. 23), upstream through T103N, R44W, Sec. 
12.
    (xl) Reach 4p. Unnamed tributary to the Rock River, from their 
confluence (T103N, R44W, Sec. 17), upstream through T104N, R44W, Sec. 
26.
    (xli) Reach 4q. Mound Creek from its confluence with the Rock River 
(T103N, R44W, Sec. 30), upstream through T104N, R45W, Sec. 35.
    (xlii) Reach 4r. Unnamed tributary to the Rock River, from their 
confluence (T103N, R44W, Sec. 8), upstream through T104N, R45W, Sec. 13.
    (xliii) Reach 4s. Unnamed tributary to the Rock River, from their 
confluence (T104N, R44W, Sec. 28), upstream through T104N, R44W, Sec. 
11.
    (xliv) Reach 4t. Unnamed tributary to the Rock River, from their 
confluence (T104N, R44W, Sec. 16), upstream through T104N, R44W, Sec. 
10.
    (xlv) Reach 4u. Poplar Creek from its confluence with the Rock River 
(T104N, R44W, Sec. 5), upstream through T105N, R45W, Sec. 32.
    (xlvi) Reach 4v. Unnamed tributary to Poplar Creek, from their 
confluence (T105N, R45W, Sec. 27), upstream through T105N, R45W, Sec. 9.
    (xlvii) Reach 4w. Chanarambie Creek from its confluence with the 
Rock River (T105N, R44W, Sec. 33), upstream through T105N, R43W, Sec. 8.
    (xlviii) Reach 4x. North Branch Chanarambie Creek from its 
confluence with Chanarambie Creek (T105N, R43W, Sec. 8), upstream 
through T106N, R43W, Sec. 18.
    (xlix) Reach 4y. Unnamed tributary to the Rock River, from their 
confluence (T105N, R44W, Sec. 8), upstream through T106N, R45W, Sec. 36.
    (l) Reach 4z. Unnamed tributary to the Rock River, from their 
confluence (T106N, R44W, Sec. 33), upstream through T106N, R44W, Sec. 
23.
    (li) Reach 4aa. East Branch Rock River from its confluence with the 
Rock River (T106N, R44W, Sec. 18), upstream through T107N, R44W, Sec. 
27.
    (lii) Reach 4bb. Unnamed tributary to East Branch Rock River, from 
their confluence (T107N, R44W, Sec. 34), upstream through T107N, R44W, 
Sec. 35.

                        Little Rock River Complex

    (liii) Reach 5a. Little Rock River from the Minnesota/Iowa State 
border (T101N, R42W, Sec. 35), upstream through T102N, R41W, Sec. 34.
    (liv) Reach 5b. Little Rock Creek from its confluence with the 
Little Rock River (T101N, R42W, Sec. 26), upstream through T102N, R42W, 
Sec. 34.

                            Mud Creek Complex

    (lv) Reach 6a. Mud Creek from the Minnesota/Iowa State border 
(T101N, R46W, Sec. 34), upstream thru T101N, R46W, Sec. 11.
    (lvi) Reach 6b. Unnamed tributary to Mud Creek, from their 
confluence (T101N, R46W, Sec. 22), upstream through T101N, R46W, Sec. 
24.
    (lvii) Reach 6c. Unnamed tributary to Mud Creek, from their 
confluence (T101N, R46W, Sec. 11), upstream through T101N, R46W, Sec. 1.
    (12) Note: Unit 4 (Map 4) follows.

[[Page 422]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR25MR05.117

    (13) Unit 5: Elkhorn River Watershed--Madison County, Nebraska.
    Taylor Creek from its confluence with Union Creek (T22N, R1W, Sec. 
32), upstream through T22N, R2W, Sec. 22.
    (14) Note: Unit 5 (Map 5) follows.

[[Page 423]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR25MR05.118


[[Page 424]]



                  Waccamaw Silverside (Menidia extensa)

    North Carolina, Columbus County. Lake Waccamaw in its entirety to 
mean high water level, and Big Creek from its mouth at Lake Waccamaw 
upstream approximately 0.6 kilometer (0.4 mile) to where the creek is 
crossed by County Road 1947.
    Constituent elements include high quality clear open water, with a 
neutral pH and clean substrate.
    Note: Map follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.123
    
                 Delta Smelt (Hypomesus transpacificus)

    California--Areas of all water and all submerged lands below 
ordinary high water and the entire water column bounded by and contained 
in Suisun Bay (including the contiguous Grizzly and Honker Bays); the 
length of Montezuma Slough; and the existing contiguous waters contained 
within the Delta, as defined by section 12220, of the State of 
California's Water Code of 1969 (a complex of bays, dead-end sloughs, 
channels typically less than 4 meters deep, marshlands, etc.) as 
follows:
    Bounded by a line beginning at the Carquinez Bridge which crosses 
the Carquinez Strait; thence, northeasterly along the western and 
northern shoreline of Suisun Bay, including Goodyear, Suisun, Cutoff, 
First Mallard (Spring Branch), and Montezuma Sloughs; thence, upstream 
to the intersection of Montezuma Slough with the western boundary of the 
Delta as delineated in section 12220 of the State of California's Water 
Code of 1969; thence, following the boundary and including all 
contiguous water bodies contained within the statutory definition of the 
Delta, to its intersection with the San Joaquin River at its confluence 
with Suisun Bay; thence, westerly along the south shore of Suisun Bay to 
the Carquinez Bridge.
    Note: Map follows:

[[Page 425]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.124

    Primary Constituent Elements--physical habitat, water, river flow, 
and salinity concentrations required to maintain delta smelt habitat for 
spawning, larval and juvenile transport, rearing, and adult migration.

                        Spikedace (Meda fulgida)

    (1) Critical habitat units are depicted for Graham, Greenlee, Pinal, 
and Yavapai Counties, Arizona; and Catron, Grant, and Hidalgo Counties, 
New Mexico, on the maps and as described below.

[[Page 426]]

    (2) Within these areas, the primary constituent elements of critical 
habitat for spikedace are the following:
    (i) Permanent, flowing water with no or minimal pollutant levels, 
including:
    (A) Living areas for adult spikedace with slow to swift flow 
velocities between 20 and 60 cm/second (8 and 24 in/second) in shallow 
water between approximately 10 cm (4 in) and 1 meter (40 in) in depth, 
with shear zones where rapid flow borders slower flow, areas of sheet 
flow (or smoother, less turbulent flow) at the upper ends of mid-channel 
sand/gravel bars, and eddies at downstream riffle edges;
    (B) Living areas for juvenile spikedace with slow to moderate water 
velocities of approximately 18 cm/second (8 in/second) or higher in 
shallow water between approximately 3 cm (1.2 in) and 1 meter (40 in) in 
depth;
    (C) Living areas for larval spikedace with slow to moderate flow 
velocities of approximately 10 cm/second (4 in/second) or higher in 
shallow water approximately 3 cm (1.2 in) to 1 meter (40 in) in depth; 
and
    (D) Water with dissolved oxygen levels greater than 3.5 cc/l and no 
or minimal pollutant levels for pollutants such as copper, arsenic, 
mercury, and cadmium; human and animal waste products; pesticides; 
suspended sediments; and gasoline or diesel fuels.
    (ii) Sand, gravel, and cobble substrates with low or moderate 
amounts of fine sediment and substrate embeddedness. Suitable levels of 
embeddedness are generally maintained by a natural, unregulated 
hydrograph that allows for periodic flooding or, if flows are modified 
or regulated, a hydrograph that allows for adequate river functions, 
such as flows capable of transporting sediments.
    (iii) Streams that have:
    (A) Low gradients of less than approximately 1.0 percent;
    (B) Water temperatures in the approximate range of 35 to 82 [deg]F 
(1.7 to 27.8 [deg]C) (with additional natural daily and seasonal 
variation);
    (C) Pool, riffle, run, and backwater components; and
    (D) An abundant aquatic insect food base consisting of mayflies, 
true flies, caddisflies, stoneflies, and dragonflies.
    (iv) Habitat devoid of nonnative aquatic species or habitat in which 
nonnative aquatic species are at levels that allow persistence of 
spikedace.
    (v) Areas within perennial, interrupted stream courses that are 
periodically dewatered but that serve as connective corridors between 
occupied or seasonally occupied habitat and through which the species 
may move when the habitat is wetted.
    (3) Each stream segment includes a lateral component that consists 
of 300 feet (91.4 meters) on either side of the stream channel measured 
from the stream edge at bank full discharge. This lateral component of 
critical habitat contains and contributes to the physical and biological 
features essential to the spikedace and is intended as a surrogate for 
the 100-year floodplain.
    (4) Critical habitat map areas. Data layers defining map areas, and 
mapping of critical habitat areas, was done using Arc GIS and verifying 
with USGS 7.5[min] quadrangles. Legal descriptions for New Mexico and 
Arizona are based on the Public Lands Survey System (PLSS). Within this 
system, all coordinates reported for New Mexico are in the New Mexico 
Principal Meridian (NMPM), while those in Arizona are in the Gila and 
Salt River Meridian (GSRM). All mileage calculations were performed 
using GIS.
    (5) Note: Index map of critical habitat units for spikedace (Map 1), 
follows:

[[Page 427]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR21MR07.005

    (6) Complex 1--Verde River, Yavapai County, Arizona.
    (i) Verde River--43.0 mi (69.2 km) of river extending from the 
Prescott and Coconino National Forest boundary with private lands at 
Township 17 North, Range 3 East, section 7, upstream to Sullivan Dam at 
Township 17 North, Range 2 West, section 15. Land ownership: U.S. Forest 
Service (Coconino and Prescott National Forests), State, and private 
lands.

[[Page 428]]

    (ii) Note: Map of Complex 1 (Verde River) of spikedace critical 
habitat (Map 2) follows:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR21MR07.006

    (7) Complex 3--Middle Gila/Lower San Pedro/Aravaipa Creek, Pinal and 
Graham Counties, Arizona.
    (i) Gila River--39.0 mi (62.8 km) of river extending from the 
Ashurst-Hayden Dam at Township 4 South, Range 11 East, section 8

[[Page 429]]

upstream to the confluence with the San Pedro River at Township 5 South, 
Range 15 East, section 23. Land ownership: Bureau of Reclamation, Bureau 
of Land Management, State, and private lands.
    (ii) Lower San Pedro River--13.4 mi (21.5 km) of river extending 
from the confluence with the Gila River at Township 5 South, Range 15 
East, section 23 upstream to the confluence with Aravaipa Creek at 
Township 7 South, Range 16 East, section 9. Land ownership: Bureau of 
Land Management, Tribal, State, and private lands.
    (iii) Aravaipa Creek--28.1 mi (45.3 km) of creek extending from the 
confluence with the San Pedro River at Township 7 South, Range 16 East, 
section 9 upstream to the confluence with Stowe Gulch at Township 6 
South, Range 19 East, section 35. Land ownership: Bureau of Land 
Management, Tribal, State, and private lands.
    (iv) Note: Map of Complex 3 (Middle Gila/Lower San Pedro/Aravaipa 
Creek) of spikedace critical habitat (Map 3) follows:

[[Page 430]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR21MR07.007

    (8) Complex 5--Upper Gila River Complex, Catron, Grant, and Hidalgo 
Counties, New Mexico.
    (i) Upper Gila River--94.9 mi (152.7 km) of river extending from the 
confluence with Moore Canyon (near the Arizona/New Mexico border) at 
Township 18 South, Range 21 West, section 32 upstream to the confluence 
of the East and West Forks of the Gila River at Township 13 South, Range 
13 West, section 8, excluding lands owned by the Phelps Dodge 
Corporation. Land ownership: Bureau of Land Management, U.S. Forest 
Service (Gila National Forest), State, and private lands.

[[Page 431]]

    (ii) East Fork Gila River--26.1 mi (42.0 km) of river extending from 
the confluence with the West Fork Gila River at Township 13 South, Range 
13 West, section 8 upstream to the confluence of Beaver and Taylor 
creeks at Township 11 South, Range 12 West, section 17. Land ownership: 
U.S. Forest Service (Gila National Forest) and private lands.
    (iii) Middle Fork Gila River--7.7 mi (12.3 km) of river extending 
from the confluence with the West Fork Gila River at Township 12 South, 
Range 14 West, section 25 upstream to the confluence with Big Bear 
Canyon at Township 12 South, Range 14 West, section 2. Land ownership: 
U.S. Forest Service (Gila National Forest) and private lands.
    (iv) West Fork Gila River--7.7 mi (12.4 km) of river extending from 
the confluence with the East Fork Gila River at Township 13 South, Range 
13 West, section 8 upstream to the confluence with EE Canyon at Township 
12 South, Range 14 West, section 22. Land ownership: U.S. Forest Service 
(Gila National Forest), National Park Service, and private lands.
    (v) Note: Map of Complex 5 (Upper Gila River Complex) of spikedace 
critical habitat (Map 4) follows:

[[Page 432]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR21MR07.008

         Big Spring Spinedace (Lepidomeda mollispinis pratensis)

    Nevada. Condor Canyon, Lincoln County. Four stream miles of Meadow 
Valley Wash and 50 feet on either side of the stream as it flows through 
the following sections: T. 1 S., R. 68 E., Sections 13, 23, 24, 26, 27, 
and 28.
    Known constituent elements include clean permanent flowing spring-
fed stream with deep pool areas and shallow marshy areas along the shore 
and the absence of exotic fishes.

[[Page 433]]

    Note: Map follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.128
    
             Little Colorado Spinedace (Lepidomeda vittata)

    Arizona:
    1. Coconino County. East Clear Creek; approximately 18 miles of 
stream extending from the confluence with Leonard Canyon (NE \1/4\ Sec. 
11 T14N R12E) upstream to the Blue Ridge Reservoir dam (SE \1/4\ Sec. 33 
T14N R11E), and approximately 13 miles of stream extending from the 
upper end of Blue Ridge Reservoir (east boundary SE \1/4\ Sec. 36 T14N 
R10E) upstream to Potato Lake (NE \1/4\ Sec. 1 T12N R9E).
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.129

    2. Navajo County. Chevelon Creek; approximately 8 miles of stream 
extending from the confluence with the Little Colorado River (NW\1/4\ 
Sec. 23 T18N R17E) upstream to Bell Cow Canyon (SE\1/4\ of the SW\1/4\ 
Sec. 11 T17N R17E).
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.131

    3. Apache County. Nutrioso Creek; approximately 5 miles of stream 
extending from the Apache-Sitgreaves National Forest boundary (north 
boundary Sec. 5 T8N R30E) upstream

[[Page 434]]

to the Nelson Reservoir dam (NE\1/4\ Sec. 29 T8N R30E).
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.130

    Constituent elements, for all areas of critical habitat, include 
clean, permanent flowing water, with pools and a fine gravel or silt-mud 
substrate.

              White River Spinedace (Lepidomeda albivallis)

    Nevada, White Pine County. Each of the following springs and 
outflows plus surrounding land areas for a distance of 50 feet from 
these springs and outflows:
    Preston Big Spring and associated outflows within T12N, R61E, NE \1/
4\ Sec. 2.
    Lund Spring and associated outflows within T11N, R62E, NE \1/4\ of 
NE \1/4\ of Sec. 4; T12N, R62E, S \1/2\ of SE \1/4\ Sec. 33.
    Note: Map follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.132
    
    Nevada, Nye County. Flag Springs and associated outflows plus 
surrounding land areas for a distance of 50 feet from the springs and 
outflows within the following areas: T7N, R62E, E \1/2\ of NE \1/4\ Sec. 
32, SW \1/4\ of NW \1/4\ Sec. 33.
    Note: Map follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.133
    
    Known constituent elements for all areas of critical habitat include 
consistently high quality and quantity of cool springs and their 
outflows, and surrounding land area that provide vegetation for cover 
and habitat for insects and other invertebrates on which the species 
feeds.

        Hiko White River Springfish (Crenichthys baileyi grandis)

    Nevada, Lincoln County. Each of the following springs and outflows 
plus surrounding land areas for a distance of 50 feet from these springs 
and outflows:
    Hiko Spring and associated outflows within T4S, R60E, SW\1/4\ of 
NE\1/4\ Sec. 14 and NW\1/4\ of SE\1/4\ Sec. 14.

[[Page 435]]

    Crystal Springs and associated outflows within T5S, R60E, all of 
NE\1/4\ of Sec. 10 and NE\1/4\ of SE\1/4\ Sec. 10, SW\1/4\ of NW\1/4\ 
Sec. 11 and NW\1/4\ of SW\1/4\ Sec. 11.
    Note: Map follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.134
    
    Known constituent elements include warmwater springs and their 
outflows and surrounding land areas that provide vegetation for cover 
and habitat for insects and other invertebrates on which the species 
feeds.

            Railroad Valley Springfish (Crenichthys nevadae)

    1. Nevada, Nye County, Duckwater area. Big Warm Spring and its 
outflow pools, streams, and marshes and a 50 foot riparian zone around 
the spring, outflow pools, streams, and marshes in T13N, R56E, NE\1/4\ 
Sec. 31, SE\1/4\ Sec. 31, NW\1/4\ Sec. 32. Little Warm Spring and its 
outflow pools, streams, and marshes, and a 50-foot riparian zone around 
the spring, outflow pools, streams, and marshes in T12N, R56E, Sec. 5.
    Note: Map follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.135
    
    1. Nevada, Nye County, Lockes Area. North, Hay Corral, Big, and 
Reynolds Springs and their outflow pools, streams, and marshes, and a 
50-foot riparian zone around the springs, outflow pools, streams, and 
marshes in T8N, R55E, SW\1/4\ Sec. 11, NW\1/4\ Sec. 14, SW\1/4\ Sec. 14, 
SE\1/4\ Sec. 15, NE\1/4\ Sec. 15, SW\1/4\ Sec. 15.
    Note: Map follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.136
    
    Known constituent elements for all areas of critical habitat of the 
Railroad Valley springfish include clear, unpolluted thermal spring 
waters ranging in temperature from 29[deg] to 36 [deg]C in pools; 
flowing channels; marshy areas with aquatic plants, insects, and 
mollusks.

          White River Springfish (Crenichthys baileyi baileyi)

    Nevada, Lincoln County. Ash Springs and associated outflows plus 
surrounding land areas for a distance of 50 feet from the springs and 
outflows within the following

[[Page 436]]

areas: T6S, R60E, E\1/2\ of E\1/2\ Sec. 1 and T6S, R61E, NW\1/4\ of 
NW\1/4\ Sec. 6.
    Note: Map follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.137
    
    Known constituent elements include warmwater springs and their 
outflows and surrounding land areas that provide vegetation for cover 
and habitat or insects and other invertebrates on which the species 
feeds.

                Colorado Squawfish (Ptychocheilus lucius)

    Description of areas taken from BLM 1:100,000 maps (available from 
BLM State Offices): Canyon of Lodore, CO 1990; La Sal, UT/CO 1985; 
Rangely, CO 1989; Delta, CO 1989; Grand Junction, CO 1990; Hite 
Crossing, UT 1982; Vernal, UT/CO 1990; Craig, CO 1990; Bluff, UT/CO 
1985; Moab, UT/CO 1985; Hanksville, UT 1982; San Rafael Desert, UT 1985; 
Huntington, UT 1982; Price, UT 1989; Farmington, NM 1991; Navajo 
Mountain, UT/AZ 1982. The 100-year flood plain for many areas is 
detailed in Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM) published by and available 
through the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). In areas where a 
FIRM is not available, the presence of alluvium soils or known high 
water marks can be used to determine the extent of the flood plain. Only 
areas of flood plain containing constituent elements are considered 
critical habitat.
    Colorado: Moffat County. The Yampa River and its 100-year flood 
plain from the State Highway 394 bridge in T.6N., R.91W., sec. 1 (6th 
Principal Meridian) to the confluence with the Green River in T.7N., 
R.103W., sec. 28 (6th Principal Meridian).
    Utah: Uintah, Carbon, Grand, Emery, Wayne, and San Juan Counties; 
and Colorado: Moffat County. The Green River and its 100-year flood 
plain from the confluence with the Yampa River in T.7N., R.103W., sec. 
28 (6th Principal Meridian) to the confluence with the Colorado River in 
T.30S., R.19E., sec. 7 (Salt Lake Meridian).
    Colorado: Rio Blanco County; and Utah: Uintah County. The White 
River and its 100-year flood plain from Rio Blanco Lake Dam in T.1N., 
R.96W., sec. 6 (6th Principal Meridian) to the confluence with the Green 
River in T.9S., R.20E., sec. 4 (Salt Lake Meridian).
    Colorado: Delta and Mesa Counties. The Gunnison River and its 100-
year flood plain from the confluence with the Uncompahgre River in 
T.15S., R.96W., sec. 11 (6th Principal Meridian) to the confluence with 
the Colorado River in T.1S., R.1W., sec. 22 (Ute Meridian).
    Colorado: Mesa and Garfield Counties; and Utah: Grand, San Juan, 
Wayne, and Garfield Counties. The Colorado River and its 100-year flood 
plain from the Colorado River Bridge at exit 90 north off Interstate 70 
in T.6S., R.93W., sec. 16 (6th Principal Meridian) to North Wash 
including the Dirty Devil arm of Lake Powell up to the full pool 
elevation in T.33S., R.14E., sec. 29 (Salt Lake Meridian).
    New Mexico: San Juan County; and Utah: San Juan County. The San Juan 
River and its 100-year flood plain from the State Route 371 Bridge in 
T.29N., R.13W., sec. 17 (New Mexico Meridian) to Neskahai Canyon in the 
San Juan arm of Lake Powell in T.41S., R.11E., sec. 26 (Salt Lake 
Meridian) up to the full pool elevation.
    Known constituent elements include water, physical habitat, and 
biological environment as required for each particular life stage for 
each species.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.138

               Alabama sturgeon (Scaphirhynchus suttkusi)

    (1) Critical habitat unit is depicted for Baldwin, Monroe, Wilcox, 
Clarke, Dallas, Lowndes, Autauga, Bibb, and Perry Counties, Alabama, on 
the map below.

[[Page 437]]

    (2) The primary constituent elements of critical habitat for the 
Alabama sturgeon are:
    (i) A flow regime (i.e., the magnitude, frequency, duration, 
seasonality of discharge over time) necessary to maintain all life 
stages of the species in the riverine environment, including migration, 
breeding site selection, resting, larval development, and protection of 
cool water refuges (i.e., tributaries).
    (ii) River channel with stable sand and gravel river bottoms, and 
bedrock walls, including associated mussel beds.
    (iii) Limestone outcrops and cut limestone banks, large gravel or 
cobble such as that found around channel training devices, and bedrock 
channel walls that provide riverine spawning sites with substrates 
suitable for embryo deposition and development.
    (iv) Long sections of free-flowing water to allow spawning 
migrations and development of embryos and larvae.
    (v) Water temperature not exceeding 32 [deg]Celsius (90 
[deg]Fahrenheit); dissolved oxygen levels not less than 5 milligrams per 
liter (mg/L) (5 parts per million (ppm)), except under extreme 
conditions due to natural causes or downstream of existing hydroelectric 
impoundments, where it can range from 5 mg/L to 4 mg/L (5 ppm to 4 ppm); 
and pH within the range of 6.0 to 8.5.
    (3) Critical habitat does not include manmade structures (such as 
buildings, aqueducts, docks, dams, runways, roads, and other paved 
areas) and the land or waterway on which they are located existing 
within the legal boundaries on the effective date of this rule.
    (4) Critical habitat map unit. Data layers defining the map unit 
were created on a base of USGS 7.5[min] quadrangles, and the critical 
habitat unit was then mapped using Universal Transverse Mercator (UTM) 
coordinates.
    (5) Unit: Alabama and Cahaba Rivers; Baldwin, Monroe, Wilcox, 
Clarke, Dallas, Lowndes, Autauga, Perry, and Bibb Counties, Alabama.
    (i) The unit encompasses 524 km (326 mi) of river channel. The 
portion of river channel in the Alabama River extends 394 km (245 mi) 
from its confluence with the Tombigbee River, Baldwin and Clarke 
Counties, Alabama, upstream to R.F. Henry Lock and Dam, Autauga and 
Lowndes Counties, Alabama; and the portion of river channel in the 
Cahaba River extends 130 km (81 mi) from its confluence with the Alabama 
River, Dallas County, Alabama, upstream to U.S. Highway 82, Bibb County, 
Alabama.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit, Critical Habitat for Alabama Sturgeon 
(Scaphirhynchus suttkusi): Alabama and Cahaba Rivers, follows:

[[Page 438]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR02JN09.011

              Gulf Sturgeon (Acipenser oxyrinchus desotoi)

    (1) Critical habitat units are depicted for Louisiana, Mississippi, 
Alabama, and Florida on the maps below.
    (2) The primary constituent elements essential for the conservation 
of Gulf sturgeon are those habitat components that support feeding, 
resting, and sheltering, reproduction, migration, and physical features 
necessary for maintaining the natural processes

[[Page 439]]

that support these habitat components. The primary constituent elements 
include:
    (i) Abundant prey items within riverine habitats for larval and 
juvenile life stages, and within estuarine and marine habitats and 
substrates for juvenile, subadult, and adult life stages;
    (ii) Riverine spawning sites with substrates suitable for egg 
deposition and development, such as limestone outcrops and cut limestone 
banks, bedrock, large gravel or cobble beds, marl, soapstone or hard 
clay;
    (iii) Riverine aggregation areas, also referred to as resting, 
holding, and staging areas, used by adult, subadult, and/or juveniles, 
generally, but not always, located in holes below normal riverbed 
depths, believed necessary for minimizing energy expenditures during 
fresh water residency and possibly for osmoregulatory functions;
    (iv) A flow regime (i.e,. the magnitude, frequency, duration, 
seasonality, and rate-of-change of fresh water discharge over time) 
necessary for normal behavior, growth, and survival of all life stages 
in the riverine environment, including migration, breeding site 
selection, courtship, egg fertilization, resting, and staging; and 
necessary for maintaining spawning sites in suitable condition for egg 
attachment, egg sheltering, resting, and larvae staging;
    (v) Water quality, including temperature, salinity, pH, hardness, 
turbidity, oxygen content, and other chemical characteristics, necessary 
for normal behavior, growth, and viability of all life stages;
    (vi) Sediment quality, including texture and other chemical 
characteristics, necessary for normal behavior, growth, and viability of 
all life stages; and
    (vii) Safe and unobstructed migratory pathways necessary for passage 
within and between riverine, estuarine, and marine habitats (e.g., a 
river unobstructed by any permanent structure, or a dammed river that 
still allows for passage).
    (3) Gulf sturgeon is under the joint jurisdiction of the U.S. Fish 
and Wildlife Service (FWS) and National Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS). 
The FWS will maintain primary responsibility for recovery actions and 
NMFS will assist in and continue to fund recovery actions pertaining to 
estuarine and marine habitats. In riverine units, the FWS will be 
responsible for all consultations regarding Gulf sturgeon and critical 
habitat. In estuarine units, we will divide responsibility based on the 
action agency involved. The FWS will consult with the Department of 
Transportation, the Environmental Protection Agency, the U.S. Coast 
Guard, and the Federal Emergency Management Agency. NMFS will consult 
with the Department of Defense, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Minerals 
Management Service and any other Federal agencies not mentioned here 
explicitly. In marine units, NMFS will be responsible for all 
consultations regarding Gulf sturgeon and critical habitat. Any Federal 
projects that extend into the jurisdiction of both the Services will be 
consulted on by the FWS with internal coordination with NMFS. Each 
agency will conduct its own intra-agency consultations as necessary.
    (4) The textual unit descriptions below are the definitive source 
for determining the critical habitat boundaries. General location maps 
by unit are provided at the end of each unit description and are 
provided for general guidance purposes only, and not as a definitive 
source for determining critical habitat boundaries.
    (5) Unit 1: Pearl River System in St. Tammany and Washington 
Parishes in Louisiana and Walthall, Hancock, Pearl River, Marion, 
Lawrence, Simpson, Copiah, Hinds, Rankin, and Pike Counties in 
Mississippi.
    (i) Unit 1 includes the Pearl River main stem from the spillway of 
the Ross Barnett Dam, Hinds and Rankin Counties, Mississippi, downstream 
to where the main stem river drainage discharges at its mouth joining 
Lake Borgne, Little Lake, or The Rigolets in Hancock County, 
Mississippi, and St. Tammany Parish, Louisiana. It includes the main 
stems of the East Pearl River, West Pearl River, West Middle River, 
Holmes Bayou, Wilson Slough, downstream to where these main stem river 
drainages discharge at the mouths of Lake Borgne, Little Lake, or The 
Rigolets. Unit 1 also includes the Bogue Chitto River main stem, a 
tributary of the Pearl River, from Mississippi State Highway 570, Pike 
County, Mississippi, downstream to its confluence with the West Pearl 
River, St. Tammany Parish, Louisiana. The lateral extent of Unit 1 is 
the ordinary high water line on each bank of the associated rivers and 
shorelines.
    (ii) Maps of Unit 1 follow:

[[Page 440]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR19MR03.000


[[Page 441]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR19MR03.001


[[Page 442]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR19MR03.002

    (6) Unit 2: Pascagoula River System in Forrest, Perry, Greene, 
George, Jackson, Clarke, Jones, and Wayne Counties, Mississippi.
    (i) Unit 2 includes all of the Pascagoula River main stem and its 
distributaries, portions of the Bouie, Leaf, and Chickasawhay 
tributaries, and all of the Big Black Creek tributary. It includes the 
Bouie River main stem beginning on the southern-most road crossing of 
Interstate 59, Forrest County, Mississippi, downstream to its confluence 
with the Leaf River, Forrest County, Mississippi. The Leaf River main 
stem beginning from Mississippi State Highway 588, Jones County, 
Mississippi, downstream to its confluence with the Chickasawhay River, 
George County, Mississippi is included. The main stem of the 
Chickasawhay River from the mouth of Oaky Creek, Clarke County, 
Mississippi, downstream to its confluence with the Leaf River, George 
County, Mississippi is included. Unit 2 also includes Big Black Creek 
main stem from its confluence with Black and Red Creeks, Jackson County, 
Mississippi, to its confluence with the Pascagoula River, Jackson 
County, Mississippi. All of the main stem of the Pascagoula River from 
its confluence with the Leaf and Chickasawhay Rivers, George County, 
Mississippi, to the discharge of the East and West Pascagoula Rivers 
into Pascagoula Bay, Jackson County, Mississippi, is included. The 
lateral extent of Unit 2 is the ordinary high water line on each bank of 
the associated rivers and shorelines.
    (ii) Major shipping channels in this unit are excluded under section 
4(b)(2) of the Act.
    (iii) Maps of Unit 2 follow:

[[Page 443]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR19MR03.003


[[Page 444]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR19MR03.004


[[Page 445]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR19MR03.005


[[Page 446]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR19MR03.006


[[Page 447]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR19MR03.007


[[Page 448]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR19MR03.008

    (7) Unit 3: Escambia River System in Santa Rosa and Escambia 
Counties, Florida and Escambia, Conecuh, and Covington Counties, 
Alabama.
    (i) Unit 3 includes the Conecuh River main stem beginning just 
downstream of the spillway of Point A Dam, Covington County, Alabama, 
downstream to the Florida State line, where its name changes to the 
Escambia River, Escambia County, Alabama, and Escambia and Santa Rosa 
Counties, Florida. It includes the entire main stem of the Escambia 
River downstream to its discharge into Escambia Bay and Macky Bay, 
Escambia and Santa Rosa Counties, Florida. All of the distributaries of 
the Escambia River including White River, Little White River, Simpson 
River, and Dead River, Santa Rosa County, Florida are included. The 
Sepulga River main stem from Alabama County Road 42, Conecuh and 
Escambia Counties, Alabama, downstream to its confluence with the 
Conecuh River, Escambia County, Alabama, is also included. The lateral 
extent of Unit 3 is the ordinary high water line on each bank of the 
associated lakes, rivers, and shorelines.
    (ii) Maps of Unit 3 follow:

[[Page 449]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR19MR03.009


[[Page 450]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR19MR03.010


[[Page 451]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR19MR03.011

    (8) Unit 4: Yellow River System in Santa Rosa and Okaloosa Counties, 
Florida and Covington County, Alabama.
    (i) Unit 4 includes the Yellow River main stem from Alabama State 
Highway 55, Covington County, Alabama, downstream to its discharge at 
Blackwater Bay, Santa Rosa County, Florida. All Yellow River 
distributaries (including Weaver River and Skim Lake) discharging into 
Blackwater Bay are included. The Shoal River main stem, a Yellow River 
tributary, from Florida Highway 85, Okaloosa County, Florida, to its 
confluence with the Yellow River, is included. The Blackwater River from 
its confluence with Big Coldwater Creek, Santa Rosa County, Florida, 
downstream to its discharge into Blackwater Bay is included. Wright 
Basin and Cooper Basin, Santa Rosa County, on the Blackwater River are 
included. The lateral extent of Unit 4 is the ordinary high water line 
on each bank of the associated lakes, rivers, and shorelines.
    (ii) Maps of Unit 4 follow:

[[Page 452]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR19MR03.012


[[Page 453]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR19MR03.013


[[Page 454]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR19MR03.014


[[Page 455]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR19MR03.015


[[Page 456]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR19MR03.016

    (9) Unit 5: Choctawhatchee River System in Holmes, Washington, and 
Walton Counties, Florida and Dale, Coffee, Geneva, and Houston Counties, 
Alabama.
    (i) Unit 5 includes the Choctawhatchee River main stem from its 
confluence with the west and east fork of the Choctawhatchee River, Dale 
County, Alabama, downstream to its discharge at Choctawhatchee Bay, 
Walton County, Florida. The distributaries discharging into 
Choctawhatchee Bay known as Mitchell River, Indian River, Cypress River, 
and Bells Leg are included. The Boynton Cutoff, Washington County, 
Florida, which joins the Choctawhatchee River main stem, and Holmes 
Creek, Washington County, Florida, are included. The section of Holmes 
Creek from Boynton Cutoff to the mouth of Holmes Creek, Washington 
County, Florida, is included. The Pea River main stem, a Choctawhatchee 
River tributary, from the Elba Dam, Coffee County, Alabama, to its 
confluence with the Choctawhatchee River, Geneva County, Alabama, is 
included. The lateral extent of Unit 5 is the ordinary high water line 
on each bank of the associated rivers and shorelines.
    (ii) Maps of Unit 5 follow:

[[Page 457]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR19MR03.017


[[Page 458]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR19MR03.018


[[Page 459]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR19MR03.019


[[Page 460]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR19MR03.020

    (10) Unit 6: Apalachicola River System in Franklin, Gulf, Liberty, 
Calhoun, Jackson, and Gadsen Counties, Florida.
    (i) Unit 6 includes the Apalachicola River mainstem, beginning from 
the Jim Woodruff Lock and Dam, Gadsden and Jackson Counties, Florida, 
downstream to its discharge at East Bay or Apalachicola Bay, Franklin 
County, Florida. All Apalachicola River distributaries, including the 
East River, Little St. Marks River, St. Marks River, Franklin County, 
Florida, to their discharge into East Bay and/or Apalachicola Bay are 
included. The entire main stem of the Brothers River, Franklin and Gulf 
Counties, Florida, a tributary of the Apalachicola River, is included. 
The lateral extent of Unit 6 is the ordinary high water line on each 
bank of the associated rivers and shorelines.
    (ii) Maps of Unit 6 follow:

[[Page 461]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR19MR03.021


[[Page 462]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR19MR03.022

    (11) Unit 7: Suwannee River System in Hamilton, Suwannee, Madison, 
Lafayette, Gilchrist, Levy, Dixie, and Columbia Counties, Florida.
    (i) Unit 7 includes the Suwannee River main stem, beginning from its 
confluence with Long Branch Creek, Hamilton County, Florida, downstream 
to the mouth of the Suwannee River. It includes all the Suwannee River 
distributaries, including the East Pass, West Pass, Wadley Pass, and 
Alligator Pass, Dixie and Levy Counties, Florida, to their discharge 
into the Suwannee Sound or the Gulf of Mexico. The Withlacoochee River 
main stem from Florida State Road 6, Madison and Hamilton Counties, 
Florida, to its confluence with the Suwannee River is included. The 
lateral extent of Unit 7 is the ordinary high water line on each bank of 
the associated rivers and shorelines.
    (ii) Maps of Unit 7 follow:

[[Page 463]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR19MR03.023


[[Page 464]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR19MR03.024


[[Page 465]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR19MR03.025


[[Page 466]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR19MR03.026

    (12) Unit 8: Lake Pontchartrain, Lake St. Catherine, The Rigolets, 
Little Lake, Lake Borgne, and Mississippi Sound in Jefferson, Orleans, 
St. Tammany, and St. Bernard Parish, Louisiana, Hancock, Jackson, and 
Harrison Counties in Mississippi, and in Mobile County, Alabama.
    (i) Unit 8 encompasses Lake Pontchartrain east of the Lake 
Pontchartrain Causeway, all of Little Lake, The Rigolets, Lake St. 
Catherine, Lake Borgne, including Heron Bay, and the Mississippi Sound. 
Critical habitat follows the shorelines around the perimeters of each 
included lake. The Mississippi Sound includes adjacent open bays 
including Pascagoula Bay, Point aux Chenes Bay, Grand Bay, Sandy Bay, 
and barrier island passes, including Ship Island Pass, Dog Keys Pass, 
Horn Island Pass, and Petit Bois Pass. The northern boundary of the 
Mississippi Sound is the shorelines of the mainland between Heron Bay 
Point, Mississippi and Point aux Pins, Alabama. Critical habitat 
excludes St. Louis Bay, north of the railroad bridge across its mouth; 
Biloxi Bay, north of the U.S. Highway 90 bridge; and Back Bay of Biloxi. 
The southern boundary follows along the broken shoreline of Lake Borgne 
created by low swampy islands from Malheureux Point to Isle au Pitre. 
From the northeast point of Isle au Pitre, the boundary continues in a 
straight north-northeast line to the point 1 nautical mile (nm) (1.9 
kilometers (km)) seaward of the western most extremity of Cat Island 
(30[deg]13[min] N, 89[deg]10[min] W). The southern boundary continues 1 
nm (1.9 km) offshore of the barrier islands and offshore of the 72 
COLREGS lines at barrier island passes (defined at 33 CFR 80.815 (c), 
(d) and (e)) to the eastern boundary. Between Cat Island and Ship Island 
there is no 72 COLREGS line. We therefore, have defined that section of 
the southern boundary as 1 nm (1.9 km) offshore of a straight line drawn 
from the southern tip of Cat Island to the western tip of Ship Island. 
The eastern boundary is the line of longitude 88[deg]18.8[min] W from 
its intersection with the shore (Point

[[Page 467]]

aux Pins) to its intersection with the southern boundary. The lateral 
extent of Unit 8 is the mean (average) high water (MHW) line on each 
shoreline of the included water bodies or the entrance to rivers, 
bayous, and creeks.
    (ii) Major shipping channels in this unit, as identified on standard 
navigation charts and marked by buoys, are excluded under section 
4(b)(2) of the Act.
    (iii) Maps of Unit 8 follow:

[[Page 468]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR19MR03.027


[[Page 469]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR19MR03.028


[[Page 470]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR19MR03.029


[[Page 471]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR19MR03.030

    (13) Unit 9: Pensacola Bay System in Escambia and Santa Rosa 
Counties, Florida.
    (i) Unit 9 includes Pensacola Bay and its adjacent main bays and 
coves. These include Big Lagoon, Escambia Bay, East Bay, Blackwater Bay, 
Bayou Grande, Macky Bay, Saultsmar Cove, Bass Hole Cove, and Catfish 
Basin. All other bays, bayous, creeks, and rivers are excluded at their 
mouths. The western boundary is the Florida State Highway 292 Bridge 
crossing Big Lagoon to Perdido Key. The southern boundary is the 72 
COLREGS line between Perdido Key and Santa Rosa Island (defined at 33 
CFR 80.810 (g)). The eastern boundary is the Florida State Highway 399 
Bridge at Gulf Breeze, Florida. The lateral extent of Unit 9 is the MHW 
line on each included bay's shoreline.
    (ii) Major shipping channels in this unit, as identified on standard 
navigation charts and marked by buoys, are excluded under section 
4(b)(2) of the Act.
    (iii) A Map of Unit 9 follows:

[[Page 472]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR19MR03.031

    (14) Unit 10: Santa Rosa Sound in Escambia, Santa Rosa, and Okaloosa 
Counties, Florida.
    (i) Unit 10 includes the Santa Rosa Sound, bounded on the west by 
the Florida State Highway 399 bridge in Gulf Breeze, Florida. The 
eastern boundary is the U.S. Highway 98

[[Page 473]]

bridge in Fort Walton Beach, Florida. The northern and southern 
boundaries of Unit 10 are formed by the shorelines to the MHW line or by 
the entrance to rivers, bayous, and creeks.
    (ii) A Map of Unit 10 follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR19MR03.032
    

[[Page 474]]


    (15) Unit 11: Florida Nearshore Gulf of Mexico Unit in Escambia, 
Santa Rosa, Okaloosa, Walton, Bay, and Gulf Counties in Florida.
    (i) Unit 11 includes a portion of the Gulf of Mexico as defined by 
the following boundaries. The western boundary is the line of longitude 
87[deg]20.0[min]W (approximately 1 nm (1.9 km) west of Pensacola Pass) 
from its intersection with the shore to its intersection with the 
southern boundary. The northern boundary is the MHW of the mainland 
shoreline and the 72 COLREGS lines at passes as defined at 30 CFR 80.810 
(a-g). The southern boundary is 1 nm (1.9 km) offshore of the northern 
boundary. The eastern boundary is the line of longitude 
85[deg]17.0[min]W from its intersection with the shore (near Money Bayou 
between Cape San Blas and Indian Peninsula) to its intersection with the 
southern boundary.
    (ii) A Map of Unit 11 follows:

[[Page 475]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR19MR03.033

    (16) Unit 12: Choctawhatchee Bay in Okaloosa and Walton Counties, 
Florida.
    (i) Unit 12 includes the main body of Choctawhatchee Bay, Hogtown 
Bayou, Jolly Bay, Bunker Cove, and Grassy Cove. All other bayous, 
creeks, rivers are excluded at their mouths/entrances. The western 
boundary is the U.S. Highway 98 bridge at Fort

[[Page 476]]

Walton Beach, Florida. The southern boundary is the 72 COLREGS line 
across East (Destin) Pass as defined at 33 CFR 80.810 (f). The lateral 
extent of Unit 12 is the MHW line on each shoreline of the included 
water bodies.
    (ii) A Map of Unit 12 follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR19MR03.034
    

[[Page 477]]


    (17) Unit 13: Apalachicola Bay in Gulf and Franklin County, Florida.
    (i) Unit 13 includes the main body of Apalachicola Bay and its 
adjacent sounds, bays, and the nearshore waters of the Gulf of Mexico. 
These consist of St. Vincent Sound, including Indian Lagoon; 
Apalachicola Bay including Horseshoe Cove and All Tides Cove; East Bay 
including Little Bay and Big Bay; and St George Sound, including 
Rattlesnake Cove and East Cove. Barrier Island passes (Indian Pass, West 
Pass, and East Pass) are also included. Sike's cut is excluded from the 
lighted buoys on the Gulf of Mexico side to the day boards on the bay 
side. The southern boundary includes water extending into the Gulf of 
Mexico 1 nm (1.9 km) from the MHW line of the barrier islands and from 
72 COLREGS lines between the barrier islands (defined at 33 CFR 80.805 
(e)-(h)). The western boundary is the line of longitude 85[deg]17.0[min] 
W from its intersection with the shore (near Money Bayou between Cape 
San Blas and Indian Peninsula) to its intersection with the southern 
boundary. The eastern boundary is formed by a straight line drawn from 
the shoreline of Lanark Village at 29[deg]53.1[min] N, 84[deg]35.0[min] 
W to a point that is 1 nm (1.9 km) offshore from the northeastern 
extremity of Dog Island at 29[deg]49.6[min] N, 84[deg]33.2[min] W. The 
lateral extent of Unit 13 is the MHW line on each shoreline of the 
included water bodies or the entrance of excluded rivers, bayous, and 
creeks.
    (ii) A Map of Unit 13 follows:

[[Page 478]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR19MR03.035

    (18) Unit 14: Suwannee Sound in Dixie and Levy Counties, Florida.
    (i) Unit 14 includes Suwannee Sound and a portion of adjacent Gulf 
of Mexico waters extending 9 nm from shore (16.7 km) out to the State 
territorial water boundary. Its northern boundary is formed by a 
straight line from the northern tip of Big Pine Island (at

[[Page 479]]

approximately 29[deg]23[min] N, 83[deg]12[min] W) to the Federal-State 
boundary at 29[deg]17[min] N, 83[deg]21[min] W. The southern boundary is 
formed by a straight line from the southern tip of Richards Island (at 
approximately 83[deg]04[min] W, 29[deg]11[min] N) to the Federal-State 
boundary at 83[deg]15[min] W, 29[deg]04[min] N. The lateral extent of 
Unit 14 is the MHW line along the shorelines and the mouths of the 
Suwannee River (East and West Pass), its distributaries, and other 
rivers, creeks, or water bodies.
    (ii) A Map of Unit 14 follows:

[[Page 480]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR19MR03.036

    (19)(i) The river reaches within Units 1 to 7 as critical habitat 
lie within the ordinary high water line. As defined in 33 CFR 32.911, 
the ordinary high water line on non-tidal rivers is the line on the 
shore established by the fluctuations of water and indicated by physical 
characteristics such as a clear, natural line impressed on the bank; 
shelving;

[[Page 481]]

changes in the character of soil; destruction of terrestrial vegetation; 
the presence of litter and debris; or other appropriate means that 
consider the characteristics of the surrounding areas.
    (ii) The downstream limit of the riverine units is the mouth of each 
river. The mouth is defined as rkm 0 (rmi 0). Although the interface of 
fresh and saltwater, referred to as the saltwater wedge, occurs within 
the lower-most reach of a river, for ease in delineating critical 
habitat units, we are defining the boundary between the riverine and 
estuarine units as rkm 0 (rmi 0).
    (iii) Regulatory jurisdiction in coastal areas extends to the line 
on the shore reached by the plane of the mean (average) high water (MHW) 
(33 CFR 329.12(a)(2)). All bays and estuaries within Units 8 to 14 
therefore, lie below the MHW lines. Where precise determination of the 
actual location becomes necessary, it must be established by survey with 
reference to the available tidal datum, preferably averaged over a 
period of 18.6 years. Less precise methods, such as observation of the 
``apparent shoreline'' which is determined by reference to physical 
markings, lines of vegetation, may be used only where an estimate is 
needed of the line reached by the mean high water.
    (iv) The term 72 COLREGS is defined as demarcation lines which 
delineate those waters upon which mariners shall comply with the 
International Regulations for Preventing Collisions at Sea, 1972 and 
those waters upon which mariners shall comply with the Inland Navigation 
Rules (33 CFR 80.01). The waters inside of these lines are Inland Rules 
waters and the waters outside the lines are COLREGS waters. These lines 
are defined in 33 CFR 80, and have been used for identification purposes 
to delineate boundary lines of the estuarine and marine habitat Units 8, 
9, 11, and 12.
    (20) Critical habitat does not include existing developed sites such 
as dams, piers, marinas, bridges, boat ramps, exposed oil and gas 
pipelines, oil rigs, and similar structures or designated public 
swimming areas.

   White Sturgeon (Acipenser transmontanus); Kootenai River Population

    (1) Critical habitat is designated in Idaho, Boundary County, on the 
Kootenai River from river mile (RM) 141.4 (river kilometer (RKM) 228) to 
RM 159.7 (RKM 257), as indicated on the map in paragraph (3) of this 
entry, from ordinary high-water mark to opposite bank ordinary high-
water mark as defined in 33 CFR 329.11.
    (2) The primary constituent elements of critical habitat for the 
Kootenai River population of the white sturgeon are:
    (i) A flow regime, during the spawning season of May through June, 
that approximates natural variable conditions and is capable of 
producing depths of 23 feet (ft) (7 meters (m)) or greater when natural 
conditions (for example, weather patterns, water year) allow. The depths 
must occur at multiple sites throughout, but not uniformly within, the 
Kootenai River designated critical habitat.
    (ii) A flow regime, during the spawning season of May through June, 
that approximates natural variable conditions and is capable of 
producing mean water column velocities of 3.3 feet per second (ft/s) 
(1.0 meters per second (m/s)) or greater when natural conditions (for 
example, weather patterns, water year) allow. The velocities must occur 
at multiple sites throughout, but not uniformly within, the Kootenai 
River designated critical habitat.
    (iii) During the spawning season of May through June, water 
temperatures between 47.3 and 53.6 degrees Fahrenheit ( [deg]F) (8.5 and 
12 degrees Celsius ( [deg]C)), with no more than a 3.6 [deg]F (2.1 
[deg]C) fluctuation in temperature within a 24-hour period, as measured 
at Bonners Ferry.
    (iv) Submerged rocky substrates in approximately 5 continuous river 
miles (8 river kilometers) to provide for natural free embryo 
redistribution behavior and downstream movement.
    (v) A flow regime that limits sediment deposition and maintains 
appropriate rocky substrate and inter-gravel spaces for sturgeon egg 
adhesion, incubation, escape cover, and free embryo development.
    (3) Note: Map of critical habitat follows:

[[Page 482]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09JY08.005

                     June Sucker (Chasmistes liorus)

    Utah, Utah County. Provo River, Sec. 5, T7S, R2E; to Sec. 36, T6S, 
R2E, the lower 7.8 kilometers (4.9 miles) of the main channel of the 
river as measured from it confluence with Utah Lake, upstream to the 
Tanner Race diversion.
    Note: Map follows:

[[Page 483]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.139

    Known constituent elements of the critical habitat include one to 
three feet of high quality water constantly flowing over a clean, 
unsilted gravel substrate. Larval June suckers require shallow areas 
with low velocities connected to the main channel of the river.

                    Modoc Sucker (Catostomus microps)

California, Modoc County.
    1. Turner Creek. Approximately 4.5 stream miles and 50 feet on 
either side of the stream channel from the juncture of Turner Creek with 
the Pit River upstream to T42N, R8E, Section 20; including those areas 
of the stream channel in T41N, R8E, Sections 1 and 2; and in T42N, R8E, 
Sections 21, 27, 28, 34, and 35.
    2. Washington Creek. Approximately 4 stream miles and 50 feet on 
either side of the stream channel from the juncture of Washington Creek 
with Turner Creek to T42N, R8E, Section 11; including those areas of the 
stream channel in T42N, R8E, Sections 14, 23, 24, 25, 26, and 35. Also 
Coffee Mill Gulch, a tributary of Washington Creek, for approximately 
1.5 miles and 50 feet on either side of the stream channel from the 
juncture of this tributary with Washington Creek upstream to T42N, R8E, 
Section 22; including those areas of the stream channel in T42N, R8E, 
Sections 22, 23, and 26.
    3. Hulbert Creek. Approximately 3.5 stream miles and 50 feet on 
either side of the stream channel from the juncture of Hulbert Creek 
with Turner Creek upstream to T42N, R8E, Section 31; including those 
areas of the stream channel in T42N, R8E, Sections 29, 30, 32, 33, 34, 
and 35; and Cedar Creek, a tributary of Hulbert Creek, for approximately 
1.5 stream miles and 50 feet on either side of the stream channel from 
the juncture of Cedar Creek with Hulbert Creek upstream to Cedar Spring; 
including those areas of the stream channel in T41N, R8E, Section 4; and 
in T42N, R8E, Section 33.
    Note: Map follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.140
    
    4. Johnson Creek. Approximately 4 stream miles and 50 feet on either 
side of the stream channel from the juncture of Johnson Creek with Rush 
Creek upstream to T40N, R10E, Section 6; including those areas of the 
stream channel in T40N, R9E, Sections 1, 11, 12, 14, 23, and 24. Also in 
unnamed tributary of Johnson Creek in Rice Flat, for approximately 1 
stream mile and 50 feet on either side of the stream channel from the 
juncture of this tributary with Johnson Creek upstream to T40N, R9E, 
Section 10; including those areas of the stream channel in T40N, R9E, 
Sections 11 and 14. Also in unnamed tributary of Johnson Creek in 
Higgins Flat, for approximately 1 stream mile and 50 feet on either side 
of the stream channel from the juncture of this tributary with Johnson 
Creek upstream to T40N, R9E, Section 10; including those areas of the 
stream channel in T40N, R9E, Sections 14 and 15.
    5. Rush Creek. Approximately 5 stream miles and 50 feet on either 
side of the stream channel from the gauging station at the State Route 
299 crossing upstream to T40N, R10E, Section 16; including those areas 
of the stream channel in T40N, R9E, Sections 24, 25, 26, 35, and 36; and 
in T40N, R10E, Sections 17, 18, and 19.
    Note: Map follows:

[[Page 484]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.141

    Known constituent elements include intermittent and permanent-water 
creeks, and adjacent land areas that provide vegetation for cover and 
protection from soil erosion.

                  Razorback Sucker (Xyrauchen texanus)

    Description of areas taken from BLM 1:100,000 scale maps (available 
from BLM State Offices): Rangely, CO 1989; Canyon of Lodore, CO 1990; 
Seep Ridge, UT/CO 1982; La Sal, UT/CO 1985; Westwater, UT/CO 1981; Hite 
Crossing, UT 1982; Glenwood Springs, CO 1988; Grand Junction, CO 1990; 
Delta, CO 1989; Navajo Mountain, UT/AZ 1982; Vernal, UT/CO 1990; Craig, 
CO 1990; Bluff, UT/CO 1985; Moab, UT/CO 1985; Hanksville, UT 1982; San 
Rafael Desert, UT 1985; Huntington, UT 1982; Price, UT 1989; Tuba City, 
AZ 1983; Lake Mead, NV/AZ 1981; Davis Dam, AZ/NV/CA 1982; Parker, AZ/CA 
1980; Yuma, AZ/CA 1988; Safford, AZ 1991; Globe, AZ 1980; Clifton, AZ/NM 
1975; Prescott, AZ 1982; Theodore Roosevelt Lake, AZ 1982; Grand Canyon, 
AZ 1980; Mt. Trumbull, AZ 1979; Boulder City, NV/AZ 1978; Blythe, CA/AZ 
1976; Trigo Mountains, AZ/CA 1988; Sedona, AZ 1982; Payson, AZ 1988; and 
U.S. Forest Service map: Tonto National Forest, Phoenix, AZ. The 100-
year flood plain for many areas is detailed in Flood Insurance Rate Maps 
(FIRM) published by and available through the FEMA. In areas where a 
FIRM is not available, the presence of alluvium soils or known high 
water marks can be used to determine the extent of the flood plain. Only 
areas of flood plain containing constituent elements are considered 
critical habitat.
    Colorado: Moffat County. The Yampa River and its 100-year flood 
plain from the mouth of Cross Mountain Canyon in T.6N., R.98W., sec. 23 
(6th Principal Meridian) to the confluence with the Green River in 
T.7N., R.103W., sec. 28 (6th Principal Meridian).
    Utah: Uintah County; and Colorado: Moffat County. The Green River 
and its 100-year flood plain from the confluence with the Yampa River in 
T.7N., R.103W., sec. 28 (6th Principal Meridian) to Sand Wash in T.11S., 
R.18E., sec. 20 (6th Principal Meridian).
    Utah: Uintah, Carbon, Grand, Emery, Wayne, and San Juan Counties. 
The Green River and its 100-year flood plain from Sand Wash at T.11S., 
R.18E., sec. 20 (6th Principal Meridian) to the confluence with the 
Colorado River in T.30S., R.19E., sec. 7 (6th Principal Meridian).
    Utah: Uintah County. The White River and its 100-year flood plain 
from the boundary of the Uintah and Ouray Indian Reservation at river 
mile 18 in T.9S., R.22E., sec. 21 (Salt Lake Meridian) to the confluence 
with the Green River in T.9S., R.20E., sec. 4 (Salt Lake Meridian).
    Utah: Uintah County. The Duchesne River and its 100-year flood plain 
from river mile 2.5 in T.4S., R.3E., sec. 30 (Salt Lake Meridian) to the 
confluence with the Green River in T.5S., R.3E., sec. 5 (Uintah 
Meridian).
    Colorado: Delta and Mesa Counties. The Gunnison River and its 100-
year flood plain from the confluence with the Uncompahgre River in 
T.15S., R.96W., sec. 11 (6th Principal Meridian) to Redlands Diversion 
Dam in T.1S., R.1W., sec. 27 (Ute Meridian).
    Colorado: Mesa and Garfield Counties. The Colorado River and its 
100-year flood plain from Colorado River Bridge at exit 90 north off 
Interstate 70 in T.6S., R.93W., sec. 16 (6th Principal Meridian) to 
Westwater Canyon in T.20S., R.25E., sec. 12 (Salt Lake Meridian) 
including the Gunnison River and its 100-year flood plain from the 
Redlands Diversion Dam in T.1S., R.1W., sec. 27 (Ute Meridian) to the 
confluence with the Colorado River in T.1S., R.1W., sec. 22 (Ute 
Meridian).
    Utah: Grand, San Juan, Wayne, and Garfield Counties. The Colorado 
River and its 100-year flood plain from Westwater Canyon in T.20S., 
R.25E., sec. 12 (Salt Lake Meridian) to full pool elevation, upstream of 
North Wash and including the Dirty Devil arm of Lake Powell in T.33S., 
R.14E., sec. 29 (Salt Lake Meridian).
    New Mexico: San Juan County; and Utah: San Juan County. The San Juan 
River and its 100-year flood plain from the Hogback Diversion in T.29N., 
R.16W., sec. 9 (New Mexico Meridian) to the full pool elevation at the 
mouth of Neskahai Canyon on the San Juan arm of Lake Powell in T.41S., 
R.11E., sec. 26 (Salt Lake Meridian).
    Arizona: Coconino and Mohave Counties; and Nevada: Clark County. The 
Colorado River and its 100-year flood plain from the confluence with the 
Paria River in T.40N., R.7E., sec. 24 (Gila and Salt River Meridian) to 
Hoover Dam in T.30N., R.23W., sec. 3 (Gila and Salt River Meridian) 
including Lake Mead to the full pool elevation.
    Arizona: Mohave County; and Nevada: Clark County. The Colorado River 
and its 100-year flood plain from Hoover Dam in

[[Page 485]]

T.30N., R.23W., sec. 1 (Gila and Salt River Meridian) to Davis Dam in 
T.21N., R.21W., sec. 18 (Gila and Salt River Meridian) including Lake 
Mohave to the full pool elevation.
    Arizona: La Paz and Yuma Counties; and California: San Bernardino, 
Riverside, and Imperial Counties. The Colorado River and its 100-year 
flood plain from Parker Dam in T.11N., R.18W., sec. 16 (Gila and Salt 
River Meridian) to Imperial Dam in T.6S., R.22W., sec. 25 (Gila and Salt 
River Meridian) including Imperial Reservoir to the full pool elevation 
or 100-year flood plain, whichever is greater.
    Arizona: Graham, Greenlee, Gila, and Pinal Counties. The Gila River 
and its 100-year flood plain from the Arizona-New Mexico border in 
T.8S., R.32E., sec. 34 (Gila and Salt River Meridian) to Coolidge Dam in 
T.3S., R.18E., sec. 17 (Gila and Salt River Meridian), including San 
Carlos Reservoir to the full pool elevation.
    Arizona: Gila County. The Salt River and its 100-year flood plain 
from the old U.S. Highway 60/State Route 77 bridge (unsurveyed) to 
Roosevelt Diversion Dam in T.3N., R.14E., sec. 4 (Gila and Salt River 
Meridian).
    Arizona: Yavapai County. The Verde River and its 100-year flood 
plain from the U.S. Forest Service boundary (Prescott National Forest) 
in T.18N., R.2E., sec. 31 to Horseshoe Dam in T.7N., R.6E., sec. 2 (Gila 
and Salt River Meridian), including Horseshoe Lake to the full pool 
elevation.
    Known constituent elements include water, physical habitat, and 
biological environment as required for each particular life stage for 
each species.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.142

                 Santa Ana Sucker (Catostomus santaanae)

    (1) Areas determined to be essential to the conservation of the 
Santa Ana sucker and designated critical habitat units are depicted for 
Los Angeles County, California, on the maps and as described as follows:
    (2) Based on the best available information, primary constituent 
elements essential for the conservation of the Santa Ana sucker include 
the following:
    (i) A functioning hydrological system that experiences peaks and 
ebbs in the water volume that reflects seasonal variation in 
precipitation throughout the year;
    (ii) A mosaic of loose sand, gravel, cobble, and boulder substrates 
in a series of riffles, runs, pools, and shallow sandy stream margins;
    (iii) Water depths greater than 3 cm (1.2 in) and bottom water 
velocities greater than 0.03 meter per second (0.01 feet per second);
    (iv) Non-turbid water or only seasonally turbid water;
    (v) Water temperatures less than 30 [deg]C (86 [deg]F); and
    (vi) Stream habitat that includes algae, aquatic emergent 
vegetation, macroinvertebrates, and riparian vegetation.
    (3) Existing features and structures made by people, such as paved 
roads, bridges, parking lots, railroad tracks, railroad trestles, and 
residential, commercial, and industrial developments including energy 
production and distribution facilities (exclusive of the stream 
channel), do not contain one or more of the primary constituent elements 
and are not critical habitat. Federal actions limited to those areas, 
therefore, would not trigger a consultation under section 7 of the Act 
unless they may affect the species and/or primary constituent elements 
in adjacent critical habitat.
    (4) Areas determined to be essential to the conservation of the 
Santa Ana sucker and designated critical habitat units are shown on the 
following index map.

[[Page 486]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04JA05.000

    (5) Areas that have been determined to be essential to the 
conservation of the Santa Ana sucker and that have been excluded from 
critical habitat designation pursuant to section 4(b)(2) of the Act are 
described as follows:
    (i) All essential areas within the boundaries of the Western 
Riverside Multiple Species Habitat Conservation Plan (which may be 
obtained by going to the Riverside County Integrated Project Web site 
(http://www.rcip.org/conservation.htm) and other

[[Page 487]]

areas of the Santa Ana River, from the confluence of Mission Channel and 
the Santa Ana River downstream to the vicinity of the Route 90, covered 
by the Santa Ana Sucker Conservation Program.
    (ii) Note: Map of essential habitat excluded from critical habitat 
(Unit 1) for Santa Ana Sucker follows:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04JA05.001


[[Page 488]]


    (6) The following textual unit descriptions are the definitive 
source for determining critical habitat boundaries. General location 
maps by unit are provided at the end of each unit description and are 
provided for general guidance purposes only, and not as a definitive 
source for determining critical habitat boundaries.
    (7) Unit 2: San Gabriel River system in Los Angeles County, 
California.
    (i) Unit 2 includes the West, North and East Forks of the San 
Gabriel River and the following tributaries: Cattle Canyon Creek, Bear 
Creek, Bichota Canyon Creek, and Big Mermaids Canyon Creek. The San 
Gabriel River portion of the unit extends from the Cogswell Dam on the 
West Fork to approximately 3,882 feet (1,229 meters; 0.77 miles; 1.21 
kilometers) downstream from the Bridge-of-No Return on the East Fork, 
and portions of the North Fork. The lateral extent of Unit 2 is defined 
by the UTM coordinates described in the legal description.
    Unit 2: San Gabriel River. Los Angeles County, California. From USGS 
1:24,000 quadrangle maps Azusa, Crystal Lake, Glendora, Mount Baldy, 
Mount San Antonio, and Waterman Mountain, California, land bounded by 
the following UTM 11 NAD 27 coordinates (E, N): 422700, 3795100; 423300, 
3795100; 423300, 3795000; 423400, 3795000; 423400, 3794400; 423300, 
3794400; 423300, 3794300; 423200, 3794300; 423200, 3794200; 423100, 
3794200; 423100, 3794000; 423000, 3794000; 423000, 3793400; 422900, 
3793400; 422900, 3793300; 422800, 3793300; 422800, 3793200; 422700, 
3793200; 422700, 3793100; 422600, 3793100; 422600, 3792900; 422500, 
3792900; 422500, 3792800; 422400, 3792800; 422400, 3792100; 422500, 
3792100; 422500, 3791800; 422700, 3791800; 422700, 3791900; 422900, 
3791900; 422900, 3792000; 423100, 3792000; 423100, 3792100; 423800, 
3792100; 423800, 3792200; 424500, 3792200; 424500, 3791900; 424300, 
3791900; 424300, 3791800; 424000, 3791800; 424000, 3791700; 423900, 
3791700; 423900, 3791600; 423400, 3791600; 423400, 3791700; 423200, 
3791700; 423200, 3791600; 423000, 3791600; 423000, 3791500; 422900, 
3791500; 422900, 3791400; 422700, 3791400; 422700, 3791300; 422600, 
3791300; 422600, 3791200; 422500, 3791200; 422500, 3791100; 422400, 
3791100; 422400, 3791000; 421700, 3791000; 421700, 3790900; 421600, 
3790900; 421600, 3790800; 421500, 3790800; 421500, 3790700; 421400, 
3790700; 421400, 3790600; 421300, 3790600; 421300, 3790200; 421200, 
3790200; 421200, 3790100; 421100, 3790100; 421100, 3789900; 420800, 
3789900; 420800, 3789800; 420700, 3789800; 420700, 3789700; 420600, 
3789700; 420600, 3789600; 420500, 3789600; 420500, 3789500; 420700, 
3789500; 420700, 3789400; 420800, 3789400; 420800, 3789000; 420900, 
3789000; 420900, 3789100; 421100, 3789100; 421100, 3789200; 421200, 
3789200; 421200, 3789300; 421700, 3789300; 421700, 3789200; 421800, 
3789200; 421800, 3789100; 421900, 3789100; 421900, 3788900; 422000, 
3788900; 422000, 3788800; 422200, 3788800; 422200, 3788700; 422400, 
3788700; 422400, 3788500; 422500, 3788500; 422500, 3788600; 422600, 
3788600; 422600, 3788700; 422500, 3788700; 422500, 3789400; 422600, 
3789400; 422600, 3789600; 422800, 3789600; 422800, 3789400; 422900, 
3789400; 422900, 3789300; 422800, 3789300; 422800, 3789200; 422700, 
3789200; 422700, 3788800; 422800, 3788800; 422800, 3788700; 422900, 
3788700; 422900, 3788800; 423100, 3788800; 423100, 3788900; 423300, 
3788900; 423300, 3788800; 424000, 3788800; 424000, 3788900; 424100, 
3788900; 424100, 3789000; 424600, 3789000; 424600, 3788900; 424700, 
3788900; 424700, 3788700; 424800, 3788700; 424800, 3788600; 425000, 
3788600; 425000, 3788700; 425500, 3788700; 425500, 3788600; 425800, 
3788600; 425800, 3788500; 426100, 3788500; 426100, 3788300; 426400, 
3788300; 426400, 3788200; 426800, 3788200; 426800, 3788300; 427000, 
3788300; 427000, 3788200; 427200, 3788200; 427200, 3788300; 427600, 
3788300; 427600, 3788200; 427700, 3788200; 427700, 3788100; 427800, 
3788100; 427800, 3788000; 428900, 3788000; 428900, 3787900; 429000, 
3787900; 429000, 3788000; 429100, 3788000; 429100, 3788200; 429200, 
3788200; 429200, 3788300; 429300, 3788300; 429300, 3788700; 429400, 
3788700; 429400, 3788800; 429500, 3788800; 429500, 3789000; 429600, 
3789000; 429600, 3789100; 429800, 3789100; 429800, 3789300; 429900, 
3789300; 429900, 3789800; 430000, 3789800; 430000, 3790400; 429900, 
3790400; 429900, 3790500; 429800, 3790500; 429800, 3790400; 429500, 
3790400; 429500, 3790500; 429400, 3790500; 429400, 3790400; 428900, 
3790400; 428900, 3790500; 428800, 3790500; 428800, 3790600; 428900, 
3790600; 428900, 3790700; 429000, 3790700; 429000, 3790800; 429100, 
3790800; 429100, 3790900; 429000, 3790900; 429000, 3791300; 429300, 
3791300; 429300, 3791100; 429500, 3791100; 429500, 3791000; 429600, 
3791000; 429600, 3790900; 429700, 3790900; 429700, 3790800; 430100, 
3790800; 430100, 3790700; 430200, 3790700; 430200, 3790800; 430300, 
3790800; 430300, 3790900; 430400, 3790900; 430400, 3791000; 430600, 
3791000; 430600, 3790900; 430700, 3790900; 430700, 3791000; 431100, 
3791000; 431100, 3791100; 431000, 3791100; 431000, 3791300; 431100, 
3791300; 431100, 3791800; 431200, 3791800; 431200, 3791900; 431100, 
3791900; 431100, 3792400; 431000, 3792400; 431000, 3792500; 430900, 
3792500; 430900, 3792800; 431100, 3792800; 431100, 3792700; 431300, 
3792700; 431300, 3792600; 431400, 3792600; 431400, 3792400; 431500, 
3792400; 431500, 3792200; 431400, 3792200; 431400, 3792100; 431500, 
3792100; 431500, 3791700; 431400, 3791700; 431400, 3791500; 431500, 
3791500; 431500, 3791200; 431400, 3791200; 431400, 3791100; 431500, 
3791100; 431500, 3790800; 431400, 3790800; 431400, 3790700; 431300, 
3790700; 431300, 3790600; 430700, 3790600; 430700, 3790500; 430600, 
3790500; 430600, 3790600; 430500, 3790600; 430500, 3790500; 430300, 
3790500; 430300, 3789800; 430200, 3789800; 430200, 3789200; 430100, 
3789200; 430100, 3788900; 430000, 3788900; 430000, 3788700; 429800, 
3788700; 429800, 3788500; 429700, 3788500; 429700, 3788200; 429600, 
3788200; 429600, 3788100; 429500, 3788100; 429500, 3788000; 429400, 
3788000; 429400, 3787800; 429600, 3787800; 429600, 3787700; 429700, 
3787700; 429700, 3787800; 429800, 3787800; 429800, 3787900; 430400, 
3787900; 430400, 3787800; 430700, 3787800; 430700, 3787900; 430900, 
3787900; 430900, 3788000; 431000, 3788000; 431000, 3788100; 431100, 
3788100; 431100, 3788300; 431200, 3788300; 431200, 3788400; 431300, 
3788400; 431300, 3788500; 431400, 3788500; 431400, 3788600; 431700, 
3788600; 431700, 3788700; 431900, 3788700; 431900, 3788800; 432300, 
3788800; 432300, 3788700; 432400, 3788700; 432400, 3788600; 432500, 
3788600;

[[Page 489]]

432500, 3788500; 432600, 3788500; 432600, 3788400; 432800, 3788400; 
432800, 3788300; 433200, 3788300; 433200, 3788200; 433400, 3788200; 
433400, 3788100; 433500, 3788100; 433500, 3787900; 433700, 3787900; 
433700, 3788000; 434300, 3788000; 434300, 3788100; 434500, 3788100; 
434500, 3788200; 434600, 3788200; 434600, 3788400; 434700, 3788400; 
434700, 3788600; 434800, 3788600; 434800, 3789000; 434900, 3789000; 
434900, 3789100; 435000, 3789100; 435000, 3789200; 435200, 3789200; 
435200, 3789300; 435500, 3789300; 435500, 3789200; 435600, 3789200; 
435600, 3789400; 435700, 3789400; 435700, 3789500; 435900, 3789500; 
435900, 3789000; 435800, 3789000; 435800, 3788900; 435200, 3788900; 
435200, 3788700; 435100, 3788700; 435100, 3788400; 435000, 3788400; 
435000, 3788200; 434900, 3788200; 434900, 3788000; 434800, 3788000; 
434800, 3787800; 434600, 3787800; 434600, 3787700; 434500, 3787700; 
434500, 3787600; 434600, 3787600; 434600, 3787300; 434100, 3787300; 
434100, 3787200; 434000, 3787200; 434000, 3787300; 433800, 3787300; 
433800, 3787400; 433600, 3787400; 433600, 3787500; 433400, 3787500; 
433400, 3787600; 433200, 3787600; 433200, 3787800; 433100, 3787800; 
433100, 3787900; 433000, 3787900; 433000, 3788000; 432600, 3788000; 
432600, 3788100; 432400, 3788100; 432400, 3788200; 432300, 3788200; 
432300, 3788300; 432200, 3788300; 432200, 3788400; 432100, 3788400; 
432100, 3788500; 432000, 3788500; 432000, 3788400; 431900, 3788400; 
431900, 3788300; 431600, 3788300; 431600, 3788200; 431500, 3788200; 
431500, 3788100; 431400, 3788100; 431400, 3788000; 431300, 3788000; 
431300, 3787800; 431200, 3787800; 431200, 3787700; 431100, 3787700; 
431100, 3787600; 430700, 3787600; 430700, 3787500; 430000, 3787500; 
430000, 3787600; 429900, 3787600; 429900, 3787500; 429800, 3787500; 
429800, 3787300; 429600, 3787300; 429600, 3787400; 429400, 3787400; 
429400, 3787500; 428900, 3787500; 428900, 3787600; 428800, 3787600; 
428800, 3787700; 428700, 3787700; 428700, 3787600; 428000, 3787600; 
428000, 3787700; 427400, 3787700; 427400, 3787800; 427100, 3787800; 
427100, 3787900; 426900, 3787900; 426900, 3787800; 426300, 3787800; 
426300, 3787900; 426200, 3787900; 426200, 3788000; 425900, 3788000; 
425900, 3788100; 425600, 3788100; 425600, 3788200; 425400, 3788200; 
425400, 3788300; 424500, 3788300; 424500, 3788500; 424200, 3788500; 
424200, 3788400; 423800, 3788400; 423800, 3788300; 423500, 3788300; 
423500, 3788400; 423100, 3788400; 423100, 3788300; 423000, 3788300; 
423000, 3788100; 422900, 3788100; 422900, 3788000; 422200, 3788000; 
422200, 3788100; 422100, 3788100; 422100, 3788200; 422000, 3788200; 
422000, 3788300; 421700, 3788300; 421700, 3788400; 421600, 3788400; 
421600, 3788800; 421200, 3788800; 421200, 3788700; 421100, 3788700; 
421100, 3788600; 421000, 3788600; 421000, 3788500; 420700, 3788500; 
420700, 3788600; 420500, 3788600; 420500, 3788800; 420400, 3788800; 
420400, 3788900; 419800, 3788900; 419800, 3789000; 419700, 3789000; 
419700, 3789100; 419400, 3789100; 419400, 3789000; 419100, 3789000; 
419100, 3788900; 419000, 3788900; 419000, 3788800; 418600, 3788800; 
418600, 3788700; 418300, 3788700; 418300, 3788800; 417500, 3788800; 
417500, 3788900; 417400, 3788900; 417400, 3789100; 417300, 3789100; 
417300, 3789400; 417100, 3789400; 417100, 3789500; 416700, 3789500; 
416700, 3789400; 416500, 3789400; 416500, 3789300; 416400, 3789300; 
416400, 3789200; 416300, 3789200; 416300, 3789100; 416000, 3789100; 
416000, 3789000; 415800, 3789000; 415800, 3788900; 415700, 3788900; 
415700, 3789000; 415400, 3789000; 415400, 3789100; 415100, 3789100; 
415100, 3789300; 414700, 3789300; 414700, 3789100; 414600, 3789100; 
414600, 3789000; 414500, 3789000; 414500, 3788900; 414400, 3788900; 
414400, 3788800; 414300, 3788800; 414300, 3788700; 414100, 3788700; 
414100, 3788600; 413500, 3788600; 413500, 3788700; 413400, 3788700; 
413400, 3788900; 413300, 3788900; 413300, 3789000; 413200, 3789000; 
413200, 3789100; 413100, 3789100; 413100, 3789200; 413000, 3789200; 
413000, 3789300; 412900, 3789300; 412900, 3789200; 412800, 3789200; 
412800, 3789100; 412700, 3789100; 412700, 3789000; 412600, 3789000; 
412600, 3788900; 412300, 3788900; 412300, 3789200; 411900, 3789200; 
411900, 3789300; 411300, 3789300; 411300, 3789500; 411200, 3789500; 
411200, 3789700; 411500, 3789700; 411500, 3789800; 411700, 3789800; 
411700, 3789700; 411900, 3789700; 411900, 3789600; 412200, 3789600; 
412200, 3789700; 412300, 3789700; 412300, 3789600; 412600, 3789600; 
412600, 3789500; 412700, 3789500; 412700, 3789600; 412800, 3789600; 
412800, 3789800; 413100, 3789800; 413100, 3789700; 413200, 3789700; 
413200, 3789500; 413300, 3789500; 413300, 3789400; 413500, 3789400; 
413500, 3789300; 413700, 3789300; 413700, 3789200; 413800, 3789200; 
413800, 3789300; 414000, 3789300; 414000, 3789400; 414400, 3789400; 
414400, 3789500; 414500, 3789500; 414500, 3789600; 415300, 3789600; 
415300, 3789400; 415600, 3789400; 415600, 3789300; 415800, 3789300; 
415800, 3789400; 416100, 3789400; 416100, 3789500; 416200, 3789500; 
416200, 3789600; 416300, 3789600; 416300, 3789700; 416400, 3789700; 
416400, 3789800; 416900, 3789800; 416900, 3789900; 417000, 3789900; 
417000, 3790600; 417100, 3790600; 417100, 3790700; 416900, 3790700; 
416900, 3790900; 416800, 3790900; 416800, 3791000; 416500, 3791000; 
416500, 3791100; 416200, 3791100; 416200, 3791200; 415900, 3791200; 
415900, 3791300; 415700, 3791300; 415700, 3791500; 415600, 3791500; 
415600, 3791700; 415500, 3791700; 415500, 3791800; 415400, 3791800; 
415400, 3791900; 415200, 3791900; 415200, 3792000; 414700, 3792000; 
414700, 3792100; 414600, 3792100; 414600, 3792300; 415500, 3792300; 
415500, 3792200; 415700, 3792200; 415700, 3792000; 415900, 3792000; 
415900, 3791900; 416000, 3791900; 416000, 3791700; 416200, 3791700; 
416200, 3791600; 416400, 3791600; 416400, 3791500; 416700, 3791500; 
416700, 3791400; 416800, 3791400; 416800, 3791300; 417100, 3791300; 
417100, 3791100; 417200, 3791100; 417200, 3791000; 417500, 3791000; 
417500, 3790600; 417400, 3790600; 417400, 3789800; 417300, 3789800; 
417300, 3789700; 417500, 3789700; 417500, 3789600; 417600, 3789600; 
417600, 3789500; 417700, 3789500; 417700, 3789200; 418200, 3789200; 
418200, 3789800; 418300, 3789800; 418300, 3789900; 418400, 3789900; 
418400, 3790100; 418500, 3790100; 418500, 3790400; 418600, 3790400; 
418600, 3790800; 418500, 3790800; 418500, 3790900; 418200, 3790900; 
418200, 3791000; 418100, 3791000; 418100, 3791200; 418000, 3791200; 
418000, 3791300; 417800, 3791300; 417800, 3791400; 417700, 3791400; 
417700, 3791600; 417600, 3791600; 417600, 3791700; 417500, 3791700; 
417500, 3792200; 417900, 3792200; 417900, 3792300; 417400, 3792300; 
417400, 3792400; 417300, 3792400; 417300, 3792600; 417200, 3792600; 
417200, 3792700; 417600, 3792700; 417600, 3792600; 418100, 3792600; 
418100, 3792900; 418200, 3792900; 418200, 3793300; 418300, 3793300; 
418300, 3793200; 418400, 3793200;

[[Page 490]]

418400, 3792500; 418300, 3792500; 418300, 3792200; 418200, 3792200; 
418200, 3792000; 418100, 3792000; 418100, 3791700; 418200, 3791700; 
418200, 3791600; 418400, 3791600; 418400, 3791400; 418500, 3791400; 
418500, 3791300; 418600, 3791300; 418600, 3791200; 418800, 3791200; 
418800, 3791100; 418900, 3791100; 418900, 3791000; 419000, 3791000; 
419000, 3790600; 419100, 3790600; 419100, 3790300; 419000, 3790300; 
419000, 3790200; 418900, 3790200; 418900, 3789700; 418800, 3789700; 
418800, 3789600; 418700, 3789600; 418700, 3789500; 418600, 3789500; 
418600, 3789200; 418800, 3789200; 418800, 3789300; 419100, 3789300; 
419100, 3789400; 419900, 3789400; 419900, 3789500; 420000, 3789500; 
420000, 3789600; 420100, 3789600; 420100, 3789700; 420200, 3789700; 
420200, 3789900; 420300, 3789900; 420300, 3790000; 420500, 3790000; 
420500, 3790100; 420700, 3790100; 420700, 3790200; 420800, 3790200; 
420800, 3790300; 420900, 3790300; 420900, 3790500; 421000, 3790500; 
421000, 3790900; 421100, 3790900; 421100, 3791000; 421200, 3791000; 
421200, 3791100; 421300, 3791100; 421300, 3791200; 421400, 3791200; 
421400, 3791300; 421500, 3791300; 421500, 3791400; 422200, 3791400; 
422200, 3791500; 422300, 3791500; 422300, 3791700; 422200, 3791700; 
422200, 3791900; 422100, 3791900; 422100, 3792200; 422000, 3792200; 
422000, 3793100; 422100, 3793100; 422100, 3793200; 422200, 3793200; 
422200, 3793400; 422400, 3793400; 422400, 3793500; 422500, 3793500; 
422500, 3794200; 422600, 3794200; 422600, 3794400; 422500, 3794400; 
422500, 3794600; 422600, 3794600; 422600, 3795000; 422700, 3795000; 
returning to 422700, 3795100.
    (ii) The map of Unit 2 follows:

[[Page 491]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04JA05.002


    (8) Unit 3: Big Tujunga Creek system in Los Angeles County, 
California.
    (i) Unit 3 includes the stretch of Big Tujunga Creek between the Big 
Tujunga Dam and Hansen Dam and the following tributaries: Stone Canyon 
Creek, Delta Canyon Creek, and Gold Canyon Creek. The lateral extent of 
Unit 3 is defined by the UTM coordinates described in the legal 
description.
    Unit 3: Big Tujunga Canyon. Los Angeles County, California. From 
USGS 1:24,000

[[Page 492]]

quagrangle maps Condor Peak, San Fernando, and Sunland, California, land 
bounded by the following UTM 11 NAD 27 coordinates (E, N): 381900, 
3797700; 382100, 3797700; 382100, 3797600; 382200, 3797600; 382200, 
3797500; 382400, 3797500; 382400, 3797400; 382600, 3797400; 382600, 
3797300; 382800, 3797300; 382800, 3797200; 383000, 3797200; 383000, 
3797100; 383100, 3797100; 383100, 3797000; 383200, 3797000; 383200, 
3796900; 383300, 3796900; 383300, 3796500; 383400, 3796500; 383400, 
3796400; 383300, 3796400; 383300, 3796200; 383200, 3796200; 383200, 
3796100; 383500, 3796100; 383500, 3796000; 383600, 3796000; 383600, 
3796300; 383700, 3796300; 383700, 3796500; 384300, 3796500; 384300, 
3796400; 384400, 3796400; 384400, 3796300; 384600, 3796300; 384600, 
3796200; 384900, 3796200; 384900, 3796100; 385000, 3796100; 385000, 
3796000; 385100, 3796000; 385100, 3795900; 385200, 3795900; 385200, 
3795800; 385300, 3795800; 385300, 3795700; 385800, 3795700; 385800, 
3795600; 386000, 3795600; 386000, 3795500; 386200, 3795500; 386200, 
3795400; 386300, 3795400; 386300, 3795300; 386500, 3795300; 386500, 
3795200; 386600, 3795200; 386600, 3795100; 386700, 3795100; 386700, 
3794900; 386800, 3794900; 386800, 3794700; 386900, 3794700; 386900, 
3794600; 387000, 3794600; 387000, 3794500; 387100, 3794500; 387100, 
3794400; 387600, 3794400; 387600, 3794300; 387700, 3794300; 387700, 
3794200; 387800, 3794200; 387800, 3793800; 387900, 3793800; 387900, 
3793900; 388000, 3793900; 388000, 3793800; 388100, 3793800; 388100, 
3793600; 388700, 3793600; 388700, 3793700; 388800, 3793700; 388800, 
3793800; 389100, 3793800; 389100, 3793700; 389300, 3793700; 389300, 
3793800; 389400, 3793800; 389400, 3793900; 389600, 3793900; 389600, 
3794000; 389800, 3794000; 389800, 3794200; 389900, 3794200; 389900, 
3794300; 390000, 3794300; 390000, 3794700; 390100, 3794700; 390100, 
3794900; 390300, 3794900; 390300, 3795000; 390400, 3795000; 390400, 
3795100; 390500, 3795100; 390500, 3795200; 390800, 3795200; 390800, 
3795000; 390700, 3795000; 390700, 3794800; 390500, 3794800; 390500, 
3794700; 390400, 3794700; 390400, 3794600; 390300, 3794600; 390300, 
3794300; 390200, 3794300; 390200, 3794200; 390100, 3794200; 390100, 
3794100; 390000, 3794100; 390000, 3793900; 389900, 3793900; 389900, 
3793800; 389800, 3793800; 389800, 3793700; 389600, 3793700; 389600, 
3793600; 389500, 3793600; 389500, 3793500; 389400, 3793500; 389400, 
3793400; 389200, 3793400; 389200, 3793300; 389000, 3793300; 389000, 
3793500; 388800, 3793500; 388800, 3793300; 388700, 3793300; 388700, 
3793200; 388300, 3793200; 388300, 3793100; 388000, 3793100; 388000, 
3793200; 387900, 3793200; 387900, 3793500; 387600, 3793500; 387600, 
3793700; 387500, 3793700; 387500, 3794000; 387200, 3794000; 387200, 
3794200; 387000, 3794200; 387000, 3794300; 386800, 3794300; 386800, 
3794500; 386500, 3794500; 386500, 3794700; 386400, 3794700; 386400, 
3794800; 386300, 3794800; 386300, 3794700; 386200, 3794700; 386200, 
3794400; 386100, 3794400; 386100, 3794300; 385900, 3794300; 385900, 
3794200; 385800, 3794200; 385800, 3794000; 385600, 3794000; 385600, 
3794300; 385800, 3794300; 385800, 3794400; 385900, 3794400; 385900, 
3794500; 386000, 3794500; 386000, 3795000; 385800, 3795000; 385800, 
3795100; 385700, 3795100; 385700, 3795200; 385600, 3795200; 385600, 
3795300; 385500, 3795300; 385500, 3795500; 385100, 3795500; 385100, 
3795600; 385000, 3795600; 385000, 3795700; 384900, 3795700; 384900, 
3795800; 384700, 3795800; 384700, 3795900; 384600, 3795900; 384600, 
3796000; 384200, 3796000; 384200, 3795900; 384300, 3795900; 384300, 
3795800; 384400, 3795800; 384400, 3795600; 384500, 3795600; 384500, 
3795500; 384600, 3795500; 384600, 3795000; 384500, 3795000; 384500, 
3794900; 384400, 3794900; 384400, 3794800; 384300, 3794800; 384300, 
3794700; 384100, 3794700; 384100, 3794900; 384200, 3794900; 384200, 
3795000; 384400, 3795000; 384400, 3795300; 384500, 3795300; 384500, 
3795400; 384400, 3795400; 384400, 3795500; 384200, 3795500; 384200, 
3795700; 384100, 3795700; 384100, 3795800; 384000, 3795800; 384000, 
3795600; 383700, 3795600; 383700, 3795700; 383600, 3795700; 383600, 
3795800; 383400, 3795800; 383400, 3795900; 383100, 3795900; 383100, 
3795800; 382500, 3795800; 382500, 3795700; 382300, 3795700; 382300, 
3795600; 382200, 3795600; 382200, 3795500; 382100, 3795500; 382100, 
3795400; 382000, 3795400; 382000, 3795200; 381900, 3795200; 381900, 
3795100; 381800, 3795100; 381800, 3795000; 381600, 3795000; 381600, 
3794900; 381500, 3794900; 381500, 3794800; 381400, 3794800; 381400, 
3794600; 381300, 3794600; 381300, 3794400; 381200, 3794400; 381200, 
3794100; 381100, 3794100; 381100, 3794000; 381000, 3794000; 381000, 
3793900; 380900, 3793900; 380900, 3793800; 380800, 3793800; 380800, 
3793600; 380700, 3793600; 380700, 3793500; 380600, 3793500; 380600, 
3793400; 380500, 3793400; 380500, 3793300; 380100, 3793300; 380100, 
3793400; 379700, 3793400; 379700, 3793300; 379500, 3793300; 379500, 
3793200; 379400, 3793200; 379400, 3793100; 379300, 3793100; 379300, 
3793000; 379100, 3793000; 379100, 3792900; 379000, 3792900; 379000, 
3792700; 378800, 3792700; 378800, 3792600; 378700, 3792600; 378700, 
3792500; 378300, 3792500; 378300, 3792300; 377300, 3792300; 377300, 
3792200; 376900, 3792200; 376900, 3792100; 376000, 3792100; 376000, 
3792200; 375400, 3792200; 375400, 3792300; 374200, 3792300; 374200, 
3792200; 373500, 3792200; 373500, 3792300; 373400, 3792300; 373400, 
3792600; 373600, 3792600; 373600, 3792700; 374300, 3792700; 374300, 
3792900; 374200, 3792900; 374200, 3793000; 374100, 3793000; 374100, 
3793200; 374500, 3793200; 374500, 3793100; 374800, 3793100; 374800, 
3793000; 374900, 3793000; 374900, 3792900; 375200, 3792900; 375200, 
3793000; 375600, 3793000; 375600, 3792900; 376500, 3792900; 376500, 
3793000; 376900, 3793000; 376900, 3793100; 377200, 3793100; 377200, 
3793200; 377500, 3793200; 377500, 3793300; 377800, 3793300; 377800, 
3793200; 378300, 3793200; 378300, 3793100; 378800, 3793100; 378800, 
3793200; 379000, 3793200; 379000, 3793300; 379100, 3793300; 379100, 
3793400; 379200, 3793400; 379200, 3793500; 379300, 3793500; 379300, 
3793600; 379600, 3793600; 379600, 3793700; 379800, 3793700; 379800, 
3793800; 380100, 3793800; 380100, 3793900; 380400, 3793900; 380400, 
3794000; 380500, 3794000; 380500, 3794100; 380600, 3794100; 380600, 
3794200; 380800, 3794200; 380800, 3794300; 380900, 3794300; 380900, 
3794600; 381000, 3794600; 381000, 3794800; 381100, 3794800; 381100, 
3794900; 381200, 3794900; 381200, 3795000; 381300, 3795000; 381300, 
3795100; 381500, 3795100; 381500, 3795400; 381800, 3795400; 381800, 
3795600; 381900, 3795600; 381900, 3795700; 382000, 3795700; 382000, 
3795900; 382200, 3795900; 382200, 3796000; 382300, 3796000; 382300, 
3796100; 383000, 3796100; 383000, 3796400; 383100, 3796400; 383100, 
3796800; 383000, 3796800; 383000, 3796900; 382900, 3796900;

[[Page 493]]

382900, 3797000; 382700, 3797000; 382700, 3797100; 382500, 3797100; 
382500, 3797200; 382200, 3797200; 382200, 3797300; 382100, 3797300; 
382100, 3797400; 382000, 3797400; 382000, 3797500; 381900, 3797500; 
returning to 381900, 3797700; excluding land bounded by 377600, 3792900; 
377600, 3792800; 377400, 3792800; 377400, 3792700; 377200, 3792700; 
377200, 3792800; 377000, 3792800; 377000, 3792700; 377100, 3792700; 
377100, 3792500; 377200, 3792500; 377200, 3792400; 377500, 3792400; 
377500, 3792600; 377600, 3792600; 377600, 3792500; 377700, 3792500; 
377700, 3792600; 377900, 3792600; 377900, 3792500; 378100, 3792500; 
378100, 3792600; 378000, 3792600; 378000, 3792800; 377900, 3792800; 
377900, 3792900; 377600, 3792900.
    (ii) The map of Unit 3 follows:

[[Page 494]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04JA05.003

                 Warner Sucker (Catostomus warnerensis)

Oregon: Lake County.

    1. Twelvemile Creek--Approximately 4 stream miles and 50 feet on 
either side of the stream commencing at the confluence of Twelvemile 
Creek and Twentymile Creek and extending upstream, and including those 
portions of Twelvemile Creek in T40S, R23E, Section 35; and T41S, R23E, 
Sections 1, 2, 12, 13, 23, and 24.
    2. Twentymile Creek--Approximately 18 stream miles and 50 feet on 
either side of the stream commencing about 9 miles upstream

[[Page 495]]

of the junction of Twelvemile and Twentymile Creeks and extending to a 
point about 9 miles downstream of the junction, and including those 
portions of Twentymile Creek in T40S, R22E, Sections 25, 35, and 36; 
T40S, R23E, Sections 19, 20, 24, 25, 28, 29, 30, 33, 34, 35 and 36; 
T40S, R24E, Sections 15, 16, 19, 20, 21, 22, 28, 29, 30; and T41S, R23E, 
Sections 2 and 3.
    Note: Map follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.143
    
    3. Spillway Canal north of Hart Lake--Approximately 2 stream miles 
and 50 feet on either side of the waterway commencing at its confluence 
with Hart Lake and extending to a point about 2 miles downstream, and 
including those portions of the waterway in T36S, R24E, Sections 7, 18, 
and 19.
    4. Snyder Creek--Approximately 3 stream miles and 50 feet on either 
side of the stream commencing at the confluence of Snyder Creek and 
Honey Creek and extending to a point about 3 miles upstream on Snyder 
Creek, and including those portions of Snyder Creek in T36S, R22E, 
Sections 1 and 12; and T36S, R23E, Sections 7, 17, and 18.
    5. Honey Creek--Approximately 16 stream miles and 50 feet on either 
side of the stream commencing at the confluence of Honey Creek with Hart 
Lake and extending to a point about 16 miles upstream on Honey Creek, 
and including those portions of Honey Creek in T36S, R24E, Sections 19, 
20, 27, 28, 29, 30, 33, 34, and 35; T36S, R23E, Sections 17, 18, 20, 21, 
22, 23, 24, 26, 27, and 28; and T36S, R22E, Sections 13, 14, 22, and 23.
    Note: Map follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.144
    
    Constituent elements of all areas proposed as critical habitat 
include streams 15 feet to 60 feet wide with gravel-bottom shoal and 
riffle areas with intervening pools. Streams should have clean, 
unpolluted flowing water and a stable riparian zone. The streams should 
support a variety of aquatic insects, crustaceans, and other small 
invertebrates for food.

                   Bull Trout (Salvelinus confluentus)

    (1) Locations of the designated critical habitat. Critical habitat 
is designated in the following States and counties on the maps and as 
described below:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
          State                               Counties
------------------------------------------------------------------------
(i) Idaho................  Adams, Benewah, Bonner, Boundary, Kootenai,
                            Nez Perce, Shoshone, Washington.
(ii) Montana.............  Deer Lodge, Flathead, Glacier, Granite, Lake,
                            Lewis and Clark, Lincoln, Mineral, Missoula,
                            Powell, Ravalli, Sanders.
(iii) Oregon.............  Baker, Deschutes, Grant, Harney, Hood River,
                            Jefferson, Klamath, Lake, Lane, Sherman,
                            Umatilla, Union, Wallowa, Wasco.
(iv) Washington..........  Asotin, Benton, Clallam, Clark, Columbia,
                            Cowlitz, Garfield, Grays Harbor, Island,
                            Jefferson, King, Kittitas, Klickitat, Mason,
                            Pend Oreille, Pierce, Skagit, Skamania,
                            Snohomish, Stevens, Thurston, Walla Walla,
                            Whatcom, Whitman, Yakima.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (2) Topographic features included in the critical habitat 
designation. Critical habitat includes the stream channels within the 
designated stream reaches and inshore extent of critical habitat for 
marine nearshore areas (the mean high high-water (MHHW) line), including 
tidally influenced freshwater heads of estuaries indicated on the maps 
below.
    (i) Critical habitat includes the stream channels within the 
designated stream reaches, and includes a lateral extent as defined by 
the ordinary high-water line. In

[[Page 496]]

areas where ordinary high-water line has not been defined, the lateral 
extent will be defined by the bankfull elevation. Bankfull elevation is 
the level at which water begins to leave the channel and move into the 
floodplain and is reached at a discharge that generally has a recurrence 
interval of 1 to 2 years on the annual flood series. Critical habitat 
includes the stream channels within the designated stream reaches, and 
includes a lateral extent from the bankfull elevation on one bank to the 
bankfull elevation on the opposite bank. Bankfull elevation is the level 
at which water begins to leave the channel and move into the floodplain 
and is reached at a discharge that generally has a recurrence interval 
of 1 to 2 years on the annual flood series. If bankfull elevation is not 
evident on either bank, the ordinary high-water line must be used to 
determine the lateral extent of critical habitat. The lateral extent of 
designated lakes is defined by the perimeter of the water body as mapped 
on standard 1:24,000 scale topographic maps.
    (ii) Critical habitat includes the inshore extent of critical 
habitat for marine nearshore areas (the MHHW line), including tidally 
influenced freshwater heads of estuaries. This refers to the average of 
all the higher high-water heights of the two daily tidal levels. 
Adjacent shoreline riparian areas, bluffs, and uplands are not 
designated as critical habitat. However, it should be recognized that 
the quality of marine habitat along shorelines is intrinsically related 
to the character of these adjacent features, and human activities that 
occur outside of the MHHW line can have major effects on physical and 
biological features of the marine environment. The offshore extent of 
critical habitat for marine nearshore areas is based on the extent of 
the photic zone, which is the layer of water in which organisms are 
exposed to light. Critical habitat extends offshore to the depth of 33 
ft (10 m) relative to the mean low low-water line (MLLW) (average of all 
the lower low-water heights of the two daily tidal levels). This equates 
to the average depth of the photic zone and is consistent with the 
offshore extent of the nearshore habitat identified under the ``Notice 
of Change to the Nation's Tidal Datums With the Adoption of a New 
National Tidal Datum Epoch Period of 1983 Through 2001''. This area 
between MHHW and minus 10 MLLW is considered the habitat most 
consistently used by bull trout in marine waters based on known use, 
forage fish availability, and ongoing migration studies, and captures 
geological and ecological processes important to maintaining these 
habitats. This area contains essential foraging habitat and migration 
corridors such as estuaries, bays, inlets, shallow subtidal areas, and 
intertidal flats.
    (3) Primary constituent elements needed for bull trout survival. 
Within the designated critical habitat areas, the primary constituent 
elements (PCEs) for bull trout are those habitat components that are 
essential for the primary biological needs of foraging, reproducing, 
rearing of young, dispersal, genetic exchange, or sheltering. Note that 
only the PCEs described in paragraphs (e)(3)(i), (vi), (vii), and (viii) 
apply to marine nearshore waters identified as critical habitat. The 
PCEs are as follows:
    (i) Water temperatures that support bull trout use. Bull trout have 
been documented in streams with temperatures from 32 to 72 [deg]F (0 to 
22 [deg]C) but are found more frequently in temperatures ranging from 36 
to 59 [deg]F (2 to 15 [deg]C). These temperature ranges may vary 
depending on bull trout life-history stage and form, geography, 
elevation, diurnal and seasonal variation, shade, such as that provided 
by riparian habitat, and local groundwater influence. Stream reaches 
with temperatures that preclude bull trout use are specifically excluded 
from designation;
    (ii) Complex stream channels with features such as woody debris, 
side channels, pools, and undercut banks to provide a variety of depths, 
velocities, and instream structures;
    (iii) Substrates of sufficient amount, size, and composition to 
ensure success of egg and embryo overwinter survival, fry emergence, and 
young-of-the-year and juvenile survival. This should include a minimal 
amount of fine substrate less than 0.25 inch (0.63 centimeter) in 
diameter.
    (iv) A natural hydrograph, including peak, high, low, and base flows 
within historic ranges or, if regulated, currently operate under a 
biological opinion that addresses bull trout, or a hydrograph that 
demonstrates the ability to support bull trout populations by minimizing 
daily and day-to-day fluctuations and minimizing departures from the 
natural cycle of flow levels corresponding with seasonal variation: This 
rule finds that reservoirs currently operating under a biological 
opinion that addresses bull trout provides management for PCEs as 
currently operated;
    (v) Springs, seeps, groundwater sources, and subsurface water to 
contribute to water quality and quantity as a cold water source;
    (vi) Migratory corridors with minimal physical, biological, or water 
quality impediments between spawning, rearing, overwintering, and 
foraging habitats, including intermittent or seasonal barriers induced 
by high water temperatures or low flows;
    (vii) An abundant food base including terrestrial organisms of 
riparian origin, aquatic macroinvertebrates, and forage fish; and
    (viii) Permanent water of sufficient quantity and quality such that 
normal reproduction, growth, and survival are not inhibited.
    (4) Exclusions from the critical habitat designation. Certain 
geographic areas are excluded from the critical habitat designation as 
described below in this paragraph (4).

[[Page 497]]

    (i) 3(5)(A) and Exclusions under section 4(b)(2) of the Act. (A) 
Habitat conservation plans. We are excluding from the critical habitat 
designation any non-Federal lands covered by an incidental take permit 
for bull trout issued under section 10(a)(1)(B) of the Act on or before 
September 26, 2005, as long as such permit, or a conservation easement 
providing comparable conservation benefits, remains legally operative on 
such lands. These excluded areas are covered by habitat conservation 
plans (HCPs). They include lands and waters covered by the Washington 
Department of Natural Resources HCP, the Plum Creek Native Fish HCP/
Stimson Lumber Company HCP, the Tacoma Water Green River HCP, the Green 
Diamond Resources Company HCP, and the City of Seattle Cedar River 
Watershed HCP.
    (B) Tribal lands. The following tribal lands contain stream segments 
or marine nearshore habitat areas that have been excluded from 
designated critical habitat pursuant to section 4(b)(2) of the Act: 
Tribal lands of the Blackfeet Nation, Swinomish Tribe, Quinault Indian 
Nation, Muckleshoot Tribe, Jamestown S'Klallam Tribe, Hoh Tribe, 
Skokomish, and Confederated Tribes of Warm Springs Reservation of 
Oregon.
    (C) Federal lands. The following Federal lands contain stream 
segments or marine nearshore habitat areas that have been excluded from 
designated critical habitat pursuant to section 4(a)(3) of the Act: 
Lands within the Nisqually National Wildlife Refuge; the Washington 
State Forest Practices Rules and Forest Practices Regulations for Bull 
Trout; the Lewis Hydroelectric Project Conservation Easements; the Snake 
River Basin Adjudication; the Northwest Forest Plan Aquatic Conservation 
Strategy; the Interim Strategy for Managing Anadromous-Fish-Producing 
Watersheds; the Federal Columbia River Power System; the Clark Fork 
River from Missoula to Butte, MT; the Middle Fork of the Boise River; 
the Interior Columbia Basin Ecosystem Management Project; the Southeast 
Oregon Resource Management Plan; the Southwest Idaho Land and Resource 
Management Plan; and waters impounded behind dams whose primary purpose 
is for flood control or water supply for human consumption (reservoirs 
and pools).
    (ii) Non-Inclusions under section 4(a)(3) of the Act. (A) Military 
lands. The following military lands contain stream segments or marine 
nearshore habitat areas that have been excluded from designated critical 
habitat pursuant to section 4(a)(3) of the Act: Bayview Acoustic 
Research Detachment, Naval Surface Warfare Center, ID; Naval Radio 
Station, Jim Creek, WA; Naval Station, Everett, WA; Naval Air Station, 
Whidbey Island, WA; the Naval Under Sea Warfare Center Division, 
Newport, WA (Dabob Bay and Crescent Harbor), Keyport facilities and Fort 
Lewis, WA.
    (B) [Reserved]
    (5) The designated critical habitat units for bull trout are set 
forth in the text and depicted on the maps below.
    (6) An index map of designated critical habitat for the Klamath 
River, Columbia River, Olympic Peninsula, Puget Sound, and Saint Mary-
Belly bull trout populations follows:

[[Page 498]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR26SE05.000

    (7) Unit 1: Klamath River Basin.
    (i) Critical habitat is designated on the water bodies listed in the 
following table:

[[Page 499]]



----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                            Stream endpoint     Stream endpoint
              Name                 Stream endpoint      Stream endpoint    latitude or lake    longitude or lake
                                       latitude            longitude            center              center
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Boulder Creek..................  42.517 N.            120.951 W.          42.495 N.           120.884 W.
Brownsworth Creek..............  42.392 N.            120.913 W.          42.469 N.           120.854 W.
Coyote Creek...................  42.854 N.            121.158 W.          42.893 N.           121.246 W.
Deming Creek...................  42.448 N.            120.953 W.          42.486 N.           120.885 W.
Dixon Creek....................  42.518 N.            120.937 W.          42.532 N.           120.923 W.
Leonard Creek..................  42.413 N.            120.867 W.          42.465 N.           120.864 W.
Long Creek.....................  42.826 N.            121.209 W.          42.933 N.           121.338 W.
North Fork Sprague River.......  42.497 N.            121.008 W.          42.557 N.           120.839 W.
Sheepy Creek...................  42.534 N.            120.931 W.          42.514 N.           120.890 W.
Sun Creek......................  42.735 N.            122.008 W.          42.898 N.           122.096 W.
Sycan Marsh....................                 Located at                42.816 N.           121.124 W.
Threemile Creek................  42.642 N.            122.065 W.          42.640 N.           122.138 W.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (ii) Map of Unit 1, Klamath River Basin, follows:

[[Page 500]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR26SE05.001

    (8) Unit 2: Clark Fork River Basin.
    (ii) Critical habitat is designated on the water bodies listed in 
the following table:

[[Page 501]]



----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                            Stream endpoint     Stream endpoint
              Name                 Stream endpoint      Stream endpoint    latitude or lake    longitude or lake
                                       latitude            longitude            center              center
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Akokala Cr.....................  48.881 N.            114.198 W.          48.892 N.           114.191 W.
Akokala Lake...................                 Located at                48.879 N.           114.198 W.
Arrow Lake.....................                 Located at                48.706 N.           113.884 W.
Barker Cr......................  46.163 N.            113.115 W.          46.100 N.           113.115 W.
Bear Creek.....................  48.234 N.            113.566 W.          48.296 N.           113.384 W.
Beaver Cr......................  46.472 N.            113.493 W.          46.468 N.           113.555 W.
Belmont Cr.....................  46.954 N.            113.569 W.          47.061 N.           113.681 W.
Big Cr.........................  47.378 N.            115.384 W.          47.364 N.           115.444 W.
Big Cr, M Fk...................  47.364 N.            115.444 W.          47.312 N.           115.492 W.
Big Cr, W Fk...................  47.364 N.            115.444 W.          47.350 N.           115.544 W.
Bitterroot River...............  46.861 N.            114.118 W.          45.944 N.           114.128 W.
Blackfoot River................  46.870 N.            113.889 W.          47.011 N.           112.476 W.
Blodgett Cr....................  46.312 N.            114.145 W.          46.248 N.           114.453 W.
Boulder Cr.....................  46.478 N.            113.237 W.          46.343 N.           113.076 W.
Bowman Cr......................  48.906 N.            114.117 W.          48.974 N.           114.063 W.
Bowman Lake....................                 Located at                48.870 N.           114.157 W.
Brewster Cr....................  46.612 N.            113.653 W.          46.582 N.           113.587 W.
Bull River.....................  48.036 N.            115.844 W.          48.109 N.           115.782 W.
Burnt Fork Creek...............  46.542 N.            114.099 W.          46.304 N.           113.837 W.
Cable Cr.......................  46.172 N.            113.180 W.          46.196 N.           113.213 W.
Cache Cr.......................  46.814 N.            114.639 W.          46.726 N.           114.758 W.
Camas Cr.......................  48.690 N.            113.901 W.          48.738 N.           113.883 W.
Cedar Cr.......................  47.178 N.            114.862 W.          47.049 N.           115.043 W.
Cedar Creek....................  48.880 N.            116.959 W.          48.909 N.           116.885 W.
Cerulean Lake..................                 Located at                48.872 N.           114.057 W.
Chicken Cr.....................  45.601 N.            114.313 W.          45.621 N.           114.403 W.
Clark Fork River...............  47.366 N.            114.776 W.          46.870 N.           113.889 W.
Clearwater Lake................                 Located at                47.385 N.           113.558 W.
Clearwater R, W Fk.............  47.256 N.            113.550 W.          47.287 N.           113.744 W.
Clearwater River...............  47.107 N.            113.427 W.          47.390 N.           113.561 W.
Coal Cr........................  48.690 N.            114.193 W.          48.698 N.           114.494 W.
Coal Cr, S Fk..................  48.680 N.            114.345 W.          48.674 N.           114.471 W.
Cold Cr........................  47.584 N.            113.756 W.          47.562 N.           113.810 W.
Copper Cr......................  47.007 N.            112.555 W.          47.060 N.           112.752 W.
Cottonwood Cr..................  47.025 N.            113.281 W.          47.161 N.           113.345 W.
Cyclone Cr.....................  48.665 N.            114.238 W.          48.712 N.           114.391 W.
Cyclone Lake...................                 Located at                48.706 N.           114.297 W.
Deer Cr........................  45.595 N.            114.321 W.          45.570 N.           114.509 W.
Deer Cr........................  47.208 N.            113.529 W.          47.249 N.           113.688 W.
Deer Cr........................  47.377 N.            115.359 W.          47.326 N.           115.389 W.
Doctor Lake....................                 Located at                47.404 N.           113.480 W.
Dry Cr.........................  47.305 N.            114.064 W.          47.259 N.           113.903 W.
Dunham Cr......................  47.103 N.            113.155 W.          47.238 N.           113.316 W.
East Fork Bitterroot River.....  45.944 N.            114.128 W.          45.911 N.           113.595 W.
East River.....................  48.353 N.            116.852 W.          48.371 N.           116.819 W.
Elk Cr.........................  47.544 N.            113.741 W.          47.480 N.           113.856 W.
Finley Cr......................  47.125 N.            113.560 W.          47.120 N.           113.649 W.
Fish Cr........................  47.004 N.            114.699 W.          46.927 N.           114.696 W.
Fish Cr, S Fk..................  46.927 N.            114.696 W.          46.753 N.           114.571 W.
Fish Cr, W Fk..................  46.927 N.            114.696 W.          46.812 N.           114.890 W.
Fishtrap Cr....................  47.713 N.            115.058 W.          47.817 N.           115.144 W.
Fitzsimmons Cr.................  48.735 N.            114.733 W.          48.752 N.           114.618 W.
Flathead River.................  48.061 N.            114.127 W.          48.468 N.           114.069 W.
Flint Cr.......................  46.654 N.            113.145 W.          46.478 N.           113.237 W.
Foster Cr......................  46.164 N.            113.120 W.          46.283 N.           113.109 W.
Fred Burr Creek................  46.365 N.            114.131 W.          46.357 N.           114.315 W.
Gilbert Cr.....................  46.682 N.            113.666 W.          46.648 N.           113.818 W.
Goat Cr........................  47.749 N.            113.828 W.          47.773 N.           113.694 W.
Gold Creek.....................  47.971 N.            116.454 W.          47.954 N.           116.451 W.
Granite Creek..................  48.087 N.            116.427 W.          48.060 N.           116.329 W.
Granite Creek..................  48.639 N.            116.863 W.          48.700 N.           117.029 W.
Graves Cr......................  47.682 N.            115.409 W.          47.718 N.           115.380 W.
Grouse Creek...................  48.403 N.            116.477 W.          48.483 N.           116.228 W.
Harrison Cr....................  48.529 N.            113.750 W.          48.574 N.           113.701 W.
Harrison Lake..................                 Located at                48.516 N.           113.771 W.
Harvey Cr......................  46.707 N.            113.372 W.          46.581 N.           113.573 W.
Hughes Cr......................  45.621 N.            114.303 W.          45.667 N.           114.021 W.
Hughes Fork....................  48.805 N.            116.923 W.          48.946 N.           117.023 W.
Indian Creek...................  48.610 N.            116.836 W.          48.634 N.           116.789 W.
Jim Cr.........................  47.648 N.            113.792 W.          47.575 N.           113.856 W.
Jocko R........................  47.322 N.            114.304 W.          47.201 N.           113.924 W.
Jocko R, M Fk..................  47.201 N.            113.924 W.          47.203 N.           113.761 W.

[[Page 502]]

 
Jocko R, N Fk..................  47.201 N.            113.924 W.          47.226 N.           113.816 W.
Jocko R, S Fk..................  47.195 N.            113.852 W.          47.104 N.           113.766 W.
Johnson Cr.....................  48.139 N.            116.229 W.          48.131 N.           116.225 W.
Kalispell Creek................  48.567 N.            116.921 W.          48.626 N.           117.134 W.
Kintla Cr......................  48.975 N.            114.250 W.          48.986 N.           114.063 W.
Kintla Lake....................                 Located at                48.966 N.           114.297 W.
Lake Alva......................                 Located at                47.314 N.           113.582 W.
Lake Inez......................                 Located at                47.270 N.           113.566 W.
Lake Isabel....................                 Located at                48.422 N.           113.493 W.
Lake McDonald..................                 Located at                48.576 N.           113.932 W.
Landers Fk.....................  46.965 N.            112.562 W.          47.099 N.           112.566 W.
Lightning Creek................  48.140 N.            116.191 W.          48.353 N.           116.175 W.
Lincoln Cr.....................  48.592 N.            113.766 W.          48.595 N.           113.758 W.
Lincoln Lake...................                 Located at                48.591 N.           113.770 W.
Lindbergh Lake.................                 Located at                47.359 N.           113.731 W.
Lion Cr........................  47.681 N.            113.815 W.          47.670 N.           113.710 W.
Lion Creek.....................  48.736 N.            116.831 W.          48.725 N.           116.672 W.
Little Blackfoot R.............  46.515 N.            112.797 W.          46.341 N.           112.465 W.
Little Joe Cr..................  47.297 N.            115.120 W.          47.270 N.           115.140 W.
Logging Cr.....................  48.784 N.            114.002 W.          48.776 N.           114.019 W.
Logging Lake...................                 Located at                48.756 N.           114.077 W.
Lost Cr, S Fk..................  47.873 N.            113.824 W.          47.869 N.           113.736 W.
Lower Quartz Lake..............                 Located at                48.810 N.           114.170 W.
McDonald Cr....................  48.632 N.            113.868 W.          48.646 N.           113.847 W.
McDonald Lake..................                 Located at                47.421 N.           113.976 W.
Meadow Cr......................  46.157 N.            113.439 W.          46.092 N.           113.443 W.
Middle Fork East River.........  48.371 N.            116.819 W.          48.362 N.           116.659 W.
Middle Fork Flathead River.....  48.468 N.            114.069 W.          47.996 N.           113.057 W.
Middle Quartz Lake.............                 Located at                48.822 N.           114.141 W.
Mill Creek.....................  46.348 N.            114.152 W.          46.312 N.           114.286 W.
Mission Cr.....................  47.354 N.            114.285 W.          47.320 N.           113.988 W.
Mission Reservoir..............                 Located at                47.321 N.           114.005 W.
Monture Cr.....................  47.020 N.            113.235 W.          47.301 N.           113.249 W.
Moose Meadow Cr................  46.139 N.            113.591 W.          46.078 N.           113.635 W.
Morrell Cr.....................  47.141 N.            113.460 W.          47.342 N.           113.471 W.
North Fork Blackfoot River.....  46.985 N.            113.129 W.          47.197 N.           112.886 W.
North Fork Flathead River......  48.468 N.            114.069 W.          49.000 N.           114.474 W.
North Fork Grouse Creek........  48.452 N.            116.373 W.          48.502 N.           116.265 W.
North Fork Indian Creek........  48.634 N.            116.789 W.          48.627 N.           116.691 W.
North Gold Creek...............  47.974 N.            116.452 W.          47.975 N.           116.426 W.
Nyack Creek....................  48.458 N.            113.804 W.          48.489 N.           113.700 W.
Ole Cr.........................  48.283 N.            113.598 W.          48.315 N.           113.463 W.
Overwhich Cr...................  45.675 N.            114.307 W.          45.717 N.           114.080 W.
Owl Cr.........................  47.115 N.            113.441 W.          47.115 N.           113.502 W.
Pack River.....................  48.320 N.            116.382 W.          48.613 N.           116.634 W.
Park Cr........................  48.310 N.            113.613 W.          48.369 N.           113.490 W.
Park Cr........................  48.422 N.            113.496 W.          48.421 N.           113.505 W.
Petty Cr.......................  46.992 N.            114.446 W.          46.850 N.           114.438 W.
Piper Cr.......................  47.675 N.            113.815 W.          47.637 N.           113.844 W.
Placid Cr......................  47.116 N.            113.541 W.          47.187 N.           113.692 W.
Placid Lake....................                 Located at                47.119 N.           113.522 W.
Post Creek.....................  47.360 N.            114.168 W.          47.410 N.           113.935 W.
Priest Lake....................                 Located at                48.481 N.           116.875 W.
Priest River...................  48.178 N.            116.892 W.          48.353 N.           116.852 W.
Prospect Cr....................  47.592 N.            115.358 W.          47.569 N.           115.676 W.
Quartz Cr......................  48.815 N.            114.165 W.          48.839 N.           114.003 W.
Quartz Lake....................                 Located at                48.826 N.           114.100 W.
Racetrack Cr...................  46.285 N.            112.729 W.          46.279 N.           112.949 W.
Rainbow Cr.....................  48.855 N.            114.053 W.          48.869 N.           114.052 W.
Rainy Lake.....................                 Located at                47.340 N.           113.593 W.
Ranch Cr.......................  46.583 N.            113.678 W.          46.468 N.           113.577 W.
Rattlesnake Cr.................  46.867 N.            113.985 W.          47.098 N.           113.909 W.
Red Meadow Cr..................  48.805 N.            114.324 W.          48.753 N.           114.565 W.
Rock Cr, E Fk..................  46.200 N.            113.499 W.          46.021 N.           113.319 W.
Rock Cr, M Fk..................  46.223 N.            113.521 W.          45.949 N.           113.523 W.
Rock Cr, Ross Fk...............  46.224 N.            113.525 W.          46.034 N.           113.779 W.
Rock Cr, W Fk..................  46.223 N.            113.521 W.          46.144 N.           113.721 W.
Rock Creek.....................  46.725 N.            113.682 W.          46.223 N.           113.521 W.
Rock Creek.....................  47.975 N.            115.742 W.          48.040 N.           115.676 W.
Saint Mary's Lake..............                 Located at                47.261 N.           113.919 W.
Salmon Lake....................                 Located at                47.099 N.           113.406 W.
Seeley Lake....................                 Located at                47.187 N.           113.505 W.

[[Page 503]]

 
Skalkaho Cr....................  46.220 N.            114.162 W.          46.057 N.           113.807 W.
Sleeping Child Cr..............  46.162 N.            114.159 W.          46.033 N.           113.814 W.
Soldier Creek..................  48.503 N.            116.838 W.          48.547 N.           116.698 W.
Soup Cr........................  47.837 N.            113.843 W.          47.812 N.           113.751 W.
South Boulder Cr...............  46.441 N.            113.214 W.          46.330 N.           113.219 W.
South Fork Bull River..........  48.109 N.            115.782 W.          48.152 N.           115.784 W.
South Fork Granite Creek.......  48.700 N.            117.029 W.          48.761 N.           117.147 W.
South Fork Indian Creek........  48.634 N.            116.789 W.          48.624 N.           116.716 W.
South Fork Lion Creek..........  48.743 N.            116.797 W.          48.716 N.           116.718 W.
Squeezer Cr....................  47.750 N.            113.815 W.          47.717 N.           113.727 W.
St Regis R.....................  47.297 N.            115.089 W.          47.427 N.           115.741 W.
Stillwater R...................  48.604 N.            114.655 W.          48.789 N.           114.685 W.
Stony Cr.......................  46.348 N.            113.603 W.          46.283 N.           113.771 W.
Storm Lake Cr..................  46.169 N.            113.153 W.          46.075 N.           113.267 W.
Sullivan Springs...............  48.088 N.            116.411 W.          48.084 N.           116.387 W.
Swan Lake......................                 Located at                47.968 N.           113.910 W.
Swan River.....................  47.928 N.            113.880 W.          47.295 N.           113.782 W.
Swift Cr.......................  48.481 N.            114.424 W.          48.654 N.           114.550 W.
Swift Cr, E Fk.................  48.687 N.            114.582 W.          48.756 N.           114.583 W.
Swift Cr, W Fk.................  48.654 N.            114.550 W.          48.723 N.           114.667 W.
Tarlac Creek...................  48.393 N.            116.737 W.          48.349 N.           116.717 W.
The Thorofare..................  48.740 N.            116.842 W.          48.766 N.           116.864 W.
Thompson R.....................  47.576 N.            115.240 W.          47.713 N.           115.058 W.
Trail Creek....................  48.924 N.            114.386 W.          48.934 N.           114.534 W.
Trapper Creek..................  48.796 N.            116.896 W.          48.877 N.           116.846 W.
Trestle Creek..................  48.283 N.            116.352 W.          48.352 N.           116.234 W.
Trout Cr.......................  47.143 N.            114.829 W.          47.004 N.           114.992 W.
Trout Lake.....................                 Located at                48.677 N.           113.912 W.
Twelvemile Cr..................  47.350 N.            115.291 W.          47.465 N.           115.324 W.
Twin Creek.....................  48.094 N.            116.129 W.          48.063 N.           116.151 W.
Twin Lakes Cr..................  46.169 N.            113.152 W.          46.056 N.           113.226 W.
Two Mouth Creek................  48.688 N.            116.836 W.          48.674 N.           116.676 W.
Uleda Creek....................  48.388 N.            116.707 W.          48.339 N.           116.694 W.
Upper Kintla Lake..............                 Located at                48.974 N.           114.173 W.
Upper Priest River.............  48.799 N.            116.911 W.          49.000 N.           116.936 W.
Upper Stillwater Lake..........                 Located at                48.587 N.           114.636 W.
Upper Whitefish Lake...........                 Located at                48.687 N.           114.578 W.
Upper Willow Cr................  46.331 N.            113.542 W.          46.566 N.           113.522 W.
Vermilion R....................  47.833 N.            115.535 W.          47.869 N.           115.409 W.
Wahlquist Cr...................  46.501 N.            113.776 W.          46.531 N.           113.843 W.
Warm Springs Cr................  45.860 N.            114.025 W.          45.726 N.           114.057 W.
Warm Springs Cr................  46.210 N.            112.767 W.          46.261 N.           113.137 W.
West Fork Bitterroot River.....  45.944 N.            114.128 W.          45.461 N.           114.341 W.
West Gold Creek................  47.954 N.            116.451 W.          47.944 N.           116.477 W.
Whale Cr.......................  48.849 N.            114.352 W.          48.851 N.           114.593 W.
Whitefish Lake.................                 Located at                48.455 N.           114.387 W.
Woodward Cr....................  47.777 N.            113.845 W.          47.767 N.           113.879 W.
Woodward Cr, S Fk..............  47.754 N.            113.857 W.          47.717 N.           113.857 W.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (ii) Map of Unit 2, Clark Fork River Basin, follows:

[[Page 504]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR26SE05.002

    (9) Unit 3: Kootenai River Basin.
    (i) Critical habitat is designated on the water bodies listed in the 
following table:

[[Page 505]]



----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                            Stream endpoint     Stream endpoint
              Name                 Stream endpoint      Stream endpoint    latitude or lake    longitude or lake
                                       latitude            longitude            center              center
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Bull Lake......................                 Located at                48.218 N.           115.853 W.
Callahan Cr....................  48.435 N.            116.012 W.          48.458 N.           115.881 W.
Fisher R.......................  48.366 N.            115.323 W.          48.070 N.           115.374 W.
Grave Cr.......................  48.798 N.            114.952 W.          48.927 N.           114.750 W.
Keeler Cr......................  48.360 N.            115.851 W.          48.331 N.           116.006 W.
Lake Creek.....................  48.360 N.            115.851 W.          48.283 N.           115.858 W.
Libby Creek....................  48.393 N.            115.537 W.          48.112 N.           115.552 W.
O'Brien Cr.....................  48.448 N.            115.866 W.          48.557 N.           115.862 W.
Phillips Cr....................  48.971 N.            115.104 W.          49.000 N.           115.062 W.
Pipe Cr........................  48.424 N.            115.606 W.          48.674 N.           115.647 W.
Poorman Creek..................  48.149 N.            115.526 W.          48.123 N.           115.631 W.
Quartz Cr......................  48.438 N.            115.638 W.          48.573 N.           115.689 W.
Sophie Lake....................                 Located at                48.962 N.           115.116 W.
Tobacco R......................  48.897 N.            115.126 W.          48.798 N.           114.952 W.
West Fisher Creek..............  48.070 N.            115.374 W.          48.050 N.           115.594 W.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (ii) Map of Unit 3, Kootenai River Basin, follows:

[[Page 506]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR26SE05.003

    (10) Unit 4: Willamette River Basin.
    (i) Critical habitat is designated on the water bodies listed in the 
following table:

[[Page 507]]



----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                            Stream endpoint     Stream endpoint
              Name                 Stream endpoint      Stream endpoint    latitude or lake    longitude or lake
                                       latitude            longitude            center              center
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Blue River.....................  44.153 N.            122.342 W.          44.172 N.           122.328 W.
Horse Creek....................  44.170 N.            122.174 W.          44.125 N.           122.036 W.
Lost Creek.....................  44.190 N.            122.066 W.          44.162 N.           122.022 W.
Mckenzie River.................  44.126 N.            123.106 W.          44.309 N.           122.028 W.
Middle Fork Willamette River...  44.023 N.            123.017 W.          43.481 N.           122.254 W.
South Fork Mckenzie River......  44.159 N.            122.295 W.          43.953 N.           122.017 W.
Swift Creek....................  43.502 N.            122.299 W.          43.560 N.           122.162 W.
West Fork Horse Creek..........  44.172 N.            122.206 W.          44.170 N.           122.174 W.
Willamette River...............  44.126 N.            123.106 W.          44.023 N.           123.017 W.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (ii) Map of Unit 4, Willamette River Basin, follows:

[[Page 508]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR26SE05.004

    (11) Unit 5: Hood River Basin.
    (i) Critical habitat is designated on the water bodies listed in the 
following table:

[[Page 509]]



----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                            Stream endpoint     Stream endpoint
              Name                 Stream endpoint      Stream endpoint    latitude or lake    longitude or lake
                                       latitude            longitude            center              center
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
East Fork Hood River...........  45.605 N.            121.632 W.          45.575 N.           121.626 W.
Hood River.....................  45.721 N.            121.506 W.          45.605 N.           121.632 W.
Middle Fork Hood River.........  45.575 N.            121.626 W.          45.463 N.           121.645 W.
West Fork Hood River...........  45.605 N.            121.632 W.          45.456 N.           121.781 W.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (ii) Map of Unit 5, Hood River Basin, follows:

[[Page 510]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR26SE05.005

    (12) Unit 6: Deschutes River Basin.
    (i) Critical habitat is designated on the water bodies listed in the 
following table:

[[Page 511]]



----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                            Stream endpoint     Stream endpoint
              Name                 Stream endpoint      Stream endpoint    latitude or lake    longitude or lake
                                       latitude            longitude            center              center
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Abbot Creek....................  44.570 N.            121.619 W.          44.544 N.           121.670 W.
Deschutes River................  45.639 N.            120.914 W.          44.373 N.           121.291 W.
Heising Spring.................  44.494 N.            121.648 W.          44.491 N.           121.651 W.
Jack Creek.....................  44.493 N.            121.647 W.          44.472 N.           121.725 W.
Lake Billy Chinook.............                 Located at                44.584 N.           121.363 W.
Metolius River.................  44.577 N.            121.619 W.          44.434 N.           121.637 W.
Spring Creek...................  44.457 N.            121.642 W.          44.451 N.           121.650 W.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (ii) Map of Unit 6, Deschutes River Basin, follows:

[[Page 512]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR26SE05.006

    (13) Unit 9: Umatilla-Walla Walla River Basins.
    (i) Critical habitat is designated on the water bodies listed in the 
following table:

[[Page 513]]



----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                            Stream endpoint     Stream endpoint
              Name                 Stream endpoint      Stream endpoint    latitude or lake    longitude or lake
                                       latitude            longitude            center              center
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Griffin Fork...................  46.121 N.            117.973 W.          46.099 N.           117.913 W.
Lewis Creek....................  46.191 N.            117.824 W.          46.156 N.           117.771 W.
Low Creek......................  45.993 N.            118.035 W.          45.973 N.           118.009 W.
Meacham Creek..................  45.702 N.            118.359 W.          45.527 N.           118.290 W.
Mill Creek.....................  46.039 N.            118.478 W.          46.011 N.           117.941 W.
North Fork Meacham Creek.......  45.527 N.            118.290 W.          45.575 N.           118.174 W.
North Fork Touchet River.......  46.302 N.            117.959 W.          46.093 N.           117.864 W.
North Fork Walla Walla River...  45.899 N.            118.307 W.          45.947 N.           117.990 W.
Paradise Creek.................  46.004 N.            118.017 W.          46.001 N.           117.990 W.
Ryan Creek.....................  45.723 N.            118.314 W.          45.694 N.           118.308 W.
South Fork Touchet River.......  46.302 N.            117.959 W.          46.105 N.           117.985 W.
South Fork Walla Walla River...  45.899 N.            118.307 W.          45.966 N.           117.963 W.
Spangler Creek.................  46.149 N.            117.806 W.          46.099 N.           117.802 W.
Touchet River..................  46.272 N.            118.174 W.          46.302 N.           117.959 W.
Umatilla River.................  45.923 N.            119.356 W.          45.726 N.           118.187 W.
Walla Walla River..............  46.039 N.            118.478 W.          45.899 N.           118.307 W.
Wolf Fork Touchet River........  46.274 N.            117.895 W.          46.075 N.           117.903 W.
Yellowhawk Creek...............  46.017 N.            118.400 W.          46.077 N.           118.272 W.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (ii) Map of Unit 9, Umatilla-Walla Walla River Basins, follows:

[[Page 514]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR26SE05.007

    (14) Unit 10: Grande Ronde River Basin.
    (i) Critical habitat is designated on the water bodies listed in the 
following table:

[[Page 515]]



----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                            Stream endpoint     Stream endpoint
              Name                 Stream endpoint      Stream endpoint    latitude or lake    longitude or lake
                                       latitude            longitude            center              center
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Bear Creek.....................  45.584 N.            117.540 W.          45.323 N.           117.480 W.
Catherine Creek................  45.408 N.            117.930 W.          45.120 N.           117.646 W.
Chicken Creek..................  45.095 N.            118.394 W.          45.024 N.           118.385 W.
Deer Creek.....................  45.620 N.            117.699 W.          45.423 N.           117.587 W.
Fly Creek......................  45.210 N.            118.394 W.          45.121 N.           118.465 W.
Grande Ronde River.............  46.080 N.            116.978 W.          44.967 N.           118.254 W.
Hurricane Creek................  45.420 N.            117.301 W.          45.274 N.           117.310 W.
Indian Creek...................  45.534 N.            117.919 W.          45.337 N.           117.721 W.
Limber Jim Creek...............  45.089 N.            118.343 W.          45.085 N.           118.229 W.
Little Bear Creek..............  45.485 N.            117.554 W.          45.428 N.           117.479 W.
Little Fly Creek...............  45.121 N.            118.465 W.          45.110 N.           118.475 W.
Little Lookingglass Creek......  45.750 N.            117.874 W.          45.817 N.           117.901 W.
Little Minam River.............  45.401 N.            117.671 W.          45.246 N.           117.599 W.
Lookingglass Creek.............  45.707 N.            117.841 W.          45.779 N.           118.078 W.
Lookout Creek..................  45.110 N.            118.475 W.          45.078 N.           118.540 W.
Lostine River..................  45.552 N.            117.489 W.          45.246 N.           117.374 W.
Minam River....................  45.621 N.            117.720 W.          45.148 N.           117.371 W.
Mottet Creek...................  45.767 N.            117.886 W.          45.788 N.           117.942 W.
North Fork Catherine Creek.....  45.120 N.            117.646 W.          45.225 N.           117.604 W.
Sheep Creek....................  45.105 N.            118.381 W.          45.016 N.           118.507 W.
South Fork Catherine Creek.....  45.120 N.            117.646 W.          45.112 N.           117.513 W.
Wallowa River..................  45.726 N.            117.784 W.          45.420 N.           117.301 W.
Wenaha River...................  45.946 N.            117.450 W.          45.951 N.           117.794 W.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (ii) Map of Unit 10, Grande Ronde River Basin, follows:

[[Page 516]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR26SE05.008

    (15) Unit 11: Imnaha-Snake River Basins.
    (i) Critical habitat is designated on the water bodies listed in the 
following table:

[[Page 517]]



----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                            Stream endpoint     Stream endpoint
              Name                 Stream endpoint      Stream endpoint    latitude or lake    longitude or lake
                                       latitude            longitude            center              center
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Big Sheep Creek................  45.557 N.            116.834 W.          45.178 N.           117.119 W.
Imnaha River...................  45.817 N.            116.764 W.          45.113 N.           117.125 W.
Little Sheep Creek.............  45.520 N.            116.859 W.          45.232 N.           117.093 W.
McCully Creek..................  45.311 N.            117.082 W.          45.211 N.           117.140 W.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (ii) Map of Unit 11, Imnaha-Snake River Basins, follows:

[[Page 518]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR26SE05.009

    (16) Unit 12: Hells Canyon Complex.
    (i) Critical habitat is designated on the water bodies listed in the 
following table:

[[Page 519]]



----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                            Stream endpoint     Stream endpoint
              Name                 Stream endpoint      Stream endpoint    latitude or lake    longitude or lake
                                       latitude            longitude            center              center
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Anthony Creek..................  45.013 N.            118.059 W.          44.953 N.           118.220 W.
Big Muddy Creek................  44.940 N.            117.945 W.          44.899 N.           118.131 W.
Clear Creek....................  44.866 N.            117.029 W.          45.043 N.           117.143 W.
East Fork Pine Creek...........  45.022 N.            117.200 W.          45.072 N.           117.176 W.
East Pine Creek................  44.872 N.            117.020 W.          45.046 N.           117.119 W.
Little Cracker Creek...........  44.826 N.            118.196 W.          44.840 N.           118.166 W.
Meadow Creek...................  44.990 N.            117.142 W.          45.017 N.           117.171 W.
North Pine Creek...............  44.910 N.            116.948 W.          45.079 N.           116.897 W.
North Powder River.............  45.039 N.            117.895 W.          44.878 N.           118.203 W.
Pine Creek.....................  44.849 N.            117.893 W.          44.826 N.           118.078 W.
Pine Creek.....................  44.974 N.            116.853 W.          45.039 N.           117.215 W.
Rock Creek.....................  44.918 N.            117.929 W.          44.856 N.           118.124 W.
Salmon Creek...................  44.888 N.            117.902 W.          44.767 N.           118.019 W.
Silver Creek...................  44.809 N.            118.207 W.          44.857 N.           118.291 W.
Wolf Creek.....................  45.044 N.            117.893 W.          45.068 N.           118.193 W.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (ii) Map of Unit 12, Hells Canyon Complex, follows:

[[Page 520]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR26SE05.010

    (17) Unit 13: Malheur River Basin.
    (i) Critical habitat is designated on the water bodies listed in the 
following table:

[[Page 521]]



----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                            Stream endpoint     Stream endpoint
              Name                 Stream endpoint      Stream endpoint    latitude or lake    longitude or lake
                                       latitude            longitude            center              center
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Big Creek......................  44.145 N.            118.624 W.          44.292 N.           118.638 W.
Lake Creek.....................  44.145 N.            118.624 W.          44.283 N.           118.683 W.
Malheur River..................  43.686 N.            118.270 W.          44.145 N.           118.624 W.
Summit Creek...................  44.099 N.            118.587 W.          44.261 N.           118.501 W.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (ii) Map of Unit 13, Malheur River Basin, follows:

[[Page 522]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR26SE05.011

    (18) Unit 14: Coeur d'Alene Lake Basin.
    (i) Critical habitat is designated on the water bodies listed in the 
following table:

[[Page 523]]



----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                            Stream endpoint     Stream endpoint
              Name                 Stream endpoint      Stream endpoint    latitude or lake    longitude or lake
                                       latitude            longitude            center              center
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Beaver Creek...................  47.083 N.            115.355 W.          47.064 N.           115.480 W.
Coeur d'Alene Lake.............                 Located at                47.449 N.           116.798 W.
Coeur d'Alene River............  47.460 N.            116.798 W.          47.558 N.           116.257 W.
Eagle Creek....................  47.644 N.            115.921 W.          47.652 N.           115.903 W.
Fly Creek......................  47.113 N.            115.385 W.          47.081 N.           115.489 W.
North Fork Coeur d'Alene River.  47.558 N.            116.257 W.          48.006 N.           116.321 W.
Prichard Creek.................  47.658 N.            115.976 W.          47.644 N.           115.921 W.
Ruby Creek.....................  46.983 N.            115.367 W.          46.961 N.           115.430 W.
St. Joe River..................  47.393 N.            116.749 W.          47.017 N.           115.078 W.
Steamboat Creek................  47.662 N.            116.154 W.          47.716 N.           116.199 W.
Timber Creek...................  47.018 N.            115.368 W.          46.992 N.           115.462 W.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (ii) Map of Unit 14, Coeur d'Alene Lake Basin, follows:

[[Page 524]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR26SE05.012

    (19) Unit 19: Lower Columbia River Basin.
    (i) Critical habitat is designated on the water bodies listed in the 
following table:

[[Page 525]]



----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                            Stream endpoint     Stream endpoint
              Name                 Stream endpoint      Stream endpoint    latitude or lake    longitude or lake
                                       latitude            longitude            center              center
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Clearwater Creek...............  46.276 N.            121.327 W.          46.278 N.           121.330 W.
Fish Lake Stream...............  46.275 N.            121.312 W.          46.342 N.           121.368 W.
Klickitat River................  45.691 N.            121.293 W.          46.255 N.           121.239 W.
Lewis River (Lower)............  45.850 N.            122.782 W.          45.957 N.           122.555 W.
Little Muddy Creek.............  46.275 N.            121.312 W.          46.278 N.           121.352 W.
Trappers Creek.................  46.275 N.            121.330 W.          46.290 N.           121.362 W.
Two Lakes Stream...............  46.342 N.            121.368 W.          46.340 N.           121.384 W.
UNNAMED--off Fish Lake Stream..  46.331 N.            121.359 W.          46.323 N.           121.437 W.
West Fork Klickitat River......  46.242 N.            121.246 W.          46.275 N.           121.312 W.
White Salmon River.............  45.723 N.            121.521 W.          45.897 N.           121.503 W.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (ii) Map of Unit 19, Lower Columbia River Basin, follows:

[[Page 526]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR26SE05.013

    (20) Unit 20: Middle Columbia River Basin.
    (i) Critical habitat is designated on the water bodies listed in the 
following table:

[[Page 527]]



----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                            Stream endpoint     Stream endpoint
              Name                 Stream endpoint      Stream endpoint    latitude or lake    longitude or lake
                                       latitude            longitude            center              center
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Ahtanum Creek..................  46.529 N.            120.472 W.          46.523 N.           120.853 W.
Box Canyon Creek...............  47.361 N.            121.243 W.          47.377 N.           121.257 W.
Bumping River..................  46.989 N.            121.094 W.          46.831 N.           121.377 W.
Cle Elum River.................  47.177 N.            120.990 W.          47.589 N.           121.161 W.
Cooper River...................  47.391 N.            121.098 W.          47.455 N.           121.213 W.
Gold Creek.....................  47.390 N.            121.382 W.          47.475 N.           121.316 W.
Jack Creek.....................  47.319 N.            120.855 W.          47.334 N.           120.742 W.
Jungle Creek...................  47.333 N.            120.855 W.          47.333 N.           120.923 W.
Kachess River..................  47.251 N.            121.200 W.          47.429 N.           121.222 W.
Naches River...................  46.630 N.            120.514 W.          46.989 N.           121.094 W.
North Fork Ahtanum Creek.......  46.523 N.            120.853 W.          46.538 N.           121.211 W.
North Fork Teanaway River......  47.251 N.            120.877 W.          47.454 N.           120.965 W.
North Fork Tieton River........  46.635 N.            121.261 W.          46.508 N.           121.435 W.
Rattlesnake Creek..............  46.820 N.            120.929 W.          46.760 N.           121.315 W.
South Fork Ahtanum Creek.......  46.523 N.            120.853 W.          46.454 N.           121.118 W.
Teanaway River.................  47.167 N.            120.834 W.          47.257 N.           120.897 W.
Tieton River...................  46.746 N.            120.786 W.          46.656 N.           121.129 W.
Yakima River...................  46.529 N.            120.472 W.          47.322 N.           121.339 W.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (ii) Map of Unit 20, Middle Columbia River Basin, follows:

[[Page 528]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR26SE05.014

    (21) Unit 22: Northeast Washington River Basins.
    (i) Critical habitat is designated on the water bodies listed in the 
following table:

[[Page 529]]



----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                            Stream endpoint     Stream endpoint
              Name                 Stream endpoint      Stream endpoint    latitude or lake    longitude or lake
                                       Latitude            latitude             center              center
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Calispell......................  48.344 N             117.289 W           48.321 N            117.307 W.
Cedar Creek....................  48.742 N.            117.411 W           48.846 N            117.521 W.
E. Fork Small Creek............  48.328 N             117.354 W           48.371 N            117.398 W.
East Branch LeClerc Creek......  48.534 N             117.282 W           48.673 N            117.188 W.
Fourth of July Creek...........  48.556 N             117.272 W           48.573 N            117.200 W.
Indian Creek...................  48.243 N             117.151 W           48.299 N            117.151 W.
LeClerc Creek..................  48.518 N             117.283 W           48.534 N            117.282 W.
Mill Creek.....................  48.489 N             117.265 W           48.493 N            117.239 W.
Ruby Creek.....................  48.556 N             117.342 W           48.568 N            117.509 W.
S. Fork Tacoma Creek...........  48.394 N             117.323 W           48.432 N            117.506 W.
Slate Creek....................  48.923 N             117.332 W           48.948 N            117.165 W.
Small Creek....................  48.321 N             117.307 W           48.337 N            117.409 W.
Sullivan Creek.................  48.865 N             117.370 W           48.950 N            117.070 W.
Tacoma Creek...................  48.392 N             117.288 W           48.445 N            117.507 W.
West Branch LeClerc Creek......  48.534 N             117.282 W           48.701 N            117.211 W.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (ii) Map of Unit 22, Northeast Washington River Basins, follows:

[[Page 530]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR26SE05.015

    (22) Unit 23: Snake River Basin in Washington.
    (i) Critical habitat is designated on the water bodies listed in the 
following table:

[[Page 531]]



----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                            Stream endpoint     Stream endpoint
              Name                 Stream endpoint      Stream endpoint    latitude or lake    longitude or lake
                                       latitude            longitude            center              center
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Asotin Creek...................  46.345 N             117.053 W           46.272 N            117.291 W.
Charley Creek..................  46.289 N             117.278 W           46.210 N            117.552 W.
Cummings Creek.................  46.333 N             117.674 W           46.219 N            117.595 W.
George Creek...................  46.326 N             117.105 W           46.118 N            117.363 W.
Hixon Creek....................  46.246 N             117.683 W           46.219 N            117.651 W.
N. Fork Asotin Creek...........  46.272 N             117.291 W           46.196 N            117.568 W.
Tucannon River.................  46.558 N             118.174 W           46.139 N            117.520 W
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (ii) Map of Unit 23, Snake River Basin in Washington, follows:

[[Page 532]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR26SE05.016

    (23) Unit 25: Snake River.
    (i) Critical habitat is designated on the water bodies listed in the 
following table:

[[Page 533]]



----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                            Stream endpoint     Stream endpoint
              Name                 Stream endpoint      Stream endpoint    latitude or lake    longitude or lake
                                       latitude            longitude            center              center
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Snake River....................  46.189 N             119.030 W           44.243 N            117.041 W.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (ii) Map of Unit 25, Snake River, follows:

[[Page 534]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR26SE05.017

    (24) Unit 27: Olympic Peninsula.
    (i) Critical habitat is designated on the water bodies listed in the 
following table:

[[Page 535]]



----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                            Stream endpoint     Stream endpoint
              Name                 Stream endpoint      Stream endpoint    latitude or lake    longitude or lake
                                       latitude            longitude            center              center
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Bell Creek.....................  48.083 N.            123.052 W.          48.057 N.           123.102 W.
Big Creek......................  47.518 N.            123.773 W.          47.566 N.           123.680 W.
Boulder Creek..................  47.982 N.            123.602 W.          47.979 N.           123.612 W.
Buckinghorse Creek.............  47.747 N.            123.481 W.          47.739 N.           123.484 W.
Canyon River...................  47.211 N.            123.551 W.          47.338 N.           123.498 W.
Cat Creek......................  47.971 N.            123.593 W.          47.946 N.           123.642 W.
Cedar Creek....................  47.712 N.            124.415 W.          47.717 N.           124.335 W.
Chehalis River.................  46.962 N.            123.823 W.          46.819 N.           123.252 W.
Clearwater River...............  47.546 N.            124.291 W.          47.730 N.           123.934 W.
Copalis River..................  47.133 N.            124.180 W.          47.234 N.           124.020 W.
Cougar Creek...................  47.862 N.            123.859 W.          47.868 N.           123.853 W.
Delabarre Creek................  47.735 N.            123.526 W.          47.726 N.           123.527 W.
Dungeness River................  48.151 N.            123.133 W.          47.942 N.           123.091 W.
Elk Creek......................  47.515 N.            123.330 W.          47.510 N.           123.344 W.
Elwha River....................  48.151 N.            123.558 W.          47.771 N.           123.580 W.
Ennis Creek....................  48.117 N.            123.404 W.          48.053 N.           123.410 W.
Godkin Creek...................  47.760 N.            123.464 W.          47.752 N.           123.451 W.
Goodman Creek..................  47.825 N.            124.512 W.          47.835 N.           124.338 W.
Gray Wolf River................  47.977 N.            123.111 W.          47.916 N.           123.242 W.
Grays Harbor Marine............  46.927 N.            124.179 W.          46.906 N.           124.138 W.
Griff Creek....................  48.013 N.            123.591 W.          48.023 N.           123.593 W.
Hayes River....................  47.808 N.            123.453 W.          47.803 N.           123.428 W.
Hoh Creek......................  47.877 N.            123.753 W.          47.883 N.           123.750 W.
Hoh River......................  47.751 N.            124.437 W.          47.878 N.           123.688 W.
Hood Canal Marine..............  47.685 N.            122.800 W.          47.434 N.           122.841 W.
Hughes Creek...................  48.025 N.            123.594 W.          48.026 N.           123.598 W.
Humptulips River...............  47.045 N.            124.048 W.          47.247 N.           123.888 W.
Hurd Creek.....................  48.124 N.            123.142 W.          48.118 N.           123.142 W.
Ignar Creek....................  47.639 N.            123.432 W.          47.637 N.           123.429 W.
Irely Creek....................  47.565 N.            123.678 W.          47.567 N.           123.672 W.
Irely Lake.....................                 Located at                47.565 N.           123.672 W.
Joe Creek......................  47.206 N.            124.202 W.          47.217 N.           124.153 W.
Kalaloch Creek.................  47.607 N.            124.374 W.          47.637 N.           124.360 W.
Little River...................  48.063 N.            123.576 W.          48.033 N.           123.456 W.
Matheny Creek..................  47.576 N.            124.113 W.          47.543 N.           123.835 W.
Moclips River..................  47.248 N.            124.219 W.          47.260 N.           124.122 W.
Morse Creek....................  48.118 N.            123.350 W.          48.064 N.           123.346 W.
Mosquito Creek.................  47.799 N.            124.481 W.          47.787 N.           124.382 W.
Mount Tom Creek................  47.868 N.            123.887 W.          47.819 N.           123.820 W.
Nolan Creek....................  47.752 N.            124.343 W.          47.743 N.           124.201 W.
North Fork Quinault River......  47.540 N.            123.666 W.          47.654 N.           123.646 W.
North Fork Skokomish River       47.315 N.            123.238 W.          47.398 N.           123.200 W.
 (Lower).
North Fork Skokomish River       47.419 N.            123.224 W.          47.539 N.           123.380 W.
 (Upper).
OGS Creek......................  47.878 N.            123.770 W.          47.879 N.           123.767 W.
O'Neil Creek...................  47.616 N.            123.470 W.          47.610 N.           123.463 W.
Owl Creek......................  47.805 N.            124.078 W.          47.780 N.           124.037 W.
Pacific Coast Marine...........  48.003 N.            124.678 W.          46.927 N.           124.179 W.
Prescott Creek.................  47.903 N.            123.490 W.          47.904 N.           123.486 W.
Pyrites Creek..................  47.639 N.            123.432 W.          47.644 N.           123.435 W.
Queets River...................  47.544 N.            124.354 W.          47.758 N.           123.657 W.
Quinault Lake..................                 Located at                47.471 N.           123.871 W.
Quinault River.................  47.349 N.            124.299 W.          47.687 N.           123.371 W.
Richert Spring.................  47.320 N.            123.218 W.          47.320 N.           123.224 W.
Rustler Creek..................  47.617 N.            123.615 W.          47.629 N.           123.568 W.
Salmon River...................  47.557 N.            124.219 W.          47.524 N.           124.040 W.
Sams River.....................  47.625 N.            124.012 W.          47.604 N.           123.851 W.
Satsop River...................  46.979 N.            123.480 W.          47.035 N.           123.524 W.
Skokomish River................  47.335 N.            123.116 W.          47.315 N.           123.238 W.
Slate Creek....................  47.521 N.            123.335 W.          47.529 N.           123.319 W.
Slough off of Elwha............  48.145 N.            123.567 W.          48.138 N.           123.558 W.
South Fork Hoh River...........  47.820 N.            124.022 W.          47.764 N.           123.785 W.
South Fork Skokomish River.....  47.315 N.            123.238 W.          47.488 N.           123.454 W.
Steamboat Creek................  47.679 N.            124.403 W.          47.688 N.           124.349 W.
Strait of Juan de Fuca Marine..  48.103 N.            122.884 W.          48.217 N.           124.100 W.
Tshletshy Creek................  47.666 N.            123.923 W.          47.606 N.           123.739 W.
West Fork Satsop River.........  47.035 N.            123.524 W.          47.360 N.           123.565 W.
Winfield Creek.................  47.810 N.            124.231 W.          47.783 N.           124.142 W.
Wishkah River..................  46.973 N.            123.806 W.          47.261 N.           123.713 W.
Wynoochee River................  46.962 N.            123.606 W.          47.385 N.           123.604 W.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


[[Page 536]]

    (ii) Map of Unit 27, Olympic Peninsula, follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR26SE05.018
    

[[Page 537]]


    (25) Unit 28: Puget Sound.
    (i) Critical habitat is designated on the water bodies listed in the 
following table:

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                            Stream endpoint     Stream endpoint
              Name                 Stream endpoint      Stream endpoint    latitude or lake    longitude or lake
                                       latitude            longitude            center              center
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Alma Creek.....................  48.600 N.            121.361 W.          48.590 N.           121.355 W.
Bacon Creek....................  48.586 N.            121.394 W.          48.681 N.           121.462 W.
Baker River....................  48.534 N.            121.735 W.          48.821 N.           121.427 W.
Bald Eagle Creek...............  48.800 N.            121.464 W.          48.797 N.           121.448 W.
Bear Creek.....................  48.965 N.            121.387 W.          48.966 N.           121.382 W.
Bear Lake Outlet (stream         48.607 N.            121.911 W.          48.610 N.           121.911 W.
 catalog <greek-i>0317).
Big Beaver Creek...............  48.773 N.            121.045 W.          48.842 N.           121.210 W.
Boulder River..................  48.282 N.            121.786 W.          48.245 N.           121.827 W.
Brush Creek....................  48.913 N.            121.423 W.          48.909 N.           121.422 W.
Canyon Creek...................  48.098 N.            121.969 W.          48.158 N.           121.816 W.
Canyon Creek (Canyon Lake        48.832 N.            122.143 W.          48.840 N.           122.110 W.
 Creek).
Carbon River...................  47.130 N.            122.232 W.          46.964 N.           121.794 W.
Cascade River..................  48.524 N.            121.429 W.          48.463 N.           121.163 W.
Chenuis Creek..................  46.992 N.            121.842 W.          46.993 N.           121.841 W.
Chilliwack River...............  49.000 N.            121.410 W.          48.878 N.           121.486 W.
Clearwater River...............  47.146 N.            121.833 W.          47.079 N.           121.781 W.
Corkindale Creek...............  48.505 N.            121.485 W.          48.518 N.           121.482 W.
Crystal Creek..................  46.929 N.            121.537 W.          46.920 N.           121.525 W.
Crystal Creek..................  48.787 N.            121.501 W.          48.791 N.           121.509 W.
Dan Creek......................  48.298 N.            121.550 W.          48.265 N.           121.539 W.
Deer Creek.....................  48.268 N.            121.931 W.          48.365 N.           121.793 W.
Deer Creek.....................  48.715 N.            121.119 W.          48.721 N.           121.104 W.
Depot Creek....................  48.997 N.            121.323 W.          48.986 N.           121.292 W.
Devils Creek...................  48.825 N.            121.042 W.          48.819 N.           121.001 W.
Diobsud Creek..................  48.559 N.            121.411 W.          48.576 N.           121.432 W.
Duwamish River.................  47.586 N.            122.359 W.          47.474 N.           122.250 W.
East Duwamish Waterway.........  47.590 N.            122.343 W.          47.567 N.           122.346 W.
East Fork Bacon Creek..........  48.661 N.            121.433 W.          48.713 N.           121.416 W.
Eastern Shoreline Guemes Island  48.529 N.            122.572 W.          48.589 N.           122.645 W.
Eastern Shoreline Puget Sound    48.511 N.            122.605 W.          49.000 N.           122.755 W.
 (North).
Eastern Shoreline Puget Sound    47.102 N.            122.727 W.          48.426 N.           122.674 W.
 (South).
Eastern Shoreline Whidbey        47.905 N.            122.387 W.          48.370 N.           122.665 W.
 Island.
Eastern Shoreline Lummi Island.  48.641 N.            122.608 W.          48.717 N.           122.718 W.
Easy Creek.....................  48.889 N.            121.457 W.          48.882 N.           121.455 W.
Ebey Slough....................  48.022 N.            122.147 W.          47.941 N.           122.169 W.
Finney Creek...................  48.524 N.            121.846 W.          48.465 N.           121.686 W.
Foss River.....................  47.653 N.            121.293 W.          47.705 N.           121.305 W.
Fryingpan Creek................  46.891 N.            121.601 W.          46.869 N.           121.649 W.
Gedney Island..................  00.000 N.            000.000 W.          48.013 N.           122.319 W.
Glacier Creek..................  47.987 N.            121.392 W.          47.987 N.           121.367 W.
Goat Island....................  00.000 N.            000.000 W.          48.363 N.           122.529 W.
Goodell Creek..................  48.672 N.            121.264 W.          48.778 N.           121.351 W.
Green River....................  47.474 N.            122.250 W.          47.299 N.           121.839 W.
Greenwater River...............  47.159 N.            121.659 W.          47.093 N.           121.457 W.
Hat Slough.....................  48.197 N.            122.361 W.          48.209 N.           122.322 W.
Hope Island....................  00.000 N.            000.000 W.          48.399 N.           122.568 W.
Howard Creek...................  48.609 N.            121.965 W.          48.619 N.           121.965 W.
Huckleberry Creek..............  47.079 N.            121.585 W.          46.989 N.           121.622 W.
Hutchinson Creek...............  48.707 N.            122.178 W.          48.733 N.           122.102 W.
Ika Island.....................  00.000 N.            000.000 W.          48.363 N.           122.501 W.
Illabot Creek..................  48.496 N.            121.530 W.          48.389 N.           121.318 W.
Indian Creek...................  48.947 N.            121.397 W.          48.935 N.           121.394 W.
Ipsut Creek....................  46.980 N.            121.832 W.          46.971 N.           121.831 W.
Jim Creek......................  48.185 N.            122.076 W.          48.216 N.           121.939 W.
Jones Creek....................  48.524 N.            122.052 W.          48.542 N.           122.050 W.
Kendall Creek..................  48.887 N.            122.148 W.          48.922 N.           122.144 W.
Klickitat Creek................  46.909 N.            121.548 W.          46.903 N.           121.546 W.
Lake Union.....................                 Located at                47.651 N.           122.355 W.
Lake Washington................                 Located at                47.520 N.           122.236 W.
Lightning Creek................  48.871 N.            121.027 W.          49.000 N.           120.978 W.
Little Beaver Creek............  48.912 N.            121.064 W.          48.878 N.           121.322 W.
Little Chilliwack River........  48.993 N.            121.407 W.          48.962 N.           121.477 W.
Lodi Creek.....................  46.960 N.            121.705 W.          46.940 N.           121.687 W.
Maple Creek....................  48.912 N.            122.078 W.          48.927 N.           122.076 W.
Marble Creek...................  48.531 N.            121.281 W.          48.542 N.           121.251 W.
Middle Fork Nooksack River.....  48.834 N.            122.154 W.          48.725 N.           121.898 W.
Mowich River...................  46.901 N.            122.030 W.          46.915 N.           121.894 W.
Newhalem Creek.................  48.671 N.            121.254 W.          48.663 N.           121.251 W.

[[Page 538]]

 
Nisqually River................  47.101 N.            122.691 W.          46.835 N.           122.323 W.
Nookachamps Creek..............  48.471 N.            122.296 W.          48.346 N.           122.202 W.
Nooksack River.................  48.771 N.            122.598 W.          48.834 N.           122.154 W.
North Fork Skagit River........  48.364 N.            122.472 W.          48.387 N.           122.366 W.
North Fork Stillaguamish River.  48.204 N.            122.126 W.          48.328 N.           121.639 W.
Panther Creek..................  48.708 N.            120.975 W.          48.631 N.           120.977 W.
Pass Creek.....................  48.815 N.            121.462 W.          48.811 N.           121.457 W.
Peat Bog Creek (st. catalog      48.790 N.            122.121 W.          48.780 N.           122.116 W.
 <greek-i> 0352).
Pierce Creek...................  48.774 N.            121.060 W.          48.766 N.           121.072 W.
Pilchuck River.................  47.904 N.            122.090 W.          47.995 N.           121.745 W.
Portage Island.................  00.000 N.            000.000 W.          48.701 N.           122.618 W.
Puyallup River.................  47.269 N.            122.425 W.          46.864 N.           121.949 W.
Ranger Creek...................  46.995 N.            121.853 W.          46.984 N.           121.854 W.
Rocky Creek....................  48.501 N.            121.494 W.          48.510 N.           121.501 W.
Roland Creek...................  48.762 N.            121.027 W.          48.770 N.           120.997 W.
Ruby Creek.....................  48.737 N.            121.046 W.          48.707 N.           120.916 W.
Samish River...................  48.555 N.            122.456 W.          48.649 N.           122.207 W.
Sauk River.....................  48.482 N.            121.604 W.          48.135 N.           121.422 W.
Silesia Creek..................  48.999 N.            121.612 W.          48.911 N.           121.484 W.
Silver Creek...................  48.972 N.            121.092 W.          48.981 N.           121.188 W.
Skagit River...................  48.387 N.            122.366 W.          49.000 N.           121.078 W.
Skookum Creek..................  48.671 N.            122.140 W.          48.686 N.           122.105 W.
Skykomish River................  47.830 N.            122.045 W.          47.813 N.           121.578 W.
Smith Creek....................  48.856 N.            122.299 W.          48.841 N.           122.261 W.
Snohomish River................  48.020 N.            122.208 W.          47.830 N.           122.045 W.
Snoqualmie River...............  47.830 N.            122.045 W.          47.541 N.           121.836 W.
South Fork Nooksack River......  48.809 N.            122.202 W.          48.675 N.           121.940 W.
South Fork Skagit River........  48.292 N.            122.367 W.          48.387 N.           122.366 W.
South Fork Skykomish River.....  47.813 N.            121.578 W.          47.705 N.           121.305 W.
South Fork Stillaguamish River.  48.204 N.            122.126 W.          48.030 N.           121.482 W.
South Fork Tolt River..........  47.696 N.            121.820 W.          47.693 N.           121.692 W.
South Mowich River.............  46.915 N.            121.894 W.          46.871 N.           121.845 W.
South Pass.....................  48.226 N.            122.385 W.          48.238 N.           122.377 W.
South Puyallup River...........  46.864 N.            121.949 W.          46.821 N.           121.846 W.
Southeastern Shoreline Vashon    47.331 N.            122.492 W.          47.349 N.           122.450 W.
 Island.
Squire Creek...................  48.280 N.            121.684 W.          48.194 N.           121.637 W.
St. Andrews Creek..............  46.837 N.            121.920 W.          46.833 N.           121.864 W.
Steamboat Slough...............  48.033 N.            122.203 W.          47.984 N.           122.168 W.
Stetattle Creek................  48.717 N.            121.148 W.          48.727 N.           121.154 W.
Stillaguamish River............  48.238 N.            122.377 W.          48.204 N.           122.126 W.
Suiattle River.................  48.330 N.            121.548 W.          48.162 N.           121.005 W.
Sulphide Creek.................  48.777 N.            121.532 W.          48.789 N.           121.551 W.
Tenas Creek....................  48.324 N.            121.438 W.          48.335 N.           121.421 W.
Three Fools Creek..............  48.891 N.            120.973 W.          48.897 N.           120.847 W.
Thunder Creek..................  48.712 N.            121.105 W.          48.563 N.           121.026 W.
Tolt River.....................  47.641 N.            121.926 W.          47.696 N.           121.820 W.
Union Slough...................  48.034 N.            122.190 W.          47.984 N.           122.166 W.
unnamed tributary (st. catalog   46.992 N.            121.704 W.          46.992 N.           121.714 W.
 <greek-i>0217).
unnamed tributary (st. catalog   46.962 N.            121.710 W.          46.960 N.           121.717 W.
 <greek-i>0226).
unnamed tributary (st. catalog   46.965 N.            121.712 W.          46.959 N.           121.711 W.
 <greek-i>0234).
unnamed tributary (st. catalog   46.905 N.            121.559 W.          46.909 N.           121.573 W.
 <greek-i>0364).
West Fork Foss River...........  47.653 N.            121.293 W.          47.627 N.           121.310 W.
West Fork White River..........  47.125 N.            121.618 W.          46.941 N.           121.707 W.
West Pass......................  48.250 N.            122.396 W.          48.238 N.           122.377 W.
White River....................  47.200 N.            122.257 W.          46.902 N.           121.636 W.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (ii) Map of Unit 28, Puget Sound, follows:

[[Page 539]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR26SE05.019

    (26) Unit 29: Saint Mary-Belly.
    (i) Critical habitat is designated on the water bodies listed in the 
following table:

[[Page 540]]



----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                            Stream endpoint     Stream endpoint
              Name                 Stream endpoint      Stream endpoint    latitude or lake    longitude or lake
                                       latitude            longitude            center              center
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Boulder Creek..................  48.839 N.            113.459 W.          48.732 N.           113.608 W.
Cracker Lake...................                 Located at                48.744 N.           113.643 W.
Divide Creek...................  48.751 N.            113.437 W.          48.634 N.           113.444 W.
Jule Creek.....................  48.988 N.            113.613 W.          48.954 N.           113.617 W.
Kennedy Creek..................  48.905 N.            113.409 W.          48.851 N.           113.604 W.
Lee Creek......................  48.998 N.            113.600 W.          48.960 N.           113.644 W.
North Fork Belly River.........  48.998 N.            113.754 W.          48.981 N.           113.770 W.
Otatso Creek...................  48.915 N.            113.464 W.          48.892 N.           113.644 W.
Red Eagle Lake.................                 Located at                48.651 N.           113.506 W.
Saint Mary Lake................                 Located at                48.685 N.           113.525 W.
Saint Mary River...............  48.998 N.            113.326 W.          48.668 N.           113.615 W.
Slide Lakes--lower pool........                 Located at                48.905 N.           113.615 W.
Slide Lakes--upper pool........                 Located at                48.901 N.           113.625 W.
Swiftcurrent Creek.............  48.836 N.            113.428 W.          48.828 N.           113.521 W.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (ii) Map of Unit 29, Saint Mary-Belly, follows:

[[Page 541]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR26SE05.020

           Little Kern Golden Trout (Salmo aguabonita whitei)

    California, Tulare County. Little Kern River, main channel and all 
streams tributary to the Little Kern River above barrier falls located 
on the Little Kern River one mile below the mouth of Trout Meadows 
Creek.
    Note: Map follows:

[[Page 542]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.145

                  Woundfin (Plagopterus argentissimus)

    Legal descriptions for St. George (Utah-Arizona) and Littlefield 
(Arizona) were obtained from the 1987 BLM maps (Surface Management 
Status 30x60 Minute Quadrangles). Legal descriptions for Overton 
(Nevada-Arizona) were obtained from the 1989 BLM maps (Surface 
Management Status 30x60 Minute Quadrangles). The 100-year floodplain for 
many areas is detailed in Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM) published by 
and available through the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). In 
areas where a FIRM is not available, the presence of alluvium soils or 
known high water marks can be used to determine the extent of the 
floodplain. Only areas of floodplain containing at least one of the 
constituent elements are considered critical habitat. Critical habitat 
designated for the woundfin is as follows:
    Utah, Washington County; Arizona, Mohave County; Nevada, Clark 
County. The Virgin River and its 100-year floodplain from its confluence 
with La Verkin Creek, Utah in T.41S., R.13W., sec.23 (Salt Lake Base and 
Meridian) to Halfway Wash, Nevada T.15S., R.69E., sec.6 (Salt Lake Base 
and Meridian).
    The primary constituent elements of critical habitat determined 
necessary for the survival and recovery of these Virgin River fishes are 
water, physical habitat, and biological environment. The desired 
conditions for each of these elements are further discussed below.
    Water--A sufficient quantity and quality of water (i.e., 
temperature, dissolved oxygen, contaminants, nutrients, turbidity, etc.) 
that is delivered to a specific location in accordance with a hydrologic 
regime that is identified for the particular life stage for each 
species. This includes the following:
    1. Water quality characterized by natural seasonally variable 
temperature, turbidity, and conductivity;
    2. Hydrologic regime characterized by the duration, magnitude, and 
frequency of flow events capable of forming and maintaining channel and 
instream habitat necessary for particular life stages at certain times 
of the year; and
    3. Flood events inundating the floodplain necessary to provide the 
organic matter that provides or supports the nutrient and food sources 
for the listed fishes.
    Physical Habitat--Areas of the Virgin River that are inhabited or 
potentially habitable by a particular life stage for each species, for 
use in spawning, nursing, feeding, and rearing, or corridors between 
such areas:
    1. River channels, side channels, secondary channels, backwaters, 
and springs, and other areas which provide access to these habitats;
    2. Areas inhabited by adult and juvenile woundfin include runs and 
pools adjacent to riffles that have sand and sand/gravel substrates;
    3. Areas inhabited by juvenile woundfin are generally deeper and 
slower. When turbidity is low, adults also tend to occupy deeper and 
slower habitats;
    4. Areas inhabited by woundfin larvae include shoreline margins and 
backwater habitats associated with growths of filamentous algae.
    Biological Environment--Food supply, predation, and competition are 
important elements of the biological environment and are considered 
components of this constituent element. Food supply is a function of 
nutrient supply, productivity, and availability to each life stage of 
the species. Predation and competition, although considered normal 
components of this environment, are out of balance due to nonnative fish 
species in many areas. Fourteen introduced species, including red shiner 
(Cyprinella lutrensis), black bullhead (Ameiurus melas), channel catfish 
(Ictalurus punctatus), and largemouth bass (Micropterus salmoides), 
compete with or prey upon the listed fishes. Of these, the red shiner is 
the most numerous and has been the most problematic for the listed 
fishes. Red shiners compete for food and available habitats and are 
known to prey on the eggs and early life stages of the listed fishes. 
Components of this constituent element include the following:
    1. Seasonally flooded areas that contribute to the biological 
productivity of the river system by producing allochthonous (humus, 
silt, organic detritus, colloidal matter, and plants and animals 
produced outside the river and brought into the river) organic matter 
which provides and supports much of the food base of the listed fishes; 
and
    2. Few or no predatory or competitive nonnative species in occupied 
Virgin River

[[Page 543]]

fishes' habitats or potential reestablishment sites.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR26JA00.001




[[Page 544]]


    (f) Clams and Snails.

              Appalachian Elktoe (Alasmidonta raveneliana)

    (1) Critical habitat units are described below and depicted in the 
maps that follow, with the lateral extent of each designated unit 
bounded by the ordinary high-water line.
    (i) Index map follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR27SE02.007
    
    (2) Unit 1.
    (i) Macon County and Swain County, NC--the main stem of the Little 
Tennessee River (Tennessee River system), from the Lake Emory Dam at 
Franklin, Macon County, NC, downstream to the backwaters of Fontana 
Reservoir in Swain County, NC.
    (3) Unit 2.
    (i) Jackson County and Swain County, NC--the main stem of the 
Tuckasegee River (Little Tennessee River system), from the N.C. State 
Route 1002 Bridge in Cullowhee, Jackson County, NC, downstream to the 
N.C. Highway 19 Bridge, north of Bryson City, Swain County, NC.
    (ii) Map of Unit 1 and Unit 2 follows:

[[Page 545]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR27SE02.008

    (4) Unit 3.
    (i) Graham County, NC--the main stem of the Cheoah River (Little 
Tennessee River system), from the Santeetlah Dam, downstream to its 
confluence with the Little Tennessee River.
    (ii) Map of Unit 3 follows:

[[Page 546]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR27SE02.009

    (5) Unit 4.
    (i) Transylvania County, NC--the main stem of the Little River 
(French Broad River system), from the Cascade Lake Power Plant, 
downstream to its confluence with the French Broad River.
    (ii) Map of Unit 4 follows:

[[Page 547]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR27SE02.010

    (6) Unit 5.
    (i) Haywood County, NC--the main stem of the West Fork Pigeon River 
(French Broad River system), from the confluence of the Little East Fork 
Pigeon River, downstream to the confluence of the East Fork Pigeon 
River, and the main stem of the Pigeon River, from the confluence of the 
West Fork Pigeon River and the East Fork Pigeon River, downstream to the 
N.C. Highway 215 Bridge crossing, south of Canton, NC.
    (ii) Map of Unit 5 follows:

[[Page 548]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR27SE02.011

    (7) Unit 6.
    (i) Yancey County and Mitchell County, NC, and Unicoi County, TN--
the main stem of the North Toe River, Yancey and Mitchell Counties, NC, 
from the confluence of Big Crabtree Creek, downstream to the confluence 
of the South Toe River; the main stem of the South Toe River, Yancey 
County, NC, from the N.C. State Route 1152 Bridge, downstream to its 
confluence with the North Toe River; the main stem of the Toe River, 
Yancey and Mitchell Counties, NC, from the confluence of the North Toe 
River and the South Toe River, downstream to the confluence of the Cane 
River; the main stem of the Cane River, Yancey County, NC, from the N.C. 
State Route 1381 Bridge, downstream to its confluence with the Toe 
River; and the main stem of the Nolichucky River from the confluence of 
the Toe River and the Cane River in Yancey County and Mitchell County, 
NC, downstream to the U.S. Highway 23/19W Bridge southwest of Erwin, 
Unicoi County, TN.
    (ii) Map of Unit 6 follows:

[[Page 549]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR27SE02.012

    (8) Within these areas, the primary constituent elements include:
    (i) Permanent, flowing, cool, clean water;
    (ii) Geomorphically stable stream channels and banks;
    (iii) Pool, riffle, and run sequences within the channel;
    (iv) Stable sand, gravel, cobble, boulder, and bedrock substrates 
with no more than low amounts of fine sediment;
    (v) Moderate to high stream gradient;
    (vi) Periodic natural flooding; and
    (vii) Fish hosts, with adequate living, foraging, and spawning areas 
for them.

               Carolina Heelsplitter (Lasmigona decorata)

    (1) Critical habitat units are described below and depicted in the 
maps that follow, with the lateral extent of each designated unit 
bounded by the ordinary high-water line.
    (2) Unit 1.
    (i) Union County, NC--main stem of Goose Creek (Pee Dee River 
system) from the N.C. Highway 218 Bridge, downstream to its confluence 
with the Rocky River, and the main stem of Duck Creek, from the 
Mecklenburg/Union County line, downstream to its confluence with Goose 
Creek.
    (ii) Map of Unit 1 follows:

[[Page 550]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR02JY02.000

    (3) Unit 2.
    (i) Union County, NC--main stem of Waxhaw Creek (Catawba River 
system) from the N.C. Highway 200 Bridge, downstream to the North 
Carolina/South Carolina State line.
    (ii) Map of Unit 2 follows:

[[Page 551]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR02JY02.001

    (4) Unit 3.
    (i) Lancaster County, SC--main stem of Gills Creek (Catawba River 
system) from the County Route S-29-875, downstream to the S.C. Route 51 
Bridge, east of the city of Lancaster.
    (ii) Map of Unit 3 follows:

[[Page 552]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR02JY02.002

    (5) Unit 4.
    (i) Lancaster, Chesterfield, and Kershaw Counties, SC--main stem of 
Flat Creek (Pee Dee River system), Lancaster County, from the S.C. Route 
204 Bridge, downstream to its confluence with Lynches River, and the 
main stem of the Lynches River, Lancaster and Chesterfield Counties, 
from the confluence of Belk Branch, Lancaster County, northeast 
(upstream) of the U.S. Highway 601 Bridge, downstream to the S.C. 
Highway 903 Bridge in Kershaw County.
    (ii) Map of Unit 4 follows:

[[Page 553]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR02JY02.003

    (6) Unit 5.
    (i) Edgefield and McCormick Counties, SC--main stem of Mountain 
Creek (Savannah River system), Edgefield County, SC, from the S.C. Route 
36 Bridge, downstream to its confluence with Turkey Creek; Beaverdam 
Creek, Edgefield County, from the S.C. Route 51 Bridge, downstream to 
its confluence with Turkey Creek; and Turkey Creek, from the S.C. Route 
36 Bridge, Edgefield County, downstream to the S.C. Route 68 Bridge, 
Edgefield and McCormick Counties.
    (ii) Map of Unit 5 follows:

[[Page 554]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR02JY02.004

    (7) Unit 6.
    (i) Greenwood and McCormick Counties, SC--main stem of Cuffytown 
Creek (Savannah River system), from the confluence of Horsepen Creek, 
northeast (upstream) of the S.C. Route 62 Bridge in Greenwood County, 
downstream to the U.S. Highway 378 Bridge in McCormick County.
    (ii) Map of Unit 6 follows:

[[Page 555]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR02JY02.005

    (8) Within these areas, the primary constituent elements include:
    (i) Permanent, flowing, cool, clean water;
    (ii) Geomorphically stable stream and river channels and banks;
    (iii) Pool, riffle, and run sequences within the channel;
    (iv) Stable substrates with no more than low amounts of fine 
sediment;
    (v) Moderate stream gradient;
    (vi) Periodic natural flooding; and
    (vii) Fish hosts, with adequate living, foraging, and spawning areas 
for them.

          Morro Shoulderband Snail (Helminthoglypta walkeriana)

    1. Critical habitat units are depicted for San Luis Obispo County, 
California, on the map below.

[[Page 556]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR07FE01.018

    Map Units 1 to 3: All located in San Luis Obispo County, California. 
Coastline boundaries are based upon the U.S. Geological Survey Morro Bay 
South 7.5 minute topographic quadrangle. Other boundaries are based upon 
the Public Land Survey System. Within the historical boundaries of the 
Canada De Los Osos Y Pecho Y Islay Mexican Land Grant,

[[Page 557]]

boundaries are based upon section lines that are extensions to the 
Public Land Survey System developed by the California Department of 
Forestry and obtained by us from the State of California's Stephen P. 
Teale Data Center. Township and Range numbering is derived from the 
Mount Diablo Base and Meridian.
    Map Unit 1: T. 29 S., R. 10 E., all of section 35 above mean sea 
level (MSL); T. 30 S., R. 10 E. All portions of sections 1, 2, 11, 12, 
14, 22, and 27 above MSL, SW\1/4\NW\1/4\ section 13 above MSL, W\1/
2\NW\1/4\ section 24, all of section 23 above MSL except S\1/2\SE\1/4\, 
NW\1/4\NW\1/4\ section 26, N\1/2\N\1/2\ section 34.
    Map Unit 2: T. 30 S., R. 10 E., E\1/2\NE\1/4\ section 24; T. 30 S., 
R, 11 E., E\3/4\N\1/2\ section 19.
    Map Unit 3: T. 30 S., R. 11 E., All of NE\1/4\ section 7 above MSL; 
in section 8, NW\1/4\NW\1/4\, S\1/2\NW\1/4\, SW\1/4\, and NW\1/4\SE\1/
4\.
    2. Within these areas, the primary constituent elements include, but 
are not limited to, those habitat components that are essential for the 
primary biological needs of foraging, sheltering, reproduction, and 
dispersal. The primary constituent elements for the Morro shoulderband 
snail are the following: sand or sandy soils; a slope not greater than 
10 percent; and the presence of, or the capacity to develop, coastal 
dune scrub vegetation.
    3. Critical habitat does not include existing developed sites 
consisting of buildings, roads, aqueducts, railroads, airports, paved 
areas, and similar features and structures.

                    Newcomb's Snail (Erinna newcombi)

    (1) Critical Habitat Units are depicted for the County of Kauai, 
Hawaii, on the maps below.
    (2) Within these areas, the primary constituent elements required by 
the Newcomb's snail are those habitat components that are essential for 
the biological needs of foraging, sheltering, reproduction, and 
dispersal. The primary constituent elements are: cool, clean, moderate-
to fast-flowing water in streams, springs, and seeps; their adjacent 
riparian areas and hydrogeologic features that capture and direct water 
flow to these spring and stream systems; a perennial flow of water 
throughout even the most severe drought conditions; and stream channel 
morphology that provides protection from channel scour by having 
overhanging waterfalls, protected tributaries, or similar refugia.
    (3) Existing human-made features and structures within the 
boundaries of the mapped units, such as dams, ditches, tunnels, flumes, 
and other human-made features that do not contain the primary 
constituent elements, are not included as critical habitat.
    (4) Critical Habitat Unit I--Na Pali Coast Streams--(i) Unit I(a): 
Kalalau Stream (149 ha; 368 ac). The Kalalau Stream Newcomb's snail 
critical habitat location consists of all flowing surface waters within 
63 boundary points with the following coordinates in UTM Zone 4 with the 
units in meters using North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83): 435010, 
2450871; 434991, 2450828; 435008, 2450782; 435112, 2450715; 435107, 
2450681; 435044, 2450591; 435058, 2450537; 435120, 2450441; 435078, 
2450308; 435048, 2450279; 435017, 2450341; 434968, 2450375; 434678, 
2450406; 434682, 2450441; 434678, 2450551; 434618, 2450603; 434578, 
2450602; 434518, 2450564; 434418, 2450540; 434444, 2450711; 434428, 
2450733; 434388, 2450657; 434338, 2450612; 434278, 2450596; 434228, 
2450621; 434188, 2450596; 434166, 2450621; 434159, 2450691; 434148, 
2450691; 434058, 2450599; 433995, 2450571; 433968, 2450540; 433878, 
2450559; 433825, 2450544; 433767, 2450451; 433738, 2450478; 433700, 
2450581; 433670, 2450611; 433670, 2450671; 433633, 2450738; 433715, 
2450996; 433732, 2451168; 433740, 2451380; 433642, 2451551; 433633, 
2451598; 433688, 2451664; 433842, 2451694; 434206, 2451592; 434680, 
2451547; 435053, 2451609; 435129, 2451611; 435147, 2451590; 435114, 
2451460; 435048, 2451400; 434973, 2451360; 435041, 2451320; 435043, 
2451250; 435134, 2451170; 435126, 2451120; 435089, 2451069; 435075, 
2451013; 435018, 2450933; 435010, 2450871;
    (ii) Unit I(b): Hanakoa Stream (63 ha; 156 ac). The Hanakoa Stream 
Newcomb's snail critical habitat location consists of all flowing 
surface waters within 24 boundary points with the following coordinates 
in UTM Zone 4 with the units in meters using North American Datum of 
1983 (NAD83): 435729, 2453628; 435717, 2453789; 436111, 2454127; 436637, 
2454087; 436700, 2454008; 436719, 2453907; 436658, 2453889; 436654, 
2453857; 436735, 2453697; 436744, 2453577; 436558, 2453527; 436518, 
2453555; 436478, 2453559; 436250, 2453496; 436152, 2453358; 436123, 
2453263; 436068, 2453238; 435998, 2453171; 435918, 2453168; 435869, 
2453229; 435799, 2453248; 435780, 2453320; 435770, 2453490; 435729, 
2453628.
    (iii) Unit I(c): Hanakapiai Stream (35 ha; 86 ac). The Hanakapiai 
Stream Newcomb's snail critical habitat location consists of all flowing 
surface waters within 25 boundary points with the following coordinates 
in UTM Zone 4 with the units in meters using North American Datum of 
1983 (NAD83): 438438, 2453772; 438785, 2453827; 438899, 2453794; 438961, 
2453796; 439113, 2453829; 439216, 2453871; 439257, 2453846; 439234, 
2453666; 439263, 2453606; 439310, 2453377; 439299, 2453306; 439258, 
2453253; 439158, 2453265; 439098, 2453290; 438949, 2453407; 438769, 
2453508; 438692, 2453457; 438674, 2453387; 438618, 2453307; 438591, 
2453347; 438578, 2453417; 438525, 2453507; 438443, 2453622; 438429, 
2453677; 438438, 2453772.
    (iv) Map 1--Unit I--Na Pali Coast Streams follows:

[[Page 558]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR20AU02.000

    (5) Critical Habitat Unit II--Central Rivers--(i) Unit II(a): 
Lumahai River (492 ha; 1,216 ac). The Lumahai River Newcomb's snail 
critical habitat location consists of all flowing surface waters within 
89 boundary points with the following coordinates in UTM Zone 4 with the 
units in meters using North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83): 447598, 
2445954; 447344, 2446136; 447298, 2446352; 447248, 2446290; 447178, 
2446384; 447088, 2446327; 446972, 2446364; 446950, 2446572; 446787, 
2446678; 446648, 2446627; 446648, 2446739; 446445, 2446836; 446409, 
2447000; 446278, 2447034; 446208, 2447169; 446097, 2447178; 446141, 
2447349; 446024, 2447449; 446014, 2447649; 445808, 2447618; 445809, 
2447680; 445839, 2447840; 445616, 2447859; 445773, 2448009; 445589, 
2448069; 445728, 2448189; 445531, 2448299; 445685, 2448359; 445605, 
2448469; 445728, 2448478; 445854, 2448578; 445858, 2448680; 445728, 
2448778; 445759, 2448939; 445618, 2448896; 445548, 2448954; 445318, 
2448932; 445338, 2449080; 445164, 2449034; 445171, 2449211; 444998, 
2449168; 444932, 2449348; 445008, 2449493; 445936, 2450417; 446309, 
2450498; 446262, 2450317; 446309, 2450238; 446476, 2450245; 446385, 
2450007; 446688, 2450060; 446714, 2449913; 446811, 2449890; 446799, 
2449758; 446998, 2449747; 447028, 2449643; 447101, 2449690; 447098, 
2449525; 447228, 2449509; 447343, 2449387; 447229, 2449247; 447298, 
2449117; 447128, 2449116; 446901, 2448918; 447174, 2448778; 447144, 
2448668; 447066, 2448628; 447190, 2448478; 446898, 2448400; 446778, 
2448451; 446649, 2448198; 446831, 2448108; 446782, 2447899; 447064, 
2447862; 446986, 2447707; 447038, 2447583; 447225, 2447529; 447162, 
2447395; 446973, 2447289; 447008, 2446969; 447288, 2446719; 447234, 
2446659; 447268, 2446571; 447448, 2446499; 447548, 2446559; 447484, 
2446393; 447518, 2446304; 447739, 2446259; 447507, 2446131; 447598, 
2445954;
    (ii) Unit II(b): Hanalei River (876 ha; 2,165 ac). The Hanalei River 
Newcomb's snail critical habitat location consists of all flowing 
surface waters within 91 boundary points with the following coordinates 
in UTM Zone 4 with the units in meters using North American Datum of 
1983 (NAD83): 450038, 2447210; 451786, 2447529; 453099, 2446469; 453648, 
2446167; 453691, 2445925; 453614, 2445904; 453508, 2446074; 453044, 
2445908; 452961, 2445785; 452974, 2445578;

[[Page 559]]

453125, 2445605; 453267, 2445468; 453258, 2445377; 453550, 2445238; 
453508, 2445111; 453318, 2445096; 453238, 2444991; 453098, 2445064; 
453010, 2444769; 452768, 2444606; 452680, 2444349; 452760, 2444169; 
452581, 2444039; 452723, 2443844; 452429, 2443810; 452486, 2443680; 
452419, 2443309; 452280, 2443240; 452198, 2443073; 452088, 2443185; 
451948, 2442960; 451678, 2442885; 451549, 2442979; 451471, 2442787; 
450955, 2442448; 451082, 2442651; 450916, 2442988; 450337, 2443081; 
450718, 2443188; 450968, 2443197; 451068, 2443077; 451255, 2443133; 
451414, 2443330; 451612, 2443370; 451552, 2443666; 451549, 2444330; 
451107, 2443911; 450988, 2444210; 450894, 2443874; 450638, 2443920; 
450431, 2443773; 450492, 2444026; 450614, 2444100; 450468, 2444134; 
450592, 2444250; 450389, 2444360; 450621, 2444363; 450698, 2444275; 
450967, 2444669; 450939, 2444770; 450803, 2444769; 450978, 2444899; 
450611, 2445032; 450698, 2445101; 450573, 2445219; 450969, 2445168; 
450768, 2445479; 451068, 2445422; 451226, 2445489; 451158, 2445584; 
451251, 2445606; 451216, 2445692; 451335, 2445819; 451188, 2445824; 
451124, 2445925; 450928, 2445983; 450904, 2446088; 451017, 2446148; 
450940, 2446208; 451031, 2446325; 451208, 2446428; 450928, 2446552; 
450788, 2446490; 450688, 2446603; 450538, 2446560; 450668, 2446774; 
450418, 2446700; 450199, 2446739; 450133, 2446913; 449784, 2447034; 
450038, 2447210.
    (iii) Map 2--Unit II--Central Rivers--follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR20AU02.001
    
    (6) Critical Habitat Unit III--Eastside Mountain Streams--(i) Unit 
III(a): Waipahee Stream (66 ha; 163 ac). The Waipahee Stream Newcomb's 
snail critical habitat location consists of all flowing surface waters 
within 78 boundary points with the following coordinates in UTM Zone 4 
with the units in meters using North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83): 
458921, 2447414; 458943, 2447424; 458998, 2447420; 459102, 2447444; 
459044, 2447534; 459104, 2447563; 459108, 2447613; 459085, 2447643; 
459100, 2447671; 459118, 2447693; 459108, 2447714; 459078,

[[Page 560]]

2447703; 459048, 2447661; 459028, 2447663; 459017, 2447694; 459045, 
2447696; 459054, 2447727; 459118, 2447770; 459164, 2447749; 459191, 
2447646; 459231, 2447596; 459309, 2447603; 459321, 2447623; 459306, 
2447685; 459351, 2447663; 459398, 2447531; 459478, 2447584; 459518, 
2447553; 459568, 2447656; 459586, 2447613; 459648, 2447556; 459738, 
2447649; 459918, 2447569; 459998, 2447569; 460018, 2447584; 460048, 
2447572; 460055, 2447576; 460261, 2447303; 460229, 2447182; 460178, 
2446882; 460172, 2446875; 460058, 2446836; 459978, 2446834; 459906, 
2446782; 459887, 2446803; 459902, 2446878; 459848, 2446946; 459818, 
2446933; 459778, 2446940; 459694, 2446904; 459702, 2447004; 459648, 
2447020; 459638, 2447098; 459608, 2447104; 459508, 2447031; 459502, 
2447068; 459448, 2447061; 459500, 2447134; 459467, 2447203; 459445, 
2447214; 459408, 2447183; 459388, 2447194; 459318, 2447163; 459268, 
2447169; 459248, 2447139; 459218, 2447136; 459182, 2447074; 459148, 
2447057; 459078, 2447076; 459083, 2447094; 459148, 2447124; 459185, 
2447224; 459166, 2447274; 459178, 2447334; 459118, 2447345; 458948, 
2447313; 459001, 2447384; 458928, 2447407.
    (ii) Unit III(b): Makaleha Stream (95 ha; 235 ac). The Makaleha 
Stream Newcomb's snail critical habitat location consists of all flowing 
surface waters within 68 boundary points with the following coordinates 
in UTM Zone 4 with the units in meters using North American Datum of 
1983 (NAD83): 459368, 2444730; 459372, 2444732; 459414, 2444830; 459438, 
2444851; 459498, 2444854; 459528, 2444873; 459588, 2444828; 459601, 
2444832; 459689, 2444388; 459662, 2444260; 459604, 2444112; 459455, 
2444044; 459279, 2444030; 459064, 2444037; 459008, 2444069; 459002, 
2444101; 458968, 2444099; 458944, 2444123; 458878, 2444096; 458808, 
2444142; 458803, 2444197; 458748, 2444245; 458658, 2444279; 458633, 
2444322; 458576, 2444325; 458582, 2444377; 458552, 2444407; 458568, 
2444467; 458478, 2444527; 458474, 2444587; 458537, 2444607; 458492, 
2444667; 458608, 2444684; 458633, 2444746; 458545, 2444763; 458495, 
2444803; 458485, 2444833; 458418, 2444844; 458347, 2444897; 458418, 
2444925; 458411, 2444963; 458504, 2444960; 458503, 2444991; 458458, 
2445046; 458458, 2445076; 458528, 2445084; 458582, 2445036; 458678, 
2444990; 458718, 2445049; 458798, 2444992; 458818, 2444992; 458868, 
2445050; 458908, 2445056; 458933, 2445106; 458927, 2445176; 458854, 
2445276; 458808, 2445463; 458960, 2445258; 459033, 2445116; 459033, 
2445066; 458978, 2444969; 458983, 2444831; 459038, 2444842; 459088, 
2444900; 459158, 2444877; 459218, 2444913; 459331, 2444816; 459368, 
2444730.
    (iii) Unit III(c): North Fork Wailua River (36 ha; 90 ac). The North 
Fork Wailua River Newcomb's snail critical habitat location consists of 
all flowing surface waters within 23 boundary points with the following 
coordinates in UTM Zone 4 with the units in meters using North American 
Datum of 1983 (NAD83): 450656, 2440137; 450861, 2440154; 450920, 
2440206; 450968, 2440196; 451045, 2440217; 451079, 2440286; 451145, 
2440241; 451197, 2440262; 451211, 2440324; 451291, 2440314; 451291, 
2440244; 451426, 2440217; 451589, 2440237; 451616, 2440286; 451811, 
2440230; 451801, 2440139; 451748, 2440049; 451717, 2439976; 451701, 
2439841; 451455, 2439688; 451343, 2439745; 450968, 2440043; 450840, 
2440040.
    (iv) Map 3--Unit III--Eastside Mountain Streams follows:

[[Page 561]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR20AU02.002

                    Pecos Assiminea (Assiminea pecos)

    1. Within the areas designated below as critical habitat, the 
primary constituent elements for Pecos assiminea include:
    (i) Permanent, flowing, unpolluted, fresh to moderately saline 
water;
    (ii) Moist or saturated soil at stream or spring run margins with 
native vegetation growing in or adapted to aquatic or very wet 
environment, such as salt grass or sedges; and
    (iii) Stable water levels with natural diurnal and seasonal 
variation.
    2. Critical habitat is depicted for the Pecos assiminea in Pecos 
County, Texas, at the Diamond Y Springs Complex. The designation 
includes the Diamond Y Spring, which is located at UTM 13- 698261 E, 
3431372 N, and 6.8 km (4.2 mi) of its outflow, ending at UTM 13- 701832 
E, 3436112 N, about 0.8 km (0.5 mi) downstream of the State Highway 18 
bridge crossing. Also included is 0.8 km (0.5 mi) of Leon Creek upstream 
of the confluence with Diamond Y Draw. All surrounding riparian 
vegetation and mesic soil environments within the spring outflow and 
portion of Leon Creek are also designated as these areas are considered 
habitat for the Pecos assiminea. Critical habitat is also depicted for 
the Pecos assiminea in Reeves County, Texas, at the East Sandia Spring 
complex. East Sandia Spring is located at UTM 13-621366 E, 342929 N. 
Critical habitat includes the springhead itself, surrounding seeps, and 
all submergent vegetation and moist soil habitat found at the margins of 
these areas. These areas are considered habitat for the Pecos assiminea.
    (i) Pecos County, Texas, including the Diamond Y Springs Complex, 
located at longitude -102.923461 and latitude 30.999271, and 
approximately 6.8 km (4.2 mi) of the spring outflow ending at about 0.8 
km (0.5 mi) downstream of the State Highway 18 bridge crossing 
(approximately longitude -102.885137 and latitude 31.041405). Also 
included is approximately 0.8 km (0.5 mi) of Leon Creek

[[Page 562]]

upstream of the confluence with Diamond Y Draw. All surrounding riparian 
vegetation and mesic soil environments within the spring, outflow, and 
portion of Leon Creek are also proposed for designation as these areas 
are considered habitat for the Pecos assiminea. Legal description 
(geographic projection, North American Datum 83): Longitude (decimal 
degrees), Latitude (decimal degrees):
-102.905319869746634, 31.022089444891570; -102.887036917654868, 
31.043947412173729; -102.884194716234887, 31.042760908977833; -
102.885135806784476, 31.040116604685526; -102.886447071974004, 
31.038190792077721; -102.886620885824385, 31.037813677269160; -
102.890251036381329, 31.035783323856453; -102.892481680821120, 
31.034679908957198; -102.893548121939546, 31.033842414359302; -
102.893785401930572, 31.033086360646934; -102.893745950415067, 
31.032373282069056; -102.894097678233564, 31.031429114358268; -
102.895544792411911, 31.030835296062797; -102.896058768051944, 
31.030036256911551; -102.898010410716566, 31.029070675153459; -
102.898781252646117, 31.029130733495535; -102.899944293890798, 
31.028912200684612; -102.900716178554276, 31.028924768711160; -
102.901441262661692, 31.028556604651808; -102.901948928625941, 
31.028042412007075; -102.901688880906221, 31.027325744767865; -
102.901714918210303, 31.026138774702297; -102.901732622700223, 
31.025331634924694; -102.901817954640350, 31.023955646131167; -
102.902125889274174, 31.022488286611136; -102.902640803335373, 
31.021641737279424; -102.903610272253857, 31.020185129479138; -
102.903508335417825, 31.019803505987209; -102.904231258688768, 
31.019530280313123; -102.905008267695379, 31.019305424852949; -
102.905627160458280, 31.018745526192433; -102.905862223627835, 
31.018084401107885; -102.907438011441329, 31.016637604571564; -
102.908402165790250, 31.015418349965021; -102.909312205831228, 
31.014150714293240; -102.909665778900688, 31.013111534294385; -
102.910342839052220, 31.012410065631975; -102.911174902560035, 
31.012186062876218; -102.912113070098556, 31.012153756020012; -
102.912844195573911, 31.011500644598044; -102.913370338091369, 
31.010131773029197; -102.914161736135028, 31.009242148253836; -
102.915610463748450, 31.008553125409257; -102.917106029547554, 
31.008244810453860; -102.918875138268959, 31.008035883431738; -
102.919664405186026, 31.007241180720893; -102.920460878479304, 
31.006114116159939; -102.920933820519480, 31.004649359449264; -
102.921603523207537, 31.004280181687651; -102.921961044126064, 
31.003051041389284; -102.922105288280434, 31.001485991578242; -
102.923062919493049, 31.000551488397821; -102.924338893382782, 
31.000192054013731; -102.925434072210962, 31.000542142822137; -
102.925748330937964, 31.001307135185360; -102.925543882342382, 
31.003108703491051; -102.924514657475115, 31.004802011677008; -
102.923332386691257, 31.005922892971402; -102.922655466250575, 
31.006624436236699; -102.921313967399342, 31.007457756682811; -
102.921298502243019, 31.008169949149053; -102.921890429628803, 
31.008844431891216; -102.922088249987723, 31.009892533060658; -
102.920305700167233, 31.010718735844538; -102.918990962464960, 
31.010317563552466; -102.917661775715189, 31.010581089582509; -
102.915939472406691, 31.011170723093645; -102.915640066348502, 
31.012258293740160; -102.915233503111892, 31.013201643466406; -
102.914004171668253, 31.013941704157816; -102.912955733451284, 
31.013972240169043; -102.912389969275623, 31.014628028040637; -
102.912099833183859, 31.015288275173923; -102.912212159226485, 
31.015195101507882; -102.910513768505638, 31.017209923999967; -
102.908484529126227, 31.019219357013320; -102.906961764318297, 
31.020762017382609; -102.906510334381181, 31.021229648922475; -
102.906323124324715, 31.022224022537589; -102.905476410341578, 
31.023112694758801; -102.904572468616138, 31.024095422710321; -
102.904098125726293, 31.025607579972412; -102.904512146691772, 
31.026849198511329; -102.904475741511831, 31.028510959127807; -
102.903447935740203, 31.030109108839046; -102.901831302956197, 
31.030890242225727; -102.900225068829968, 31.031196566903024; -
102.897834397853146, 31.032060033587637; -102.896823149655987, 
31.032898465556570; -102.895449713462554, 31.035155846795476; -
102.894484140543042, 31.036422464608236; -102.892135869908444, 
31.037856459486278; -102.890355694384951, 31.038539777638526; -
102.889015567482971, 31.039277771567470; -102.888427464446750, 
31.040930483816535; -102.887036917654868, 31.043947412173729.
    (ii) Reeves County, Texas, at the East Sandia Spring complex. East 
Sandia Spring is located at longitude -103.728918, latitude 30.991012. 
The designation includes the springhead itself, surrounding seeps, and 
all submergent vegetation and moist soil habitat found at the margins of 
these areas. These areas are considered habitat for the Pecos assiminea. 
Legal description (geographic projection, North American Datum 83): 
Longitude (decimal degrees), Latitude (decimal degrees): -
103.729296238487009, 30.990656960487129; -103.731179077171333, 
30.989695620405591; -103.730160658036496, 30.991850361242875; -
103.727182653076312, 30.992477028891606; -103.729159475230986, 
30.988608062418542; -103.731179077171333, 30.989695620405591.
    3. A map of the Diamond Y Springs Complex and East Sandia Spring 
Complex follows:

[[Page 563]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09AU05.000


[[Page 564]]



     Eleven Mobile River Basin Mussel Species: Southern acornshell 
  (Epioblasma othcaloogensis), ovate clubshell (Pleurobema perovatum), 
 southern clubshell (Pleurobema decisum), upland combshell (Epioblasma 
 metastriata), triangular kidneyshell (Ptychobranchus greenii), Alabama 
moccasinshell (Medionidus acutissimus), Coosa moccasinshell (Medionidus 
   parvulus), orange-nacre mucket (Lampsilis perovalis), dark pigtoe 
 (Pleurobema furvum), southern pigtoe (Pleurobema georgianum), and fine-
                  lined pocketbook (Lampsilis altilis)

    (1) The primary constituent elements essential for the conservation 
of the southern acornshell (Epioblasma othcaloogensis), ovate clubshell 
(Pleurobema perovatum), southern clubshell (Pleurobema decisum), upland 
combshell (Epioblasma metastriata); triangular kidneyshell 
(Ptychobranchus greenii), Alabama moccasinshell (Medionidus 
acutissimus), Coosa moccasinshell (Medionidus parvulus), orange-nacre 
mucket (Lampsilis perovalis), dark pigtoe (Pleurobema furvum), southern 
pigtoe (Pleurobema georgianum), and fine-lined pocketbook (Lampsilis 
altilis) are those habitat components that support feeding, sheltering, 
reproduction, and physical features for maintaining the natural 
processes that support these habitat components. The primary constituent 
elements include:
    (i) Geomorphically stable stream and river channels and banks;
    (ii) A flow regime (i.e., the magnitude, frequency, duration, and 
seasonality of discharge over time) necessary for normal behavior, 
growth, and survival of all life stages of mussels and their fish hosts 
in the river environment;
    (iii) Water quality, including temperature, pH, hardness, turbidity, 
oxygen content, and other chemical characteristics, necessary for normal 
behavior, growth, and viability of all life stages;
    (iv) Sand, gravel, and/or cobble substrates with low to moderate 
amounts of fine sediment, low amounts of attached filamentous algae, and 
other physical and chemical characteristics necessary for normal 
behavior, growth, and viability of all life stages;
    (v) Fish hosts, with adequate living, foraging, and spawning areas 
for them; and
    (vi) Few or no competitive nonnative species present.
    (2) Critical habitat unit descriptions and maps.
    (i) Index map. The index map showing critical habitat units in the 
States of Mississippi, Alabama, Georgia, and Tennessee for the 11 Mobile 
River Basin mussel species follows:

[[Page 565]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR01JY04.001

    (ii) Protected species and critical habitat units. A table listing 
the protected species, their respective critical habitat units, and the 
States that contain those habitat units follows. Detailed critical 
habitat unit descriptions and maps appear below the table.

[[Page 566]]



------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                 Critical habitat
            Species                   units                States
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Southern acornshell             Units 13, 18, 19,  AL, GA, TN
 (Epioblasma othcaloogensis).    21, 24, 25, 26.
Ovate clubshell (Pleurobema     Units 1, 2, 3, 4,  AL, GA, MS, TN
 perovatum).                     5, 6, 7, 8, 9,
                                 10, 11, 12, 13,
                                 17, 18, 19, 21,
                                 24, 25, 26.
Southern clubshell (Pleurobema  Units 1, 2, 3, 4,  AL, GA, MS, TN
 decisum).                       5, 6, 7, 8, 9,
                                 13, 14, 15, 17,
                                 18, 19, 21, 24,
                                 25, 26.
Upland combshell (Epioblasma    Units 12, 13, 18,  AL, GA, TN
 metastriata).                   19, 21, 24, 25,
                                 26.
Triangular kidneyshell          Units 10, 11, 12,  AL, GA, TN
 (Ptychobranchus greenii).       13, 18, 19, 20,
                                 21, 22, 23, 24,
                                 25, 26.
Alabama moccasinshell           Units 1, 2, 3, 4,  AL, GA, MS, TN
 (Medionidus acutissimus).       5, 6, 7, 8, 9,
                                 10, 11, 12, 13,
                                 15, 25, 26.
Coosa moccasinshell             Units 18, 19, 20,  AL, GA, TN
 (Medionidus parvulus).          21, 22, 23, 24,
                                 25, 26.
Orange-nacre mucket (Lampsilis  Units 1, 2, 3, 4,  AL, MS
 perovalis).                     5, 6, 7, 8, 9,
                                 10, 11, 12, 13,
                                 14, 15.
Dark pigtoe (Pleurobema         Units 10, 11, 12.  AL
 furvum).
Southern pigtoe (Pleurobema     Units 18, 19, 20,  AL, GA, TN
 georgianum).                    21, 22, 23, 24,
                                 25, 26.
Fine-lined pocketbook           Units 13, 16, 17,  AL, GA, TN
 (Lampsilis altilis).            18, 19, 20, 21,
                                 22, 23, 24, 25,
                                 26.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (iii) Unit 1. East Fork Tombigbee River, Monroe, Itawamba County, 
Mississippi. This is a critical habitat unit for the ovate clubshell, 
southern clubshell, Alabama moccasinshell, and orange-nacre mucket.
    (A) Unit 1 includes the East Fork Tombigbee River main stem from 
Mississippi Highway 278 (T13S R7E S3), Monroe County, upstream to the 
confluence of Mill Creek (T11S R8E S24), Itawamba County, Mississippi.
    (B) Map of Unit 1 follows:

[[Page 567]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR01JY04.002

    (iv) Unit 2. Bull Mountain Creek, Itawamba County, Mississippi. This 
is a critical habitat unit for the ovate clubshell, southern clubshell, 
Alabama moccasinshell, and orange-nacre mucket.
    (A) Unit 2 includes the main stem of Bull Mountain Creek from 
Mississippi Highway 25 (T11S R9E S30), upstream to U.S. Highway 78 (T10S 
R10E S6), Itawamba County, Mississippi.
    (B) Map of Unit 2 follows:

[[Page 568]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR01JY04.003

    (v) Unit 3. Buttahatchee River and Sipsey Creek, Lowndes/Monroe 
County, Mississippi; Lamar County, Alabama. This is a critical habitat 
unit for the ovate clubshell, southern clubshell, Alabama moccasinshell, 
and orange-nacre mucket.
    (A) Unit 3 includes the Buttahatchee River main stem from its 
confluence with the impounded waters of Columbus Lake (Tombigbee River, 
T16S R19W S23), Lowndes/Monroe County, Mississippi, upstream to the 
confluence of Beaver Creek (T13S R15W S17), Lamar County, Alabama; and 
Sipsey Creek, from its confluence with the Buttahatchee

[[Page 569]]

River (T14S R17W S2), upstream to the Mississippi/Alabama State Line 
(T12S R10E S21), Monroe County, Mississippi.
    (B) Map of Unit 3 follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR01JY04.004
    
    (vi) Unit 4. Luxapalila Creek and Yellow Creek, Lowndes County, 
Mississippi; Lamar County, Alabama. This is a critical habitat unit for 
the ovate clubshell, southern

[[Page 570]]

clubshell, Alabama moccasinshell, and orange-nacre mucket.
    (A) Unit 4 includes the Luxapalila Creek main stem from Waterworks 
Road (T18S R18W S11), Columbus, Mississippi, upstream to approximately 
1.0 km (0.6 mi) above Steens Road (T17S R17W S27), Lowndes County, 
Mississippi; and the Yellow Creek main stem from its confluence with 
Luxapalila Creek (T17S R17W S21), Lowndes County, Mississippi, upstream 
to the confluence of Cut Bank Creek (T16S R16W S30), Lamar County, 
Alabama.
    (B) Map of Unit 4 follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR01JY04.005
    

[[Page 571]]


    (vii) Unit 5. Coalfire Creek, Pickens County, Alabama. This is a 
critical habitat unit for the ovate clubshell, southern clubshell, 
Alabama moccasinshell, and orange-nacre mucket.
    (A) Unit 5 includes the Coalfire Creek main stem from its confluence 
with the impounded waters of Aliceville Lake (Tombigbee River, T20S R17W 
S26), upstream to U.S. Highway 82 (T19S R15W S15), Pickens County, 
Alabama.
    (B) Map of Unit 5 follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR01JY04.006
    

[[Page 572]]


    (viii) Unit 6. Lubbub Creek, Pickens County, Alabama. This is a 
critical habitat unit for the ovate clubshell, southern clubshell, 
Alabama moccasinshell, and orange-nacre mucket.
    (A) Unit 6 includes the main stem of Lubbub Creek from its 
confluence with the impounded waters of Gainesville Lake (Tombigbee 
River, T24N R2W S11), upstream to the confluence of Little Lubbub Creek 
(T21S R1W S34), Pickens County, Alabama.
    (B) Map of Unit 6 follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR01JY04.007
    

[[Page 573]]


    (ix) Unit 7. Sipsey River, Greene/Pickens, Tuscaloosa Counties, 
Alabama. This is a critical habitat unit for the ovate clubshell, 
southern clubshell, Alabama moccasinshell, and orange-nacre mucket.
    (A) Unit 7 includes the Sipsey River main stem from its confluence 
with impounded waters of Gainesville Lake (Tombigbee River, T24N R1W 
S30), Greene/Pickens County, upstream to Alabama Highway 171 crossing 
(T18S R12W S34), Tuscaloosa County, Alabama.
    (B) Map of Unit 7 follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR01JY04.008
    

[[Page 574]]


    (x) Unit 8. Trussels Creek, Greene County, Alabama. This is a 
critical habitat unit for the ovate clubshell, southern clubshell, 
Alabama moccasinshell, and orange-nacre mucket.
    (A) Unit 8 includes the Trussels Creek main stem from its confluence 
with the impounded waters of Demopolis Lake (Tombigbee River, T21N R2W 
S15), upstream to Alabama Highway 14 (T22N R1E S4), Greene County, 
Alabama.
    (B) Map of Unit 8 follows:

[[Page 575]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR01JY04.009

    (xi) Unit 9. Sucarnoochee River, Sumter County, Alabama. This is a 
critical habitat unit for the ovate clubshell, southern clubshell, 
Alabama moccasinshell, and orange-nacre mucket.
    (A) Unit 9 includes the Sucarnoochee River main stem from its 
confluence with the Tombigbee River (T17N R1W S26), upstream to the 
Mississippi/Alabama State Line (T19N R4W S15), Sumter County, Alabama.
    (B) Map of Unit 9 follows:

[[Page 576]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR01JY04.010

    (xii) Unit 10. Sipsey Fork and tributaries, Winston, Lawrence 
Counties, Alabama. This is a critical habitat unit for the ovate 
clubshell, triangular kidneyshell, Alabama moccasinshell, orange-nacre 
mucket, and dark pigtoe.
    (A) Unit 10 includes the Sipsey Fork main stem from the section 11/
12 line (T10S R8W), Winston County, Alabama, upstream to the confluence 
of Hubbard Creek (T8S R9W S27), Lawrence County, Alabama; Thompson 
Creek, from its confluence with Hubbard

[[Page 577]]

Creek (T8S R9W S27), upstream to section 2 line (T8S R9W) Lawrence 
County; Brushy Creek, from the confluence of Glover Creek (T10S R7W 
S11), Winston County, upstream to section 9 (T8S R7W), Lawrence County; 
Capsey Creek, from confluence with Brushy Creek (T9S R7W S23), Winston 
County, upstream to the confluence of Turkey Creek (T8S R6W S33), 
Lawrence County; Rush Creek, from confluence with Brushy Creek (T9S R7W 
S15), upstream to Winston/Lawrence County Line (T9S R7W S1), Winston 
County; Brown Creek, from confluence with Rush Creek (T9S R7W S2), 
Winston County, upstream to section 24 line (T8S R7W), Lawrence County; 
Beech Creek, from confluence with Brushy Creek (T9S R7W S8), to 
confluence of East and West Forks (T9S R7W S6), Winston County; Caney 
Creek and North Fork Caney Creek, from confluence with Sipsey Fork (T9S 
R8W S28), upstream to section 14 line (T9S R9W), Winston County; Borden 
Creek, from confluence with Sipsey Fork (T8S R8W S5), Winston County, 
upstream to the confluence of Montgomery Creek (T8S R8W S10), Lawrence 
County; and Flannagin Creek, from confluence with Borden Creek (T8S R8W 
S28), upstream to confluence of Dry Creek (T8S R8W S4), Lawrence County.

[[Page 578]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR01JY04.011


[[Page 579]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR01JY04.012

    (xiii) Unit 11. North River and Clear Creek, Tuscaloosa, Fayette 
Counties, Alabama. This is a critical habitat unit for the ovate 
clubshell, triangular kidneyshell, Alabama moccasinshell, orange-nacre 
mucket, and dark pigtoe.
    (A) Unit 11 includes the main stem of the North River from 
Tuscaloosa County Road 38 (T18S R10W S16), Tuscaloosa County, upstream 
to confluence of Ellis Creek (T16S R10W S6), Fayette County, Alabama; 
and Clear Creek from its confluence with North River (T16S R11W S13) to 
Bays Lake Dam (T16S R11W S2), Fayette County, Alabama.
    (B) Map of Unit 11 follows:

[[Page 580]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR01JY04.013

    (xiv) Unit 12. Locust Fork and Little Warrior Rivers, Jefferson, 
Blount Counties, Alabama. This is a critical habitat unit for the ovate 
clubshell, upland combshell, triangular kidneyshell, Alabama 
moccasinshell, orange-nacre mucket, and dark pigtoe.
    (A) Unit 12 includes the Locust Fork main stem from U.S. Highway 78 
(T15S R4W S30), Jefferson County, upstream to the confluence of Little 
Warrior River (T13S R1W

[[Page 581]]

S3), Blount County, Alabama; and Little Warrior River from its 
confluence with the Locust Fork (T13S R1W S3), upstream to the 
confluence of Calvert Prong and Blackburn Fork (T13S R1W S12), Blount 
County, Alabama.
    (B) Map of Unit 12 follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR01JY04.014
    

[[Page 582]]


    (xv) Unit 13. Cahaba River and Little Cahaba River, Jefferson, 
Shelby, Bibb Counties, Alabama. This is a critical habitat unit for the 
southern acornshell, ovate clubshell, southern clubshell, upland 
combshell, triangular kidneyshell, Alabama moccasinshell, orange-nacre 
mucket, and fine-lined pocketbook.
    (A) Unit 13 includes the Cahaba River from U.S. Highway 82 (T23N R9E 
S26), Centerville, Bibb County, upstream to Jefferson County Road 143 
(T18S R1E S33), Jefferson County, Alabama; and the Little Cahaba River 
from its confluence with the Cahaba River (T24N R10E S21), upstream to 
the confluence of Mahan and Shoal Creeks (T24N R11E S14), Bibb County, 
Alabama.
    (B) Map of Unit 13 follows:

[[Page 583]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR01JY04.015

    (xvi) Unit 14. Alabama River, Autauga, Lowndes, Dallas Counties, 
Alabama. This is a critical habitat unit for the southern clubshell and 
orange-nacre mucket.
    (A) Unit 14 includes the Alabama River from the confluence of the 
Cahaba River (T16N R10E S32), Dallas County, upstream to the confluence 
of Big Swamp Creek (T15N R12E S1), Lowndes County, Alabama.
    (B) Map of Unit 14 follows:

[[Page 584]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR01JY04.016

    (xvii) Unit 15. Bogue Chitto Creek, Dallas County, Alabama. This is 
a critical habitat unit for the southern clubshell, Alabama 
moccasinshell, and orange-nacre mucket.
    (A) Unit 15 includes the Bogue Chitto Creek main stem from its 
confluence with the Alabama River (T14N R8E S24), Dallas County, 
upstream to U.S. Highway 80 (T17N R7E S24), Dallas County, Alabama.
    (B) Map of Unit 15 follows:

[[Page 585]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR01JY04.017

    (xviii) Unit 16. Tallapoosa River, Cleburne County, Alabama, and 
Paulding, Haralson Counties, Georgia; Cane Creek, Cleburne County, 
Alabama. This is a critical habitat unit for the fine-lined pocketbook.
    (A) Unit 16 includes the main stem Tallapoosa River from U.S. 
Highway 431 (T17S R10E S31), Cleburne County, Alabama, upstream to the 
confluence of McClendon and Mud Creeks (33[deg]50[min]43[sec] N 
85[deg]00[min]45[sec] W), Paulding County, Georgia; and Cane Creek from 
its confluence with Tallapoosa River (T16S R10E S24), upstream to 
section 33/4

[[Page 586]]

Line (T15S, R11E), Cleburne County, Alabama.
    (B) Map of Unit 16 follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR01JY04.018
    
    (xix) Unit 17. Uphapee, Choctafaula, and Chewacla Creeks, Macon, Lee 
Counties, Alabama. This is a critical habitat unit for the ovate 
clubshell, southern clubshell, and fine-lined pocketbook.
    (A) Unit 17 includes the mainstem of Uphapee Creek from Alabama 
Highway 199

[[Page 587]]

(T17N R23E S3), upstream to the confluence of Opintlocco and Chewacla 
Creeks (T17N R24E S26), Macon County, Alabama; Choctafaula Creek, from 
confluence with Uphapee Creek (T17N R24E S8), upstream to Macon County 
Road 54 (T18N R 25E S31), Macon County, Alabama; Chewacla Creek, from 
confluence with Opintlocco Creek (T17N R24E S26), Macon County, Alabama, 
upstream to Lee County Road 159 (T18N R26E S18), Lee County, Alabama; 
Opintlocco Creek, from confluence with Chewacla Creek (T17N R24E S26), 
upstream to Macon County Road 79 (T16N R25E S25) Macon County, Alabama.
    (B) Map of Unit 17 follows:

[[Page 588]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR01JY04.019

    (xx) Unit 18. Coosa River (Old River Channel) and Terrapin Creek, 
Cherokee, Calhoun, Cleburne Counties, Alabama. This is a critical 
habitat unit for the southern acornshell, ovate clubshell, southern 
clubshell, upland combshell, triangular kidneyshell, Coosa 
moccasinshell, southern pigtoe, and fine-lined pocketbook.
    (A) Unit 18 includes the Coosa River main stem from the power line 
crossing southeast of Maple Grove, Alabama (T10S R8E S35), upstream to 
Weiss Dam (T10S R8E S13), Cherokee County, Alabama; Terrapin Creek, 53

[[Page 589]]

km (33 mi) extending from its confluence with the Old Coosa River 
channel (T10S R9E S28), Cherokee County, upstream to Cleburne County 
Road 49 (T13S R11E S15), Cleburne County, Alabama; South Fork Terrapin 
Creek, 7 km (4 mi), from its confluence with Terrapin Creek (T13S R11E 
S18), upstream to Cleburne County Road 55 (T13S R11E S30), Cleburne 
County, Alabama.
    (B) Map of Unit 18 follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR01JY04.020
    

[[Page 590]]


    (xxi) Unit 19. Hatchet Creek, Coosa, Clay Counties, Alabama. This is 
a critical habitat unit for the southern acornshell, ovate clubshell, 
southern clubshell, upland combshell, triangular kidneyshell, Coosa 
moccasinshell, southern pigtoe, and fine-lined pocketbook.
    (A) Unit 19 includes the main stem of Hatchet Creek from the 
confluence of Swamp Creek at Coosa County Road 29 (T22N R17E S26), Coosa 
County, Alabama, upstream to Clay County Road 4 (T22S R6E S17) Clay 
County, Alabama.
    (B) Map of Unit 19 follows:

[[Page 591]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR01JY04.021

    (xxii) Unit 20. Shoal Creek, Calhoun, Cleburne Counties, Alabama. 
This is a critical habitat unit for the triangular kidneyshell, Coosa 
moccasinshell, southern pigtoe, and fine-lined pocketbook.
    (A) Unit 20 includes the main stem of Shoal Creek from the headwater 
of Whitesides Mill Lake (T15S R9E S12), Calhoun County, Alabama, 
upstream to the tailwater of Coleman Lake Dam (T14S R10E S26), Cleburne 
County, Alabama.

[[Page 592]]

    (B) Map of Unit 20 follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR01JY04.022
    
    (xxiii) Unit 21. Kelly Creek and Shoal Creek, Shelby, St. Clair 
Counties, Alabama. This is a critical habitat unit for the southern 
acornshell, ovate clubshell, southern clubshell, upland combshell, 
triangular

[[Page 593]]

kidneyshell, Coosa moccasinshell, southern pigtoe, and fine-lined 
pocketbook.
    (A) Unit 21 includes the Kelly Creek main stem extending from the 
confluence with the Coosa River (T19S R3E S5), upstream to the 
confluence of Shoal Creek (T17S R2E S28), St. Clair County, Alabama; and 
the main stem of Shoal Creek from the confluence with Kelly Creek (T17S 
R2E S28), St. Clair County, Alabama, upstream to the St. Clair/Shelby 
County Line (T17S R2E S30), St. Clair County, Alabama.
    (B) Map of Unit 21 follows:

[[Page 594]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR01JY04.023

    (xxiv) Unit 22. Cheaha Creek, Talladega, Clay Counties, Alabama. 
This is a critical habitat unit for the triangular kidneyshell, Coosa 
moccasinshell, southern pigtoe, and fine-lined pocketbook.
    (A) Unit 22 includes the main stem of Cheaha Creek from its 
confluence with Choccolocco Creek (T17S R6E S19), Talladega County, 
Alabama, upstream to the tailwater of Chinnabee Lake Dam (T18S R7E S14), 
Clay County, Alabama.

[[Page 595]]

    (B) Map of Unit 22 follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR01JY04.024
    
    (xxv) Unit 23. Yellowleaf Creek and Mud Creek, Shelby County, 
Alabama. This is a critical habitat unit for the triangular kidneyshell, 
Coosa moccasinshell, southern pigtoe, and fine-lined pocketbook.
    (A) Unit 23 includes the Yellowleaf Creek main stem from Alabama 
Highway 25 (T20S

[[Page 596]]

R2E S29), upstream to Shelby County Road 49 (T20S R1W S13); and the 
Muddy Prong main stem extending from its confluence with Yellowleaf 
Creek (T20S R1E S1), upstream to U.S. Highway 280 (T19S R1E S28), Shelby 
County, Alabama.
    (B) Map of Unit 23 follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR01JY04.025
    

[[Page 597]]


    (xxvi) Unit 24. Big Canoe Creek, St. Clair County, Alabama. This is 
a critical habitat unit for the southern acornshell, ovate clubshell, 
southern clubshell, upland combshell, triangular kidneyshell, Coosa 
moccasinshell, southern pigtoe, and fine-lined pocketbook.
    (A) Unit 24 includes the main stem of Big Canoe Creek from its 
confluence with Little Canoe Creek at the St. Clair/Etowah County line 
(T13S R5E S17), St. Clair County, upstream to the confluence of Fall 
Branch (T14S R1E S28) St. Clair County, Alabama.
    (B) Map of Unit 24 follows:

[[Page 598]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR01JY04.026

    (xxvii) Unit 25. Oostanaula, Coosawattee, and Conasauga Rivers, and 
Holly Creek, Floyd, Gordon, Whitfield, Murray Counties, Georgia; 
Bradley, Polk Counties, Tennessee. This is a critical habitat unit for 
the southern acornshell, ovate clubshell, southern clubshell, upland 
combshell, triangular kidneyshell, Alabama moccasinshell, Coosa 
moccasinshell, southern pigtoe, and fine-lined pocketbook.
    (A) Unit 25 includes the Oostanaula River main stem from its 
confluence with the

[[Page 599]]

Etowah River, Floyd County, Georgia (34[deg]15[min]13[sec] N, 
85[deg]10[min]35[sec] W), upstream to the confluence of the Conasauga 
and Coosawattee River, Gordon County, Georgia (34[deg]32[min]32[sec] N, 
84[deg]54[min]12[sec] W); the Coosawattee River main stem from its 
confluence with the Conasauga River (34[deg]32[min]32[sec] N, 
84[deg]54[min]12[sec] W), upstream to Georgia State Highway 136, Gordon 
County, Georgia (34[deg]36[min]49[sec] N, 84[deg]46[min]43[sec] W); the 
Conasauga River main stem from confluence with the Coosawattee River 
(34[deg]32[min]32[sec] N, 84[deg]54[min]13[sec] W), Gordon County, 
Georgia, upstream through Bradley and Polk Counties, Tennessee, to 
Murray County Road 2 (34[deg]58[min]27[sec] N, 84[deg]38[min]43[sec] W), 
Murray County, Georgia; and the mainstem of Holly Creek from its 
confluence with the Conasauga River (34[deg]42[min]12[sec] N, 
84[deg]53[min]29[sec] W), upstream to its confluence with Rock Creek, 
Murray County, Georgia (34[deg]46[min]59[sec] N, 84[deg]45[min]25[sec] 
W).
    (B) Map of Unit 25 follows:

[[Page 600]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR01JY04.027

    (xxviii) Unit 26. Lower Coosa River, Elmore County, Alabama. This is 
a critical habitat unit for the southern acornshell, ovate clubshell, 
southern clubshell, upland combshell, triangular kidneyshell, Alabama 
moccasinshell, Coosa moccasinshell, southern pigtoe, and fine-lined 
pocketbook.
    (A) Unit 26 includes the Coosa River main stem from Alabama State 
Highway 111 bridge (T18N R18/19E S24/19), upstream to

[[Page 601]]

Jordan Dam (T19N R18E S22), Elmore County, Alabama.
    (B) Map of Unit 26 follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR01JY04.028
    

[[Page 602]]



 Five Tennessee and Cumberland River Basin Mussels Species: Purple bean 
 (Villosa perpurpurea), Cumberlandian combshell (Epioblasma brevidens), 
Cumberland elktoe (Alasmidonta atropurpurea), oyster mussel (Epioblasma 
 capsaeformis), and rough rabbitsfoot (Quadrula cylindrica strigillata).

    (1) The primary constituent elements essential for the conservation 
of the purple bean (Villosa perpurpurea), Cumberlandian combshell 
(Epioblasma brevidens), Cumberland elktoe (Alasmidonta atropurpurea), 
oyster mussel (Epioblasma capsaeformis), and rough rabbitsfoot (Quadrula 
cylindrica strigillata) are those habitat components that support 
feeding, sheltering, reproduction, and physical features for maintaining 
the natural processes that support these habitat components. The primary 
constituent elements include:
    (i) Permanent, flowing stream reaches with a flow regime (i.e, the 
magnitude, frequency, duration, and seasonality of discharge over time) 
necessary for normal behavior, growth, and survival of all life stages 
of the five mussels and their host fish;
    (ii) Geomorphically stable stream and river channels and banks;
    (iii) Stable substrates consisting of mud, sand, gravel, and/or 
cobble/boulder, with low amounts of fine sediments or attached 
filamentous algae;
    (iv) Water quality (including temperature, turbidity, oxygen 
content, and other characteristics) necessary for the normal behavior, 
growth, and survival of all life stages of the five mussels and their 
host fish; and
    (v) Fish hosts with adequate living, foraging, and spawning areas 
for them.
    (2) Critical habitat unit descriptions and maps.
    (i) Index map. The index map showing critical habitat units in the 
States of Mississippi, Alabama, Tennessee, Kentucky, and Virginia for 
the five Tennessee and Cumberland River Basin mussels follows:

[[Page 603]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31AU04.000


[[Page 604]]


    (ii) Table of protected species and critical habitat units. A table 
listing the protected species, their respective critical habitat units, 
and the States that contain those habitat units follows. Detailed 
critical habitat unit descriptions and maps appear below the table.

    Table of Five Tennessee and Cumberland River Basin Mussels, Their
  Critical Habitat Units, and States Containing Those Critical Habitat
                                  Units
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                   Critical habitat
             Species                     units              States
------------------------------------------------------------------------
purple bean (Villosa              Units 3, 4, 5, 7..  TN, VA
 perpurpurea).
Cumberlandian combshell           Units 1, 2, 4, 5,   AL, KY, MS, TN, VA
 (Epioblasma brevidens).           6, 9, 10.
Cumberland elktoe (Alasmidonta    Units 8, 9, 11,     KY, TN
 atropurpurea).                    12, 13.
oyster mussel (Epioblasma         Units 1, 2, 4, 5,   AL, KY, MS, TN, VA
 capsaeformis).                    6, 9,10.
rough rabbitsfoot (Quadrula       Units 4, 5........  TN, VA
 cylindrica strigillata).
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (iii) Unit 1. Duck River, Marshall and Maury Counties, Tennessee. 
This is a critical habitat unit for the oyster mussel and Cumberlandian 
combshell.
    (A) Unit 1 includes the main stem of the Duck River from rkm 214 
(rmi 133) (0.3 rkm (0.2 rmi) upstream of the First Street Bridge) (-
87.03 longitude, 35.63 latitude) in the City of Columbia, Maury County, 
Tennessee, upstream to Lillard Mill Dam at rkm 288 (rmi 179) (-86.78 
longitude, 35.58 latitude), Marshall County, Tennessee.
    (B) Map of Unit 1 follows:

[[Page 605]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31AU04.001

    (iv) Unit 2. Bear Creek, Colbert County, Alabama, and Tishomingo 
County, Mississippi. This is a critical habitat unit for the oyster 
mussel and Cumberlandian combshell.
    (A) Unit 2 consists of the main stem of Bear Creek from the 
backwaters of Pickwick Lake at rkm 37 (rmi 23) (-88.09 longitude, 34.81 
latitude), Colbert County, Alabama, upstream through Tishomingo County, 
Mississippi, ending at the Mississippi/Alabama State line.
    (B) Map of Unit 2 follows:

[[Page 606]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31AU04.002

    (v) Unit 3. Obed River, Cumberland and Morgan Counties, Tennessee. 
This is a critical habitat unit for the purple bean.
    (A) Unit 3 includes the Obed River main stem from its confluence 
with the Emory River (-84.69 longitude, 36.09 latitude), Morgan County, 
Tennessee, upstream to Adams Bridge, Cumberland County, Tennessee (-
84.95 longitude, 36.07 latitude).
    (B) Map of Unit 3 follows:

[[Page 607]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31AU04.003

    (vi) Unit 4. Powell River, Claiborne and Hancock Counties, 
Tennessee, and Lee County, Virginia. This is a critical habitat unit for 
the purple bean, Cumberlandian combshell, oyster mussel, and rough 
rabbitsfoot.
    (A) Unit 4 includes the main stem of the Powell River from the U.S. 
25E bridge in Claiborne County, Tennessee (-83.63 longitude, 36.53 
latitude), upstream to river mile 159 (upstream of Rock Island in the 
vicinity of Pughs) Lee County, Virginia.
    (B) Map of Unit 4 follows:

[[Page 608]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31AU04.004

    (vii) Unit 5. Clinch River, Hancock County, Tennessee, and Scott, 
Russell, and Tazewell Counties, Virginia; Copper Creek, Scott County, 
Virginia; and Indian Creek, Tazewell County, Virginia. This is a 
critical habitat unit for the purple bean, Cumberlandian combshell, 
oyster mussel, and rough rabbitsfoot.
    (A) Unit 5 includes the Clinch River main stem from rkm 255 (rmi 
159) (-83.36 longitude, 36.43 latitude) immediately below Grissom 
Island, Hancock County, Tennessee, upstream to its confluence with 
Indian Creek

[[Page 609]]

in Cedar Bluff, Tazewell County, Virginia (-81.80 longitude, 37.10 
latitude); Copper Creek in Scott County, Virginia, from its confluence 
with the Clinch River (-82.74 longitude, 36.67 latitude) upstream to 
Virginia State Route 72 (-82.56 longitude, 36.68 latitude); and Indian 
Creek from its confluence with the Clinch River upstream to the fourth 
Norfolk Southern Railroad crossing at Van Dyke, Tazewell County, 
Virginia (-81.77 longitude, 37.14 latitude).
    (B) Map of Unit 5 follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31AU04.005
    

[[Page 610]]


    (viii) Unit 6. Nolichucky River, Hamblen and Cocke Counties, 
Tennessee. This is a critical habitat unit for the Cumberlandian 
combshell and oyster mussel.
    (A) Unit 6 consists of the main stem of the Nolichucky River from 
rkm 14 (rmi 9) (-83.18 longitude, 36.18 latitude) (approximately 0.6 rkm 
(0.4 rmi) upstream of Enka Dam) upstream to Susong Bridge (-83.20 
longitude, 36.14 latitude) in Hamblen and Cocke Counties, Tennessee.
    (B) Map of Unit 6 follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31AU04.006
    

[[Page 611]]


    (ix) Unit 7. Beech Creek, Hawkins County, Tennessee. This is a 
critical habitat unit for the purple bean.
    (A) Unit 7 includes the Beech Creek main stem from rkm 4 (rmi 2) (-
82.92 longitude, 36.40 latitude) of Beech Creek (in the vicinity of 
Slide, Tennessee) upstream to the dismantled railroad bridge at rkm 27 
(rmi 16) (-82.77 longitude, 36.40 latitude).
    (B) Map of Unit 7 follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31AU04.007
    

[[Page 612]]


    (x) Unit 8. Rock Creek, McCreary County, Kentucky. This is a 
critical habitat unit for the Cumberland elktoe.
    (A) Unit 8 includes the main stem of Rock Creek from its confluence 
with White Oak Creek (-84.59 longitude, 36.71 latitude), upstream to the 
low-water crossing at rkm 25.6 (rmi 15.9) approximately 2.6 km (1.6 mi) 
southwest of Bell Farm (-84.69 longitude, 36.65 latitude), McCreary 
County, Kentucky.
    (B) Map of Unit 8 follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31AU04.008
    

[[Page 613]]


    (xi) Unit 9. Big South Fork of the Cumberland River and its 
tributaries, Fentress, Morgan, and Scott Counties, Tennessee, and 
McCreary County, Kentucky. This is a critical habitat unit for the 
Cumberlandian combshell, Cumberland elktoe, and oyster mussel.
    (A) Unit 9 consists of the Big South Fork of the Cumberland River 
main stem from its confluence with Laurel Crossing Branch (-84.54 
longitude, 36.64 latitude), McCreary County, Kentucky, upstream to its 
confluence with the New River and Clear Fork, Scott County, Tennessee; 
North White Oak Creek from its confluence with the Big South Fork 
upstream to Panther Branch (-84.75 longitude, 36.42 latitude), Fentress 
County, Tennessee; New River from its confluence with Clear Fork 
upstream to U.S. Highway 27 (-84.55 longitude, 36.38 latitude), Scott 
County, Tennessee; Clear Fork from its confluence with the New River 
upstream to its confluence with North Prong Clear Fork, Morgan and 
Fentress Counties, Tennessee; White Oak Creek from its confluence with 
Clear Fork upstream to its confluence with Bone Camp Creek, Morgan 
County, Tennessee; Bone Camp Creek from its confluence with White Oak 
Creek upstream to Massengale Branch (-84.71 longitude, 36.28 latitude), 
Morgan County, Tennessee; Crooked Creek from its confluence with Clear 
Fork upstream to Buttermilk Branch (-84.92 longitude, 36.36 latitude), 
Fentress County, Tennessee; and North Prong Clear Fork from its 
confluence with Clear Fork upstream to Shoal Creek (-84.97 longitude, 
36.26 latitude), Fentress County, Tennessee.
    (B) Maps of Unit 9 follow:

[[Page 614]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31AU04.009


[[Page 615]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31AU04.010


[[Page 616]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31AU04.011

    (xii) Unit 10. Buck Creek, Pulaski County, Kentucky. This is a 
critical habitat unit for the Cumberlandian combshell and oyster mussel.
    (A) Unit 10 includes the Buck Creek main stem from the State Road 
192 Bridge (-84.43 longitude, 37.06 latitude) upstream to the State Road 
328 Bridge (-84.56 longitude, 37.32 latitude) in Pulaski County, 
Kentucky.
    (B) Map of Unit 10 follows:

[[Page 617]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31AU04.012

    (xiii) Unit 11. Sinking Creek, Laurel County, Kentucky. This is a 
critical habitat unit for the Cumberland elktoe.
    (A) Unit 11 includes the main stem of Sinking Creek from its 
confluence with the Rockcastle River (-84.28 longitude, 37.10 latitude) 
upstream to its confluence with Laurel Branch (-84.17 longitude, 37.09 
latitude) in Laurel County, Kentucky.
    (B) Map of Unit 11 follows:

[[Page 618]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31AU04.013

    (xiv) Unit 12. Marsh Creek, McCreary County, Kentucky. This is a 
critical habitat unit for the Cumberland elktoe.
    (A) Unit 12 includes the Marsh Creek main stem from its confluence 
with the Cumberland River (-84.35 longitude, 36.78 latitude) upstream to 
State Road 92 Bridge (-84.35 longitude, 36.66 latitude) in McCreary 
County, Kentucky.
    (B) Map of Unit 12 follows:

[[Page 619]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31AU04.014

    (xv) Unit 13. Laurel Fork, Claiborne County, Tennessee, and Whitley 
County, Kentucky. This is a critical habitat unit for the Cumberland 
elktoe.
    (A) Unit 13 includes the main stem of the Laurel Fork of the 
Cumberland River from the boundary between Claiborne and Campbell 
Counties (-84.00 longitude, 36.58 latitude) upstream to rkm 11 (rmi 
6.85) in Whitley County, Kentucky. The upstream terminus is 3 rkm (2 
rmi) upstream of the Kentucky/Tennessee State line (-84.00 longitude, 
36.60 latitude).
    (B) Map of Unit 13 follows:

[[Page 620]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31AU04.015


[[Page 621]]



   Seven mussel species (in four northeast Gulf of Mexico drainages): 
    Purple bankclimber (Elliptoideus sloatianus), Gulf moccasinshell 
    (Medionidus penicillatus), Ochlockonee moccasinshell (Medionidus 
simpsonianus), oval pigtoe (Pleurobema pyriforme), shinyrayed pocketbook 
(Lampsilis subangulata), Chipola slabshell (Elliptio chipolaensis), and 
                   fat threeridge (Amblema neislerii).

    (1) Critical habitat units are depicted on the maps below for the 
following counties:
    (i) Alabama: Houston and Russell;
    (ii) Florida: Alachua, Bay, Bradford, Calhoun, Columbia, Franklin, 
Gadsden, Gulf, Jackson, Leon, Liberty, Union, Wakulla, and Washington; 
and
    (iii) Georgia: Baker, Calhoun, Coweta, Crawford, Crisp, Decatur, 
Dooly, Dougherty, Early, Fayette, Grady, Lee, Macon, Marion, Meriwether, 
Miller, Mitchell, Peach, Pike, Schley, Spalding, Sumter, Talbot, Taylor, 
Terrell, Thomas, Upson, Webster, and Worth.
    (2) The primary constituent elements of critical habitat for the 
purple bankclimber (Elliptoideus sloatianus), Gulf moccasinshell 
(Medionidus penicillatus), Ochlockonee moccasinshell (Medionidus 
simpsonianus), oval pigtoe (Pleurobema pyriforme), shinyrayed pocketbook 
(Lampsilis subangulata), Chipola slabshell (Elliptio chipolaensis), and 
fat threeridge (Amblema neislerii) are:
    (i) A geomorphically stable stream channel (a channel that maintains 
its lateral dimensions, longitudinal profile, and spatial pattern over 
time without a consistent aggrading or degrading bed elevation);
    (ii) A predominantly sand, gravel, and/or cobble stream substrate 
with low to moderate amounts of silt and clay;
    (iii) Permanently flowing water;
    (iv) Water quality (including temperature, turbidity, dissolved 
oxygen, and chemical constituents) that meets or exceeds the current 
aquatic life criteria established under the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. 
1251-1387); and
    (v) Fish hosts (such as largemouth bass, sailfin shiner, brown 
darter) that support the larval life stages of the seven mussels.
    (3) Critical habitat does not include manmade structures (such as 
buildings, aqueducts, airports, roads, and other paved areas) and the 
land on which they are located existing within the legal boundaries on 
the effective date of this rule and not containing one or more of the 
primary constituent elements.
    (4) Critical habitat unit maps. Data layers defining map units were 
created with USGS National Hydrography Dataset (NHD) GIS data. The 
1:100,000 river reach (route) files were used to calculate river 
kilometers and miles. The following data sources were referenced to 
identify upstream and downstream extents of critical habitat units: USGS 
7.5' quadrangles; Georgia Department of Transportation county highway 
maps; U.S. Census Bureau 1:100,000 TIGER line road data; 1993 Georgia 
digital orthographic quarter quads (DOQQs); 2004 Florida DOQQs; and 
DeLorme Atlas and Gazetteers for Alabama, Florida, and Georgia. The 
projection used in mapping all units was Universal Transverse Mercator 
(UTM), NAD 83, Zone 16 North.
    (5) Note: Index map of critical habitat units in the States of 
Alabama, Florida, and Georgia for the seven mussels follows:

[[Page 622]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR15NO07.000

    (6) Table of listed species and critical habitat units. A table 
showing the listed species, their respective critical habitat units, and 
the States that contain those habitat units follows. Detailed critical 
habitat unit descriptions and maps appear below in paragraphs (7) 
through (17).

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                  Critical habitat
            Species                    units               States
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Purple bankclimber               Units 5, 6, 7, 8,  AL, FL, GA
 (Elliptoideus sloatianus).       9, 10.

[[Page 623]]

 
Gulf moccasinshell (Medionidus   Units 1, 2, 4, 5,  AL, FL, GA
 penicillatus).                   6, 7.
Ochlockonee moccasinshell        Unit 9...........  FL, GA
 (Medionidus simpsonianus).
Oval pigtoe (Pleurobema          Units 1, 2, 4, 5,  AL, FL, GA
 pyriforme).                      6, 7, 9, 11.
Shinyrayed pocketbook            Units 2, 3, 4, 5,  AL, FL, GA
 (Lampsilis subangulata).         6, 7, 9.
Chipola slabshell (Elliptio      Unit 2...........  AL, FL
 chipolaensis).
Fat threeridge (mussel)          Units 2, 7, 8....  AL, FL, GA
 (Amblema neislerii).
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (7) Unit 1. Econfina and Moccasin creeks, Bay and Washington 
Counties, Florida. This is a critical habitat unit for the Gulf 
moccasinshell and oval pigtoe.
    (i) General Description: Unit 1 includes the main stem of Econfina 
Creek and one of its tributaries, Moccasin Creek, encompassing a total 
stream length of 31.4 kilometers (km) (19.5 miles (mi)). The main stem 
of Econfina Creek extends from its confluence with Deer Point Lake at 
the powerline crossing located 3.8 km (2.3 mi) downstream of Bay County 
Highway 388 (-85.56 longitude, 30.36 latitude), Bay County, Florida, 
upstream 28.6 km (17.8 mi) to Tenmile Creek (-85.50 longitude, 30.51 
latitude), Washington County, Florida; and Moccasin Creek from its 
confluence with Econfina Creek upstream 2.8 km (1.7 mi) to Ellis Branch 
(-85.53 longitude, 30.41 latitude), Bay County, Florida.
    (ii) Note: Unit 1 map follows:

[[Page 624]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR15NO07.001

    (8) Unit 2. Chipola River and Dry, Rocky, Waddells Mill, Baker, 
Marshall, Big, and Cowarts Creeks in Houston County, Alabama, and in 
Calhoun, Gulf, and Jackson counties, Florida. This is a critical habitat 
unit for the fat threeridge, shinyrayed pocketbook, Gulf moccasinshell, 
oval pigtoe, and Chipola slabshell.
    (i) General Description: Unit 2 includes the main stem of the 
Chipola River and seven of its tributaries, encompassing a total stream 
length of 228.7 km (142.1 mi). The main stem

[[Page 625]]

of the Chipola River extends from its confluence with the Apalachicola 
River (-85.09 longitude, 30.01 latitude) in Gulf County, Florida, 
upstream 144.9 river km (90.0 river mi), including the reach known as 
Dead Lake, to the confluence of Marshall and Cowarts creeks (-85.27 
longitude, 30.91 latitude) in Jackson County, Florida; Dry Creek from 
the Chipola River upstream 7.6 river km (4.7 river mi) to Ditch Branch 
(-85.24 longitude, 30.69 latitude), Jackson County, Florida; Rocky Creek 
from the Chipola River upstream 7.1 river km (4.4 river mi) to Little 
Rocky Creek (-85.13 longitude, 30.68 latitude), Jackson County, Florida; 
Waddells Mill Creek from the Chipola River upstream 3.7 river km (2.3 
river mi) to Russ Mill Creek (-85.29 longitude, 30.87 latitude), Jackson 
County, Florida; Baker Creek from Waddells Mill Creek upstream 5.3 river 
km (3.3 river mi) to Tanner Springs (-85.32 longitude, 30.83 latitude), 
Jackson County, Florida; Marshall Creek from the Chipola River upstream 
13.7 river km (8.5 river mi) to the Alabama-Florida State line (-85.33 
longitude, 31.00 latitude), Jackson County, Florida; Cowarts Creek from 
the Chipola River in Jackson County, Florida, upstream 33.5 river km 
(20.8 river mi) to the Edgar Smith Road bridge (-85.29 longitude, 31.13 
latitude), Houston County, Alabama; and Big Creek from the Alabama-
Florida State line upstream 13.0 river km (8.1 river mi) to Limestone 
Creek (-85.42 longitude, 31.08 latitude), Houston County, Alabama. The 
short segment of the Chipola River that flows underground within the 
boundaries of Florida Caverns State Park is not included within this 
unit.
    (ii) Note: Unit 2 map follows:

[[Page 626]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR15NO07.002

    (9) Unit 3. Uchee Creek, Russell County, Alabama. This is a critical 
habitat unit for the shinyrayed pocketbook.
    (i) General Description: Unit 3 includes the main stem of Uchee 
Creek from its confluence with the Chattahoochee River upstream 34.2 km 
(21.2 mi) to Island Creek (-85.18 longitude, 32.38 latitude), Russell 
County, Alabama, encompassing a total stream length of 34.2 km (21.2 
mi).
    (ii) Note: Unit 3 map follows:

[[Page 627]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR15NO07.003

    (10) Unit 4. Sawhatchee, Sheffield Mill, and Kirkland creeks, Early 
County, Georgia. This is a critical habitat unit for the shinyrayed 
pocketbook, Gulf moccasinshell, and oval pigtoe.
    (i) General Description: Unit 4 includes the main stems of 
Sawhatchee and Kirkland creeks, and one tributary, encompassing a total 
stream length of 37.8 km (23.5 mi). Unit 4 includes Sawhatchee Creek 
from its confluence with the Chattahoochee River upstream 28.6 km (17.8 
mi) to the powerline crossing located 1.4 km (0.87 mi) upstream of Early 
County Road 15 (-84.99 longitude, 31.32

[[Page 628]]

latitude); Sheffield Mill Creek, the tributary, from its confluence with 
Sawhatchee Creek upstream 3.1 km (1.9 mi) to the powerline crossing 
located 2.3 km (1.4 mi) upstream of Sowhatchee Road (-85.01 longitude, 
31.23 latitude); Kirkland Creek from its confluence with the 
Chattahoochee River upstream 6.1 km (3.8 mi) to Dry Creek (-85.00 
longitude, 31.13 latitude).
    (ii) Note: Unit 4 map follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR15NO07.004
    

[[Page 629]]


    (11) Unit 5. Upper Flint River and Swift, Limestone, Turkey, 
Pennahatchee, Little Pennahatchee, Hogcrawl, Red Oak, Line, and 
Whitewater creeks in Coweta, Crawford, Crisp, Dooly, Fayette, Macon, 
Meriwether, Peach, Pike, Spalding, Sumter, Talbot, Taylor, Upson, and 
Worth counties, Georgia. This is a critical habitat unit for the 
shinyrayed pocketbook, Gulf moccasinshell, oval pigtoe, and purple 
bankclimber.
    (i) General Description: Unit 5 encompasses a total stream length of 
380.4 km (236.4 mi) and includes the Flint River from the State Highway 
27 bridge (Vienna Road) (-83.98 longitude, 32.06 latitude) in Dooly and 
Sumter counties, Georgia (the river is the county boundary), upstream 
247.4 km (153.7 mi) through Macon, Peach, Taylor, Crawford, Talbot, 
Upson, Pike, Meriwether, and Coweta counties, to Horton Creek (-84.42 
longitude, 33.29 latitude) in Fayette and Spalding counties, Georgia 
(the river is the county boundary); Swift Creek from Lake Blackshear 
upstream 11.3 km (7 mi) to Rattlesnake Branch (-83.84 longitude, 31.82 
latitude), Crisp and Worth counties, Georgia (the creek is the county 
boundary); Limestone Creek from Lake Blackshear, Crisp County, Georgia, 
upstream 8.8 km (5.5 mi) to County Road 89 (-83.88 longitude, 32.04 
latitude), Dooly County, Georgia; Turkey Creek from the Flint River 
upstream 21.7 km (13.5 mi) to Rogers Branch (-83.89 longitude, 32.20 
latitude), in Dooly County, Georgia; Pennahatchee Creek from Turkey 
Creek upstream 4.8 km (3 mi) to Little Pennahatchee Creek (-83.89 
longitude, 32.10 latitude), Dooly County, Georgia; Little Pennahatchee 
Creek from Pennahatchee Creek upstream 5.8 km (3.6 mi) to Rock Hill 
Creek (-83.85 longitude, 32.13 latitude), Dooly County, Georgia; 
Hogcrawl Creek from the Flint River upstream 21.6 km (13.4 mi) to Little 
Creek (-83.90 longitude, 32.28 latitude), Dooly and Macon counties, 
Georgia (the creek is the county boundary); Red Oak Creek from the Flint 
River upstream 21.7 km (13.5 mi) to Brittens Creek (-84.68 longitude, 
33.11 latitude), Meriwether County, Georgia; Line Creek from the Flint 
River upstream 15.8 km (9.8 mi) to Whitewater Creek (-84.51 longitude, 
33.28 latitude), Coweta and Fayette counties, Georgia (the creek is the 
county boundary); and Whitewater Creek from Line Creek upstream 21.5 km 
(13.4 mi) to Ginger Cake Creek (-84.49 longitude, 33.42 latitude), 
Fayette County, Georgia.
    (ii) Note: Two maps of unit 5--northern part of unit 5 and--southern 
part of unit 5 follow:

[[Page 630]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR15NO07.005


[[Page 631]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR15NO07.006

    (12) Unit 6. Middle Flint River and Kinchafoonee, Lanahassee, 
Muckalee, Little Muckalee, Mill, Mercer Mill Pond, Abrams, Jones, and 
Chokee creeks in Dougherty, Lee, Marion, Schley, Sumter, Terrell, 
Webster, and Worth counties, Georgia. This is a critical habitat unit 
for the shinyrayed pocketbook, Gulf moccasinshell, oval pigtoe, and 
purple bankclimber.
    (i) General Description: Unit 6 encompasses a total stream length of 
302.3 km (187.8 mi) and includes the Flint River from Piney

[[Page 632]]

Woods Creek (-84.06 longitude, 31.61 latitude) in Dougherty County, 
Georgia (the upstream extent of Lake Worth), upstream 39.9 km (24.8 mi) 
to the Warwick Dam (-83.94 longitude, 31.85 latitude), Lee and Worth 
counties, Georgia; Kinchafoonee Creek from its confluence with Lake 
Worth at the Lee--Dougherty county line (-84.17 longitude, 31.62 
latitude), upstream 107.6 km (66.8 mi) through Terrell and Sumter 
Counties, Georgia, to Dry Creek (-84.58 longitude, 32.17 latitude), 
Webster County, Georgia; Lanahassee Creek from Kinchafoonee Creek 
upstream 9.3 km (5.8 mi) to West Fork Lanahassee Creek (-84.50 
longitude, 32.11 latitude), Webster County, Georgia; Muckalee Creek, 
from its confluence with Lake Worth at the Lee--Dougherty county line (-
84.14 longitude, 31.62 latitude), upstream 104.5 km (64.9 mi) to County 
Road 114 (-84.44 longitude, 32.23 latitude), Marion County, Georgia; 
Little Muckalee Creek, from Muckalee Creek in Sumter County, Georgia, 
upstream 7.2 km (4.5 mi) to Galey Creek (-84.29 longitude, 32.17 
latitude), Schley County, Georgia; Mill Creek from the Flint River 
upstream 3.2 km (2 mi) to Mercer Millpond Creek (-83.99 longitude, 31.67 
latitude), Worth County, Georgia; Mercer Millpond Creek from Mill Creek 
upstream 0.45 km (0.28 mi) to Mercer Mill Pond (-83.99 longitude, 31.68 
latitude), Worth County, Georgia; Abrams Creek from the Flint River 
upstream 15.9 km (9.9 mi) to County Road 123 (-83.93 longitude, 31.68 
latitude), Worth County, Georgia; Jones Creek from the Flint River 
upstream 3.8 km (2.4 mi) to County Road 123 (-83.96 longitude, 31.76 
latitude), Worth County, Georgia; and Chokee Creek, from the Flint River 
upstream 10.5 km (6.5 mi) to Dry Branch Creek (-84.02 longitude, 31.89 
latitude), Lee County, Georgia.
    (ii) Note: Two maps of unit 6--western part of unit 6 and--eastern 
part of unit 6 follow:

[[Page 633]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR15NO07.007


[[Page 634]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR15NO07.008

    (13) Unit 7. Lower Flint River and Spring, Aycocks, Dry, 
Ichawaynochaway, Mill, Pachitla, Little Pachitla, Chickasawhatchee, and 
Cooleewahee creeks in Baker, Calhoun, Decatur, Dougherty, Early, Miller, 
Mitchell, and Terrell counties, Georgia. This is a critical habitat unit 
for the fat threeridge, shinyrayed pocketbook, Gulf moccasinshell, oval 
pigtoe, and purple bankclimber.
    (i) General Description: Unit 7 encompasses a total stream length of 
396.7 km (246.5 mi) and includes the Flint River from its confluence 
with Big Slough (-84.56 longitude,

[[Page 635]]

30.93 latitude), Decatur County, Georgia, upstream 116.4 km (72.3 mi) 
through Baker and Mitchell Counties, Georgia, to the Flint River Dam 
(which impounds Lake Worth) (-84.14 longitude, 31.60 latitude), 
Dougherty County, Georgia; Spring Creek, from its confluence with Lake 
Seminole at Smith Landing (-84.75 longitude, 30.89 latitude), Decatur 
County, Georgia, upstream 74.2 km (46.1 mi) to County Road 35 (-84.78 
longitude, 31.34 latitude), Early County, Georgia; Aycocks Creek from 
Spring Creek upstream 15.9 km (9.9 mi) to Cypress Creek (-84.79 
longitude, 31.15 latitude), Miller County, Georgia; Dry Creek from 
Spring Creek upstream 9.9 km (6.1 mi) to Wamble Creek (-84.84 longitude, 
31.31 latitude), Early County, Georgia; Ichawaynochaway Creek from the 
Flint River, Baker County, Georgia, upstream 68.6 km (42.6 mi) to 
Merrett Creek (-84.58 longitude, 31.54 latitude), Calhoun County, 
Georgia; Mill Creek from Ichawaynochaway Creek upstream 7.4 km (4.6 mi) 
to County Road 163 (-84.63 longitude, 31.40 latitude), Baker County, 
Georgia; Pachitla Creek, from Ichawaynochaway Creek upstream 18.9 km 
(11.8 mi) to Little Pachitla Creek (-84.68 longitude, 31.56 latitude), 
Calhoun County, Georgia; Little Pachitla Creek from Pachitla Creek 
upstream 5.8 km (3.6 mi) to Bear Branch (-84.72 longitude, 31.58 
latitude), Calhoun County, Georgia; Chickasawhatchee Creek from 
Ichawaynochaway Creek, Baker County, Georgia, upstream 64.5 km (40.1 mi) 
to U.S. Highway 82 (-84.38 longitude, 31.74 latitude), Terrell County, 
Georgia; and Cooleewahee Creek from the Flint River upstream 15.1 km 
(9.4 mi) to Piney Woods Branch (-84.31 longitude, 31.42 latitude), Baker 
County, Georgia.
    (ii) Note: Two maps of unit 7--western part of unit 7 and--eastern 
part of unit 7 follow:

[[Page 636]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR15NO07.009


[[Page 637]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR15NO07.010

    (14) Unit 8. Apalachicola River, Chipola Cutoff, Swift Slough, River 
Styx, Kennedy Slough, and Kennedy Creek in Calhoun, Franklin, Gadsden, 
Gulf, Jackson, and Liberty Counties, Florida. This is a critical habitat 
unit for the fat threeridge and purple bankclimber.
    (i) General Description: Unit 8 includes the main stem of the 
Apalachicola River, two of its distributaries, Chipola Cutoff and Swift 
Slough, and three of its tributaries, River Styx, Kennedy Slough, and 
Kennedy Creek, encompassing a total length of 161.2 river km

[[Page 638]]

(100.2 river mi). The main stem of the Apalachicola River extends from 
the downstream end of Bloody Bluff Island (river mile 15.3 on U.S. Army 
Corps of Engineers Navigation Charts) (-85.01 longitude, 29.88 
latitude), Franklin County, Florida, through Calhoun and Liberty 
Counties, Florida, upstream to the Jim Woodruff Lock and Dam (which 
impounds Lake Seminole) (-84.86 longitude, 30.71 latitude), Gadsden and 
Jackson Counties, Florida; Chipola Cutoff from the Apalachicola River in 
Gulf County, Florida, downstream 4.5 river km (2.8 river mi) to its 
confluence with the Chipola River; Swift Slough from the Apalachicola 
River in Liberty County, Florida, downstream 3.6 river km (2.2 river mi) 
to its confluence with the River Styx (-85.12 longitude, 30.10 
latitude); River Styx from the mouth of Swift Slough (-85.12 longitude, 
30.10 latitude) in Liberty County, Florida, downstream 3.8 river km (2.4 
river mi) to its confluence with the Apalachicola River; Kennedy Slough 
from -85.07 longitude, 30.01 latitude in Liberty County, Florida, 
downstream 0.9 river km (0.5 river mi) to its confluence with Kennedy 
Creek; and Kennedy Creek from Brushy Creek Feeder (-85.06 longitude, 
30.01 latitude) in Liberty County, Florida, downstream 1.1 river km (0.7 
river mi) to its confluence with the Apalachicola River.
    (ii) Note: Unit 8 map follows:

[[Page 639]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR15NO07.011

    (15) Unit 9. Upper Ochlockonee River and Barnetts and West Barnetts 
creeks, and the Little Ochlockonee River in Gadsden and Leon counties, 
Florida, and in Grady and Thomas counties, Georgia. This is a critical 
habitat unit for the shinyrayed pocketbook, Ochlockonee moccasinshell, 
oval pigtoe, and purple bankclimber.
    (i) General Description: Unit 9 includes the main stem of the 
Ochlockonee River upstream of Lake Talquin and three tributaries 
encompassing a total stream length of 177.3 km (110.2 mi). The main stem 
of the

[[Page 640]]

Ochlockonee River extends from its confluence with Gulley Branch (the 
approximate upstream extent of Lake Talquin) (-84.44 longitude, 30.46 
latitude), Gadsden and Leon counties, Florida, upstream 134.0 km (83.3 
mi) to Bee Line Road/County Road 306 (-83.94 longitude, 31.03 latitude), 
Thomas County, Georgia; Barnetts Creek from the Ochlockonee River 
upstream 20 km (12.4 mi) to Grady County Road 170/Thomas County Road 74 
(-84.12 longitude, 30.98 latitude), Grady and Thomas counties, Georgia; 
West Barnetts Creek from Barnetts Creek upstream 10 km (6.2 mi) to 
Georgia Highway 111 (-84.17 longitude, 30.98 latitude), Grady County, 
Georgia; and the Little Ochlockonee River from the Ochlockonee River 
upstream 13.3 km (8.3 mi) to Roup Road/County Road 33 (-84.02 longitude, 
31.02 latitude), Thomas County, Georgia.
    (ii) Note: Unit 9 map follows:

[[Page 641]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR15NO07.012

    (16) Unit 10. Lower Ochlockonee River in Leon, Liberty, and Wakulla 
counties, Florida. This is a critical habitat unit for the purple 
bankclimber.
    (i) General Description: Unit 10 encompasses a total stream length 
of 75.4 km (46.9 mi) and includes the main stem of the Ochlockonee River 
from its confluence with Syfrett Creek (-84.56 longitude, 30.02 
latitude), Wakulla County, Florida, upstream 75.4 km (46.9 mi) to the 
Jackson Bluff Dam (which impounds Lake Talquin) (-84.65 longitude, 30.39 
latitude), Leon and Liberty counties, Florida.
    (ii) Note: Unit 10 map follows:

[[Page 642]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR15NO07.013

    (17) Unit 11. Santa Fe River and New River in Alachua, Bradford, 
Columbia, and Union counties, Florida. This is a critical habitat unit 
for the oval pigtoe.
    (i) General Description: Unit 11 includes the main stem of the Santa 
Fe River and its tributary the New River encompassing a total stream 
length of 83.1 km (51.6 mi). The main channel of the Santa Fe River 
extends from where the river goes underground in O'Leno State Park (-
82.57 longitude, 29.91 latitude), Alachua and Columbia counties, 
Florida, upstream 60.2 km (37.4 mi) to the powerline crossing located 
1.9 km (1.2 mi) downstream from the U.S. Highway 301 bridge (-82.18 
longitude, 29.84 latitude) in

[[Page 643]]

Alachua and Bradford counties, Florida; and the New River from its 
confluence with the Santa Fe River at the junction of Alachua, Bradford, 
and Union counties, Florida, upstream 22.9 km (14.2 mi) to McKinney 
Branch (-82.27 longitude, 30.01 latitude) in Bradford and Union 
counties, Florida.
    (ii) Note: Unit 11 map follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR15NO07.014
    

[[Page 644]]


    (g) Arachnids.

          Cokendolpher Cave Harvestman (Texella cokendolpheri)

    (1) Critical habitat for the Cokendolpher cave harvestman occurs in 
Unit 20 as described below and depicted on Map 1 (index map) and Map 2 
below. All coordinates are geographic longitude and latitude, decimal 
degree coordinate pairs, referenced to North American Horizontal Datum 
1983. Coordinates were derived from 2001 digital orthophotographs.
    (2) Map 1--Index map of critical habitat units for karst 
invertebrate species in Bexar County, Texas--follows:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR08AP03.000

    (3) The primary constituent elements include:
    (i) The physical features of karst-forming rock containing 
subterranean spaces with stable temperatures, high humidities (near 
saturation), and suitable substrates (for example, spaces between and 
underneath rocks suitable for foraging and sheltering); and
    (ii) The biological features of a healthy surface community of 
native plants (for example, juniper-oak woodland) and animals (for 
example, cave crickets) surrounding the karst feature that provide 
nutrient input and buffer the karst ecosystem from adverse effects 
(from, for example, nonnative species invasions, contaminants, and 
fluctuations in temperature and humidity).
    (4) Existing human-constructed, above-ground, impervious structures 
do not contain the primary constituent elements and are not considered 
to be critical habitat. Such features and structures include, but are 
not limited to, buildings and paved roads. However, subsurface areas 
under these structures are considered to be critical habitat since 
subterranean spaces containing these species and/or transmitting 
moisture and nutrients through the karst ecosystem extend, in some 
cases, underneath these existing human-constructed structures. 
Landscaped areas associated with existing human-constructed structures 
also are not considered critical habitat.
    (5) Unit 20 (23 ha (57 ac)) is an area bounded by points with the 
following coordinates: -98.4582897, 29.5087489; -98.4575517, 29.5091199; 
-98.4561171, 29.5091615; -98.4553228, 29.5088978; -98.4552343, 
29.5082394; -98.4563160, 29.5073726;

[[Page 645]]

-98.4571671, 29.5071204; -98.4586325, 29.5063688; -98.4606616, 
29.5044311; -98.4637341, 29.5006275; -98.4649997, 29.4990919; -
98.4656642, 29.4986719; -98.4660631, 29.4991019; -98.4658881, 
29.4995898; -98.4646589, 29.5017013; -98.4639396, 29.5027162; -
98.4616730, 29.5055952; -98.4595256, 29.5073856; -98.4591719, 
29.5077488; -98.4582897, 29.5087489.
    (6) Map 2--Unit 20 follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR08AP03.001
    

[[Page 646]]



               Braken Bat Cave Meshweaver (Cicurina venii)

    (1) Critical habitat for the Braken Bat Cave meshweaver in Bexar 
County, Texas, occurs in Unit 15 as described below and depicted on Map 
3 below. Unit 15 also is depicted on Map 1 (index map) provided in the 
entry for Cokendolpher cave harvestman in this paragraph (g). The 
primary constituent elements and statements regarding existing 
structures and associated landscaping, as described in the entry for 
Cokendolpher cave harvestman in this paragraph (g), are identical for 
this species.
    (2) Unit 15 (34 ha (85 ac)) is an area bounded by points with the 
following coordinates: -98.7631005, 29.4388531; -98.7600316, 29.4394009; 
-98.7598094, 29.4392533; -98.7587180, 29.4382984; -98.7558932, 
29.4384257; -98.7556537, 29.4383265; -98.7547983, 29.4359982; -
98.7550418, 29.4352415; -98.7555963, 29.4347910; -98.7573878, 
29.4337784; -98.7580646, 29.4338220; -98.7586605, 29.4340159; -
98.7612682, 29.4363049; -98.7623440, 29.4362183; -98.7633120, 
29.4363085; -98.7638206, 29.4366668; -98.7641806, 29.4371861; -
98.7641397, 29.4377268; -98.7639175, 29.4385170; -98.7631005, 
29.4388531.
    (3) Map 3--Unit 15 follows:

[[Page 647]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR08AP03.002

                Kauai Cave Wolf Spider (Adelocosa anops).

    (1) Critical habitat units are depicted for the island of Kauai, 
Hawaii, on the maps below.
    (2) The primary constituent elements for the Kauai cave wolf spider 
are:
    (i) The presence of subterranean spaces from 5 mm to 25 cm (0.2 in 
to 10 in) at their narrowest point (collectively termed ``mesocaverns'') 
and/or cave passages greater than 25 cm (<ls-thn-eq>10 in);

[[Page 648]]

    (ii) Dark and/or stagnant air zones that maintain relative humidity 
at saturation levels (<ls-thn-eq>=100 percent); and
    (iii) The presence in these types of mesocaverns or caves of roots 
from living, nontoxic plants such as, but not limited to, ohia 
(Metrosideros polymorpha), maiapilo (Capparis sandwichiana), and aalii 
(Dodonea viscosa).
    (3) All critical habitat areas contain one or more of the primary 
constituent elements for the Kauai cave wolf spider.
    (4)(i) Existing human-constructed features and structures within the 
boundaries of mapped units that involved trenching, filling, or 
excavation resulting in below-surface modification or alteration would 
not contain either of the primary constituent elements and are excluded 
from critical habitat designation. Such features and structures include 
but are not limited to: Homes and buildings for which the underlying 
bedrock has been altered for their construction or through incorporation 
of or connection to buried structural foundations, septic tanks, city 
sewage and drainage systems, or water or underground electrical supply 
corridors; paved roads; and areas previously or currently used as a 
quarry.
    (ii) Areas that have been modified on the surface but without 
trenching, filling, or excavation resulting in below-surface 
modification or alteration are included in the critical habitat 
designation, even if they are adjacent to areas that have undergone 
below-surface modification.
    (5) Critical habitat units are described below. Coordinates in UTM 
Zone 4 with units in meters using North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83). 
The following map shows the general locations of the 14 critical habitat 
units designated on the island of Kauai.
    (i) Note: Map 1--Index map follows:

[[Page 649]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09AP03.000

    (6) Unit 1--(<1 ha (1 ac)):
    (i) Unit 1 consists of the following 10 boundary points with the 
following coordinates in UTM Zone 4, with the units in meters, using 
North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83): Start at 450554, 2420457; 450546, 
2420468; 450576, 2420510; 450586, 2420518; 450607, 2420516; 450624, 
2420502; 450625, 2420480; 450618, 2420452; 450600, 2420437; 450574, 
2420434; return to starting point.
    (ii) Note: Unit 1 is depicted on Map 2--Units 1, 2, 3, and 4--below.
    (7) Unit 2--(7 ha (16 ac)):
    (i) Unit 2 consists of the following 16 boundary points with the 
following coordinates in UTM Zone 4, with the units in meters, using 
North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83): Start at 451483, 2420974; 451539, 
2420991; 451583, 2421015; 451622, 2421014; 451667, 2420984; 451677, 
2420926; 451680, 2420869; 451705, 2420799; 451622, 2420769; 451650, 
2420664; 451488,

[[Page 650]]

2420620; 451468, 2420624; 451433, 2420642; 451470, 2420758; 451501, 
2420801; 451510, 2420870; return to starting point.
    (ii) Note: Unit 2 is depicted on Map 2--Units 1, 2, 3, and 4--below.
    (8) Unit 3--(6 ha (16 ac)):
    (i) Unit 3 consists of the following 14 boundary points with the 
following coordinates in UTM Zone 4, with the units in meters using 
North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83): Start at 450881, 2419947; 450879, 
2419981; 450855, 2420053; 450859, 2420089; 450903, 2420089; 451012, 
2420125; 451058, 2420191; 451138, 2420180; 451184, 2420119; 451159, 
2420048; 451194, 2420014; 451183, 2419982; 451136, 2419987; 451114, 
2419892; return to starting point.
    (ii) Note: Unit 3 is depicted on Map 2--Units 1, 2, 3, and 4--below.
    (9) Unit 4--(2 ha (6 ac)):
    (i) Unit 4 consists of the following 33 boundary points with the 
following coordinates in UTM Zone 4, with the units in meters using 
North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83): Start at 452087, 2419809; 452063, 
2419804; 452053, 2419805; 452040, 2419807; 452027, 2419811; 452007, 
2419824; 451994, 2419844; 451989, 2419867; 451994, 2419890; 452007, 
2419910; 452027, 2419923; 452045, 2419927; 452053, 2419932; 452076, 
2419936; 452082, 2419936; 452084, 2419936; 452090, 2419939; 452095, 
2419942; 452096, 2419943; 452118, 2419954; 452145, 2419960; 452168, 
2419955; 452188, 2419942; 452201, 2419922; 452206, 2419899; 452201, 
2419876; 452188, 2419856; 452172, 2419844; 452153, 2419835; 452132, 
2419822; 452123, 2419817; 452099, 2419812; 452093, 2419812; return to 
starting point.
    (ii) Note: Unit 4 is depicted on Map 2--Units 1, 2, 3, and 4--which 
follows:

[[Page 651]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09AP03.001

    (10) Unit 5--(1 ha (2 ac)):
    (i) Unit 5 consists of the following 35 boundary points with the 
following coordinates in UTM Zone 4, with the units in meters using 
North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83): Start at 452493, 2420608; 452493, 
2420613; 452493, 2420616; 452496, 2420639; 452492, 2420652; 452491, 
2420660; 452492, 2420669; 452497, 2420683; 452498, 2420686; 452502, 
2420694; 452516, 2420711; 452518, 2420713; 452528, 2420720; 452540, 
2420722; 452552, 2420720; 452561, 2420713; 452568, 2420704; 452570, 
2420692; 452568, 2420680; 452564, 2420673; 452553, 2420660; 452556, 
2420649; 452557, 2420641; 452557, 2420637; 452554, 2420613; 452555, 
2420611; 452555, 2420607; 452553, 2420595; 452546, 2420585; 452536, 
2420579; 452525, 2420576; 452513, 2420579; 452503, 2420585; 452496, 
2420595; 452494, 2420602; return to starting point.
    (ii) Unit 5 is depicted on Map 3--Units 5, 6, 7, and 8--below.
    (11) Unit 6--(2 ha (4 ac)):
    (i) Unit 6 consists of the following 21 boundary points with the 
following coordinates in UTM Zone 4, with the units in meters using 
North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83): Start at 453052, 2420607; 453065,

[[Page 652]]

2420616; 453078, 2420622; 453101, 2420626; 453126, 2420621; 453139, 
2420616; 453154, 2420606; 453164, 2420591; 453167, 2420579; 453169, 
2420551; 453165, 2420533; 453156, 2420517; 453141, 2420500; 453127, 
2420490; 453109, 2420486; 453078, 2420490; 453053, 2420505; 453042, 
2420522; 453034, 2420543; 453032, 2420559; 453036, 2420585; return to 
starting point.
    (ii) Unit 6 is depicted on Map 3--Units 5, 6, 7, and 8--below.
    (12) Unit 7--(3 ha (9 ac)):
    (i) Unit 7 consists of the following 7 boundary points with the 
following coordinates in UTM Zone 4, with the units in meters using 
North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83): Start at 452623, 2421100; 452812, 
2421077; 452831, 2421041; 452816, 2421016; 452786, 2420896; 452590, 
2420946; 452608, 2421015; return to starting point.
    (ii) Unit 7 is depicted on Map 3--Units 5, 6, 7, and 8--below.
    (13) Unit 8--(2 ha (7 ac)):
    (i) Unit 8 consists of the following 33 boundary points with the 
following coordinates in UTM Zone 4, with the units in meters using 
North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83): Start at 452763, 2421383; 452759, 
2421402; 452760, 2421421; 452767, 2421462; 452766, 2421477; 452768, 
2421497; 452771, 2421510; 452780, 2421523; 452812, 2421556; 452824, 
2421564; 452831, 2421567; 452848, 2421571; 452857, 2421571; 452875, 
2421567; 452890, 2421557; 452899, 2421542; 452904, 2421531; 452907, 
2421514; 452908, 2421497; 452904, 2421480; 452899, 2421471; 452902, 
2421454; 452900, 2421439; 452894, 2421422; 452891, 2421412; 452891, 
2421402; 452888, 2421385; 452880, 2421368; 452871, 2421355; 452844, 
2421338; 452822, 2421335; 452799, 2421339; 452778, 2421357; return to 
starting point.
    (ii) Unit 8 is depicted on Map 3--Units 5, 6, 7, and 8--which 
follows:

[[Page 653]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09AP03.002

    (14) Unit 9--(1 ha (4 ac)):
    (i) Unit 9 consists of the following 5 boundary points with the 
following coordinates in UTM Zone 4, with the units in meters using 
North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83): Start at 452568, 2422604; 452577, 
2422610; 452696, 2422521; 452580, 2422429; 452537, 2422471; return to 
starting point.
    (ii) Note: Unit 9 is depicted on Map 4--Units 9 and 10--below.
    (15) Unit 10--(14 ha (35 ac)):
    (i) Unit 10 consists of the following 14 boundary points with the 
following coordinates in UTM Zone 4, with the units in meters using 
North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83): Start at 452688, 2421988; 452834, 
2422427; 453145, 2422210; 453061, 2422147; 453053, 2422133; 453053, 
2422102; 453061, 2422078; 453074, 2422029; 453002, 2421944; 453015, 
2421922; 453022, 2421892; 452896, 2421910; 452733, 2421917; 452705, 
2421959; return to starting point.
    (ii) Note: Unit 10 is depicted on Map 4--Units 9 and 10--which 
follows:

[[Page 654]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09AP03.003

    (16) Unit 11--(4 ha (10 ac)):
    (i) Unit 11 consists of the following 17 boundary points with the 
following coordinates in UTM Zone 4, with the units in meters using 
North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83): Start at 453958, 2419773; 453976, 
2419766; 453999, 2419741; 454054, 2419702; 454068, 2419667; 454060, 
2419596; 454042, 2419553; 454005, 2419528; 453962, 2419521; 453894, 
2419545; 453872, 2419573; 453862, 2419600; 453852, 2419642; 453862, 
2419676; 453887, 2419718; 453912, 2419742; 453936, 2419768; return to 
starting point.
    (ii) Note: Unit 11 is depicted on Map 5--Units 11 and 12--below.
    (17) Unit 12 (6 ha (16 ac)):
    (i) Unit 12 consists of the following 21 boundary points with the 
following coordinates in UTM Zone 4, with the units in meters using 
North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83): Start at 454185, 2420229; 454242, 
2420243; 454326, 2420241; 454387, 2420207; 454420, 2420147; 454475, 
2420133; 454502, 2420080; 454474, 2420055; 454366, 2419954; 454341, 
2419944; 454321, 2419921; 454311, 2419895; 454286, 2419903; 454264, 
2419927; 454229, 2419962; 454208, 2419993; 454186, 2420038; 454169, 
2420058; 454145, 2420086; 454112, 2420103; 454120, 2420133; return to 
starting point.

[[Page 655]]

    (ii) Note: Unit 12 is depicted on Map 5--Units 11 and 12--which 
follows:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09AP03.004

    (18) Unit 13--(21 ha (52 ac)):
    (i) Unit 13 consists of the following 43 boundary points with the 
following coordinates in UTM Zone 4, with the units in meters using 
North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83): Start at 457108, 2420666; 457027, 
2420606; 456763, 2420391; 456727, 2419912; 456456, 2419772; 455868, 
2419764; 455633, 2419645; 455601, 2419531; 455389, 2419219; 455225, 
2419029; 455014, 2418947; 455014, 2419015; 454926, 2419043; 455027, 
2419064; 455102, 2419103; 455202, 2419192; 455255, 2419258; 455300, 
2419334; 455508, 2419515; 455586, 2419614; 455664, 2419674; 455767, 
2419730; 455859, 2419764; 455969, 2419780; 456212, 2419805; 456272, 
2419811; 456376, 2419831; 456451, 2419859; 456531, 2419900; 456583, 
2419935; 456627, 2419981; 456656,

[[Page 656]]

2420036; 456682, 2420173; 456709, 2420316; 456718, 2420343; 456704, 
2420433; 456723, 2420583; 456747, 2420580; 456771, 2420584; 456786, 
2420569; 456848, 2420572; 456979, 2420634; 457022, 2420649; return to 
starting point.
    (ii) Note: Unit 13 is depicted on Map 6--Unit 13--which follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09AP03.005
    
    (19) Unit 14--(39 ha (96 ac)):
    (i) Unit 14 consists of the following 47 boundary points with the 
following coordinates in UTM Zone 4, with the units in meters using 
North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83): Coastline. 457575, 2420977; 
457548, 2420981; 457598, 2421002; 457624, 2421039; 457624, 2421039; 
457624, 2421039; 457664, 2421105; 457715, 2421146; 457755, 2421170; 
457901, 2421204; 458025, 2421342; 458025, 2421367; 458078, 2421412; 
458078, 2421413; 458078, 2421413; 458184, 2421510; 458226, 2421607; 
458226, 2421607; 458226, 2421607; 458259,

[[Page 657]]

2421727; 458308, 2421809; 458371, 2421876; 458405, 2421905; 458237, 
2422080; 458301, 2422271; 458346, 2422339; 458686, 2422403; 458785, 
2422371; 458932, 2422252; 458997, 2422153; Coastline. 458706, 2421920; 
458670, 2421988; 458662, 2422059; 458688, 2422116; 458778, 2422112; 
458809, 2422160; 458719, 2422266; 458630, 2422266; 458556, 2422191; 
458563, 2422061; 458479, 2421989; 458500, 2421803.
    (ii) Note: Unit 14 is depicted on Map 7--Unit 14--which follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09AP03.006
    
                 Madla Cave Meshweaver (Cicurina madla)

    (1) Critical habitat for the Madla Cave meshweaver in Bexar County, 
Texas, occurs in Units 2, 3, 5, 8b, and 17 as described below and 
depicted on Maps 4 through 7 below. These units also are depicted on Map 
1 (index map) provided in the entry for Cokendolpher cave harvestman in 
this paragraph (g). The

[[Page 658]]

primary constituent elements and statements regarding existing 
structures and associated landscaping, as described in the entry for 
Cokendolpher cave harvestman in this paragraph (g), are identical for 
this species.
    (2) Four caves and their associated karst management areas 
established under the La Cantera section 10(a)(1)(B) permit are within 
the boundaries of units but are not designated as critical habitat. 
These include Helotes Blowhole and Helotes Hilltop caves and the 
surrounding approximately 10 ha (25 ac) (within Unit 3); Hills and Dales 
Pit and the surrounding approximately 28 ha (70 ac) (within Unit 8b); 
and Madla Cave and the surrounding 2 ha (5 ac) (within Unit 17).
    (3) Unit 2 (37 ha (92 ac)) is an area bounded by points with the 
following coordinates: -98.7233687, 29.6171088; -98.7232109, 29.6176729; 
-98.7226506, 29.6187073; -98.7223227, 29.6191855; -98.7219946, 
29.6195016; -98.7215653, 29.6198980; -98.7214108, 29.6206847; -
98.7175298, 29.6206847; -98.7174011, 29.6219810; -98.7170539, 
29.6225993; -98.7162170, 29.6229506; -98.7153881, 29.6229101; -
98.7147133, 29.6225995; -98.7143375, 29.6220053; -98.7142667, 
29.6214953; -98.7144462, 29.6206782; -98.7144750, 29.6170924; -
98.7145361, 29.6170162; -98.7165027, 29.6170258; -98.7163850, 
29.6174867; -98.7177246, 29.6172351; -98.7177252, 29.6170317; -
98.7211420, 29.6170764; -98.7233687, 29.6171088.
    (4) Map 4--Unit 2 follows:

[[Page 659]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR08AP03.003

    (5) Unit 3 (17 ha (41 ac)) is an area bounded by points with the 
following coordinates: -98.6924522, 29.5880654; -98.6884953, 29.5878232; 
-98.6883750, 29.5869448; -98.6879295, 29.5850798; -98.6894469, 
29.5850833; -98.6906186, 29.5841182; -98.6929315, 29.5855036; -
98.6936461, 29.5865268; -98.6931713, 29.5875652; -98.6924522, 
29.5880654.
    (6) Map 5--Unit 3 follows:

[[Page 660]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR08AP03.004

    (7) Unit 5 (16 ha (40 ac)) is an area bounded by points with the 
following coordinates: -98.6935478, 29.6136095; -98.6890212, 29.6135990; 
-98.6890205, 29.6111931; -98.6891305, 29.6109546; -98.6896239, 
29.6104067; -98.6903350, 29.6101696; -98.6935582, 29.6101663; -
98.6935478, 29.6136095.
    (8) Map 6--Unit 5 (which also depicts Unit 17) follows:

[[Page 661]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR08AP03.005

    (9) Unit 8b (28 ha (69 ac)) is an area bounded by points with the 
following coordinates: -98.6429582, 29.5992695; -98.6395799, 29.6005152; 
-98.6381868, 29.6000556; -98.6378758, 29.5991778; -98.6383595, 
29.5973398; -98.6370868, 29.5969511; -98.6383585, 29.5959854; -
98.6384179, 29.5941526; -98.6395017, 29.5934820; -98.6411044, 
29.5935108; -98.6417193, 29.5949384; -98.6417849, 29.5965421; -
98.6429721, 29.5983417; -98.6429582, 29.5992695.
    (10) Map 7--Unit 8b (which also depicts Unit 8a) follows:

[[Page 662]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR08AP03.006

    (11) Unit 17 (16 ha (40 ac)) is an area bounded by points with the 
following coordinates: -98.6986633, 29.6061189; -98.6978901, 29.6064178; 
-98.6968967, 29.6060042; -98.6955470, 29.6059909; -98.6944214, 
29.6056088; -98.6944325, 29.6018959; -98.6967798, 29.6018910; -
98.6967762, 29.6031320; -98.6986774, 29.6031773; -98.6986633, 
29.6061189.
    (12) For a map of unit 17, refer to Map 6--Unit 5 in paragraph (8) 
of this entry.

[[Page 663]]

             Robber Baron Cave Meshweaver (Cicurina baronia)

    (1) Critical habitat for the Robber Baron Cave meshweaver in Bexar 
County, Texas, occurs in Unit 20 as provided in the critical habitat 
unit description and depicted on Map 1 and Map 2 in the entry for 
Cokendolpher cave harvestman in this paragraph (g). The primary 
constituent elements and statements regarding existing structures and 
associated landscaping, as described in the entry for Cokendolpher cave 
harvestman in this paragraph (g), are identical for this species.

             Spruce-Fir Moss Spider (Microhexura montivaga)

    1. Critical habitat units and their ownership are described below 
and depicted in the following maps.

[[Page 664]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR06JY01.000

    Unit 1: Swain County, North Carolina, and Sevier County, Tennessee--
all portions of the GSMNP bounded to the north and to the south of the 
North Carolina/Tennessee State line (State line) by the 1,646-m (5,400-
ft) contour, from the intersection of the 1,646-m (5,400-ft) contour 
with the State line, south of Mingus Lead, Tennessee, southwest and then 
west to the intersection of the 1,646-m (5,400-ft) contour with the 
State line, east of The Narrows and west of Jenkins Knob, North 
Carolina, and Tennessee.
    Unit 2: Sevier County, Tennessee--all portions of the GSMNP at and 
above the 1,646-m (5,400-ft) contour, bounded on the southwest side by 
the North Carolina/Tennessee State line from the intersection of the 
State line with the 1,646-m (5,400-ft) contour near Dry Sluice Gap, 
southeast to the intersection of the State line with the 1,646-m (5,400-

[[Page 665]]

ft) contour at the head of Minnie Ball Branch, North Carolina, northwest 
of Newfound Gap, North Carolina, and Tennessee.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR06JY01.001

    Unit 3: Avery and Mitchell Counties, North Carolina, and Carter 
County, Tennessee--all portions of the Pisgah National Forest in North 
Carolina and the Cherokee National Forest in Tennessee, bounded to the 
north and to the south of the North Carolina/Tennessee State line by the 
1,646-m (5,400-ft) contour, from the intersection of the 1,646-m (5,400-
ft) contour with the State line north of Elk Hollow Branch, Avery 
County, North

[[Page 666]]

Carolina, and southwest of Yellow Mountain, Carter County, Tennessee, 
west to the 1,646-m (5,400-ft) contour at Eagle Cliff, Mitchell County, 
North Carolina.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR06JY01.002

    Unit 4: Avery, Caldwell, and Watauga Counties, North Carolina--all 
areas of Grandfather Mountain at and above the 1,646-m (5,400-ft) 
contour.

    2. Within these areas, the primary constituent elements include:
    (i) Fraser fir or fir-dominated spruce-fir forests at and above 
1,646 m (5,400 ft) in elevation; and

[[Page 667]]

    (ii) Moderately thick and humid, but not wet, moss (species in the 
genus Dicranodontium, and possibly Polytrichum) and/or liverwort mats on 
rock surfaces that are adequately sheltered from the sun and rain (by 
overhang and aspect) and include a thin layer of humid soil and/or humus 
between the moss and rock surface.
    3. Existing human structures and other features not containing all 
of the primary constituent elements are not considered critical habitat.

    (h) Crustaceans.

              Kauai Cave Amphipod (Spelaeorchestia koloana)

    (1) Critical habitat units are depicted for the island of Kauai, 
Hawaii, on the maps below.
    (2) The primary constituent elements for the Kauai cave amphipod 
are:
    (i) The presence of subterranean spaces from 5 mm to 25 cm (0.2 in 
to 10 in) at their narrowest point (collectively termed ``mesocaverns'') 
and/or cave passages greater than 25 cm (<ls-thn-eq>10 in);
    (ii) Dark and/or stagnant air zones that maintain relative humidity 
at saturation levels (<ls-thn-eq>=100 percent); and
    (iii) The presence in these types of mesocaverns or caves of roots 
from living, nontoxic plants such as, but not limited to, ohia 
(Metrosideros polymorpha), maiapilo (Capparis sandwichiana), and aalii 
(Dodonea viscosa).
    (3) All critical habitat areas contain one or more of the primary 
constituent elements for the Kauai cave amphipod.
    (4)(i) Existing human-constructed features and structures within the 
boundaries of mapped units that involved trenching, filling, or 
excavation resulting in below-surface modification or alteration would 
not contain either of the primary constituent elements and are excluded 
from critical habitat designation. Such features and structures include 
but are not limited to: Homes and buildings for which the underlying 
bedrock has been altered for their construction or through incorporation 
of or connection to buried structural foundations, septic tanks, city 
sewage and drainage systems, or water or underground electrical supply 
corridors; paved roads; and areas previously or currently used as a 
quarry.
    (ii) Areas that have been modified on the surface but without 
trenching, filling, or excavation resulting in below-surface 
modification or alteration are included in the critical habitat 
designation, even if they are adjacent to areas that have undergone 
below-surface modification.
    (5) Critical habitat units are described below. Coordinates in UTM 
Zone 4 with units in meters using North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83). 
The following map shows the general locations of the 14 critical habitat 
units designated on the island of Kauai.
    (i) Note: Map 1--Index map follows:

[[Page 668]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09AP03.007

    (6) Unit 1--(<1 ha (1 ac)):
    (i) Unit 1 consists of the following 10 boundary points with the 
following coordinates in UTM Zone 4, with the units in meters, using 
North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83): Start at 450554, 2420457; 450546, 
2420468; 450576, 2420510; 450586, 2420518; 450607, 2420516; 450624, 
2420502; 450625, 2420480; 450618, 2420452; 450600, 2420437; 450574, 
2420434; return to starting point.
    (ii) Note: Unit 1 is depicted on Map 2--Units 1, 2, 3, and 4--below.
    (7) Unit 2--(7 ha (16 ac)):
    (i) Unit 2 consists of the following 16 boundary points with the 
following coordinates in UTM Zone 4, with the units in meters, using 
North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83): Start at 451483, 2420974; 451539, 
2420991; 451583, 2421015; 451622, 2421014; 451667, 2420984; 451677, 
2420926; 451680, 2420869; 451705, 2420799; 451622, 2420769; 451650, 
2420664; 451488,

[[Page 669]]

2420620; 451468, 2420624; 451433, 2420642; 451470, 2420758; 451501, 
2420801; 451510, 2420870; return to starting point.
    (ii) Note: Unit 2 is depicted on Map 2--Units 1, 2, 3, and 4--below.
    (8) Unit 3--(6 ha (16 ac)):
    (i) Unit 3 consists of the following 14 boundary points with the 
following coordinates in UTM Zone 4, with the units in meters using 
North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83): Start at 450881, 2419947; 450879, 
2419981; 450855, 2420053; 450859, 2420089; 450903, 2420089; 451012, 
2420125; 451058, 2420191; 451138, 2420180; 451184, 2420119; 451159, 
2420048; 451194, 2420014; 451183, 2419982; 451136, 2419987; 451114, 
2419892; return to starting point.
    (ii) Note: Unit 3 is depicted on Map 2--Units 1, 2, 3, and 4--below.
    (9) Unit 4--(2 ha (6 ac)):
    (i) Unit 4 consists of the following 33 boundary points with the 
following coordinates in UTM Zone 4, with the units in meters using 
North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83): Start at 452087, 2419809; 452063, 
2419804; 452053, 2419805; 452040, 2419807; 452027, 2419811; 452007, 
2419824; 451994, 2419844; 451989, 2419867; 451994, 2419890; 452007, 
2419910; 452027, 2419923; 452045, 2419927; 452053, 2419932; 452076, 
2419936; 452082, 2419936; 452084, 2419936; 452090, 2419939; 452095, 
2419942; 452096, 2419943; 452118, 2419954; 452145, 2419960; 452168, 
2419955; 452188, 2419942; 452201, 2419922; 452206, 2419899; 452201, 
2419876; 452188, 2419856; 452172, 2419844; 452153, 2419835; 452132, 
2419822; 452123, 2419817; 452099, 2419812; 452093, 2419812; return to 
starting point.
    (ii) Note: Unit 4 is depicted on Map 2--Units 1, 2, 3, and 4--which 
follows:

[[Page 670]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09AP03.008

    (10) Unit 5--(1 ha (2 ac)):
    (i) Unit 5 consists of the following 35 boundary points with the 
following coordinates in UTM Zone 4, with the units in meters using 
North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83): Start at 452493, 2420608; 452493, 
2420613; 452493, 2420616; 452496, 2420639; 452492, 2420652; 452491, 
2420660; 452492, 2420669; 452497, 2420683; 452498, 2420686; 452502, 
2420694; 452516, 2420711; 452518, 2420713; 452528, 2420720; 452540, 
2420722; 452552, 2420720; 452561, 2420713; 452568, 2420704; 452570, 
2420692; 452568, 2420680; 452564, 2420673; 452553, 2420660; 452556, 
2420649; 452557, 2420641; 452557, 2420637; 452554, 2420613; 452555, 
2420611; 452555, 2420607; 452553, 2420595; 452546, 2420585; 452536, 
2420579; 452525, 2420576; 452513, 2420579; 452503, 2420585; 452496, 
2420595; 452494, 2420602; return to starting point.
    (ii) Unit 5 is depicted on Map 3--Units 5, 6, 7, and 8--below.
    (11) Unit 6--(2 ha (4 ac)):

[[Page 671]]

    (i) Unit 6 consists of the following 21 boundary points with the 
following coordinates in UTM Zone 4, with the units in meters using 
North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83): Start at 453052, 2420607; 453065, 
2420616; 453078, 2420622; 453101, 2420626; 453126, 2420621; 453139, 
2420616; 453154, 2420606; 453164, 2420591; 453167, 2420579; 453169, 
2420551; 453165, 2420533; 453156, 2420517; 453141, 2420500; 453127, 
2420490; 453109, 2420486; 453078, 2420490; 453053, 2420505; 453042, 
2420522; 453034, 2420543; 453032, 2420559; 453036, 2420585; return to 
starting point.
    (ii) Unit 6 is depicted on Map 3--Units 5, 6, 7, and 8--below.
    (12) Unit 7--(3 ha (9 ac)):
    (i) Unit 7 consists of the following 7 boundary points with the 
following coordinates in UTM Zone 4, with the units in meters using 
North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83): Start at 452623, 2421100; 452812, 
2421077; 452831, 2421041; 452816, 2421016; 452786, 2420896; 452590, 
2420946; 452608, 2421015; return to starting point.
    (ii) Unit 7 is depicted on Map 3--Units 5, 6, 7, and 8--below.
    (13) Unit 8--(2 ha (7 ac)):
    (i) Unit 8 consists of the following 33 boundary points with the 
following coordinates in UTM Zone 4, with the units in meters using 
North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83): Start at 452763, 2421383; 452759, 
2421402; 452760, 2421421; 452767, 2421462; 452766, 2421477; 452768, 
2421497; 452771, 2421510; 452780, 2421523; 452812, 2421556; 452824, 
2421564; 452831, 2421567; 452848, 2421571; 452857, 2421571; 452875, 
2421567; 452890, 2421557; 452899, 2421542; 452904, 2421531; 452907, 
2421514; 452908, 2421497; 452904, 2421480; 452899, 2421471; 452902, 
2421454; 452900, 2421439; 452894, 2421422; 452891, 2421412; 452891, 
2421402; 452888, 2421385; 452880, 2421368; 452871, 2421355; 452844, 
2421338; 452822, 2421335; 452799, 2421339; 452778, 2421357; return to 
starting point.
    (ii) Unit 8 is depicted on Map 3--Units 5, 6, 7, and 8--which 
follows:

[[Page 672]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09AP03.009

    (14) Unit 9--(1 ha (4 ac)):
    (i) Unit 9 consists of the following 5 boundary points with the 
following coordinates in UTM Zone 4, with the units in meters using 
North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83): Start at 452568, 2422604; 452577, 
2422610; 452696, 2422521; 452580, 2422429; 452537, 2422471; return to 
starting point.
    (ii) Note: Unit 9 is depicted on Map 4--Units 9 and 10--below.
    (15) Unit 10--(14 ha (35 ac)):
    (i) Unit 10 consists of the following 14 boundary points with the 
following coordinates in UTM Zone 4, with the units in meters using 
North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83): Start at 452688, 2421988; 452834, 
2422427; 453145, 2422210; 453061, 2422147; 453053, 2422133; 453053, 
2422102; 453061, 2422078; 453074, 2422029; 453002, 2421944; 453015, 
2421922; 453022, 2421892; 452896, 2421910; 452733, 2421917; 452705, 
2421959; return to starting point.
    (ii) Note: Unit 10 is depicted on Map 4--Units 9 and 10--which 
follows:

[[Page 673]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09AP03.010

    (16) Unit 11--(4 ha (10 ac)):
    (i) Unit 11 consists of the following 17 boundary points with the 
following coordinates in UTM Zone 4, with the units in meters using 
North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83): Start at 453958, 2419773; 453976, 
2419766; 453999, 2419741; 454054, 2419702; 454068, 2419667; 454060, 
2419596; 454042, 2419553; 454005, 2419528; 453962, 2419521; 453894, 
2419545; 453872, 2419573; 453862, 2419600; 453852, 2419642; 453862, 
2419676; 453887, 2419718; 453912, 2419742; 453936, 2419768; return to 
starting point.
    (ii) Note: Unit 11 is depicted on Map 5--Units 11 and 12--below.
    (17) Unit 12 (6 ha (16 ac)):
    (i) Unit 12 consists of the following 21 boundary points with the 
following coordinates in UTM Zone 4, with the units in meters using 
North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83): Start at 454185, 2420229; 454242, 
2420243; 454326, 2420241; 454387, 2420207; 454420, 2420147; 454475, 
2420133; 454502, 2420080; 454474, 2420055; 454366, 2419954; 454341, 
2419944; 454321, 2419921; 454311, 2419895; 454286, 2419903; 454264, 
2419927; 454229, 2419962; 454208, 2419993; 454186, 2420038; 454169, 
2420058; 454145, 2420086; 454112, 2420103; 454120, 2420133; return to 
starting point.

[[Page 674]]

    (ii) Note: Unit 12 is depicted on Map 5--Units 11 and 12--which 
follows:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09AP03.011

    (18) Unit 13--(21 ha (52 ac)):
    (i) Unit 13 consists of the following 43 boundary points with the 
following coordinates in UTM Zone 4, with the units in meters using 
North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83): Start at 457108, 2420666; 457027, 
2420606; 456763, 2420391; 456727, 2419912; 456456, 2419772; 455868, 
2419764; 455633, 2419645; 455601, 2419531; 455389, 2419219; 455225, 
2419029; 455014, 2418947; 455014, 2419015; 454926, 2419043; 455027, 
2419064; 455102, 2419103; 455202, 2419192; 455255, 2419258; 455300, 
2419334; 455508, 2419515; 455586, 2419614; 455664, 2419674; 455767, 
2419730; 455859, 2419764; 455969, 2419780; 456212, 2419805; 456272, 
2419811; 456376, 2419831; 456451, 2419859; 456531, 2419900; 456583, 
2419935; 456627, 2419981; 456656,

[[Page 675]]

2420036; 456682, 2420173; 456709, 2420316; 456718, 2420343; 456704, 
2420433; 456723, 2420583; 456747, 2420580; 456771, 2420584; 456786, 
2420569; 456848, 2420572; 456979, 2420634; 457022, 2420649; return to 
starting point.
    (ii) Note: Unit 13 is depicted on Map 6--Unit 13--which follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09AP03.012
    
    (19) Unit 14--(39 ha (96 ac)):
    (i) Unit 14 consists of the following 47 boundary points with the 
following coordinates in UTM Zone 4, with the units in meters using 
North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83): Coastline. 457575, 2420977; 
457548, 2420981; 457598, 2421002; 457624, 2421039; 457624, 2421039; 
457624, 2421039; 457664, 2421105; 457715, 2421146; 457755, 2421170; 
457901, 2421204; 458025, 2421342; 458025, 2421367; 458078, 2421412; 
458078, 2421413; 458078, 2421413; 458184, 2421510; 458226, 2421607; 
458226, 2421607; 458226, 2421607; 458259,

[[Page 676]]

2421727; 458308, 2421809; 458371, 2421876; 458405, 2421905; 458237, 
2422080; 458301, 2422271; 458346, 2422339; 458686, 2422403; 458785, 
2422371; 458932, 2422252; 458997, 2422153; Coastline. 458706, 2421920; 
458670, 2421988; 458662, 2422059; 458688, 2422116; 458778, 2422112; 
458809, 2422160; 458719, 2422266; 458630, 2422266; 458556, 2422191; 
458563, 2422061; 458479, 2421989; 458500, 2421803.
    (ii) Note: Unit 14 is depicted on Map 7--Unit 14--which follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR09AP03.013
    
                Peck's cave amphipod (Stygobromus pecki).

    (1) Critical habitat units are depicted for Comal County, Texas, on 
the maps below.
    (2) The primary constituent elements of critical habitat for Peck's 
cave amphipod are:

[[Page 677]]

    (i) High-quality water with no or minimal levels of pollutants, such 
as soaps and detergents (Brown 1987, p. 261) and other compounds 
containing surfactants, heavy metals, pesticides, fertilizer nutrients, 
petroleum hydrocarbons, pharmaceuticals and veterinary medicines, and 
semi-volatile compounds, such as industrial cleaning agents, and 
including:
    (A) Low salinity with total dissolved solids that generally range 
from 307 to 368 mg/L; and
    (B) Low turbidity that generally is less than 5 nephelometric 
turbity units;
    (ii) Aquifer water temperatures that range from approximately 68 to 
75 [deg]F (20 to 24 [deg]C); and
    (iii) Food supply that includes detritus (decomposed materials), 
leaf litter, living plant material, algae, fungi, bacteria and other 
microorganisms, and decaying roots.
    (3) Critical habitat does not include manmade structures (such as 
buildings, aqueducts, roads, and other paved areas) and the land on 
which they are located existing within the legal boundaries on the 
effective date of this rule. Where lakes are designated, critical 
habitat is only designated for areas where springs occur and does not 
include areas of the lake bottom beyond a radius of 50 ft (15.2 m) from 
the spring outlet.
    (4) Critical habitat map units. Data layers defining map units were 
created by using ArcGIS. All coordinates are UTM zone 14 coordinate 
pairs, referenced to North American Horizontal Datum 1983. Coordinates 
were derived from 2004 digital orthophotographs. All acreage and mileage 
calculations were performed using GIS.
    (5) Note: Index map (Map 1) follows:

[[Page 678]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17JY07.000

    (6) Comal Springs Unit, Comal County, Texas.
    (i) Aquatic habitat areas bounded by the UTM Zone 14 NAD 83 
coordinates (meters E, meters N): 583387, 3287251; 583392, 3287264; 
583405, 3287280; 583404, 3287290; 583407, 3287301; 583414, 3287307; 
583425, 3287308; 583425, 3287320; 583433, 3287328; 583444, 3287330; 
583454, 3287325; 583463, 3287301; 583482, 3287272; 583486, 3287286; 
583501, 3287296; 583520, 3287314; 583547, 3287326;

[[Page 679]]

583557, 3287333; 583572, 3287335; 583586, 3287342; 583567, 3287387; 
583560, 3287408; 583559, 3287423; 583534, 3287403; 583499, 3287359; 
583491, 3287347; 583484, 3287340; 583471, 3287334; 583461, 3287334; 
583452, 3287340; 583450, 3287350; 583454, 3287364; 583465, 3287374; 
583494, 3287415; 583521, 3287443; 583526, 3287453; 583563, 3287477; 
583589, 3287503; 583613, 3287519; 583643, 3287547; 583662, 3287561; 
583719, 3287617; 583759, 3287669; 583780, 3287701; 583811, 3287743; 
583833, 3287764; 583848, 3287784; 583892, 3287826; 583911, 3287850; 
583970, 3287907; 584008, 3287938; 584047, 3287963; 584055, 3287964; 
584065, 3287960; 584073, 3287948; 584074, 3287941; 584081, 3287952; 
584131, 3288011; 584164, 3288044; 584183, 3288062; 584197, 3288071; 
584216, 3288093; 584236, 3288110; 584258, 3288138; 584284, 3288161; 
584325, 3288209; 584343, 3288223; 584364, 3288233; 584375, 3288243; 
584386, 3288244; 584401, 3288234; 584403, 3288218; 584433, 3288201; 
584437, 3288193; 584436, 3288184; 584416, 3288167; 584405, 3288167; 
584375, 3288184; 584365, 3288180; 584344, 3288156; 584329, 3288131; 
584320, 3288125; 584298, 3288103; 584273, 3288067; 584204, 3287997; 
584187, 3287985; 584176, 3287973; 584152, 3287943; 584147, 3287933; 
584105, 3287880; 584080, 3287862; 584049, 3287844; 584026, 3287815; 
584021, 3287805; 584013, 3287798; 584009, 3287787; 583999, 3287775; 
583971, 3287751; 583947, 3287735; 583927, 3287725; 583920, 3287718; 
583890, 3287704; 583850, 3287673; 583845, 3287665; 583851, 3287662; 
583860, 3287650; 583865, 3287640; 583865, 3287629; 583863, 3287622; 
583854, 3287609; 583840, 3287600; 583836, 3287584; 583829, 3287576; 
583838, 3287552; 583841, 3287535; 583841, 3287520; 583835, 3287501; 
583804, 3287452; 583790, 3287435; 583766, 3287416; 583727, 3287406; 
583706, 3287406; 583695, 3287398; 583686, 3287370; 583699, 3287298; 
583698, 3287288; 583694, 3287282; 583617, 3287257; 583610, 3287258; 
583605, 3287262; 583597, 3287280; 583584, 3287277; 583565, 3287270; 
583541, 3287255; 583534, 3287244; 583518, 3287233; 583510, 3287211; 
583496, 3287192; 583480, 3287183; 583459, 3287177; 583436, 3287178; 
583419, 3287184; 583400, 3287198; 583396, 3287205; 583387, 3287251.
    (ii) Note: Comal Springs Unit (Map 2) follows:

[[Page 680]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17JY07.001

    (7) Hueco Springs Unit, Comal County, Texas.
    (i) Aquatic habitat areas bounded by the UTM Zone 14 NAD 83 
coordinates (meters E, meters N): 583113, 3292498; 583114, 3292498; 
583115, 3292498; 583116, 3292498; 583117, 3292498; 583118, 3292497; 
583119, 3292497; 583120, 3292497; 583120, 3292496; 583121, 3292496; 
583122, 3292495; 583123, 3292495; 583124, 3292494; 583124, 3292493; 
583125, 3292493; 583126, 3292492; 583126, 3292491; 583127, 3292490; 
583127, 3292489; 583127, 3292489; 583128, 3292488; 583128, 3292487; 
583128, 3292486; 583128, 3292485; 583128, 3292484; 583128, 3292483; 
583128, 3292482; 583128, 3292481; 583128, 3292480;

[[Page 681]]

583128, 3292479; 583128, 3292478; 583127, 3292477; 583127, 3292477; 
583127, 3292476; 583126, 3292475; 583126, 3292474; 583125, 3292473; 
583124, 3292473; 583124, 3292472; 583123, 3292471; 583122, 3292471; 
583122, 3292470; 583121, 3292470; 583120, 3292469; 583119, 3292469; 
583118, 3292468; 583117, 3292468; 583116, 3292468; 583115, 3292468; 
583114, 3292468; 583113, 3292468; 583112, 3292468; 583111, 3292468; 
583111, 3292468; 583110, 3292468; 583109, 3292468; 583108, 3292469; 
583107, 3292469; 583106, 3292470; 583105, 3292470; 583104, 3292471; 
583104, 3292471; 583103, 3292472; 583102, 3292472; 583102, 3292473; 
583101, 3292474; 583100, 3292475; 583100, 3292475; 583100, 3292476; 
583099, 3292477; 583099, 3292478; 583099, 3292479; 583098, 3292480; 
583098, 3292481; 583098, 3292482; 583098, 3292483; 583098, 3292484; 
583098, 3292485; 583098, 3292486; 583098, 3292487; 583099, 3292488; 
583099, 3292488; 583099, 3292489; 583100, 3292490; 583100, 3292491; 
583101, 3292492; 583101, 3292493; 583102, 3292493; 583103, 3292494; 
583103, 3292495; 583104, 3292495; 583105, 3292496; 583106, 3292496; 
583107, 3292497; 583108, 3292497; 583108, 3292497; 583109, 3292498; 
583110, 3292498; 583111, 3292498; 583112, 3292498; 583113, 3292498.
    (ii) Aquatic habitat areas bounded by the UTM Zone 14 NAD 83 
coordinates (meters E, meters N): 583132, 3292420; 583133, 3292421; 
583133, 3292421; 583133, 3292422; 583134, 3292423; 583134, 3292424; 
583134, 3292425; 583135, 3292426; 583136, 3292426; 583136, 3292427; 
583137, 3292428; 583138, 3292428; 583138, 3292429; 583139, 3292430; 
583140, 3292430; 583141, 3292430; 583142, 3292431; 583143, 3292431; 
583143, 3292431; 583144, 3292432; 583145, 3292432; 583146, 3292432; 
583147, 3292432; 583148, 3292432; 583149, 3292432; 583150, 3292432; 
583151, 3292432; 583152, 3292431; 583153, 3292431; 583154, 3292431; 
583155, 3292430; 583155, 3292430; 583156, 3292429; 583157, 3292429; 
583158, 3292428; 583158, 3292427; 583159, 3292427; 583160, 3292426; 
583160, 3292425; 583161, 3292424; 583161, 3292423; 583162, 3292422; 
583162, 3292422; 583162, 3292421; 583162, 3292420; 583163, 3292419; 
583163, 3292418; 583163, 3292417; 583163, 3292416; 583163, 3292415; 
583162, 3292414; 583162, 3292413; 583162, 3292412; 583162, 3292411; 
583161, 3292410; 583161, 3292409; 583160, 3292409; 583160, 3292408; 
583159, 3292407; 583159, 3292406; 583158, 3292406; 583157, 3292405; 
583156, 3292404; 583156, 3292404; 583156, 3292403; 583155, 3292402; 
583155, 3292402; 583155, 3292401; 583154, 3292400; 583154, 3292399; 
583153, 3292398; 583152, 3292398; 583152, 3292397; 583151, 3292396; 
583150, 3292396; 583149, 3292395; 583149, 3292395; 583148, 3292394; 
583147, 3292394; 583146, 3292393; 583145, 3292393; 583144, 3292393; 
583143, 3292393; 583142, 3292393; 583141, 3292393; 583140, 3292393; 
583139, 3292393; 583138, 3292393; 583137, 3292393; 583137, 3292393; 
583136, 3292394; 583135, 3292394; 583134, 3292395; 583133, 3292395; 
583132, 3292396; 583132, 3292396; 583131, 3292397; 583130, 3292397; 
583129, 3292398; 583129, 3292399; 583128, 3292400; 583128, 3292400; 
583127, 3292401; 583127, 3292402; 583127, 3292403; 583126, 3292404; 
583126, 3292405; 583126, 3292406; 583126, 3292407; 583126, 3292408; 
583126, 3292409; 583126, 3292410; 583126, 3292411; 583126, 3292412; 
583127, 3292413; 583127, 3292413; 583127, 3292414; 583128, 3292415; 
583128, 3292416; 583129, 3292417; 583129, 3292418; 583130, 3292418; 
583131, 3292419; 583131, 3292420; 583132, 3292420.
    (iii) Note: Hueco Springs Unit (Map 3) follows:

[[Page 682]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17JY07.002

          Conservancy Fairy Shrimp (Branchinecta conservatio).

    (1) Critical habitat units are depicted for Butte, Colusa, Mariposa, 
Merced, Solano, Stanislaus, Tehama, and Ventura Counties, California, on 
the maps below.
    (2) The primary constituent elements of critical habitat for 
Conservancy fairy shrimp (Branchinecta conservatio) are the habitat 
components that provide:

[[Page 683]]

    (i) Topographic features characterized by mounds and swales and 
depressions within a matrix of surrounding uplands that result in 
complexes of continuously, or intermittently, flowing surface water in 
the swales connecting the pools described below in paragraph (2)(ii), 
providing for dispersal and promoting hydroperiods of adequate length in 
the pools;
    (ii) Depressional features including isolated vernal pools with 
underlying restrictive soil layers that become inundated during winter 
rains and that continuously hold water for a minimum of 19 days, in all 
but the driest years; thereby providing adequate water for incubation, 
maturation, and reproduction. As these features are inundated on a 
seasonal basis, they do not promote the development of obligate wetland 
vegetation habitats typical of permanently flooded emergent wetlands;
    (iii) Sources of food, expected to be detritus occurring in the 
pools, contributed by overland flow from the pools' watershed, or the 
results of biological processes within the pools themselves, such as 
single-celled bacteria, algae, and dead organic matter, to provide for 
feeding; and
    (iv) Structure within the pools described above in paragraph 
(2)(ii), consisting of organic and inorganic materials, such as living 
and dead plants from plant species adapted to seasonally inundated 
environments, rocks, and other inorganic debris that may be washed, 
blown, or otherwise transported into the pools, that provide shelter.
    (3) Existing manmade features and structures, such as buildings, 
roads, railroads, airports, runways, other paved areas, lawns, and other 
urban landscaped areas do not contain one or more of the primary 
constituent elements. Federal actions limited to those areas, therefore, 
would not trigger a consultation under section 7 of the Act unless they 
may affect the species and/or primary constituent elements in adjacent 
critical habitat.
    (4) Unit 1 Tehama County, California.
    (i) Unit 1A: Tehama County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 
topographic quadrangles Richardson Springs, and Acorn Hollow. Land 
bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 588739, 
4429822; 588900, 4429500; 589500, 4429500; 589500, 4428600; 589500, 
4428000; 589800, 4427100; 590500, 4426400; 590500, 4425300; 591200, 
4424400; 591500, 4423300; 591562, 4422558; 590526, 4423686; 589986, 
4424273; 589816, 4424458; 589129, 4425207; 588454, 4426221; 588425, 
4426265; 588279, 4426485; 588213, 4426583; 588213, 4426584; 588600, 
4429100; 588733, 4429833; returning to 588739, 4429822.
    (ii) Unit 1B: Tehama County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 
topographic quadrangle Richardson Springs NW. Land bounded by the 
following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 593700, 4420900; 
593164, 4420815; 592329, 4421723; 592258, 4421800; 593000, 4421800; 
593100, 4421500; 593500, 4421400; returning to 593700, 4420900.
    (iii) Unit 1C: Tehama County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 
topographic quadrangle Richardson Springs NW. Land bounded by the 
following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 594500, 4420300; 
593881, 4420035; 593371, 4420590; 594000, 4420800; 594400, 4420600; 
returning to 594500, 4420300.
    (iv) Unit 1D: Tehama County, and Butte County, California. From USGS 
1:24,000 topographic quadrangles Richardson Springs NW, Campbell Mound, 
Richardson Springs. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 
coordinates (E,N): 597100, 4416400; 597100, 4415600; 597044, 4415525; 
596800, 4415200; 597100, 4415000; 597800, 4415500; 598100, 4415200; 
597600, 4414600; 597600, 4414400; 597300, 4413800; 597300, 4413300; 
598200, 4413900; 598400, 4413900; 598400, 4413600; 597422, 4411938; 
597281, 4412382; 596959, 4413403; 596640, 4414416; 596620, 4414481; 
596305, 4415484; 596303, 4415489; 596130, 4416040; 596091, 4416160; 
596028, 4416358; 596011, 4416411; 595993, 4416465; 595982, 4416500; 
596000, 4416500; 596100, 4416400; 596200, 4416500; 596300, 4416600; 
596400, 4416700; 596500, 4416700; 596500, 4416800; 596600, 4416800; 
returning to 597100, 4416400.
    (v) Unit 1E: Butte County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 
topographic quadrangles Richardson Springs. Land bounded by the 
following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 598900, 4411800; 
599400, 4411700; 599800, 4411700; 599800, 4411000; 599300, 4410700; 
599100, 4410800; 599000, 4410800; 598800, 4410600; 598500, 4410400; 
598300, 4410100; 598100, 4410000; 598070, 4409970; 598051, 4409993; 
598038, 4410010; 598014, 4410083; 597806, 4410737; 597725, 4410990; 
597461, 4411816; 597434, 4411900; 597600, 4411900; 598300, 4412700; 
598500, 4413300; 598900, 4413300; returning to 598900, 4411800.

    (vi) Note: Unit 1 (Map 1) follows:

[[Page 684]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10FE06.000

    (5) Unit 3: Solano County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 
topographic quadrangles Elmira, and Denverton. Land bounded by the 
following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 594915, 4234098; 
594916, 4233314; 595044, 4233310; 595068, 4233296; 595131, 4233266; 
595174, 4233226; 595189, 4233210; 595239, 4233151; 595322, 4232978; 
595423, 4232778; 595483, 4232667; 595553,

[[Page 685]]

4232524; 595699, 4232243; 595966, 4231717; 594927, 4231710; 594445, 
4231707; 594409, 4231673; 594410, 4231616; 594434, 4231540; 594474, 
4231494; 594495, 4231457; 594497, 4231414; 594510, 4231370; 594543, 
4231356; 594575, 4231342; 594603, 4231341; 594614, 4231338; 594616, 
4231325; 594618, 4231311; 594614, 4231290; 594605, 4231284; 594583, 
4231275; 594573, 4231268; 594557, 4231245; 594550, 4231209; 594543, 
4231179; 594500, 4231200; 593800, 4231200; 593600, 4230500; 593291, 
4230515; 593291, 4230514; 589300, 4230700; 589179, 4230901; 589179, 
4230901; 589240, 4230894; 589274, 4230890; 589315, 4230894; 589321, 
4230909; 589313, 4231179; 589015, 4231215; 589100, 4231300; 589100, 
4231700; 588900, 4232300; 588900, 4233000; 589983, 4233500; 590000, 
4233500; 590100, 4233500; 590100, 4233300; 590600, 4233300; 591100, 
4232800; 591138, 4232825; 591143, 4232820; 591184, 4232856; 591700, 
4233200; 592513, 4233290; 592594, 4233291; 592594, 4233299; 592600, 
4233300; 592600, 4233800; 592900, 4233700; 592900, 4233751; 592901, 
4233751; 592900, 4233754; 592900, 4233800; 593400, 4234100; 594200, 
4234100; 594300, 4234900; 594500, 4234900; 594890, 4235396; returning to 
594915, 4234098.

    (6) Note: Unit 3 (Map 2) follows:

[[Page 686]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10FE06.001

    (7) Unit 5: Stanislaus County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 
topographic quadrangle Ripon. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, 
NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 662400, 4168300; 661600, 4168000; 661600, 
4168300; 660300, 4167800; 660600, 4167500; 660800, 4167200; 660000, 
4167200; 659500, 4168800; 661600, 4168800; 661600,

[[Page 687]]

4169400; 662400, 4169400; returning to 662400, 4168300.

    (8) Note: Unit 5 (Map 3) follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10FE06.002
    

[[Page 688]]


    (9) Unit 6: Merced County, and Mariposa County, California. From 
USGS 1:24,000 topographic quadrangles Snelling, Merced Falls, Winton, 
Yosemite Lake, Haystack Mtn. Indian Gulch, Merced, Planada, Owens 
Reservoir, Illinois Hill, Plainsburg, Le Grand, and Raynor Creek. Land 
bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 747003, 
4125902; 747142, 4125971; 747303, 4125987; 747358, 4126000; 747200, 
4126000; 747142, 4125971; 747123, 4125969; 747070, 4125950; 747003, 
4125902; 747000, 4125900; 746900, 4125900; 746600, 4125800; 746300, 
4125700; 746200, 4125600; 746200, 4125500; 745700, 4125500; 745700, 
4125100; 744500, 4125100; 744500, 4125300; 744400, 4125300; 744400, 
4125200; 743700, 4125200; 743700, 4125800; 744500, 4125800; 744500, 
4126200; 743700, 4126200; 743700, 4127000; 743600, 4127000; 742700, 
4127000; 742400, 4127000; 742000, 4127200; 742000, 4128600; 742800, 
4128600; 742800, 4129100; 742900, 4129100; 743000, 4129100; 743000, 
4129200; 743400, 4129300; 743600, 4129500; 743600, 4130284; 743605, 
4130284; 743600, 4130493; 743600, 4130700; 743595, 4130700; 743561, 
4132097; 743560, 4132170; 743556, 4132335; 743549, 4132692; 743537, 
4133202; 743529, 4133301; 743531, 4133352; 743530, 4133400; 743523, 
4133729; 743518, 4134016; 743515, 4134159; 743509, 4134382; 743500, 
4134708; 743504, 4134743; 743565, 4134782; 744447, 4135329; 746234, 
4136439; 746230, 4136445; 745985, 4136865; 745952, 4136931; 745915, 
4136978; 745914, 4136987; 745902, 4137008; 745748, 4137298; 745669, 
4137403; 745620, 4137437; 745503, 4137487; 745203, 4138201; 744984, 
4138471; 744895, 4138606; 744895, 4138606; 744830, 4138711; 744596, 
4139085; 744234, 4139637; 744233, 4139645; 744162, 4139744; 744162, 
4139744; 744013, 4140002; 744013, 4140002; 743998, 4140029; 743996, 
4140030; 743973, 4140072; 743907, 4140195; 743889, 4140229; 743877, 
4140264; 743750, 4140609; 743388, 4140868; 743091, 4141131; 743053, 
4141165; 742997, 4141268; 742771, 4141692; 742748, 4141734; 742355, 
4142343; 742336, 4142368; 742271, 4142457; 742238, 4142503; 742139, 
4142637; 742056, 4142749; 742002, 4142823; 741974, 4142874; 741808, 
4143176; 741722, 4143360; 741419, 4144010; 741385, 4144081; 741316, 
4144328; 741297, 4144395; 741245, 4144456; 741194, 4144530; 741162, 
4144608; 741076, 4144820; 740864, 4144897; 740843, 4144899; 740750, 
4144952; 740641, 4145056; 740535, 4145175; 740517, 4145182; 740490, 
4145240; 740487, 4145263; 740386, 4145415; 740321, 4145847; 740320, 
4146066; 740303, 4146114; 740276, 4146159; 740272, 4146225; 740293, 
4146273; 740293, 4146303; 740370, 4146426; 740415, 4146474; 740536, 
4146602; 740735, 4146722; 740825, 4146775; 741069, 4147251; 741071, 
4147549; 741071, 4147576; 740982, 4147830; 740955, 4147883; 740914, 
4147967; 740822, 4148059; 740772, 4148182; 740782, 4148363; 740776, 
4148391; 740695, 4148831; 740617, 4149151; 740447, 4149311; 740396, 
4149534; 740344, 4149561; 740303, 4149575; 740289, 4149588; 740238, 
4149636; 740225, 4149666; 740057, 4149659; 739993, 4149678; 739917, 
4149678; 739791, 4149621; 739705, 4149597; 739701, 4149596; 739602, 
4149593; 739521, 4149560; 739443, 4149542; 739197, 4149515; 738714, 
4149273; 738694, 4149252; 738674, 4149251; 738178, 4148999; 737835, 
4148823; 737747, 4148772; 737044, 4148135; 736672, 4147809; 736430, 
4147669; 735929, 4147379; 735716, 4147219; 735669, 4147184; 735605, 
4147136; 735437, 4147009; 735223, 4146848; 735183, 4146809; 735156, 
4146798; 735151, 4146778; 735022, 4146655; 734989, 4146630; 734609, 
4146349; 734480, 4146255; 734012, 4145909; 733808, 4145758; 733765, 
4145739; 733763, 4145732; 733370, 4145442; 732703, 4144952; 732391, 
4144910; 732197, 4144885; 731993, 4144850; 731062, 4144594; 730371, 
4144363; 729000, 4143905; 728736, 4143813; 728542, 4143745; 728346, 
4143647; 728018, 4143482; 727340, 4143194; 726795, 4142958; 726607, 
4142867; 726599, 4142856; 726577, 4142853; 725785, 4142417; 725793, 
4142408; 725843, 4142361; 726002, 4142378; 726117, 4142355; 726204, 
4142264; 726415, 4142046; 726420, 4141975; 726381, 4141921; 726367, 
4141880; 726261, 4141732; 726182, 4141648; 725935, 4141477; 725916, 
4141451; 725903, 4141379; 725914, 4141349; 725981, 4141288; 726033, 
4141240; 726145, 4141137; 726156, 4141109; 726147, 4141073; 726096, 
4140993; 726083, 4140896; 726089, 4140784; 726108, 4140739; 726268, 
4140551; 726269, 4140436; 726283, 4140368; 726313, 4140308; 726412, 
4140209; 726455, 4140025; 726457, 4140000; 726459, 4139959; 726715, 
4139715; 726786, 4139647; 726804, 4139630; 726822, 4139625; 726822, 
4139611; 726823, 4139582; 726809, 4139546; 726755, 4139466; 726754, 
4139433; 726931, 4139179; 727174, 4138842; 727220, 4138823; 727261, 
4138819; 727328, 4138864; 727331, 4138842; 727333, 4138831; 727335, 
4138819; 727343, 4138816; 727396, 4138803; 727406, 4138800; 727414, 
4138798; 727552, 4138779; 727711, 4138793; 727806, 4138786; 727819, 
4138766; 727845, 4138644; 727858, 4138617; 727881, 4138590; 727700, 
4138500; 727600, 4138400; 727400, 4138300; 727400, 4137800; 727300, 
4137800; 727300, 4137600; 727400, 4137600; 727400, 4137500; 727300, 
4137500; 727300, 4137400; 727400, 4137400; 727400, 4137200; 726500, 
4137200; 726500, 4136500; 726400, 4136400; 725800, 4136400; 725800, 
4137200; 725000, 4137200; 724900, 4138800; 725500, 4138800; 725500, 
4138700; 725800, 4138700; 725800, 4138800; 725900, 4138800; 725900, 
4139500; 726500, 4139500; 726500, 4139600; 725900, 4139600; 725800, 
4139600; 725800, 4140200; 725900, 4140200; 725900, 4140900; 725400, 
4140900; 725400, 4140800; 725100, 4140800; 725100, 4141000; 724900, 
4141000; 724900, 4141200; 724100, 4141200; 724100, 4141600; 723400, 
4141600; 723400, 4141100; 723200, 4141100; 723200, 4140600; 723400, 
4140500; 723400, 4139500; 724000, 4139500; 724000, 4139400; 723900, 
4138900; 723900, 4138700; 723500, 4138200; 723400, 4138200; 723400, 
4138300; 723000, 4138300; 723000, 4138700; 723000, 4138900; 723100, 
4139100; 723200, 4139400; 723300, 4139500; 722100, 4139500; 722000, 
4140500; 721900, 4141100; 721900, 4141900; 721900, 4143400; 720800, 
4143400; 720900, 4141800; 721000, 4141500; 721000, 4141200; 721100, 
4141100; 721000, 4141000; 717800, 4140900; 717700, 4142500; 714500, 
4142400; 714500, 4144900; 715500, 4144900; 715500, 4145000; 715800, 
4145000; 715900, 4145000; 716000, 4145000; 716100, 4145100; 716100, 
4145200; 716000, 4145200; 715900, 4145300; 715900, 4145400; 716000, 
4145500; 716000, 4145600; 716100, 4145700; 717000, 4145700; 717700, 
4145300; 717800, 4145300; 717800, 4145200; 717800, 4145100; 717600, 
4144900; 717600, 4144800; 717600, 4144700; 717800, 4144500; 717900, 
4144600; 718200, 4144600; 718400, 4144500; 718700, 4144500; 718700, 
4144800; 718600, 4145000; 718700, 4145100; 718700, 4145600; 718600, 
4145600; 718600, 4145700; 718700, 4145800; 718600, 4145900; 718500, 
4146000; 718500,

[[Page 689]]

4146100; 718600, 4146200; 718600, 4146500; 718300, 4146500; 718200, 
4146600; 718200, 4146800; 718300, 4146800; 718500, 4146900; 718600, 
4147000; 718600, 4147100; 718400, 4147200; 718500, 4147300; 718500, 
4147600; 718700, 4147600; 718700, 4147400; 719000, 4147500; 719100, 
4147700; 719300, 4147600; 719600, 4147900; 719700, 4148000; 719700, 
4148100; 719800, 4148200; 720000, 4148200; 720600, 4148200; 720600, 
4148300; 720700, 4148400; 720800, 4148400; 720900, 4148500; 722700, 
4148500; 722700, 4148600; 722900, 4148600; 723200, 4148700; 723400, 
4148700; 723200, 4148600; 723100, 4148500; 723000, 4148400; 723200, 
4148200; 723400, 4148200; 723500, 4148300; 723600, 4148400; 723600, 
4148500; 723800, 4148500; 723800, 4148400; 723900, 4148400; 723900, 
4148500; 724000, 4148700; 724200, 4148500; 724200, 4148900; 724300, 
4149000; 724300, 4149100; 724500, 4149000; 724500, 4149300; 724700, 
4149400; 724900, 4149600; 725000, 4149700; 725000, 4150000; 724900, 
4150100; 725000, 4150200; 725200, 4150200; 725300, 4150400; 725400, 
4150500; 725400, 4150600; 725100, 4150900; 724700, 4150900; 724700, 
4153400; 725000, 4153500; 725400, 4153900; 725600, 4154100; 725800, 
4154200; 726000, 4154300; 726200, 4154000; 726300, 4153800; 726300, 
4153700; 727800, 4153600; 727800, 4153400; 727900, 4153400; 727900, 
4153500; 728400, 4153600; 728700, 4153700; 729000, 4153700; 729000, 
4153600; 729100, 4153500; 729300, 4153400; 729400, 4153400; 729400, 
4153300; 729300, 4153200; 729500, 4153100; 729800, 4153100; 729900, 
4153200; 729900, 4154200; 730000, 4154200; 730100, 4154300; 730600, 
4154300; 730700, 4154400; 731000, 4154600; 731200, 4154700; 731500, 
4154700; 731800, 4154900; 732200, 4154900; 732600, 4154800; 733200, 
4154500; 733400, 4154500; 733700, 4154300; 734700, 4154300; 734900, 
4154600; 735100, 4154800; 735100, 4154900; 735500, 4155300; 735600, 
4155300; 735800, 4155500; 736100, 4155900; 737100, 4155400; 737157, 
4155367; 737800, 4155000; 738200, 4154200; 738300, 4153300; 739000, 
4152800; 739100, 4152200; 740200, 4151800; 740800, 4151500; 740800, 
4150300; 741100, 4149900; 741700, 4149400; 742100, 4148500; 742100, 
4147100; 743400, 4146100; 744000, 4145600; 744400, 4144600; 744300, 
4143900; 743900, 4142700; 744000, 4142000; 744200, 4141700; 745500, 
4140300; 746100, 4139500; 746800, 4138500; 747700, 4137700; 748500, 
4135800; 748700, 4135100; 749500, 4134000; 749501, 4133999; 750173, 
4132710; 750700, 4131700; 751600, 4130500; 752000, 4130200; 752094, 
4130188; 752157, 4130180; 752800, 4130100; 753300, 4130400; 753500, 
4130400; 753900, 4130200; 754000, 4129300; 753400, 4128400; 753900, 
4127700; 754400, 4127700; 754600, 4127400; 755300, 4128400; 755400, 
4128400; 755600, 4127700; 756900, 4126400; 757800, 4125800; 758400, 
4126300; 758500, 4126300; 758600, 4126000; 757900, 4125100; 757400, 
4125100; 757175, 4124750; 757166, 4124735; 756500, 4123700; 753500, 
4122400; 750200, 4122400; 750200, 4121400; 748600, 4121400; 748600, 
4121900; 747800, 4121900; 747800, 4123300; 748300, 4123300; 748300, 
4123500; 748500, 4123500; 748600, 4123500; 748600, 4123900; 747800, 
4123900; 747800, 4124600; 747400, 4125100; 747400, 4125500; 746900, 
4125500; 746900, 4125763; 746902, 4125767; 746921, 4125818; 746971, 
4125871; 746997, 4125897; returning to 747003, 4125902.

    (10) Note: Unit 6 (Map 4) follows:

[[Page 690]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10FE06.003

    (11) Unit 7: Merced County, California.
    (i) Unit 7A: Merced County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 
topographic quadrangles Gustine, Stevinson, San Luis Ranch. Land bounded 
by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 688300, 4129000; 
688600, 4128800; 689100, 4128900; 689200, 4128800; 689400, 4128600; 
689800, 4128500; 689900, 4128300; 690200,

[[Page 691]]

4128300; 690400, 4128200; 690500, 4128000; 690600, 4125500; 692700, 
4125500; 693200, 4125000; 693100, 4124800; 693100, 4124400; 693300, 
4123700; 693600, 4123400; 693800, 4123000; 694000, 4122900; 694079, 
4122821; 694035, 4122790; 692453, 4121671; 692300, 4121900; 692200, 
4122000; 692200, 4122500; 692100, 4122700; 691800, 4122800; 691400, 
4122800; 691261, 4123079; 691262, 4123097; 691263, 4123113; 691267, 
4123155; 691273, 4123198; 691267, 4123238; 691248, 4123272; 691217, 
4123291; 691200, 4123294; 691200, 4123500; 691110, 4123679; 691126, 
4123677; 691149, 4123682; 691156, 4123694; 691166, 4123718; 691177, 
4123739; 691191, 4123771; 691193, 4123793; 691200, 4123800; 691195, 
4123810; 691201, 4123850; 691215, 4123892; 691220, 4123942; 691214, 
4123980; 691192, 4124020; 691171, 4124049; 691150, 4124072; 691127, 
4124089; 691099, 4124095; 691071, 4124095; 691055, 4124090; 690900, 
4124400; 690559, 4124400; 690559, 4124402; 690569, 4124417; 690582, 
4124427; 690582, 4124447; 690576, 4124466; 690563, 4124483; 690546, 
4124493; 690525, 4124502; 690523, 4124502; 690523, 4124519; 690500, 
4124524; 690475, 4124530; 690469, 4124538; 690445, 4124570; 690388, 
4124590; 690353, 4124592; 690180, 4124650; 690127, 4124689; 690083, 
4124695; 690025, 4124783; 690020, 4124854; 689996, 4124900; 689988, 
4125006; 689952, 4125056; 689912, 4125095; 689856, 4125119; 689819, 
4125184; 689788, 4125210; 689747, 4125229; 689700, 4125300; 689658, 
4125595; 689665, 4125595; 689672, 4125603; 689645, 4125757; 689630, 
4125793; 689600, 4126000; 689700, 4126200; 689600, 4126600; 689400, 
4126600; 689275, 4126538; 689239, 4126581; 689188, 4126664; 689134, 
4126678; 689121, 4126682; 689069, 4126728; 689067, 4126852; 689020, 
4126961; 688990, 4126993; 688911, 4126978; 688903, 4126995; 688913, 
4127006; 689100, 4127100; 689024, 4127195; 689025, 4127207; 688949, 
4127292; 688931, 4127324; 688922, 4127322; 688854, 4127407; 688823, 
4127454; 688780, 4127503; 688735, 4127581; 688723, 4127621; 688696, 
4127650; 688684, 4128244; 688193, 4128235; 688100, 4128700; returning to 
688300, 4129000.
    (ii) Unit 7B: Merced County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 
topographic quadrangles Stevinson, San Luis Ranch. Land bounded by the 
following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 695400, 4125600; 
695500, 4122000; 694900, 4122400; 694700, 4122700; 694500, 4122900; 
694500, 4123100; 694100, 4123400; 693800, 4123500; 693800, 4123800; 
693500, 4123900; 693500, 4124500; 693700, 4124700; 693800, 4125000; 
693600, 4125200; 693400, 4125300; 693122, 4125670; 693100, 4125700; 
693146, 4125746; 693200, 4125800; 693700, 4125900; 693700, 4127300; 
693800, 4127300; 693900, 4127000; 694200, 4126900; 694600, 4126400; 
694600, 4126200; 694700, 4126000; 695179, 4125726; returning to 695400, 
4125600.
    (iii) Unit 7C: Merced County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 
topographic quadrangles Stevinson, Arena, San Luis Ranch, Turner Ranch: 
Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 
699300, 4126300; 699300, 4125400; 700100, 4125400; 700200, 4126000; 
700600, 4125700; 701100, 4125300; 701100, 4124300; 700300, 4124300; 
700300, 4123800; 700500, 4123800; 700600, 4123500; 701100, 4123400; 
701200, 4123200; 701400, 4123100; 701600, 4122700; 701900, 4122500; 
702600, 4122200; 702870, 4121705; 703200, 4121100; 703900, 4120500; 
704600, 4119800; 704600, 4119800; 704700, 4119700; 698900, 4119600; 
698800, 4119700; 698543, 4119957; 698558, 4119970; 698501, 4120012; 
698504, 4120069; 698626, 4120197; 698662, 4120077; 698694, 4120113; 
698668, 4121116; 698663, 4121510; 698594, 4121508; 698600, 4121600; 
699900, 4121600; 700000, 4120400; 700200, 4120400; 700200, 4122700; 
697000, 4122600; 696900, 4125100; 697700, 4125100; 697700, 4125300; 
697600, 4125400; 697700, 4125600; 698000, 4125700; 698200, 4125800; 
698300, 4126100; 698700, 4126500; 699500, 4126500; 699600, 4126300; 
returning to 699300, 4126300.
    (iv) Unit 7D: Merced County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangles Arena, Turner Ranch. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 
10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 706700, 4122100; 706800, 4120900; 706700, 
4120500; 706700, 4119700; 708100, 4119700; 708100, 4119600; 708000, 
4119500; 707900, 4119200; 707900, 4119000; 708000, 4118900; 708300, 
4118900; 708300, 4118100; 707900, 4118100; 707500, 4118500; 706500, 
4118500; 706000, 4118900; 705600, 4119300; 705200, 4119700; 704800, 
4120000; 704700, 4120100; 704700, 4120400; 705100, 4120400; 705100, 
4120600; 704900, 4120700; 704900, 4120800; 705100, 4120800; 704900, 
4121000; 705000, 4121100; 705100, 4121700; 705200, 4121700; 705300, 
4122000; 705700, 4122100; 705700, 4122200; 705400, 4122300; 705300, 
4122400; 705500, 4122600; 705400, 4122600; 705300, 4122500; 705200, 
4122500; 705100, 4122500; 704900, 4122500; 704900, 4122700; 704800, 
4122800; 704500, 4122800; 704300, 4122900; 704000, 4122800; 703900, 
4122900; 703400, 4124400; 703300, 4124600; 701300, 4126500; 700100, 
4127600; 700467, 4129067; 700500, 4129200; 700500, 4130600; 701000, 
4130600; 701000, 4130100; 701100, 4129800; 701200, 4129800; 701100, 
4130100; 701100, 4130600; 701700, 4130600; 701700, 4129200; 701800, 
4129200; 702800, 4129200; 703000, 4128800; 703300, 4128800; 703900, 
4128800; 703900, 4129000; 704200, 4129000; 704200, 4128500; 703300, 
4128400; 703400, 4128300; 703400, 4127900; 703500, 4127800; 703800, 
4127500; 703700, 4127300; 703500, 4127300; 703400, 4127100; 703400, 
4126100; 703500, 4126100; 704400, 4126100; 704300, 4126000; 704400, 
4125900; 704500, 4125300; 704500, 4124800; 705000, 4124800; 705000, 
4125300; 705700, 4125300; 705700, 4124900; 706600, 4125000; 706700, 
4123700; returning to 706700, 4122100.
    (v) Unit 7E: Merced County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangles Turner Ranch, Sandy Mush. Land bounded by the following UTM 
Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 706700, 4122100; 711500, 4122200; 
711500, 4121700; 711500, 4121200; 709900, 4121300; 709900, 4121900; 
709800, 4121900; 709800, 4121800; 709700, 4121500; 709500, 4121500; 
709300, 4121600; 708800, 4121400; 708700, 4121300; 706800, 4121300; 
returning to 706700, 4122100.
    (vi) Unit 7F: Merced County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangles Turner Ranch, Sandy Mush. Land bounded by the following UTM 
Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 711200, 4120500; 711400, 4120400; 
711500, 4120500; 711600, 4119600; 711900, 4119600; 711900, 4119400; 
712100, 4119300; 712300, 4119300; 712300, 4119200; 712600, 4119200; 
712800, 4118800; 711600, 4118700; 711600, 4118500; 711400, 4118500; 
711300,

[[Page 692]]

4118400; 711100, 4118100; 709900, 4118100; 709900, 4118800; 709900, 
4119000; 709700, 4119000; 709700, 4119600; 710300, 4119600; 710300, 
4119900; 710700, 4119900; 710700, 4120000; 710600, 4120000; 710600, 
4120100; 710700, 4120200; 710600, 4120300; 710700, 4120400; 710700, 
4120500; 710900, 4120400; 711100, 4120400; returning to 711200, 4120500.

    (vii) Note: Unit 7 (Map 5) follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10FE06.004
    

[[Page 693]]


    (12) Unit 8: Ventura County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangles San Guillermo, Lockwood Valley, Alamo Mountain, Lion Canyon, 
Topatopa Mountains. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 
coordinates (E,N): 864689, 3849170; 865272, 3847801; 866149, 3846550; 
867028, 3843593; 867093, 3842494; 867037, 3842150; 866579, 3839353; 
865815, 3838706; 865267, 3839476; 864068, 3839404; 863282, 3837452; 
861766, 3835957; 860385, 3835574; 859656, 3836032; 858662, 3835872; 
857481, 3835501; 856246, 3836030; 854941, 3836052; 853594, 3836774; 
852265, 3837196; 851706, 3838166; 850507, 3838094; 849284, 3838422; 
848261, 3838762; 847708, 3839632; 847788, 3841642; 849375, 3841937; 
851020, 3842938; 851266, 3843856; 853063, 3845668; 853362, 3847390; 
854407, 3848355; 855307, 3848409; 857217, 3848323; 859016, 3848430; 
859968, 3849289; 861343, 3849773; 862794, 3850662; 863971, 3849428; 
returning to 864689, 3849170.

    (13) Note: Unit 8 (Map 6) follows:

[[Page 694]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10FE06.005

            Longhorn Fairy Shrimp (Branchinecta longiantenna)

    (1) Critical habitat units are depicted for Alameda, Contra Costa, 
Merced, and San Luis Obispo Counties, California, on the map below.
    (2) The primary constituent elements of critical habitat for 
longhorn fairy shrimp

[[Page 695]]

(Branchinecta longiantenna) are the habitat components that provide:
    (i) Topographic features characterized by mounds and swales and 
depressions within a matrix of surrounding uplands that result in 
complexes of continuously, or intermittently, flowing surface water in 
the swales connecting the pools described below in paragraph (2)(ii), 
providing for dispersal and promoting hydroperiods of adequate length in 
the pools;
    (ii) Depressional features including isolated vernal pools with 
underlying restrictive soil layers that become inundated during winter 
rains and that continuously hold water for a minimum of 23 days, in all 
but the driest years; thereby providing adequate water for incubation, 
maturation, and reproduction. As these features are inundated on a 
seasonal basis, they do not promote the development of obligate wetland 
vegetation habitats typical of permanently flooded emergent wetlands;
    (iii) Sources of food, expected to be detritus occurring in the 
pools, contributed by overland flow from the pools' watershed, or the 
results of biological processes within the pools themselves, such as 
single-celled bacteria, algae, and dead organic matter, to provide for 
feeding; and
    (iv) Structure within the pools described above in paragraph 
(2)(ii), consisting of organic and inorganic materials, such as living 
and dead plants from plant species adapted to seasonally inundated 
environments, rocks, and other inorganic debris that may be washed, 
blown, or otherwise transported into the pools, that provide shelter.
    (3) Existing manmade features and structures, such as buildings, 
roads, railroads, airports, runways, other paved areas, lawns, and other 
urban landscaped areas do not contain one or more of the primary 
constituent elements. Federal actions limited to those areas, therefore, 
would not trigger a consultation under section 7 of the Act unless they 
may affect the species and/or primary constituent elements in adjacent 
critical habitat.
    (4) Unit 1: Contra Costa County.
    (i) Unit 1A: Contra Costa County. USGS 24,000 topographic quad Byron 
Hot Springs: Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 
coordinates (E,N): 614800, 4185400; 615100, 4185200; 615100, 4185500; 
615300, 4185500; 615400, 4185200; 615600, 4184900; 615800, 4184900; 
616000, 4184800; 616000, 4184700; 615800, 4184500; 615700, 4184500; 
615500, 4184200; 615100, 4184200; 614800, 4184200; 614700, 4184000; 
614600, 4184000; 614600, 4184500; 614900, 4185000; 614600, 4185300; 
614600, 4185900; 614700, 4185900; returning to 614800, 4185400.
    (ii) Unit 1B: Alameda County. USGS 24,000 topographic quad Byron Hot 
Springs: Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates 
(E,N): 615500, 4181200; 615500, 4181100; 615600, 4181100; 615700, 
4181300; 615800, 4181200; 616000, 4180600; 616000, 4180500; 616200, 
4180200; 616200, 4179900; 615900, 4179900; 615900, 4179700; 616200, 
4179500; 616200, 4179000; 616100, 4179000; 615900, 4179200; 615900, 
4179400; 615700, 4179600; 615500, 4180100; 615100, 4180500; 614800, 
4180800; 614400, 4180900; 614100, 4181100; 614600, 4181500; 614700, 
4181500; 614700, 4181700; 614900, 4181700; 615200, 4181400; 615400, 
4181300; returning to 615500, 4181200.

    (iii) Note: Unit 1 (Map 1) follows:

[[Page 696]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10FE06.006

    (5) Unit 2: Merced County. USGS 24,000 topographic quads Gustine, 
Stevinson, San Luis Ranch: Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, 
NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 688300, 4129000; 688600, 4128800; 689100, 
4128900; 689200, 4128800; 689400, 4128600; 689800, 4128500; 689900, 
4128300; 690200, 4128300; 690400, 4128200; 690500, 4128000; 690600, 
4125500; 692700, 4125500;

[[Page 697]]

693200, 4125000; 693100, 4124800; 693100, 4124400; 693300, 4123700; 
693600, 4123400; 693800, 4123000; 694000, 4122900; 694079, 4122821; 
694035, 4122790; 692453, 4121671; 692300, 4121900; 692200, 4122000; 
692200, 4122500; 692100, 4122700; 691800, 4122800; 691400, 4122800; 
691261, 4123079; 691262, 4123097; 691263, 4123113; 691267, 4123155; 
691273, 4123198; 691267, 4123238; 691248, 4123272; 691217, 4123291; 
691200, 4123294; 691200, 4123500; 691110, 4123679; 691126, 4123677; 
691149, 4123682; 691156, 4123694; 691166, 4123718; 691177, 4123739; 
691191, 4123771; 691193, 4123793; 691200, 4123800; 691195, 4123810; 
691201, 4123850; 691215, 4123892; 691220, 4123942; 691214, 4123980; 
691192, 4124020; 691171, 4124049; 691150, 4124072; 691127, 4124089; 
691099, 4124095; 691071, 4124095; 691055, 4124090; 690900, 4124400; 
690559, 4124400; 690559, 4124402; 690569, 4124417; 690582, 4124427; 
690582, 4124447; 690576, 4124466; 690563, 4124483; 690546, 4124493; 
690525, 4124502; 690523, 4124502; 690523, 4124519; 690500, 4124524; 
690475, 4124530; 690469, 4124538; 690445, 4124570; 690388, 4124590; 
690353, 4124592; 690180, 4124650; 690127, 4124689; 690083, 4124695; 
690025, 4124783; 690020, 4124854; 689996, 4124900; 689988, 4125006; 
689952, 4125056; 689912, 4125095; 689856, 4125119; 689819, 4125184; 
689788, 4125210; 689747, 4125229; 689700, 4125300; 689658, 4125595; 
689665, 4125595; 689672, 4125603; 689645, 4125757; 689630, 4125793; 
689600, 4126000; 689700, 4126200; 689600, 4126600; 689400, 4126600; 
689275, 4126538; 689239, 4126581; 689188, 4126664; 689134, 4126678; 
689121, 4126682; 689069, 4126728; 689067, 4126852; 689020, 4126961; 
688990, 4126993; 688911, 4126978; 688903, 4126995; 688913, 4127006; 
689100, 4127100; 689024, 4127195; 689025, 4127207; 688949, 4127292; 
688931, 4127324; 688922, 4127322; 688854, 4127407; 688823, 4127454; 
688780, 4127503; 688735, 4127581; 688723, 4127621; 688696, 4127650; 
688684, 4128244; 688193, 4128235; 688100, 4128700; returning to 688300, 
4129000.

    (6) Note: Unit 2 (Map 2) follows:

[[Page 698]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10FE06.007

    (7) Unit 3: San Luis Obispo County. USGS 24,000 topographic quads 
Simmler: Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates 
(E,N): 774375, 3914002; 777312, 3913479; 778710, 3913564; 779726, 
3913325; 780573, 3912575; 780827, 3911688; 779496, 3910506; 779321, 
3910094; 780960, 3909492; 781390, 3909017; 782948, 3908110; 783520, 
3906942; 783765, 3906725; 783760,

[[Page 699]]

3906724; 782946, 3906690; 782936, 3906690; 782156, 3906654; 782132, 
3906653; 782082, 3908301; 780768, 3908263; 780485, 3908255; 780490, 
3908031; 780522, 3906619; 779393, 3906593; 777627, 3906558; 777613, 
3906978; 777456, 3906974; 777388, 3907272; 777578, 3909087; 777442, 
3909680; 774998, 3910333; 772742, 3911198; 772708, 3913400; 773483, 
3913848; returning to 774375, 3914002.

    (8) Note: Unit 3 (Map 3) follows:

[[Page 700]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10FE06.008


[[Page 701]]



            Riverside Fairy Shrimp (Streptocephalus woottoni)

    (1) Critical habitat units for Ventura, Orange, and San Diego 
Counties, California, are depicted on the maps that follow.
    (2) Critical habitat consists of vernal pools, vernal pool 
complexes, and ephemeral ponds and depressions and their associated 
surrounding upslope areas with the soil and hydrologic regimes indicated 
on the maps below and in the legal descriptions.
    (3) Within these areas, the primary constituent elements for the 
Riverside fairy shrimp are those habitat components that are essential 
for the primary biological needs of foraging, sheltering, reproduction, 
and dispersal. The primary constituent elements are found in those areas 
that support vernal pools or other ephemeral ponds and depressions, and 
their associated watersheds. The primary constituent elements determined 
essential to the conservation of Riverside fairy shrimp are:
    (i) Small to large pools or pool complexes that have the appropriate 
size and volume, local climate, topography, water temperature, water 
chemistry, soil conditions, and length of time of inundation with water 
necessary for Riverside fairy shrimp incubation and reproduction, as 
well as dry periods necessary to provide the conditions to maintain a 
dormant and viable cyst bank. Specifically, the conditions necessary to 
allow for successful reproduction of Riverside fairy shrimp fall within 
the following ranges:
    (A) Moderate to deep depths ranging from 10 in (25 cm) to 5-10 ft 
(1.5-3 m);
    (B) Pool or pond inundation lasting for a minimum of 2 months to 5-8 
months or more, i.e., a sufficient wet period in winter and spring 
months to allow the Riverside fairy shrimp to hatch, mature, and 
reproduce, followed by a dry period prior to the next winter and spring 
rains;
    (1) Water temperatures within the range of 41-77 degrees F (5-25 
degrees C);
    (2) Water chemistry with low total dissolved solids and alkalinity 
(means of 77 and 65 parts per million, respectively); and
    (3) Water pH within a range of 6.4-7.1.
    (ii) The immediately surrounding upslope area that provides the pool 
or pool complex with the following:
    (A) Hydrologic flows, both above-ground (sheet flow) and sub-surface 
through soil or sediments, to fill the pools and maintain the seasonal 
cycle of ponding and drying, at the appropriate rates;
    (B) A source of detritus and nutrients;
    (C) Sources of soil, ion and mineral transport to the pool or pool 
complex to provide and maintain the appropriate water chemistry 
conditions and impermeability of the pool basin(s); and
    (D) Habitat for animals that act as dispersers of cysts and vernal 
pool plant seeds or pollen, as well as habitat for the pollinators of 
the vernal pool plants that also form an integral part of the vernal 
pool's ecology.
    (iii) The size of the immediately surrounding upslope area varies 
greatly depending on a number of factors and has been assessed for each 
sub-unit. Factors that affect the size of the surrounding upslope area 
include surface and sub-surface hydrology, the topography of the area 
surrounding the pool or pools, the vegetative coverage, and the soil and 
bedrock substrate in the area. The upslope areas designated vary from a 
few acres to over 100 ac (40 ha) in size.
    (iv) Soils in the summit, rim and basin geomorphic positions with a 
clay component and/or an impermeable surface or subsurface layer that 
provide a unique assemblage of nutrient availability and redox 
conditions known to support vernal pool habitat. The biogeochemical 
environment strongly influences hydrologic properties and plays a 
critical role in nutrient cycling in vernal pool ecosystems (Hobson and 
Dahlgren 1998).
    (v) The matrix of vernal pools/ephemeral wetlands, the immediate 
upslope areas, upland habitats, and underlying soil substrates form 
hydrological and ecologically functional units. These features and the 
lands that they represent are essential to the conservation of the 
Riverside fairy shrimp. All lands identified as essential and proposed 
as critical habitat contain one or more of the primary constituent 
elements for the Riverside fairy shrimp.
    (4) Critical habitat does not include man-made structures existing 
on the effective date of this rule and not containing one or more of the 
primary constituent elements, such as buildings, aqueducts, airports, 
and roads, and the land on which such structures are located.
    (5) Data layers defining map units were created on a base of USGS 
7.5[min] quadrangles, and critical habitat units were then mapped using 
Universal Transverse Mercator (UTM) coordinates.
    (6) Index map of critical habitat units for the Riverside fairy 
shrimp follows:

[[Page 702]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR12AP05.000

    (7) Unit 1: Ventura County, California.
    (i) Sub-unit 1A: City of Moorpark Greenbelt, north Tierra Rejada 
Valley from USGS 1:24,000 quadrangle map Simi Valley West. Lands bounded 
by the following UTM NAD27 coordinates (E, N): 329000, 3793300; 329400, 
3793300; 329400, 3792900; 329300, 3792900; 329300, 3792800; 329000, 
3792800; 329000, 3793300.
    (ii) Sub-unit 1B: south Tierra Rejada Valley. Lands bounded by the 
following UTM NAD27 coordinates (E, N): 330900, 3792500; 331100, 
3792500; 331100, 3792300; 331200, 3792300; 331200, 3792200; 331300, 
3792200; 331300, 3792100; 331400, 3792100; 331400, 3791400; 331300, 
3791400; 331300, 3791500; 331100, 3791500; 331100, 3791400; 331000, 
3791400; 331000, 3791300; 330600, 3791300; 330600, 3791900; 330500, 
3791900; 330500, 3792000; 330600, 3792000; 330600, 3792100; 330700, 
3792100; 330700, 3792300; 330800, 3792300; 330800, 3792400; 330900, 
3792400; 330900, 3792500.
    (iii) Note: Map of critical habitat Sub-units 1A and 1B for the 
Riverside fairy shrimp follows:

[[Page 703]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR12AP05.001

    (8) Unit 2: Orange County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 quadrangle 
map Santiago Peak.
    (i) Unit 2: Land within O'Neill Regional Park. Lands bounded by the 
following UTM NAD27 coordinates (E, N): 443400, 3725300; 443900, 
3725300; 443900, 3724900; 443800, 3724900; 443800, 3724800; 443600, 
3724800; 443600, 3724900; 443500, 3724900; 443500, 3725100; 443400, 
3725100; 443400, 3725300.
    (ii) Note: Map of critical habitat Unit 2 for the Riverside fairy 
shrimp follows:

[[Page 704]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR12AP05.002

    (9) Unit 3: North San Diego County, San Diego County, California. 
From USGS 1:24,000 quadrangle map Encinitas.
    (i) Unit 3: Land near Poinsettia Lane Commuter Station, Carlsbad 
Lands bounded by the following UTM NAD27 coordinates (E, N): 470100, 
3663600; thence east to the North San Diego County Transit (NSDCT) 
boundary at UTM NAD27 y-coordinate 3663600; thence south following the 
NSDCT boundary to UTM NAD27 x-coordinate 470300; thence south to UTM 
NAD27 coordinates 470300, 3663300; thence east to the NSDCT boundary at 
UTM NAD27 y-coordinate 3663300; thence southeast following the NSDCT 
boundary lands to UTM NAD 27 x-coordinate 470400; thence south following 
UTM NAD27 x-coordinate 470400 to the NSDCT boundary; thence west and 
south following the NSDCT boundary to UTM NAD27 y-coordinate 3662400; 
thence west following UTM NAD27 y-coordinate 3662400 to the NSDCT 
boundary; thence northwest following the NSDCT boundary to UTM NAD27 x-
coordinate 470400; thence north along UTM NAD27 x-coordinate 470400 to 
UTM NAD27 coordinates 470400, 3662900; thence west to NSDCT lands at UTM 
NAD 27 y-coordinate 3662900; thence northwest following the NSDCT 
boundary returning to UTM NAD27 coordinates 470100, 3663600.
    (ii) Note: Map of critical habitat Unit 3 for the Riverside fairy 
shrimp follows:

[[Page 705]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR12AP05.003

    (10) Map Unit 4: South San Diego County, San Diego, California. From 
USGS 1:24,000 quadrangle map Imperial Beach.
    (i) Unit 4: Sweetwater Union High School District lands on Otay 
Mesa. Lands bounded by the following UTM NAD27 coordinates (E, N): 
498000, 3602800; 498100, 3602800; thence south to the Sweetwater Union 
High School District (SUHSD) boundary at UTM NAD27 x-coordinate 498100; 
thence west following the SUHSD boundary to UTM NAD27 x-coordinate 
498000; thence north following UTM NAD27 x-coordinate 498000 returning 
to UTM NAD27 coordinates 498000, 3602800.
    (ii) Note: Map of critical habitat Unit 4 for the Riverside fairy 
shrimp follows:

[[Page 706]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR12AP05.004

          San Diego Fairy Shrimp (Branchinecta sandiegonensis)

    (1) Critical habitat units are depicted for Orange and San Diego 
counties, California, on the maps below.
    (2) The primary constituent elements of critical habitat for the San 
Diego fairy shrimp are:
    (i) Vernal pools with shallow to moderate depths (2 in (5 cm) to 12 
in (30 cm)) that hold water for sufficient lengths of time (7 to 60 
days) necessary for incubation, maturation, and reproduction of the San 
Diego fairy shrimp, in all but the driest years;
    (ii) Topographic features characterized by mounds and swales and 
depressions within a matrix of surrounding uplands that result in 
complexes of continuously, or intermittently, flowing surface water in 
the swales connecting the pools described in paragraph (2)(i) of this 
entry, providing for dispersal and promoting hydroperiods of adequate 
length in the pools (i.e., the vernal pool watershed); and
    (iii) Flat to gently sloping topography, and any soil type with a 
clay component and/or an impermeable surface or subsurface layer known 
to support vernal pool habitat (including Carlsbad, Chesterton, Diablo, 
Huerhuero, Linne, Olivenhain, Placentia, Redding, and Stockpen soils).
    (3) Critical habitat does not include manmade structures (such as 
buildings, aqueducts, runways, roads, and other paved areas) and the 
land on which they are located existing within the legal boundaries on 
the effective date of this rule.
    (4) Critical habitat map units. Data layers defining map units were 
created using a base of U.S. Geological Survey 7.5[min] quadrangle

[[Page 707]]

maps, and the critical habitat units were then mapped using UTM 
coordinates.
    (5) Note: Index map (Map 1) follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR12DE07.000
    

[[Page 708]]


    (6) Unit 1: Orange County, California. From USGS 1:24, 000 
quadrangle map Newport Beach.
    (i) Subunit 1C. Land bounded by the following UTM NAD27 coordinates 
(E,N): 412805, 3721810; 412694, 3721593; 412668, 3721631; 412633, 
3721638; 412589, 3721661; 412539, 3721674; 412521, 3721676; 412436, 
3721693; 412465, 3721807; 412524, 3721907; 412616, 3721871; 412643, 
3721844; 412677, 3721827; 412744, 3721820; 412805, 3721810.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit 1, Subunit 1C (Map 2) follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR12DE07.001
    

[[Page 709]]


    (7) Unit 2: San Diego County, California. From USGS 1:24, 000 
quadrangle map Encinitas.
    (i) Subunit 2G. Land bounded by the following UTM NAD27 coordinates 
(E,N): 470300, 3663348; 470301, 3663346; 470323, 3663284; 470356, 
3663198; 470366, 3663172; 470382, 3663133; 470388, 3663119; 470399, 
3663092; 470399, 3663092; 470408, 3663065; 470418, 3663034; 470424, 
3663019; 470434, 3663002; 470442, 3662980; 470447, 3662960; 470459, 
3662925; 470476, 3662876; 470527, 3662739; 470531, 3662733; 470573, 
3662699; 470596, 3662675; 470596, 3662661; 470590, 3662625; 470584, 
3662600; 470568, 3662600; 470548, 3662600; 470500, 3662727; 470500, 
3662779; 470500, 3662800; 470492, 3662800; 470472, 3662800; 470430, 
3662912; 470400, 3662991; 470400, 3663000; 470397, 3663000; 470343, 
3663144; 470300, 3663252; 470300, 3663328; 470300, 3663330.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit 2, Subunit 2G (Map 3) follows:

[[Page 710]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR12DE07.002

    (8) Unit 3: San Diego County, California. From USGS 1:24, 000 
quadrangle maps San Marcos, San Pasqual, and Ramona.
    (i) Subunit 3A. Land bounded by the following UTM NAD27 coordinates 
(E,N): 482519, 3667481; 482522, 3667490; 482746, 3667403; 482743, 
3667398; 482702, 3667300; 482600, 3667300; 482600, 3667232; 482556, 
3667127; 482419, 3667185; 482436, 3667237; 482433, 3667249; 482361, 
3667282; 482404, 3667370; 482467, 3667341; 482489, 3667400; 482500, 
3667400; 482500, 3667430.

[[Page 711]]

    (ii) Subunit 3C. Land bounded by the following UTM NAD27 coordinates 
(E,N): 482054, 3666630; 481931, 3666341; 481800, 3666394; 481800, 
3666400; 481786, 3666400; 481600, 3666476; 481600, 3666500; 481542, 
3666500; 481586, 3666600; 481600, 3666600; 481600, 3666631; 481672, 
3666793. Land bounded by the following UTM NAD27 coordinates (E,N): 
481457, 3666290; 481750, 3666164; 481792, 3666269; 481822, 3666258; 
481888, 3666230; 481888, 3666188; 481900, 3666135; 481900, 3666128; 
481900, 3666100; 481908, 3666100; 481910, 3666093; 481926, 3666044; 
481938, 3666006; 481954, 3665952; 481953, 3665951; 481872, 3665932; 
481893, 3665863; 481726, 3665813; 481717, 3665831; 481700, 3665878; 
481700, 3665900; 481692, 3665900; 481662, 3665987; 481637, 3666057; 
481623, 3666077; 481600, 3666087; 481600, 3666100; 481572, 3666100; 
481571, 3666100; 481406, 3666174; 481444, 3666261; 481455, 3666286.
    (iii) Subunit 3D. Land bounded by the following UTM NAD27 
coordinates (E,N): 482905, 3666600; 482943, 3666600; 482951, 3666576; 
482878, 3666400; 482844, 3666400; 482800, 3666539; 482800, 3666566.
    (iv) Subunit 3E.1. Land bounded by the following UTM NAD27 
coordinates (E,N): 505832, 3655634; 505833, 3655626; 505920, 3655402; 
506333, 3654967; 506504, 3655015; 506619, 3655015; 506795, 3655157; 
507417, 3654906; 507417, 3654593; 507713, 3654398; 507614, 3654262; 
506880, 3654385; 506410, 3654601; 505906, 3654692; 505398, 3655020; 
505000, 3655164; 505000, 3655250; 505000, 3655500; 505000, 3655532; 
505068, 3655630; 505199, 3655620; 505259, 3655600; 505403, 3655674; 
505514, 3655610; 505534, 3655573; 505660, 3655633; 505665, 3655636; 
505665, 3655636; 505692, 3655667; 505811, 3655671; 505832, 3655634; 
505832, 3655634.
    (v) Subunit 3E.2. Land bounded by the following UTM NAD27 
coordinates (E,N): 509149, 3655266; 509295, 3655337; 509429, 3655206; 
509321, 3655061; 509275, 3655000; 509250, 3655000; 509250, 3654973; 
509174, 3654924; 509203, 3654625; 508642, 3654684; 508347, 3654484; 
508311, 3654514; 508344, 3654563; 508583, 3654776; 508577, 3654914; 
508488, 3654973; 508013, 3654934; 508029, 3655012; 507918, 3655209; 
507485, 3655284; 507301, 3655340; 507261, 3655424; 507203, 3655544; 
508301, 3655340; 508379, 3655228; 508429, 3655157; 508444, 3655152; 
508646, 3655084; 508760, 3655311; 509003, 3655196; 509131, 3655258.
    (vi) Subunit 3E.3. Land bounded by the following UTM NAD27 
coordinates (E,N): 510101, 3654200; 510140, 3654178; 510198, 3654185; 
510244, 3654214; 510292, 3654240; 510317, 3654246; 510342, 3654205; 
510330, 3654166; 510323, 3654121; 510325, 3654076; 510321, 3654007; 
510314, 3654000; 510300, 3654000; 510300, 3653984; 510250, 3653938; 
510250, 3653938; 510210, 3653900; 510200, 3653900; 510152, 3653953; 
510148, 3653968; 510158, 3654004; 510110, 3654061; 510023, 3654160; 
510062, 3654196; 510098, 3654200; 510100, 3654200; 510100, 3654200. Land 
bounded by the following UTM NAD27 coordinates (E,N): 511334, 3655370; 
511340, 3655365; 511345, 3655353; 511397, 3655274; 511404, 3655265; 
511416, 3655273; 511460, 3655300; 511473, 3655300; 511500, 3655262; 
511500, 3655250; 511500, 3655218; 511500, 3655214; 511331, 3655102; 
511310, 3655088; 511300, 3655099; 511300, 3655100; 511299, 3655100; 
511292, 3655107; 511250, 3655150; 511208, 3655192; 511200, 3655200; 
511200, 3655265; 511250, 3655310; 511299, 3655354; 511333, 3655371.
    (vii) Subunit 3E.4. Land bounded by the following UTM NAD27 
coordinates (E,N): 512552, 3654788; 512561, 3654778; 512553, 3654759; 
512542, 3654734; 512535, 3654677; 512533, 3654565; 512532, 3654547; 
512531, 3654515; 512530, 3654422; 512485, 3654420; 512487, 3654359; 
512313, 3654385; 512139, 3654363; 511954, 3654363; 511937, 3654353; 
511935, 3654350; 511874, 3654257; 511806, 3654242; 511802, 3654342; 
511873, 3654405; 511946, 3654429; 511947, 3654432; 511948, 3654430; 
512095, 3654525; 512106, 3654533; 512441, 3654750; 512442, 3654750; 
512443, 3654750; 512500, 3654787; 512500, 3654785; 512517, 3654799; 
512532, 3654810; 512533, 3654809.
    (viii) Note: Map of Unit 3, Subunits 3A, 3C, and 3D (Map 4) follows:

[[Page 712]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR12DE07.003

    (ix) Note: Map of Unit 3, Subunits 3E.1, 3E.2, 3E.3, and 3E.4 (Map 
5) follows:

[[Page 713]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR12DE07.004

    (9) Unit 4: San Diego County, California. From USGS 1:24, 000 
quadrangle maps Del Mar, La Jolla, and La Mesa.
    (i) Subunit 4A/B. Land bounded by the following UTM NAD27 
coordinates (E,N): 485317, 3645035; 485298, 3645039; 485274, 3645039; 
485259, 3645035; 485245, 3645032; 485244, 3645032; 485241, 3645032; 
485226, 3645028; 485213, 3645026; 485209, 3645025; 485187, 3645020; 
485173, 3645017; 485153, 3645012; 485139, 3645009; 485128, 3645009; 
485114, 3645012; 485101, 3645018; 485090, 3645027; 485078, 3645035; 
485065, 3645043; 485052, 3645052; 485033,

[[Page 714]]

3645066; 485019, 3645074; 485009, 3645081; 485001, 3645086; 484987, 
3645095; 484971, 3645103; 484957, 3645107; 484940, 3645108; 484923, 
3645108; 484912, 3645106; 484901, 3645102; 484897, 3645098; 484890, 
3645093; 484886, 3645088; 484884, 3645085; 484883, 3645077; 484886, 
3645067; 484890, 3645055; 484899, 3645041; 484906, 3645034; 484915, 
3645027; 484921, 3645018; 484929, 3645005; 484935, 3644996; 484943, 
3644981; 484947, 3644970; 484947, 3644958; 484945, 3644947; 484939, 
3644936; 484933, 3644928; 484925, 3644922; 484916, 3644917; 484904, 
3644916; 484891, 3644921; 484873, 3644929; 484860, 3644939; 484860, 
3644939; 484850, 3644950; 484841, 3644961; 484829, 3644979; 484822, 
3644989; 484817, 3644997; 484812, 3645003; 484806, 3645012; 484796, 
3645023; 484795, 3645024; 484785, 3645030; 484771, 3645032; 484758, 
3645034; 484741, 3645032; 484729, 3645030; 484715, 3645026; 484709, 
3645024; 484704, 3645022; 484697, 3645018; 484691, 3645012; 484688, 
3645008; 484685, 3645004; 484675, 3644990; 484670, 3644981; 484665, 
3644967; 484662, 3644959; 484659, 3644953; 484656, 3644947; 484651, 
3644936; 484650, 3644934; 484639, 3644920; 484633, 3644912; 484629, 
3644906; 484622, 3644899; 484615, 3644896; 484605, 3644894; 484600, 
3644893; 484589, 3644893; 484575, 3644897; 484561, 3644903; 484550, 
3644908; 484539, 3644916; 484531, 3644929; 484523, 3644951; 484520, 
3644957; 484518, 3644963; 484517, 3644969; 484515, 3644975; 484512, 
3644991; 484507, 3645006; 484498, 3645018; 484491, 3645021; 484490, 
3645022; 484487, 3645023; 484472, 3645024; 484459, 3645023; 484458, 
3645023; 484458, 3645023; 484450, 3645023; 484426, 3645025; 484397, 
3645030; 484378, 3645037; 484367, 3645047; 484358, 3645060; 484352, 
3645072; 484349, 3645083; 484350, 3645096; 484357, 3645102; 484368, 
3645107; 484379, 3645111; 484393, 3645112; 484410, 3645110; 484414, 
3645108; 484414, 3645108; 484429, 3645101; 484441, 3645097; 484451, 
3645092; 484460, 3645085; 484472, 3645078; 484486, 3645069; 484498, 
3645062; 484498, 3645062; 484512, 3645058; 484515, 3645057; 484520, 
3645057; 484529, 3645056; 484544, 3645055; 484564, 3645053; 484586, 
3645053; 484600, 3645054; 484618, 3645060; 484632, 3645062; 484634, 
3645062; 484634, 3645062; 484636, 3645063; 484646, 3645065; 484649, 
3645066; 484650, 3645066; 484665, 3645068; 484691, 3645073; 484704, 
3645078; 484714, 3645087; 484718, 3645095; 484720, 3645102; 484721, 
3645109; 484721, 3645119; 484721, 3645123; 484720, 3645131; 484715, 
3645143; 484708, 3645157; 484701, 3645163; 484691, 3645171; 484683, 
3645177; 484669, 3645185; 484662, 3645189; 484651, 3645194; 484650, 
3645195; 484649, 3645196; 484647, 3645199; 484637, 3645201; 484622, 
3645206; 484621, 3645208; 484620, 3645208; 484620, 3645209; 484607, 
3645222; 484602, 3645230; 484598, 3645243; 484595, 3645261; 484592, 
3645283; 484589, 3645300; 484589, 3645300; 484588, 3645313; 484587, 
3645331; 484582, 3645350; 484578, 3645361; 484573, 3645370; 484564, 
3645376; 484555, 3645381; 484543, 3645385; 484531, 3645386; 484523, 
3645385; 484510, 3645382; 484502, 3645378; 484487, 3645371; 484478, 
3645370; 484465, 3645367; 484449, 3645365; 484440, 3645365; 484429, 
3645366; 484419, 3645373; 484412, 3645379; 484409, 3645388; 484406, 
3645399; 484406, 3645403; 484406, 3645404; 484406, 3645404; 484406, 
3645407; 484408, 3645413; 484413, 3645418; 484416, 3645426; 484423, 
3645430; 484427, 3645432; 484432, 3645436; 484440, 3645439; 484451, 
3645448; 484458, 3645454; 484465, 3645459; 484471, 3645465; 484476, 
3645472; 484479, 3645476; 484483, 3645490; 484483, 3645497; 484481, 
3645508; 484476, 3645519; 484470, 3645526; 484459, 3645530; 484447, 
3645535; 484422, 3645543; 484412, 3645546; 484406, 3645547; 484389, 
3645553; 484377, 3645559; 484367, 3645572; 484363, 3645578; 484362, 
3645585; 484363, 3645594; 484368, 3645599; 484368, 3645599; 484369, 
3645600; 484372, 3645605; 484377, 3645611; 484380, 3645626; 484382, 
3645635; 484386, 3645643; 484386, 3645644; 484387, 3645655; 484387, 
3645663; 484387, 3645664; 484385, 3645677; 484382, 3645688; 484371, 
3645700; 484363, 3645706; 484348, 3645713; 484335, 3645718; 484318, 
3645720; 484307, 3645718; 484297, 3645717; 484289, 3645713; 484283, 
3645711; 484274, 3645709; 484265, 3645712; 484255, 3645715; 484245, 
3645723; 484244, 3645723; 484237, 3645728; 484219, 3645734; 484209, 
3645732; 484197, 3645729; 484186, 3645724; 484177, 3645720; 484167, 
3645715; 484155, 3645708; 484143, 3645699; 484130, 3645694; 484115, 
3645691; 484104, 3645693; 484093, 3645702; 484085, 3645711; 484077, 
3645718; 484074, 3645730; 484076, 3645740; 484083, 3645747; 484098, 
3645753; 484110, 3645754; 484123, 3645755; 484135, 3645754; 484149, 
3645752; 484160, 3645755; 484167, 3645758; 484173, 3645761; 484178, 
3645765; 484182, 3645769; 484185, 3645774; 484191, 3645785; 484199, 
3645795; 484205, 3645802; 484212, 3645811; 484220, 3645818; 484229, 
3645823; 484238, 3645822; 484241, 3645821; 484244, 3645820; 484250, 
3645816; 484256, 3645810; 484258, 3645804; 484262, 3645801; 484264, 
3645799; 484267, 3645796; 484270, 3645794; 484277, 3645788; 484292, 
3645778; 484307, 3645773; 484325, 3645771; 484343, 3645773; 484353, 
3645775; 484362, 3645778; 484376, 3645781; 484384, 3645782; 484396, 
3645780; 484407, 3645778; 484417, 3645773; 484425, 3645770; 484442, 
3645764; 484445, 3645762; 484454, 3645753; 484460, 3645744; 484467, 
3645739; 484475, 3645734; 484485, 3645731; 484491, 3645730; 484499, 
3645727; 484504, 3645722; 484512, 3645718; 484518, 3645714; 484524, 
3645705; 484526, 3645693; 484527, 3645686; 484524, 3645666; 484521, 
3645660; 484515, 3645649; 484507, 3645632; 484505, 3645617; 484506, 
3645610; 484510, 3645602; 484511, 3645600; 484512, 3645600; 484512, 
3645600; 484512, 3645600; 484515, 3645597; 484521, 3645593; 484528, 
3645590; 484538, 3645589; 484548, 3645583; 484556, 3645574; 484566, 
3645563; 484571, 3645552; 484577, 3645534; 484581, 3645520; 484587, 
3645507; 484590, 3645496; 484594, 3645482; 484600, 3645459; 484604, 
3645442; 484610, 3645431; 484615, 3645423; 484621, 3645410; 484629, 
3645399; 484631, 3645397; 484631, 3645397; 484632, 3645396; 484637, 
3645392; 484643, 3645387; 484647, 3645382; 484647, 3645382; 484650, 
3645378; 484661, 3645369; 484674, 3645356; 484687, 3645347; 484700, 
3645335; 484704, 3645332; 484723, 3645320; 484737, 3645313; 484751, 
3645305; 484769, 3645292; 484789, 3645285; 484806, 3645275; 484810, 
3645274; 484817, 3645270; 484827, 3645268; 484835, 3645267; 484840, 
3645268; 484847, 3645269; 484853, 3645274; 484857, 3645279; 484860, 
3645287; 484865, 3645298; 484871, 3645306; 484879, 3645314; 484885, 
3645324; 484891, 3645331; 484899, 3645342; 484907, 3645352; 484916, 
3645357; 484924, 3645358; 484935, 3645357; 484945, 3645354; 484950, 
3645345; 484957, 3645338; 484965, 3645330; 484970, 3645324; 484976, 
3645317; 484985, 3645304; 484993, 3645296; 484996, 3645293; 485007, 
3645285; 485015, 3645282; 485021,

[[Page 715]]

3645281; 485031, 3645280; 485035, 3645280; 485044, 3645280; 485056, 
3645279; 485065, 3645279; 485076, 3645278; 485093, 3645273; 485113, 
3645266; 485126, 3645261; 485136, 3645258; 485144, 3645253; 485150, 
3645252; 485162, 3645242; 485175, 3645233; 485189, 3645219; 485202, 
3645210; 485214, 3645199; 485217, 3645198; 485219, 3645197; 485226, 
3645189; 485236, 3645180; 485246, 3645172; 485259, 3645165; 485274, 
3645158; 485286, 3645150; 485293, 3645147; 485304, 3645144; 485320, 
3645144; 485334, 3645145; 485351, 3645151; 485360, 3645156; 485367, 
3645162; 485369, 3645166; 485371, 3645171; 485372, 3645175; 485374, 
3645180; 485375, 3645189; 485374, 3645194; 485374, 3645205; 485376, 
3645221; 485379, 3645238; 485383, 3645255; 485388, 3645281; 485391, 
3645291; 485398, 3645304; 485405, 3645312; 485406, 3645312; 485390, 
3645351; 485385, 3645385; 485377, 3645442; 485356, 3645586; 485340, 
3645756; 485335, 3645772; 485318, 3645827; 485318, 3645827; 485310, 
3645851; 485309, 3645984; 485375, 3646007; 485375, 3646007; 485388, 
3646011; 485407, 3646016; 485485, 3646037; 485696, 3646058; 485786, 
3646083; 485789, 3646083; 485876, 3646098; 485954, 3646155; 486023, 
3646185; 486099, 3646175; 486160, 3646136; 486200, 3646117; 486222, 
3646106; 486223, 3646100; 486232, 3646056; 486215, 3645983; 486196, 
3645951; 486213, 3645920; 486218, 3645920; 486183, 3645872; 486189, 
3645811; 486190, 3645412; 485919, 3645438; 485918, 3645438; 485917, 
3645371; 486016, 3645368; 486080, 3645305; 486040, 3645234; 486027, 
3645244; 485982, 3645240; 485825, 3645240; 485751, 3645241; 485738, 
3645193; 485708, 3645150; 485701, 3645138; 485693, 3645136; 485681, 
3645130; 485679, 3645130; 485671, 3645127; 485656, 3645121; 485644, 
3645114; 485631, 3645108; 485623, 3645103; 485618, 3645100; 485615, 
3645098; 485599, 3645096; 485591, 3645094; 485586, 3645093; 485581, 
3645092; 485571, 3645092; 485561, 3645095; 485550, 3645099; 485533, 
3645100; 485533, 3645100; 485518, 3645103; 485504, 3645104; 485489, 
3645102; 485479, 3645100; 485470, 3645097; 485464, 3645092; 485461, 
3645088; 485451, 3645078; 485446, 3645072; 485445, 3645070; 485445, 
3645069; 485441, 3645060; 485440, 3645059; 485440, 3645058; 485440, 
3645052; 485385, 3645047; 485372, 3645046; 485369, 3645046; 485369, 
3645044; 485369, 3645023; 485365, 3645017; 485365, 3645016; 485364, 
3645016; 485364, 3645016; 485341, 3645027; 485326, 3645032; 485322, 
3645033.
    (ii) Subunit 4C. Land bounded by the following UTM NAD27 coordinates 
(E,N): 490395, 3629279; 490395, 3629231; 490396, 3629048; 490358, 
3628917; 490295, 3628700; 490293, 3628636; 490280, 3628634; 490111, 
3628613; 490000, 3628601; 489913, 3628573; 489739, 3628518; 489724, 
3628567; 489718, 3628588; 489705, 3628631; 489842, 3628715; 489893, 
3628747; 489985, 3628789; 490101, 3628795; 490203, 3628901; 490202, 
3628998; 490304, 3629099; 490306, 3629152; 490301, 3629236; 490299, 
3629280; 490342, 3629279; 490364, 3629279.
    (iii) Subunit 4D. Land bounded by the following UTM NAD27 
coordinates (E,N): 494410, 3622458; 494410, 3622458; 494415, 3622443; 
494429, 3622410; 494425, 3622393; 494409, 3622376; 494394, 3622372; 
494374, 3622371; 494341, 3622377; 494327, 3622361; 494325, 3622291; 
494300, 3622294; 494300, 3622300; 494250, 3622300; 494226, 3622303; 
494227, 3622331; 494234, 3622339; 494242, 3622347; 494240, 3622360; 
494228, 3622373; 494210, 3622384; 494200, 3622392; 494200, 3622400; 
494192, 3622400; 494186, 3622411; 494180, 3622431; 494100, 3622428; 
494102, 3622400; 494100, 3622400; 494100, 3622392; 494093, 3622379; 
494071, 3622370; 494044, 3622367; 494024, 3622370; 494006, 3622381; 
494000, 3622388; 494000, 3622400; 493991, 3622400; 493979, 3622418; 
493969, 3622437; 493839, 3622432; 493839, 3622463; 493839, 3622466; 
493839, 3622467; 493839, 3622468; 493867, 3622468; 494023, 3622470; 
494092, 3622471; 494099, 3622471; 494417, 3622476; 494417, 3622475; 
494417, 3622475. Land bounded by the following UTM NAD27 coordinates 
(E,N): 494403, 3622266; 494430, 3622258; 494439, 3622241; 494444, 
3622219; 494433, 3622200; 494400, 3622200; 494400, 3622136; 494399, 
3622134; 494389, 3622114; 494300, 3622115; 494300, 3622151; 494308, 
3622175; 494300, 3622214; 494300, 3622265.
    (iv) Subunit 4E. Land bounded by the following UTM NAD27 coordinates 
(E,N): 479564, 3643663; 479567, 3643643; 479569, 3643624; 479569, 
3643612; 479569, 3643604; 479565, 3643579; 479562, 3643558; 479558, 
3643541; 479555, 3643523; 479552, 3643502; 479550, 3643476; 479551, 
3643456; 479560, 3643436; 479574, 3643422; 479580, 3643414; 479580, 
3643414; 479590, 3643399; 479596, 3643380; 479600, 3643346; 479600, 
3643346; 479600, 3643346; 479596, 3643219; 479596, 3643164; 479605, 
3643123; 479608, 3643108; 479611, 3643082; 479612, 3643060; 479610, 
3643042; 479611, 3643020; 479606, 3643005; 479602, 3642994; 479597, 
3642980; 479594, 3642970; 479593, 3642966; 479590, 3642954; 479589, 
3642951; 479582, 3642943; 479575, 3642938; 479567, 3642936; 479565, 
3642937; 479564, 3642936; 479541, 3642932; 479537, 3642904; 479500, 
3642905; 479500, 3643000; 479400, 3643000; 479400, 3643055; 479400, 
3643061; 479400, 3643100; 479386, 3643100; 479377, 3643100; 479308, 
3643100; 479308, 3643103; 479252, 3643201; 479259, 3643248; 479330, 
3643265; 479376, 3643287; 479381, 3643289; 479403, 3643300; 479415, 
3643362; 479424, 3643410; 479428, 3643412; 479432, 3643426; 479443, 
3643437; 479443, 3643437; 479490, 3643487; 479502, 3643499; 479503, 
3643651; 479504, 3643652; 479511, 3643660; 479524, 3643673; 479548, 
3643698; 479553, 3643685; 479556, 3643684; 479559, 3643677; 479561, 
3643673.
    (v) Subunit 4F. Land bounded by the following UTM NAD27 coordinates 
(E,N): 479996, 3643593; 479997, 3643543; 479997, 3643513; 479913, 
3643503; 479900, 3643503; 479900, 3643577; 479900, 3643683; 479998, 
3643682.
    (vi) Subunit 4G. Land bounded by the following UTM NAD27 coordinates 
(E,N): 484021, 3642526; 484021, 3642515; 484019, 3642503; 484019, 
3642503; 484015, 3642495; 484008, 3642489; 484005, 3642487; 483999, 
3642483; 483988, 3642477; 483978, 3642473; 483969, 3642470; 483965, 
3642469; 483952, 3642466; 483943, 3642465; 483931, 3642465; 483921, 
3642466; 483909, 3642470; 483898, 3642470; 483891, 3642472; 483881, 
3642475; 483862, 3642479; 483847, 3642484; 483832, 3642490; 483823, 
3642494; 483823, 3642494; 483814, 3642497; 483795, 3642503; 483778, 
3642505; 483756, 3642504; 483742, 3642499; 483727, 3642491; 483712, 
3642484; 483696, 3642476; 483682, 3642473; 483669, 3642475; 483662, 
3642480; 483659, 3642490; 483659, 3642502; 483664, 3642514; 483682, 
3642533; 483690, 3642536; 483703, 3642538; 483721, 3642540; 483740, 
3642541; 483760, 3642541; 483777,

[[Page 716]]

3642538; 483788, 3642540; 483790, 3642540; 483805, 3642537; 483826, 
3642531; 483846, 3642527; 483865, 3642528; 483880, 3642532; 483882, 
3642532; 483898, 3642540; 483912, 3642548; 483927, 3642557; 483943, 
3642565; 483955, 3642571; 483968, 3642573; 483978, 3642570; 483988, 
3642566; 484001, 3642560; 484008, 3642553; 484016, 3642542; 484020, 
3642535.
    (vii) Subunit 4H. Land bounded by the following UTM NAD27 
coordinates (E,N): 483842, 3642261; 483853, 3642265; 483867, 3642269; 
483879, 3642272; 483892, 3642272; 483905, 3642274; 483912, 3642274; 
483917, 3642275; 483933, 3642275; 483948, 3642277; 483964, 3642279; 
483976, 3642280; 483993, 3642281; 484005, 3642281; 484013, 3642279; 
484023, 3642276; 484028, 3642270; 484030, 3642263; 484030, 3642255; 
484029, 3642248; 484025, 3642241; 484020, 3642233; 484014, 3642224; 
484002, 3642214; 483985, 3642202; 483972, 3642193; 483953, 3642177; 
483939, 3642167; 483933, 3642159; 483933, 3642146; 483939, 3642132; 
483948, 3642118; 483954, 3642108; 483955, 3642106; 483955, 3642105; 
483934, 3642094; 483873, 3642068; 483839, 3642059; 483835, 3642058; 
483834, 3642058; 483819, 3642055; 483809, 3642053; 483796, 3642052; 
483747, 3642050; 483677, 3642050; 483628, 3642051; 483601, 3642056; 
483596, 3642059; 483549, 3642079; 483543, 3642082; 483549, 3642088; 
483558, 3642093; 483570, 3642095; 483580, 3642095; 483589, 3642094; 
483597, 3642092; 483606, 3642090; 483607, 3642090; 483607, 3642090; 
483635, 3642088; 483682, 3642088; 483719, 3642094; 483754, 3642105; 
483783, 3642129; 483796, 3642147; 483797, 3642148; 483803, 3642165; 
483806, 3642181; 483810, 3642198; 483814, 3642219; 483818, 3642238; 
483823, 3642249; 483824, 3642251; 483832, 3642258; 483841, 3642261.
    (viii) Subunit 4I. Land bounded by the following UTM NAD27 
coordinates (E,N): 485100, 3641415; 485231, 3641411; 485237, 3641411; 
485445, 3641409; 485450, 3641409; 485450, 3641400; 485444, 3641310; 
485444, 3641310; 485438, 3641220; 485369, 3641214; 485290, 3641219; 
485258, 3641235; 485211, 3641234; 485143, 3641234; 485111, 3641262; 
485101, 3641270; 485069, 3641328; 485056, 3641340; 485041, 3641355; 
485022, 3641356; 485015, 3641375; 485004, 3641397; 485000, 3641419; 
485019, 3641424; 485035, 3641417; 485036, 3641417; 485039, 3641417.
    (ix) Subunit 4J. Land bounded by the following UTM NAD27 coordinates 
(E,N): 485600, 3639788; 485601, 3639788; 485612, 3639787; 485615, 
3639782; 485615, 3639781; 485609, 3639777; 485604, 3639774; 485600, 
3639771; 485595, 3639769; 485578, 3639758; 485558, 3639749; 485534, 
3639741; 485503, 3639730; 485490, 3639724; 485478, 3639714; 485466, 
3639709; 485445, 3639701; 485441, 3639700; 485417, 3639692; 485400, 
3639687; 485385, 3639682; 485363, 3639673; 485322, 3639658; 485308, 
3639654; 485285, 3639648; 485267, 3639644; 485247, 3639637; 485195, 
3639619; 485173, 3639614; 485170, 3639614; 485153, 3639615; 485139, 
3639618; 485125, 3639622; 485114, 3639632; 485106, 3639643; 485100, 
3639655; 485097, 3639660; 485095, 3639672; 485099, 3639680; 485100, 
3639681; 485102, 3639685; 485107, 3639693; 485112, 3639703; 485114, 
3639705; 485123, 3639716; 485131, 3639722; 485136, 3639730; 485134, 
3639744; 485125, 3639756; 485115, 3639770; 485104, 3639781; 485104, 
3639787; 485105, 3639787; 485104, 3639797; 485600, 3639797.
    (x) Subunit 4K. Land bounded by the following UTM NAD27 coordinates 
(E,N): 486900, 3633200; 486911, 3633200; 486913, 3633170; 486914, 
3633158; 486917, 3633125; 486934, 3632893; 486937, 3632893; 486941, 
3632892; 486943, 3632892; 486942, 3632891; 486940, 3632890; 486995, 
3632852; 486996, 3632831; 486996, 3632805; 486971, 3632804; 486964, 
3632804; 486964, 3632819; 486948, 3632822; 486941, 3632873; 486939, 
3632873; 486916, 3632876; 486915, 3632877; 486915, 3632877; 486909, 
3632877; 486903, 3632877; 486900, 3632877; 486895, 3632877; 486859, 
3632877; 486791, 3632884; 486731, 3632895; 486720, 3632900; 486693, 
3632912; 486682, 3632917; 486674, 3632921; 486668, 3632923; 486627, 
3632941; 486618, 3632944; 486596, 3632950; 486580, 3632937; 486579, 
3632937; 486400, 3632968; 486192, 3633005; 486136, 3633015; 486136, 
3633015; 486135, 3633139; 486200, 3633155; 486220, 3633160; 486220, 
3633161; 486331, 3633188; 486332, 3633188; 486332, 3633189; 486381, 
3633201; 486402, 3633206; 486482, 3633225; 486603, 3633253; 486689, 
3633272; 486690, 3633272; 486700, 3633274; 486771, 3633284; 486775, 
3633284; 486786, 3633284; 486900, 3633299.
    (xi) Subunit 4L. Land bounded by the following UTM NAD27 coordinates 
(E,N): 487340, 3633277; 487340, 3633277; 487361, 3633261; 487346, 
3633241; 487346, 3633241; 487346, 3633241; 487298, 3633197; 487280, 
3633208; 487280, 3633208; 487280, 3633209; 487268, 3633218; 487200, 
3633269; 487196, 3633272; 487160, 3633234; 487100, 3633264; 487073, 
3633277; 487065, 3633300; 487062, 3633309; 487053, 3633340; 487147, 
3633365; 487147, 3633366; 487152, 3633366; 487204, 3633380.
    (xii) Subunit 4M. Land bounded by the following UTM NAD27 
coordinates (E,N): 487669, 3631049; 487669, 3631036; 487667, 3630972; 
487660, 3630780; 487672, 3630772; 487816, 3630687; 487818, 3630675; 
487828, 3630556; 487829, 3630556; 488292, 3630338; 488292, 3630320; 
488294, 3630143; 488295, 3630029; 488260, 3630028; 488195, 3630027; 
488076, 3630043; 487879, 3630039; 487830, 3630081; 487805, 3630102; 
487714, 3630177; 487798, 3630210; 487829, 3630273; 487830, 3630336; 
487830, 3630388; 487516, 3630559; 487501, 3630568; 487340, 3630655; 
487335, 3630674; 487313, 3630766; 487384, 3630777; 487428, 3630783; 
487503, 3630920; 487508, 3631141; 487677, 3631228; 487672, 3631125; 
487670, 3631078.
    (xiii) Note: Map of Unit 4, Subunits 4A/B, 4G, 4H, 4I, and 4J (Map 
6) follows:

[[Page 717]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR12DE07.005

    (xiv) Note: Map of Unit 4, Subunits 4C, 4K, 4L and 4M (Map 7) 
follows:

[[Page 718]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR12DE07.006

    (xv) Note: Map of Unit 4, Subunit 4D (Map 8) follows:

[[Page 719]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR12DE07.007

    (xvi) Note: Map of Unit 4, Subunits 4E and 4F (Map 9) follows:

[[Page 720]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR12DE07.008

    (10) Unit 5: San Diego County, California. From USGS 1:24, 000 
quadrangle maps Imperial Beach, Jamul Mountains, Otay Mesa, and Otay 
Mountain.
    (i) Subunit 5A. Land bounded by the following UTM NAD27 coordinates 
(E,N): 506870, 3606405; 506878, 3606405; 506888, 3606405; 506887, 
3606404; 506881, 3606394; 506880, 3606392; 506879, 3606390; 506882, 
3606388; 506874, 3606348; 506856, 3606282; 506837, 3606194; 506847, 
3606090; 506880, 3606025; 506858, 3606009; 506843, 3605998; 506802, 
3605981; 506795, 3605978; 506749, 3605974; 506739,

[[Page 721]]

3605981; 506713, 3605998; 506692, 3606035; 506675, 3606077; 506660, 
3606147; 506656, 3606157; 506647, 3606180; 506644, 3606186; 506636, 
3606200; 506625, 3606220; 506593, 3606288; 506586, 3606303; 506555, 
3606368; 506541, 3606400; 506539, 3606405; 506528, 3606429; 506522, 
3606487; 506609, 3606517; 506609, 3606518; 506613, 3606522; 506620, 
3606526; 506631, 3606530; 506657, 3606530; 506685, 3606523; 506688, 
3606523; 506691, 3606524; 506702, 3606526; 506707, 3606529; 506719, 
3606537; 506724, 3606543; 506728, 3606550; 506732, 3606567; 506733, 
3606573; 506734, 3606582; 506753, 3606589; 506741, 3606620; 506742, 
3606626; 506744, 3606633; 506745, 3606642; 506748, 3606650; 506754, 
3606656; 506760, 3606661; 506766, 3606664; 506773, 3606667; 506780, 
3606666; 506788, 3606665; 506793, 3606660; 506801, 3606654; 506806, 
3606648; 506813, 3606638; 506819, 3606631; 506827, 3606625; 506837, 
3606621; 506844, 3606619; 506846, 3606618; 506853, 3606616; 506857, 
3606614; 506858, 3606461; 506858, 3606449; 506858, 3606449; 506858, 
3606436; 506858, 3606427; 506858, 3606405; 506858, 3606405. Excluding 
land bounded by the following UTM NAD27 coordinates (E,N): 506704, 
3606405; 506655, 3606405; 506655, 3606405; 506655, 3606400; 506656, 
3606300; 506656, 3606200; 506656, 3606186; 506656, 3606186; 506706, 
3606186; 506831, 3606187; 506831, 3606252; 506847, 3606275; 506858, 
3606290; 506858, 3606290; 506858, 3606372; 506858, 3606392; 506858, 
3606405. Land bounded by the following UTM NAD27 coordinates (E,N): 
505791, 3606031; 505841, 3605966; 505884, 3605895; 505914, 3605830; 
505935, 3605785; 505950, 3605753; 505951, 3605750; 505964, 3605715; 
505973, 3605708; 505983, 3605665; 505863, 3605614; 505847, 3605635; 
505834, 3605651; 505825, 3605658; 505797, 3605677; 505774, 3605686; 
505774, 3605767; 505774, 3605767; 505774, 3605807; 505774, 3606046; 
505774, 3606046.
    (ii) Subunit 5B. Land bounded by the following UTM NAD27 coordinates 
(E,N): 504332, 3605189; 504347, 3605165; 504372, 3605163; 504405, 
3605173; 504429, 3605160; 504432, 3605139; 504454, 3605119; 504474, 
3605134; 504505, 3605127; 504533, 3605097; 504559, 3605077; 504597, 
3605074; 504629, 3605076; 504630, 3604936; 504630, 3604918; 504629, 
3604782; 504627, 3604782; 504627, 3604746; 504626, 3604744; 504627, 
3604742; 504626, 3604631; 504603, 3604604; 504587, 3604590; 504573, 
3604589; 503692, 3604599; 503641, 3604600; 503620, 3604621; 503508, 
3604831; 503453, 3604971; 503470, 3604979; 503500, 3604973; 503517, 
3604970; 503525, 3604977; 503534, 3604982; 503556, 3604994; 503626, 
3604992; 503626, 3605008; 503626, 3605032; 503628, 3605033; 503628, 
3605033; 503705, 3605099; 503742, 3605171; 503743, 3605172; 503754, 
3605194. Land bounded by the following UTM NAD27 coordinates (E,N): 
503241, 3604951; 503260, 3604945; 503260, 3604964; 503275, 3604981; 
503314, 3604988; 503319, 3604989; 503389, 3604822; 503508, 3604612; 
503537, 3604561; 503567, 3604506; 503620, 3604411; 503620, 3604400; 
503619, 3604330; 503617, 3604074; 503617, 3603990; 503609, 3603990; 
503569, 3603990; 503464, 3603991; 502923, 3603996; 502813, 3603997; 
502813, 3603997; 502800, 3604601; 502800, 3604620; 502799, 3604653; 
502800, 3604654; 502820, 3604686; 502830, 3604730; 502835, 3604781; 
502836, 3604804; 502994, 3604803; 502991, 3604794; 503003, 3604742; 
503041, 3604705; 503064, 3604692; 503074, 3604694; 503104, 3604726; 
503111, 3604741; 503137, 3604801; 503208, 3604801; 503208, 3604953.
    (iii) Subunit 5C. Land bounded by the following UTM NAD27 
coordinates (E,N): 505948, 3603807; 505970, 3603764; 505991, 3603750; 
506009, 3603736; 505983, 3603699; 505954, 3603652; 505908, 3603585; 
505841, 3603550; 505808, 3603538; 505522, 3603537; 505458, 3603536; 
505450, 3603546; 505435, 3603553; 505408, 3603570; 505401, 3603574; 
505369, 3603601; 505358, 3603624; 505365, 3603650; 505375, 3603667; 
505374, 3603667; 505390, 3603794; 505391, 3603794; 505416, 3603798; 
505467, 3603821; 505484, 3603845; 505500, 3603876; 505487, 3603903; 
505566, 3604008; 505566, 3604011; 505568, 3604010; 505578, 3604030; 
505600, 3604057; 505623, 3604065; 505623, 3604065; 505622, 3604070; 
505617, 3604088; 505625, 3604130; 505632, 3604141; 505633, 3604141; 
505633, 3604141; 505641, 3604152; 505675, 3604184; 505720, 3604211; 
505732, 3604218; 505732, 3604218; 505732, 3604218; 505785, 3604243; 
505820, 3604252; 505844, 3604235; 505902, 3604197; 505948, 3604161; 
505958, 3604137; 505958, 3604117; 505946, 3604091; 505926, 3604057; 
505920, 3604041; 505929, 3604037; 505942, 3604028; 505949, 3604021; 
505955, 3604011; 505961, 3603997; 505959, 3603982; 505951, 3603973; 
505948, 3603966; 505942, 3603961; 505929, 3603951; 505914, 3603946; 
505912, 3603945; 505912, 3603928; 505926, 3603866; 505936, 3603840.
    (iv) Subunit 5D. Land bounded by the following UTM NAD27 coordinates 
(E,N): 509019, 3602417; 509019, 3602284; 509015, 3602132; 509048, 
3602002; 509135, 3601973; 509203, 3602071; 509235, 3602133; 509236, 
3602136; 509268, 3602255; 509270, 3602335; 509272, 3602407; 509308, 
3602461; 509348, 3602490; 509438, 3602540; 509604, 3602573; 509727, 
3602641; 509821, 3602670; 509926, 3602613; 510009, 3602537; 510009, 
3602450; 509976, 3602327; 509915, 3602212; 509832, 3602096; 509727, 
3601865; 509712, 3601746; 509692, 3601743; 509659, 3601737; 509628, 
3601732; 509604, 3601726; 509576, 3601713; 509533, 3601697; 509504, 
3601687; 509419, 3601669; 509357, 3601654; 509354, 3601654; 509315, 
3601643; 509277, 3601623; 509010, 3601592; 508505, 3601541; 508494, 
3601540; 508266, 3601517; 508266, 3601517; 508266, 3601517; 508265, 
3601517; 507688, 3601459; 507688, 3601459; 507534, 3601443; 507508, 
3601733; 507507, 3601736; 507509, 3601735; 507571, 3601753; 507517, 
3601850; 507484, 3601937; 507560, 3601995; 507589, 3602056; 507582, 
3602147; 507614, 3602241; 507654, 3602208; 507690, 3602147; 507719, 
3602172; 507730, 3602248; 507737, 3602331; 507748, 3602410; 507787, 
3602450; 507813, 3602403; 507860, 3602320; 507921, 3602190; 507983, 
3602049; 508003, 3602033; 508113, 3601944; 508141, 3601999; 508161, 
3602070; 508181, 3602147; 508217, 3602168; 508243, 3602118; 508279, 
3602013; 508394, 3601901; 508524, 3601901; 508554, 3601918; 508651, 
3601973; 508712, 3602061; 508719, 3602071; 508719, 3602165; 508719, 
3602255; 508745, 3602302; 508795, 3602414; 508819, 3602464; 508839, 
3602504; 508867, 3602504; 508887, 3602499; 508907, 3602494; 508936, 
3602486; 509019, 3602425.
    (v) Subunit 5F. Land bounded by the following UTM NAD27 coordinates 
(E,N): 500168, 3603213; 500175, 3603212; 500176, 3603212; 500176, 
3603205; 500175, 3603200; 500174, 3603154; 500170, 3603022; 500168, 
3602973; 500167, 3602921; 500166, 3602890; 500165, 3602890; 500150, 
3602901; 500145,

[[Page 722]]

3602889; 500144, 3602888; 500084, 3602881; 500029, 3602874; 500047, 
3602855; 500052, 3602849; 500042, 3602844; 500028, 3602840; 500014, 
3602839; 500000, 3602840; 499992, 3602842; 499987, 3602844; 499974, 
3602850; 499969, 3602853; 499961, 3602857; 499950, 3602865; 499940, 
3602875; 499933, 3602885; 499942, 3602885; 499947, 3602885; 499952, 
3602885; 499956, 3602890; 499956, 3602971; 499956, 3602974; 499956, 
3602992; 499956, 3603141; 499964, 3603142; 500014, 3603147; 500048, 
3603151; 500046, 3603200; 500046, 3603215; 500046, 3603220; 500164, 
3603213. Land bounded by the following UTM NAD27 coordinates (E,N): 
499760, 3602958; 499763, 3602950; 499763, 3602887; 499792, 3602887; 
499808, 3602860; 499825, 3602835; 499861, 3602824; 499904, 3602816; 
499951, 3602808; 499986, 3602804; 500000, 3602800; 500003, 3602796; 
500004, 3602796; 500018, 3602793; 500030, 3602787; 500042, 3602779; 
500052, 3602769; 500060, 3602758; 500066, 3602745; 500069, 3602731; 
500069, 3602728; 500070, 3602718; 500070, 3602716; 500076, 3602703; 
500080, 3602689; 500081, 3602676; 500080, 3602662; 500076, 3602648; 
500070, 3602636; 500062, 3602624; 500052, 3602614; 500041, 3602606; 
500028, 3602600; 500026, 3602600; 500025, 3602597; 500019, 3602585; 
500011, 3602573; 500001, 3602564; 500000, 3602563; 499990, 3602556; 
499977, 3602550; 499965, 3602546; 499963, 3602527; 499972, 3602500; 
499975, 3602477; 499969, 3602456; 499952, 3602435; 499929, 3602421; 
499913, 3602434; 499909, 3602430; 499897, 3602422; 499895, 3602421; 
499891, 3602411; 499891, 3602373; 499888, 3602336; 499887, 3602329; 
499876, 3602304; 499862, 3602296; 499828, 3602282; 499813, 3602276; 
499788, 3602265; 499750, 3602262; 499728, 3602264; 499717, 3602275; 
499710, 3602283; 499706, 3602313; 499684, 3602337; 499685, 3602340; 
499698, 3602361; 499703, 3602395; 499702, 3602396; 499696, 3602408; 
499695, 3602410; 499692, 3602422; 499692, 3602436; 499692, 3602444; 
499691, 3602448; 499675, 3602476; 499694, 3602512; 499724, 3602552; 
499748, 3602585; 499763, 3602614; 499765, 3602639; 499763, 3602641; 
499745, 3602636; 499706, 3602616; 499662, 3602599; 499641, 3602608; 
499629, 3602639; 499623, 3602686; 499599, 3602723; 499595, 3602715; 
499598, 3602705; 499600, 3602690; 499598, 3602677; 499594, 3602663; 
499592, 3602659; 499591, 3602656; 499588, 3602651; 499580, 3602639; 
499577, 3602636; 499577, 3602589; 499586, 3602524; 499588, 3602463; 
499563, 3602456; 499538, 3602479; 499502, 3602507; 499483, 3602555; 
499471, 3602590; 499437, 3602611; 499431, 3602650; 499429, 3602688; 
499407, 3602712; 499395, 3602747; 499389, 3602793; 499385, 3602832; 
499373, 3602870; 499351, 3602865; 499347, 3602855; 499328, 3602823; 
499318, 3602784; 499302, 3602767; 499276, 3602768; 499254, 3602783; 
499225, 3602803; 499224, 3602803; 499224, 3602802; 499232, 3602791; 
499238, 3602778; 499242, 3602764; 499247, 3602766; 499260, 3602767; 
499267, 3602766; 499274, 3602766; 499278, 3602765; 499281, 3602764; 
499288, 3602763; 499292, 3602761; 499294, 3602761; 499306, 3602759; 
499318, 3602753; 499330, 3602745; 499340, 3602735; 499348, 3602724; 
499353, 3602711; 499357, 3602698; 499358, 3602684; 499358, 3602681; 
499358, 3602680; 499360, 3602666; 499358, 3602652; 499355, 3602638; 
499350, 3602629; 499361, 3602628; 499374, 3602624; 499387, 3602618; 
499398, 3602610; 499407, 3602602; 499409, 3602601; 499416, 3602589; 
499422, 3602576; 499425, 3602567; 499426, 3602563; 499427, 3602549; 
499426, 3602535; 499422, 3602522; 499416, 3602509; 499411, 3602501; 
499417, 3602494; 499425, 3602483; 499428, 3602477; 499431, 3602474; 
499441, 3602465; 499449, 3602453; 499455, 3602440; 499458, 3602431; 
499459, 3602427; 499460, 3602413; 499459, 3602399; 499455, 3602386; 
499449, 3602373; 499441, 3602362; 499431, 3602352; 499424, 3602347; 
499425, 3602346; 499460, 3602319; 499485, 3602289; 499501, 3602264; 
499532, 3602246; 499549, 3602226; 499553, 3602205; 499550, 3602183; 
499555, 3602176; 499555, 3602176; 499559, 3602169; 499561, 3602164; 
499565, 3602150; 499566, 3602136; 499565, 3602122; 499561, 3602109; 
499558, 3602104; 499555, 3602097; 499547, 3602085; 499537, 3602075; 
499526, 3602067; 499513, 3602061; 499500, 3602057; 499486, 3602056; 
499472, 3602057; 499459, 3602061; 499446, 3602067; 499434, 3602075; 
499429, 3602080; 499422, 3602079; 499408, 3602081; 499395, 3602084; 
499382, 3602090; 499371, 3602098; 499361, 3602108; 499353, 3602119; 
499347, 3602132; 499346, 3602136; 499343, 3602145; 499342, 3602159; 
499343, 3602170; 499343, 3602173; 499347, 3602187; 499353, 3602199; 
499360, 3602210; 499359, 3602212; 499351, 3602245; 499356, 3602271; 
499347, 3602291; 499323, 3602295; 499298, 3602298; 499278, 3602309; 
499269, 3602305; 499256, 3602301; 499242, 3602300; 499228, 3602301; 
499215, 3602305; 499202, 3602311; 499190, 3602319; 499181, 3602329; 
499176, 3602335; 499184, 3602299; 499187, 3602288; 499176, 3602307; 
499174, 3602310; 499156, 3602340; 499154, 3602344; 499137, 3602396; 
499134, 3602404; 499133, 3602407; 499113, 3602496; 499110, 3602510; 
499107, 3602523; 499106, 3602527; 499105, 3602531; 499082, 3602625; 
499077, 3602646; 499075, 3602652; 499075, 3602668; 499072, 3602728; 
499072, 3602735; 499071, 3602748; 499075, 3602763; 499088, 3602809; 
499090, 3602814; 499096, 3602835; 499115, 3602853; 499119, 3602857; 
499137, 3602874; 499163, 3602885; 499198, 3602900; 499200, 3602901; 
499215, 3602907; 499243, 3602919; 499245, 3602920; 499251, 3602920; 
499308, 3602924; 499316, 3602925; 499327, 3602922; 499373, 3602911; 
499437, 3602860; 499440, 3602857; 499457, 3602838; 499463, 3602838; 
499558, 3602840; 499558, 3602990; 499661, 3602989; 499737, 3602987. Land 
bounded by the following UTM NAD27 coordinates (E,N): 498628, 3602069; 
498638, 3602063; 498692, 3602024; 498727, 3601981; 498745, 3601957; 
498752, 3601948; 498759, 3601937; 498766, 3601929; 498767, 3601929; 
498780, 3601925; 498793, 3601919; 498804, 3601911; 498814, 3601901; 
498822, 3601890; 498828, 3601877; 498832, 3601864; 498832, 3601863; 
498832, 3601855; 498868, 3601832; 498873, 3601829; 498923, 3601788; 
498966, 3601760; 498973, 3601760; 499043, 3601753; 499149, 3601715; 
499155, 3601713; 499221, 3601690; 499266, 3601661; 499266, 3601661; 
499307, 3601634; 499343, 3601618; 499343, 3601618; 499325, 3601653; 
499324, 3601659; 499324, 3601659; 499320, 3601682; 499346, 3601698; 
499389, 3601697; 499424, 3601689; 499449, 3601704; 499483, 3601715; 
499517, 3601715; 499532, 3601732; 499547, 3601770; 499559, 3601784; 
499585, 3601800; 499608, 3601782; 499633, 3601747; 499659, 3601712; 
499714, 3601684; 499763, 3601668; 499792, 3601630; 499824, 3601610; 
499838, 3601603; 499848, 3601619; 499896, 3601624; 499940, 3601606; 
499958, 3601597; 499984, 3601634; 500021, 3601684; 500044, 3601716; 
500045, 3601719; 500045, 3601719; 500089, 3601730; 500190, 3601721; 
500242, 3601714; 500245, 3601710; 500249, 3601711; 500249,

[[Page 723]]

3601709; 500267, 3601635; 500267, 3601634; 500274, 3601604; 500294, 
3601588; 500303, 3601557; 500308, 3601530; 500323, 3601507; 500342, 
3601488; 500340, 3601466; 500334, 3601439; 500341, 3601411; 500350, 
3601380; 500375, 3601350; 500380, 3601319; 500372, 3601300; 500372, 
3601299; 500369, 3601300; 500352, 3601304; 500322, 3601311; 500298, 
3601309; 500279, 3601300; 500274, 3601298; 500267, 3601300; 500248, 
3601308; 500211, 3601326; 500184, 3601327; 500163, 3601321; 500163, 
3601320; 500154, 3601304; 500152, 3601300; 500149, 3601296; 500133, 
3601264; 500120, 3601254; 500108, 3601231; 500107, 3601230; 500107, 
3601229; 500104, 3601204; 500064, 3601189; 500030, 3601181; 500003, 
3601183; 499982, 3601184; 499924, 3601177; 499905, 3601168; 499878, 
3601149; 499852, 3601133; 499822, 3601134; 499757, 3601145; 499711, 
3601147; 499651, 3601146; 499590, 3601148; 499557, 3601151; 499556, 
3601151; 499540, 3601152; 499512, 3601153; 499500, 3601152; 499471, 
3601148; 499429, 3601140; 499380, 3601146; 499345, 3601135; 499317, 
3601110; 499269, 3601093; 499249, 3601100; 499239, 3601146; 499227, 
3601146; 499194, 3601145; 499158, 3601143; 499137, 3601133; 499129, 
3601107; 499124, 3601078; 499098, 3601074; 499074, 3601079; 499061, 
3601055; 499065, 3601024; 499064, 3600987; 499049, 3600935; 499018, 
3600891; 498982, 3600880; 498970, 3600869; 498914, 3600841; 498851, 
3600818; 498757, 3600792; 498667, 3600774; 498571, 3600766; 498528, 
3600778; 498484, 3600804; 498435, 3600849; 498407, 3600889; 498376, 
3600936; 498349, 3600957; 498309, 3600976; 498270, 3600995; 498249, 
3600977; 498217, 3600951; 498210, 3600920; 498202, 3600891; 498203, 
3600889; 498204, 3600704; 498208, 3600700; 498208, 3600700; 498208, 
3600699; 498221, 3600669; 498234, 3600637; 498233, 3600631; 497938, 
3600602; 497938, 3600539; 497930, 3600538; 497768, 3600522; 497762, 
3600531; 497744, 3600568; 497727, 3600599; 497726, 3600600; 497711, 
3600627; 497687, 3600650; 497647, 3600666; 497616, 3600687; 497606, 
3600714; 497602, 3600738; 497622, 3600756; 497656, 3600760; 497697, 
3600761; 497738, 3600776; 497761, 3600802; 497790, 3600834; 497827, 
3600868; 497842, 3600880; 497864, 3600920; 497917, 3601050; 497926, 
3601090; 497924, 3601089; 497922, 3601094; 497923, 3601094; 497923, 
3601099; 497923, 3601136; 497924, 3601169; 497924, 3601201; 497924, 
3601264; 497924, 3601265; 497925, 3601391; 497925, 3601442; 497926, 
3601682; 497926, 3601686; 497940, 3601685; 497983, 3601684; 498048, 
3601683; 498275, 3601679; 498282, 3601678; 498285, 3601725; 498295, 
3601889; 498304, 3602048; 498306, 3602073; 498614, 3602069; 498615, 
3602069.
    (vi) Subunit 5G. Land bounded by the following UTM NAD27 coordinates 
(E,N): 499163, 3604679; 499168, 3604677; 499169, 3604676; 499169, 
3604671; 499174, 3604638; 499175, 3604631; 499177, 3604618; 499175, 
3604601; 499173, 3604575; 499176, 3604567; 499190, 3604533; 499200, 
3604524; 499227, 3604500; 499242, 3604487; 499250, 3604456; 499251, 
3604452; 499286, 3604445; 499299, 3604469; 499543, 3604452; 499556, 
3604416; 499565, 3604389; 499629, 3604368; 499699, 3604386; 499700, 
3604385; 499744, 3604322; 499744, 3604300; 499745, 3604266; 499747, 
3604175; 499748, 3604122; 499748, 3604122; 499749, 3604100; 499750, 
3604061; 499739, 3604057; 499700, 3604042; 499648, 3604021; 499618, 
3604022; 499549, 3604024; 499533, 3604008; 499525, 3604000; 499500, 
3603974; 499440, 3603913; 499439, 3603900; 499431, 3603830; 499429, 
3603817; 499404, 3603839; 499398, 3603849; 499369, 3603891; 499356, 
3603915; 499337, 3603927; 499328, 3603924; 499305, 3603918; 499263, 
3603904; 499237, 3603929; 499238, 3603972; 499247, 3604004; 499245, 
3604008; 499242, 3604014; 499239, 3604020; 499237, 3604027; 499236, 
3604034; 499235, 3604041; 499235, 3604048; 499236, 3604055; 499237, 
3604058; 499228, 3604075; 499190, 3604094; 499200, 3604109; 499218, 
3604140; 499258, 3604151; 499259, 3604151; 499270, 3604156; 499292, 
3604156; 499325, 3604156; 499377, 3604142; 499427, 3604118; 499460, 
3604091; 499487, 3604114; 499517, 3604142; 499557, 3604141; 499570, 
3604141; 499593, 3604115; 499622, 3604098; 499646, 3604112; 499648, 
3604135; 499644, 3604167; 499640, 3604175; 499620, 3604210; 499579, 
3604252; 499575, 3604255; 499557, 3604274; 499551, 3604279; 499533, 
3604297; 499474, 3604333; 499452, 3604342; 499412, 3604360; 499376, 
3604370; 499328, 3604385; 499258, 3604401; 499240, 3604407; 499213, 
3604414; 499162, 3604442; 499150, 3604454; 499138, 3604466; 499124, 
3604500; 499124, 3604501; 499123, 3604508; 499118, 3604536; 499111, 
3604581; 499110, 3604584; 499109, 3604607; 499108, 3604623; 499108, 
3604623; 499107, 3604623; 499106, 3604640; 499103, 3604677; 499103, 
3604682; 499120, 3604694; 499120, 3604695; 499121, 3604695. Land bounded 
by the following UTM NAD27 coordinates (E,N): 498823, 3603831; 498873, 
3603865; 498928, 3603903; 498930, 3603895; 498938, 3603850; 498912, 
3603794; 498870, 3603746; 498833, 3603700; 498795, 3603670; 498762, 
3603651; 498719, 3603629; 498670, 3603600; 498663, 3603579; 498678, 
3603566; 498669, 3603545; 498651, 3603535; 498622, 3603534; 498625, 
3603525; 498634, 3603530; 498648, 3603533; 498661, 3603535; 498675, 
3603533; 498689, 3603530; 498701, 3603524; 498713, 3603516; 498723, 
3603506; 498731, 3603495; 498737, 3603482; 498740, 3603468; 498741, 
3603463; 498747, 3603476; 498755, 3603484; 498773, 3603507; 498810, 
3603545; 498859, 3603574; 498901, 3603605; 498943, 3603631; 498976, 
3603632; 499011, 3603645; 499027, 3603658; 499026, 3603657; 499024, 
3603656; 499010, 3603652; 498996, 3603651; 498983, 3603652; 498969, 
3603656; 498960, 3603660; 498956, 3603662; 498945, 3603670; 498935, 
3603680; 498927, 3603691; 498921, 3603704; 498918, 3603717; 498916, 
3603731; 498916, 3603732; 498918, 3603745; 498921, 3603759; 498927, 
3603771; 498935, 3603783; 498945, 3603792; 498956, 3603800; 498969, 
3603806; 498983, 3603810; 498988, 3603810; 498996, 3603811; 499010, 
3603810; 499024, 3603806; 499036, 3603800; 499048, 3603792; 499058, 
3603783; 499066, 3603771; 499072, 3603759; 499075, 3603745; 499076, 
3603731; 499075, 3603717; 499072, 3603704; 499066, 3603691; 499058, 
3603680; 499056, 3603679; 499082, 3603687; 499082, 3603687; 499088, 
3603650; 499088, 3603612; 499094, 3603574; 499107, 3603535; 499120, 
3603511; 499139, 3603492; 499127, 3603448; 499102, 3603430; 499075, 
3603416; 499056, 3603387; 499061, 3603365; 499101, 3603365; 499143, 
3603379; 499174, 3603384; 499205, 3603385; 499211, 3603370; 499223, 
3603341; 499229, 3603313; 499237, 3603306; 499241, 3603296; 499242, 
3603293; 499246, 3603283; 499249, 3603265; 499248, 3603257; 499248, 
3603254; 499247, 3603250; 499247, 3603249; 499244, 3603249; 499218, 
3603250; 499214, 3603250; 499024, 3603257; 499021, 3603257; 499021, 
3603258; 499023, 3603301; 499025, 3603366; 499026, 3603409; 499067, 
3603488; 499062, 3603580; 499036, 3603611;

[[Page 724]]

499033, 3603608; 499030, 3603605; 498978, 3603558; 498955, 3603537; 
498939, 3603507; 498935, 3603498; 498891, 3603486; 498787, 3603476; 
498783, 3603476; 498784, 3603469; 498796, 3603264; 498780, 3603265; 
498746, 3603266; 498638, 3603269; 498631, 3603269; 498450, 3603275; 
498389, 3603277; 498348, 3603279; 498341, 3603279; 498341, 3603310; 
498341, 3603354; 498340, 3603460; 498340, 3603493; 498339, 3603675; 
498466, 3603673; 498564, 3603672; 498745, 3603667; 498786, 3603788; 
498788, 3603795; 498793, 3603800; 498800, 3603808; 498818, 3603827. Land 
bounded by the following UTM NAD27 coordinates (E,N): 499520, 3603710; 
499537, 3603690; 499502, 3603686; 499500, 3603686; 499465, 3603682; 
499465, 3603676; 499467, 3603527; 499468, 3603437; 499470, 3603335; 
499470, 3603331; 499475, 3603330; 499515, 3603321; 499527, 3603292; 
499528, 3603290; 499542, 3603257; 499546, 3603249; 499537, 3603249; 
499468, 3603247; 499445, 3603247; 499443, 3603247; 499367, 3603246; 
499358, 3603246; 499295, 3603248; 499267, 3603249; 499267, 3603249; 
499267, 3603250; 499268, 3603254; 499276, 3603292; 499277, 3603296; 
499285, 3603334; 499289, 3603354; 499297, 3603389; 499309, 3603417; 
499330, 3603436; 499349, 3603447; 499351, 3603462; 499353, 3603474; 
499347, 3603487; 499328, 3603492; 499281, 3603507; 499260, 3603569; 
499265, 3603615; 499261, 3603624; 499258, 3603652; 499257, 3603663; 
499255, 3603681; 499265, 3603698; 499283, 3603709; 499294, 3603710; 
499300, 3603714; 499312, 3603709; 499313, 3603709; 499328, 3603706; 
499332, 3603704; 499348, 3603695; 499382, 3603690; 499383, 3603690; 
499430, 3603695; 499486, 3603704; 499497, 3603706.
    (vii) Subunit 5H. Land bounded by the following UTM NAD27 
coordinates (E,N): 507788, 3609712; 507858, 3609742; 507950, 3609771; 
508044, 3609778; 508178, 3609744; 508218, 3609710; 508262, 3609710; 
508280, 3609740; 508330, 3609757; 508397, 3609740; 508403, 3609790; 
508604, 3609787; 508699, 3609699; 508787, 3609559; 508746, 3609407; 
508557, 3609308; 508392, 3609308; 508090, 3609118; 507643, 3609056; 
507269, 3609054; 507257, 3609091; 507269, 3609148; 507269, 3609191; 
507290, 3609251; 507329, 3609280; 507389, 3609280; 507367, 3609319; 
507310, 3609369; 507310, 3609419; 507338, 3609448; 507401, 3609470; 
507382, 3609518; 507394, 3609547; 507391, 3609636; 507388, 3609713.
    (viii) Subunit 5I. Land bounded by the following UTM NAD27 
coordinates (E,N): 522790, 3603588; 522715, 3603505; 522712, 3603500; 
522700, 3603500; 522700, 3603479; 522699, 3603478; 522663, 3603371; 
522692, 3603132; 522639, 3603116; 522566, 3603131; 522529, 3603165; 
522517, 3603225; 522514, 3603355; 522496, 3603446; 522488, 3603478; 
522497, 3603494; 522563, 3603563; 522641, 3603627; 522720, 3603689; 
522759, 3603708; 522791, 3603699; 522800, 3603685; 522800, 3603617.
    (ix) Note: Map of Unit 5, Subunits 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, and 5H (Map 10) 
follows:

[[Page 725]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR12DE07.009

    (x) Note: Map of Unit 5, Subunits 5F and 5G (Map 11) follows:

[[Page 726]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR12DE07.010

    (xi) Note: Map of Unit 5, Subunit 5I (Map 12) follows:

[[Page 727]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR12DE07.011

             Vernal Pool Fairy Shrimp (Branchinecta lynchi)

    (1) Critical habitat units are depicted for Jackson County, Oregon, 
and Alameda, Amador, Butte, Contra Costa, Fresno, Kings, Madera, 
Mariposa, Merced, Monterey, Napa, Placer, Sacramento, San Benito, San 
Joaquin, San Luis Obispo, Santa Barbara, Shasta, Solano, Stanislaus, 
Tehama, Tulare, Ventura, and Yuba Counties, California on the map below:

[[Page 728]]

    (2) The primary constituent elements of critical habitat for vernal 
pool fairy shrimp (Branchinecta lynchi) are the habitat components that 
provide:
    (i) Topographic features characterized by mounds and swales and 
depressions within a matrix of surrounding uplands that result in 
complexes of continuously, or intermittently, flowing surface water in 
the swales connecting the pools described below in paragraph (2)(ii), 
providing for dispersal and promoting hydroperiods of adequate length in 
the pools;
    (ii) Depressional features including isolated vernal pools with 
underlying restrictive soil layers that become inundated during winter 
rains and that continuously hold water for a minimum of 18 days, in all 
but the driest years; thereby providing adequate water for incubation, 
maturation, and reproduction. As these features are inundated on a 
seasonal basis, they do not promote the development of obligate wetland 
vegetation habitats typical of permanently flooded emergent wetlands;
    (iii) Sources of food, expected to be detritus occurring in the 
pools, contributed by overland flow from the pools' watershed, or the 
results of biological processes within the pools themselves, such as 
single-celled bacteria, algae, and dead organic matter, to provide for 
feeding; and
    (iv) Structure within the pools described above in paragraph 
(3)(ii), consisting of organic and inorganic materials, such as living 
and dead plants from plant species adapted to seasonally inundated 
environments, rocks, and other inorganic debris that may be washed, 
blown, or otherwise transported into the pools, that provide shelter.
    (3) Existing manmade features and structures, such as buildings, 
roads, railroads, airports, runways, other paved areas, lawns, and other 
urban landscaped areas do not contain one or more of the primary 
constituent elements. Federal actions limited to those areas, therefore, 
would not trigger a consultation under section 7 of the Act unless they 
may affect the species and/or primary constituent elements in adjacent 
critical habitat.
    (4) Unit 1: Jackson County, Oregon
    (i) Unit 1A: Jackson County, Oregon. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Shady Grove. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 
83 coordinates (E,N): 514300, 4710800; 514300, 4710300; 514100, 4710300; 
514100, 4709900; 513900, 4709900; 513900, 4709700; 513600, 4709700; 
513600, 4709800; 513500, 4709800; 513500, 4710000; 513700, 4710000; 
513700, 4710300; 513200, 4710300; 513200, 4710600; 513100, 4710600; 
513100, 4710800; returning to 514300, 4710800;
    (ii) Unit 1B: Jackson County, Oregon. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Shady Grove. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 
83 coordinates (E,N): 514100, 4707500; 514100, 4707300; 514000, 4707300; 
514000, 4707200; 513900, 4707200; 513900, 4707000; 513600, 4707000; 
513600, 4707300; 513700, 4707300; 513700, 4707400; 513800, 4707400; 
513800, 4707500; 513400, 4707500; 513400, 4708000; 514700, 4708000; 
514700, 4707700; 514600, 4707700; 514600, 4707600; 514200, 4707600; 
514200, 4707500; returning to 514100, 4707500;
    (iii) Unit 1C: Jackson County, Oregon. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Shady Grove. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 
83 coordinates (E,N): 511800, 4707800; 511800, 4707300; 511900, 4707300; 
511900, 4706800; 512000, 4706800; 512000, 4706600; 511800, 4706600; 
511800, 4706700; 511300, 4706700; 511300, 4706800; 511200, 4706800; 
511200, 4706900; 511100, 4706900; 511100, 4707000; 511000, 4707000; 
511000, 4707200; 511100, 4707200; 511100, 4707300; 511200, 4707300; 
511200, 4707400; 511100, 4707400; 511100, 4707500; 511200, 4707500; 
511200, 4707600; 511400, 4707600; 511400, 4707700; 511600, 4707700; 
511600, 4707800; returning to 511800, 4707800.
    (iv) Unit 1D: Jackson County, Oregon. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Eagle Point. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 
83 coordinates (E,N): 515900, 4706700; 515900, 4706500; 516000, 4706500; 
516000, 4706400; 516100, 4706400; 516100, 4706600; 516000, 4706600; 
516000, 4706700; 515900, 4706700; 515900, 4707000; 516200, 4707000; 
516200, 4706900; 516300, 4706900; 516300, 4706700; 516400, 4706700; 
516400, 4706800; 516500, 4706800; 516500, 4707000; 516700, 4707000; 
516700, 4706900; 516900, 4706900; 516900, 4707000; 517000, 4707000; 
517000, 4707100; 517100, 4707100; 517100, 4706900; 517400, 4706900; 
517400, 4706700; 517300, 4706700; 517300, 4706500; 517200, 4706500; 
517200, 4706400; 517100, 4706400; 517100, 4706300; 516700, 4706300; 
516700, 4705600; 516500, 4705600; 516500, 4705500; 516600, 4705500; 
516600, 4705400; 516700, 4705400; 516700, 4704800; 516600, 4704800; 
516600, 4704600; 516300, 4704600; 516300, 4704500; 516400, 4704500; 
516400, 4704400; 516500, 4704400; 516500, 4704300; 515800, 4704300; 
515800, 4704600; 516000, 4704600; 516000, 4704700; 515500, 4704700; 
515500, 4704800; 515400, 4704800; 515400, 4705100; 515500, 4705100; 
515500, 4705200; 515700, 4705200; 515700, 4705300; 515800, 4705300; 
515800, 4705900; 515700, 4705900; 515700, 4706200; 515600, 4706200; 
515600, 4706400; 515500, 4706400; 515500, 4706500; 515100, 4706500; 
515100, 4706700; 515000, 4706700; 515000, 4706900; 514700, 4706900; 
514700, 4707000; 514600, 4707000; 514600, 4707200; 514700, 4707200; 
514700, 4707300; 515000, 4707300; 515000, 4707200; 515100, 4707200; 
515100, 4707100; 515200, 4707100; 515200, 4707000; 515300, 4707000; 
515300, 4706800; 515400, 4706800; 515400, 4706700; 515500, 4706700; 
515500, 4706600; 515600, 4706600; 515600, 4706700; returning to 515900, 
4706700;
    (v) Unit 1E: Jackson County, Oregon. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Shady Grove. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 
83 coordinates (E,N):510800, 4707100; 510800, 4706900; 511000, 4706900; 
511000, 4706500; 510700, 4706500; 510700, 4706300; 510500, 4706300; 
510500, 4706000; 510400, 4706000; 510400, 4706100; 510300, 4706100; 
510300, 4706300; 510100, 4706300; 510100, 4706400; 510000, 4706400; 
510000, 4706500; 509800, 4706500; 509800, 4706700; 510000, 4706700;

[[Page 729]]

510000, 4706900; 510100, 4706900; 510100, 4707000; 510200, 4707000; 
510200, 4706900; 510500, 4706900; 510500, 4707000; 510600, 4707000; 
510600, 4707100; returning to 510800, 4707100.
    (vi) Unit 1F: Jackson County, Oregon. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Shady Grove. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 
83 coordinates (E,N): 511300, 4706000; 511300, 4705900; 511500, 4705900; 
511500, 4705100; 511400, 4705100; 511400, 4704800; 511200, 4704800; 
511200, 4705000; 511000, 4705000; 511000, 4705200; 510900, 4705200; 
510900, 4705300; 510800, 4705300; 510800, 4705900; 511000, 4705900; 
511000, 4706000; 511300, 4706000; excluding 511200, 4705500; 511200, 
4705300; 511300, 4705300; 511300, 4705500; returning to 511200, 4705500;
    (vii) Unit 1G: Jackson County, Oregon. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Eagle Point. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 
83 coordinates (E,N): 517600, 4705100; 517600, 4705000; 517800, 4705000; 
517800, 4704900; 517900, 4704900; 517900, 4704800; 519100, 4704800; 
519100, 4704700; 519300, 4704700; 519300, 4704600; 519400, 4704600; 
519400, 4704300; 519100, 4704300; 519100, 4704200; 518600, 4704200; 
518600, 4704100; 517900, 4704100; 517900, 4704200; 517700, 4704200; 
517700, 4704000; 517200, 4704000; 517200, 4704100; 517100, 4704100; 
517100, 4704300; 517000, 4704300; 517000, 4704700; 516900, 4704700; 
516900, 4704900; 517000, 4704900; 517000, 4705000; 517100, 4705000; 
517100, 4705100; returning to 517600, 4705100
    (5) Unit 2: Jackson County, Oregon.
    (i) Unit 2A: Jackson County, Oregon. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Eagle Point. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 
83 coordinates (E,N): 514200, 4699200; 514200, 4698800; 514300, 4698800; 
514300, 4698900; 514400, 4698900; 514400, 4699000; 514900, 4699000; 
514900, 4698900; 515100, 4698900; 515100, 4699100; 515200, 4699100; 
515200, 4699000; 515500, 4699000; 515500, 4698800; 515600, 4698800; 
515600, 4699000; 515700, 4699000; 515700, 4698900; 515800, 4698900; 
515800, 4698500; 515500, 4698500; 515500, 4698700; 515400, 4698700; 
515400, 4698600; 515300, 4698600; 515300, 4698500; 515100, 4698500; 
515100, 4698600; 514900, 4698600; 514900, 4698500; 514400, 4698500; 
514400, 4698600; 514300, 4698600; 514300, 4698400; 513400, 4698400; 
513400, 4698500; 513300, 4698500; 513300, 4698600; 513400, 4698600; 
513400, 4698700; 513500, 4698700; 513500, 4698800; 513700, 4698800; 
513700, 4699000; 513800, 4699000; 513800, 4699100; 513900, 4699100; 
513900, 4699200; returning to 514200, 4699200.
    (ii) Unit 2B: Jackson County, Oregon. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Eagle Point. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 
83 coordinates (E,N): 517300, 4698400; 517300, 4698300; 517500, 4698300; 
517500, 4698200; 517600, 4698200; 517600, 4698300; 517900, 4698300; 
517900, 4697800; 518500, 4697800; 518500, 4697700; 518600, 4697700; 
518600, 4697600; 518800, 4697600; 518800, 4697700; 519100, 4697700; 
519100, 4697600; 519300, 4697600; 519300, 4697500; 519400, 4697500; 
519400, 4697400; 519500, 4697400; 519500, 4697300; 519700, 4697300; 
519700, 4697200; 519800, 4697200; 519800, 4697100; 520000, 4697100; 
520000, 4696800; 519900, 4696800; 519900, 4696700; 520400, 4696700; 
520400, 4696600; 520500, 4696600; 520500, 4696300; 520400, 4696300; 
520400, 4696100; 520500, 4696100; 520500, 4696200; 520600, 4696200; 
520600, 4696100; 520700, 4696100; 520700, 4695900; 520600, 4695900; 
520600, 4695800; 520500, 4695800; 520500, 4695500; 520700, 4695500; 
520700, 4695400; 520800, 4695400; 520800, 4694400; 520700, 4694400; 
520700, 4694500; 520500, 4694500; 520500, 4694600; 520400, 4694600; 
520400, 4694700; 520300, 4694700; 520300, 4694800; 519900, 4694800; 
519900, 4694900; 519500, 4694900; 519500, 4695200; 519400, 4695200; 
519400, 4695600; 519300, 4695600; 519300, 4695800; 519200, 4695800; 
519200, 4695900; 519100, 4695900; 519100, 4696000; 519000, 4696000; 
519000, 4696200; 519300, 4696200; 519300, 4696300; 519100, 4696300; 
519100, 4696400; 518900, 4696400; 518900, 4696500; 518800, 4696500; 
518800, 4696400; 518600, 4696400; 518600, 4696700; 518500, 4696700; 
518500, 4696800; 518400, 4696800; 518400, 4696900; 518300, 4696900; 
518300, 4697000; 518200, 4697000; 518200, 4697100; 518100, 4697100; 
518100, 4697200; 517600, 4697200; 517600, 4697300; 517300, 4697300; 
517300, 4697400; 517100, 4697400; 517100, 4697600; 517000, 4697600; 
517000, 4697800; 516900, 4697800; 516900, 4698400; returning to 517300, 
4698400.
    (iii) Unit 2C: Jackson County, Oregon. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Eagle Point. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 
83 coordinates (E,N): 516100, 4697800; 516100, 4697400; 515000, 4697400; 
515000, 4697800; 515200, 4697800; 515200, 4697700; 515300, 4697700; 
515300, 4697800; returning to 516100, 4697800.
    (iv) Unit 2D. Jackson County, Oregon. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Eagle Point. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 
83 coordinates (E,N): 517000, 4697200; 517000, 4697100; 517200, 4697100; 
517200, 4697000; 517300, 4697000; 517300, 4696900; 517400, 4696900; 
517400, 4696600; 517200, 4696600; 517200, 4696700; 516800, 4696700; 
516800, 4696600; 516300, 4696600; 516300, 4696500; 516200, 4696500; 
516200, 4696200; 515900, 4696200; 515900, 4696900; 516100, 4696900; 
516100, 4697000; 516500, 4697000; 516500, 4697100; 516800, 4697100; 
516800, 4697200; returning to 517000, 4697200.
    (v) Unit 2E: Jackson County, Oregon. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Eagle Point. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 
83 coordinates (E,N): 515500, 4696600; 515500, 4696400; 515100, 4696400; 
515100, 4696300; 515200, 4696300; 515200, 4695800; 515000, 4695800; 
515000, 4695900; 514500, 4695900; 514500, 4695800; 514300, 4695800; 
514300, 4695900; 514200, 4695900; 514200, 4696000; 514100, 4696000; 
514100, 4695900; 514000, 4695900; 514000, 4695800; 513900, 4695800; 
513900, 4695900; 513800, 4695900; 513800, 4696600; 513500, 4696600; 
513500, 4696800; 515600, 4696800; 515600, 4696600; returning to 515500, 
4696600; excluding 514500, 4696500; 514500, 4696400; 514300, 4696400; 
514300, 4696500; 514200, 4696500; 514200, 4696400; 514100, 4696400; 
514100, 4696300; 514700, 4696300; 514700, 4696500; returning to 514500, 
4696500.
    (6) Unit 3: Jackson County, Oregon.

[[Page 730]]

    (i) Unit 3A: Jackson County, Oregon. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Eagle Point. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 
83 coordinates (E,N): 511600, 4698900; 511600, 4699000; 511400, 4699000; 
511400, 4699100; 511100, 4699100; 511100, 4699200; 510700, 4699200; 
510700, 4699300; 510600, 4699300; 510600, 4699500; 510900, 4699500; 
510900, 4699600; 511200, 4699600; 511200, 4699700; 511300, 4699700; 
511300, 4699900; 511400, 4699900; 511400, 4700000; 511500, 4700000; 
511500, 4699900; 511600, 4699900; 511600, 4699800; 511700, 4699800; 
511700, 4699900; 511900, 4699900; 511900, 4698900; returning to 511600, 
4698900.
    (ii) Unit 3B: Jackson County, Oregon. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Eagle Point, Sams Valley. Land bounded by the following UTM 
Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 511600, 4698900; 511600, 4698600; 
511300, 4698600; 511300, 4698700; 511200, 4698700; 511200, 4698600; 
511000, 4698600; 511000, 4698500; 510700, 4698500; 510700, 4698600; 
510500, 4698600; 510500, 4698500; 509600, 4698500; 509600, 4698100; 
509400, 4698100; 509400, 4698000; 509200, 4698000; 509200, 4697800; 
509300, 4697800; 509300, 4697600; 509400, 4697600; 509400, 4697200; 
509500, 4697200; 509500, 4697000; 510100, 4697000; 510100, 4697100; 
511700, 4697100; 511700, 4697000; 511900, 4697000; 511900, 4696400; 
510800, 4696400; 510800, 4696300; 510600, 4696300; 510600, 4696400; 
510300, 4696400; 510300, 4696500; 509700, 4696500; 509700, 4696600; 
509600, 4696600; 509600, 4696500; 508900, 4696500; 508900, 4696600; 
508600, 4696600; 508600, 4696700; 508400, 4696700; 508400, 4696800; 
508300, 4696800; 508300, 4696900; 508200, 4696900; 508200, 4697000; 
508100, 4697000; 508100, 4697100; 508000, 4697100; 508000, 4697300; 
508100, 4697300; 508100, 4697600; 508400, 4697600; 508400, 4697700; 
508600, 4697700; 508600, 4697800; 508500, 4697800; 508500, 4698000; 
508400, 4698000; 508400, 4698400; 508500, 4698400; 508500, 4698500; 
508800, 4698500; 508800, 4698600; 508900, 4698600; 508900, 4698300; 
509000, 4698300; 509000, 4698400; 509100, 4698400; 509100, 4698600; 
509200, 4698600; 509200, 4698700; 509500, 4698700; 509500, 4698900; 
509800, 4698900; 509800, 4699000; 510100, 4699000; 510100, 4699100; 
511000, 4699100; 511000, 4699000; 511300, 4699000; 511300, 4698900; 
511600, 4698900; excluding 508500, 4697300; 508500, 4697100; returning 
to 508600, 4697100; 508600, 4697300; 508500, 4697300; also excluding 
508800, 4697800; 508800, 4697700; 509100, 4697700; 509100, 4697800; 
returning to 508800, 4697800;
    (iii) Unit 3C: Jackson County, Oregon. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Sams Valley. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 
83 coordinates (E,N): 506800, 4697600; 506800, 4697500; 506900, 4697500; 
506900, 4697300; 506800, 4697300; 506800, 4697200; 506700, 4697200; 
506700, 4696700; 507000, 4696700; 507000, 4697000; 506900, 4697000; 
506900, 4697200; 507000, 4697200; 507000, 4697400; 507100, 4697400; 
507100, 4697500; 507200, 4697500; 507200, 4697400; 507300, 4697400; 
507300, 4697300; 507400, 4697300; 507400, 4697100; 507500, 4697100; 
507500, 4697000; 507600, 4697000; 507600, 4696900; 507700, 4696900; 
507700, 4696700; 507900, 4696700; 507900, 4696000; 508300, 4696000; 
508300, 4695000; 507800, 4695000; 507800, 4695200; 507400, 4695200; 
507400, 4695400; 506900, 4695400; 506900, 4695800; 506800, 4695800; 
506800, 4695900; 506400, 4695900; 506400, 4695800; 505600, 4695800; 
505600, 4696000; 505800, 4696000; 505800, 4696700; 506200, 4696700; 
506200, 4696800; 506100, 4696800; 506100, 4697300; 506200, 4697300; 
506200, 4697600; returning to 506800, 4697600.
    (7) Unit 4: Jackson County, Oregon
    (i) Unit 4A: Jackson County, Oregon. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Sams Valley. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 
83 coordinates (E,N): 507200, 4703500; 507200, 4703400; 507300, 4703400; 
507300, 4703300; 507800, 4703300; 507800, 4703200; 507900, 4703200; 
507900, 4703100; 508000, 4703100; 508000, 4703000; 508100, 4703000; 
508100, 4702900; 508200, 4702900; 508200, 4702800; 508300, 4702800; 
508300, 4702700; 508400, 4702700; 508400, 4702500; 508500, 4702500; 
508500, 4702300; 508600, 4702300; 508600, 4701900; 508800, 4701900; 
508800, 4701500; 508700, 4701500; 508700, 4701400; 508600, 4701400; 
508600, 4701300; 508400, 4701300; 508400, 4701500; 508300, 4701500; 
508300, 4701900; 508200, 4701900; 508200, 4702000; 508100, 4702000; 
508100, 4702100; 508000, 4702100; 508000, 4702200; 507900, 4702200; 
507900, 4702300; 507800, 4702300; 507800, 4702400; 507700, 4702400; 
507700, 4702500; 507600, 4702500; 507600, 4702400; 507500, 4702400; 
507500, 4702300; 507300, 4702300; 507300, 4702200; 507400, 4702200; 
507400, 4702100; 507600, 4702100; 507600, 4702000; 507700, 4702000; 
507700, 4701800; 507800, 4701800; 507800, 4701700; 507900, 4701700; 
507900, 4701400; 507700, 4701400; 507700, 4701500; 507600, 4701500; 
507600, 4701600; 507300, 4701600; 507300, 4701700; 507100, 4701700; 
507100, 4701800; 507000, 4701800; 507000, 4701900; 506900, 4701900; 
506900, 4702000; 506800, 4702000; 506800, 4702200; 506700, 4702200; 
506700, 4702400; 506600, 4702400; 506600, 4702500; 506500, 4702500; 
506500, 4702700; 506600, 4702700; 506600, 4702900; 506700, 4702900; 
506700, 4703100; 506800, 4703100; 506800, 4703400; 507000, 4703400; 
507000, 4703500; returning to 507200, 4703500;
    (ii) Unit 4B: Jackson County, Oregon. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Sams Valley. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 
83 coordinates (E,N): 503800, 4700900; 503800, 4700800; 503900, 4700800; 
503900, 4700700; 504000, 4700700; 504000, 4700600; 504300, 4700600; 
504300, 4700500; 504400, 4700500; 504400, 4699500; 504200, 4699500; 
504200, 4699200; 504100, 4699200; 504100, 4699100; 504000, 4699100; 
504000, 4698900; 503800, 4698900; 503800, 4699000; 503700, 4699000; 
503700, 4699400; 503800, 4699400; 503800, 4699800; 503700, 4699800; 
503700, 4700900; returning to 503800, 4700900.

    (iii) Note: Units 1-4 (Map 1) follow:

[[Page 731]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10FE06.009

    (8) Unit 5: Shasta County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Palo Cedro, Enterprise, Balls Ferry, Cottonwood. Land bounded 
by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 562500, 4487400; 
562700, 4487100; 562900, 4487200; 563200, 4487200; 563300, 4487000; 
563300, 4486700; 563800, 4486400; 564300, 4484700; 564300, 4484400; 
564500, 4484100; 564500,

[[Page 732]]

4483800; 564600, 4483700; 564600, 4483400; 564400, 4483100; 564100, 
4482800; 564100, 4482600; 564300, 4482600; 564300, 4482400; 564300, 
4482300; 564200, 4482200; 564100, 4482100; 564000, 4482100; 564200, 
4481800; 564200, 4480900; 563600, 4480900; 563300, 4481000; 563100, 
4480900; 562900, 4480900; 562500, 4481200; 562400, 4481500; 562400, 
4481700; 562300, 4482400; 562000, 4482500; 561900, 4482800; 561800, 
4483300; 561500, 4483700; 561000, 4484000; 560700, 4485400; 560700, 
4486500; 560800, 4486700; 561000, 4486900; 561200, 4487000; 561300, 
4487600; 561600, 4487900; 562000, 4487900; returning to 562500, 4487400;
    (9) Unit 6: Tehama County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Red Bluff East, Red Bluff West, Gerber, West of Gerber, 
Corning, Henleyville. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 
coordinates (E,N): 563400, 4444500; 563400, 4444400; 563500, 4444400; 
563700, 4444400; 563800, 4443800; 564200, 4443800; 564300, 4443600; 
564200, 4443400; 564100, 4443200; 564000, 4443200; 564000, 4443000; 
564100, 4443000; 564100, 4442800; 564100, 4442700; 564100, 4442600; 
564200, 4442600; 564300, 4442900; 564400, 4443100; 564400, 4443400; 
564700, 4443400; 565200, 4443400; 565500, 4443300; 565800, 4442900; 
566100, 4442900; 566200, 4442500; 566100, 4442400; 566100, 4442100; 
565800, 4441900; 566000, 4441600; 566000, 4441500; 565400, 4441200; 
565500, 4441000; 565400, 4440800; 565400, 4440200; 565400, 4439000; 
566100, 4439000; 566100, 4439300; 566500, 4439900; 566400, 4440400; 
566000, 4440600; 567500, 4441200; 567900, 4441200; 568673, 4440582; 
568400, 4440400; 568300, 4439900; 568700, 4439100; 569500, 4439400; 
569850, 4438750; 570194, 4438101; 569400, 4438200; 569000, 4438300; 
568600, 4438400; 567800, 4438400; 567600, 4438400; 567400, 4438200; 
567000, 4438100; 567000, 4438000; 566800, 4437700; 566800, 4437400; 
566200, 4437400; 566200, 4438200; 565900, 4438400; 565400, 4438000; 
564200, 4438000; 564200, 4437800; 563900, 4437800; 563600, 4437600; 
563400, 4437400; 563400, 4436900; 563400, 4436600; 563200, 4436600; 
563200, 4436200; 563200, 4435800; 563500, 4435800; 563700, 4436100; 
564200, 4436400; 564500, 4436500; 564700, 4436500; 564900, 4436400; 
564900, 4436200; 564800, 4435800; 565100, 4435800; 564800, 4435500; 
564500, 4435500; 564400, 4435400; 564200, 4435200; 564100, 4435000; 
563800, 4434900; 563600, 4434700; 563500, 4434500; 563400, 4434500; 
563200, 4434200; 563600, 4434200; 563600, 4432600; 563700, 4432600; 
563500, 4432100; 564500, 4431968; 564500, 4431500; 565400, 4431500; 
565400, 4431400; 567000, 4431300; 567000, 4430700; 566800, 4430500; 
567400, 4430500; 567500, 4429600; 566800, 4429600; 566300, 4429600; 
566100, 4429700; 566100, 4429100; 566000, 4429200; 565800, 4429300; 
565500, 4429200; 565300, 4429200; 565100, 4429000; 564600, 4429000; 
564300, 4428700; 564000, 4428700; 563700, 4428500; 563700, 4428200; 
564100, 4428200; 564600, 4428200; 565500, 4428300; 566600, 4428100; 
566600, 4428000; 567000, 4428000; 567100, 4427900; 567300, 4427200; 
566900, 4427200; 566100, 4426900; 566000, 4426700; 565500, 4426700; 
565400, 4426600; 565297, 4426600; 565307, 4427383; 564276, 4427370; 
564270, 4428012; 564280, 4428155; 563943, 4428136; 563688, 4428134; 
563596, 4428131; 563607, 4427381; 563688, 4427377; 563689, 4426540; 
563940, 4426553; 564800, 4426576; 564800, 4426200; 564800, 4425900; 
563700, 4425800; 562600, 4425100; 562300, 4425000; 562100, 4425000; 
562000, 4425000; 561800, 4424900; 561700, 4424800; 561600, 4424800; 
561500, 4424800; 561300, 4424800; 561200, 4424800; 560900, 4424900; 
560700, 4424900; 560400, 4425000; 560100, 4424900; 559800, 4424800; 
559800, 4424500; 559700, 4424400; 559400, 4424300; 559300, 4424400; 
559200, 4424500; 559100, 4424500; 558900, 4424700; 558700, 4424800; 
558300, 4424800; 558100, 4424800; 557900, 4424600; 557700, 4424500; 
557300, 4424300; 557000, 4424200; 556800, 4424100; 556600, 4424100; 
556100, 4424000; 555900, 4424000; 555800, 4423900; 555800, 4423800; 
555500, 4423800; 555400, 4423800; 555300, 4423700; 555200, 4423600; 
555100, 4423600; 555000, 4423600; 554600, 4424900; 555100, 4425600; 
557200, 4426300; 557800, 4426800; 558300, 4426500; 559500, 4428300; 
558200, 4428200; 557800, 4428500; 557400, 4429300; 558000, 4429900; 
558600, 4430000; 558600, 4431100; 560000, 4431600; 559200, 4431900; 
558300, 4432000; 557400, 4432200; 557400, 4432600; 558400, 4433100; 
558400, 4433600; 557800, 4433600; 557500, 4433800; 557300, 4434400; 
555100, 4434800; 555100, 4435400; 557000, 4436200; 557900, 4439000; 
557000, 4439000; 554600, 4437400; 553200, 4437000; 553200, 4437600; 
554500, 4438100; 555400, 4439700; 556500, 4439800; 556500, 4441800; 
558500, 4442600; 558500, 4443000; 557400, 4442900; 557000, 4443000; 
556800, 4443400; 557500, 4444300; 558000, 4443700; 558400, 4443700; 
559800, 4443900; 559800, 4443700; 559700, 4443500; 559700, 4443200; 
559900, 4443400; 560000, 4443500; 560500, 4443500; 560700, 4443600; 
561000, 4443700; 561700, 4443900; 562400, 4444000; 562500, 4444100; 
562600, 4444100; 562600, 4444500; 562900, 4444500; returning to 563400, 
4444500;
    (10) Unit 7: Tehama County, California.
    (i) Unit 7A: Tehama County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Acorn Hollow and Richardson Springs NW. Land bounded by the 
following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 588739, 4429822; 
588900, 4429500; 589500, 4429500; 589500, 4428600; 589500, 4428000; 
589800, 4427100; 590500, 4426400; 590500, 4425300; 591200, 4424400; 
591500, 4423300; 591562, 4422558; 590526, 4423686; 589986, 4424273; 
589816, 4424458; 589129, 4425207; 588454, 4426221; 588425, 4426265; 
588279, 4426485; 588213, 4426583; 588213, 4426584; 588600, 4429100; 
588733, 4429833; returning to 588739, 4429822;
    (ii) Unit 7B: Tehama County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Sloughhouse. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 
83 coordinates (E,N): 593700, 4420900; 593164, 4420815; 592329, 4421723; 
592258, 4421800; 593000, 4421800; 593100, 4421500; 593500, 4421400; 
returning to 593700, 4420900;
    (iii) Unit 7C: Tehama County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Richard Springs NW. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 
10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 594500, 4420300; 593881, 4420035; 593371, 
4420590; 594000, 4420800; 594400, 4420600; returning to 594500, 4420300;
    (iv) Unit 7D: Tehama and Butte Counties, California. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangle Campbell Mound, Richardson Springs, and 
Richardson Springs NW. Land bounded

[[Page 733]]

by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 597100, 4416400; 
597100, 4415600; 597044, 4415525; 596800, 4415200; 597100, 4415000; 
597800, 4415500; 598100, 4415200; 597600, 4414600; 597600, 4414400; 
597300, 4413800; 597300, 4413300; 598200, 4413900; 598400, 4413900; 
598400, 4413600; 597422, 4411938; 597281, 4412382; 596959, 4413403; 
596640, 4414416; 596620, 4414481; 596305, 4415484; 596303, 4415489; 
596130, 4416040; 596091, 4416160; 596028, 4416358; 596011, 4416411; 
595993, 4416465; 595982, 4416500; 596000, 4416500; 596100, 4416400; 
596200, 4416500; 596300, 4416600; 596400, 4416700; 596500, 4416700; 
596500, 4416800; 596600, 4416800; returning to 597100, 4416400.
    (v) Unit 7E: Butte County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Richardson Springs. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 
10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 598900, 4411800; 599400, 4411700; 599800, 
4411700; 599800, 4411000; 599300, 4410700; 599100, 4410800; 599000, 
4410800; 598800, 4410600; 598500, 4410400; 598300, 4410100; 598100, 
4410000; 598070, 4409970; 598051, 4409993; 598038, 4410010; 598014, 
4410083; 597806, 4410737; 597725, 4410990; 597461, 4411816; 597434, 
4411900; 597600, 4411900; 598300, 4412700; 598500, 4413300; 598900, 
4413300; returning to 598900, 4411800;
    (vi) Unit 7F: Butte County, California, California. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangle Richardson Springs. Land bounded by the 
following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 599500, 4406200; 
600300, 4406000; 601200, 4405600; 601800, 4405600; 602000, 4405500; 
602200, 4405200; 602500, 4405200; 602700, 4404900; 603300, 4404700; 
604500, 4404200; 605200, 4404200; 605600, 4404000; 605600, 4403600; 
605100, 4403300; 604700, 4403400; 604500, 4403300; 604475, 4403175; 
604400, 4403100; 604300, 4403100; 604200, 4403000; 604100, 4402900; 
604000, 4402900; 603800, 4402800; 603800, 4402600; 603600, 4402400; 
603400, 4402400; 603200, 4402500; 603100, 4402400; 602900, 4402400; 
602900, 4402100; 602700, 4402100; 602300, 4402600; 602300, 4402700; 
601800, 4403300; 601714, 4403300; 601553, 4403500; 601501, 4403499; 
601465, 4403621; 601319, 4403663; 601226, 4403595; 601089, 4403571; 
600979, 4403503; 600901, 4403569; 600860, 4403446; 600704, 4403566; 
600542, 4403475; 600507, 4403530; 600473, 4403563; 600453, 4403580; 
600369, 4403651; 600344, 4403642; 600232, 4403605; 599983, 4403679; 
599973, 4403678; 599801, 4403662; 599725, 4403718; 599651, 4403697; 
599493, 4403839; 599328, 4403862; 599302, 4403865; 599269, 4403870; 
599084, 4403634; 599024, 4403611; 598987, 4404400; 598980, 4404543; 
598971, 4404723; 598955, 4405388; 598953, 4405458; 598951, 4405529; 
598947, 4405677; 598934, 4405719; 598919, 4405750; 599000, 4405800; 
598900, 4406100; 598700, 4406000; 598694, 4406000; 598635, 4406058; 
598598, 4406103; 598583, 4406127; 598567, 4406159; 598549, 4406210; 
598544, 4406234; 598540, 4406255; 598533, 4406421; 598522, 4406815; 
598516, 4407133; 598511, 4407496; 598513, 4407515; 598525, 4407568; 
598527, 4407571; 598527, 4407589; 598580, 4407812; 598800, 4407900; 
598900, 4408100; 599200, 4408400; 600200, 4408900; 600300, 4408800; 
600300, 4408400; 600000, 4408100; 600400, 4407600; 599500, 4406700; 
returning to 599500, 4406200.
    (11) Unit 8: Tehama and Glenn Counties, California. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangle Kirkwood and Black Butte Dam. Land bounded by 
the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 572100, 4410900; 
572100, 4410100; 571800, 4409600; 570500, 4409000; 570200, 4409000; 
570200, 4409300; 569700, 4409300; 569700, 4409000; 569800, 4407700; 
569900, 4407000; 569800, 4406100; 569800, 4405643; 569800, 4405500; 
569400, 4405500; 569107, 4405647; 568600, 4405900; 568300, 4405900; 
567809, 4405654; 567500, 4405500; 567200, 4405500; 565000, 4405500; 
564769, 4405673; 564600, 4405800; 564100, 4405800; 563860, 4405680; 
563700, 4405600; 563400, 4405400; 563214, 4405679; 563200, 4405700; 
562800, 4405800; 561400, 4406200; 560900, 4406200; 560600, 4406300; 
560500, 4406400; 560400, 4406600; 560400, 4406900; 560800, 4406900; 
560800, 4407300; 561200, 4407300; 561200, 4411300; 565500, 4411300; 
565500, 4410500; 568400, 4410500; 568400, 4410600; 568400, 4411400; 
570500, 4411400; 570800, 4411700; 571400, 4411500; 571500, 4411000; 
returning to 572100, 4410900;
    (12) Unit 9: Butte County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Chico. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 
coordinates (E,N): 605100, 4399600; 606500, 4399500; 606797, 4399330; 
606777, 4399300; 606724, 4399252; 606568, 4399265; 606528, 4399272; 
606479, 4399279; 606478, 4399279; 606394, 4399264; 606362, 4399238; 
606329, 4399210; 606274, 4399169; 606209, 4399135; 606125, 4399122; 
606060, 4399122; 605967, 4399131; 605899, 4399134; 605857, 4399134; 
605822, 4399130; 605789, 4399116; 605781, 4399138; 605775, 4399149; 
605764, 4399152; 605763, 4399152; 605701, 4399142; 605589, 4399116; 
605504, 4399107; 605432, 4399110; 605319, 4399064; 605233, 4399045; 
605173, 4399034; 605135, 4399023; 605134, 4399023; 605127, 4399023; 
605109, 4399023; 605080, 4399025; 605063, 4399025; 605002, 4399051; 
604957, 4399069; 604907, 4399092; 604029, 4399508; 603896, 4399435; 
603886, 4399435; 603879, 4399436; 603300, 4399523; 603300, 4399600; 
602900, 4399600; 603500, 4399800; 604700, 4400200; returning to 605100, 
4399600.

    (13) Note: Units 5-9 (Map 2) follow:

[[Page 734]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10FE06.010

    (14) Unit 10: Glenn and Colusa Counties, California. This unit was 
excluded from the designation pursuant to Section 4(b)(2) of the Act.
    (15) Unit 11: Yuba County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Browns Valley and Wheatland. Land bounded by the following 
UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates

[[Page 735]]

(E,N): 635000, 4332200; 635000, 4329900; 634600, 4329900; 633800, 
4329900; 633600, 4330100; 633500, 4330100; 633300, 4330100; 633300, 
4330300; 632700, 4330100; 632400, 4329900; 632400, 4329000; 631300, 
4329000; 631300, 4329200; 631600, 4329200; 631600, 4329800; 631900, 
4329800; 631900, 4330600; 632800, 4330600; 633000, 4330900; 633000, 
4331300; 633100, 4331500; 633500, 4331700; 633800, 4331500; 633800, 
4332200; returning to 635000, 4332200.
    (16) Unit 12: Placer County, California.
    (i) Unit 12A: Placer County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Lincoln. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 
coordinates (E,N): 647900, 4313400; 647900, 4312700; 648000, 4312500; 
647900, 4311500; 647700, 4311500; 647600, 4311300; 647300, 4311400; 
646900, 4311400; 646900, 4311300; 647200, 4311300; 647500, 4311200; 
647800, 4311200; 647900, 4311100; 647800, 4311000; 646900, 4311000; 
646800, 4310900; 646800, 4310800; 647400, 4310800; 647500, 4310900; 
647600, 4310800; 647800, 4310700; 648000, 4310700; 648000, 4310000; 
648000, 4309700; 647200, 4309700; 647200, 4309200; 646700, 4309100; 
646700, 4308800; 646600, 4308800; 646100, 4309100; 646100, 4308200; 
646126, 4308174; 646012, 4308259; 645967, 4308294; 645917, 4308327; 
645822, 4308387; 645337, 4308742; 645215, 4308841; 645100, 4308942; 
644197, 4309858; 644195, 4309860; 644194, 4309862; 644149, 4309914; 
643464, 4310618; 643700, 4310500; 644000, 4310900; 644300, 4310400; 
645400, 4310400; 645800, 4310200; 646100, 4310200; 646300, 4310000; 
647500, 4310000; 647500, 4310200; 646800, 4310200; 646500, 4310300; 
646500, 4310600; 646600, 4310700; 646100, 4310700; 645900, 4310800; 
645900, 4311200; 646100, 4311100; 646500, 4311100; 646500, 4311200; 
646300, 4311200; 646300, 4311400; 646400, 4311700; 646800, 4311700; 
646800, 4311900; 646800, 4312000; 646900, 4312100; 646800, 4312500; 
647000, 4312600; 647100, 4312800; 647300, 4312800; 647400, 4312700; 
647400, 4312800; 647300, 4312900; 647100, 4312900; 646800, 4312698; 
646800, 4313000; 646900, 4313400; 647100, 4313800; 647300, 4314200; 
648300, 4314200; 648300, 4313900; returning to 647900, 4313400;
    (ii) Unit 12B: Placer County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Lincoln. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 
coordinates (E,N): 644400, 4306677; 644400, 4305900; 644700, 4305900; 
644700, 4305400; 644800, 4305400; 644800, 4305200; 645100, 4305200; 
645100, 4305100; 645200, 4305000; 645400, 4305100; 645526, 4305100; 
645502, 4305086; 645456, 4305073; 645413, 4305069; 645405, 4305070; 
645394, 4305065; 645377, 4305040; 645344, 4305023; 645314, 4305010; 
645277, 4304988; 645258, 4304970; 645235, 4304941; 645228, 4304937; 
645208, 4304916; 645145, 4304856; 645068, 4304806; 644987, 4304762; 
644904, 4304734; 644828, 4304731; 644796, 4304732; 644778, 4304737; 
644764, 4304744; 644764, 4304742; 644744, 4304744; 644707, 4304725; 
644667, 4304698; 644626, 4304669; 644600, 4304649; 644575, 4304634; 
644563, 4304634; 644560, 4304636; 644554, 4304639; 644540, 4304653; 
644526, 4304663; 644515, 4304656; 644483, 4304652; 644439, 4304646; 
644388, 4304643; 644357, 4304642; 644327, 4304640; 644316, 4304635; 
644300, 4304631; 644300, 4304900; 644100, 4304900; 644100, 4305000; 
644000, 4305000; 644000, 4306669; returning to 644400, 4306677.

    (iii) Note: Units 11-12 (Map 3) follow:

[[Page 736]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10FE06.011

    (17) Unit 13: Sacramento County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 
scale quadrangle Carmichael. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, 
NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 649800, 4269600; 649800, 4268700; 650400, 
4268900; 650800, 4268800; 651000, 4268800; 651000, 4269400; 651800, 
4269300; 651500, 4268800; 651600, 4267900; 651600, 4266500; 651500, 
4266400; 651500, 4266300;

[[Page 737]]

651100, 4266300; 651100, 4266000; 651570, 4265812; 651589, 4265075; 
651600, 4264400; 651400, 4264400; 651400, 4264200; 650500, 4264200; 
650500, 4264300; 650400, 4264300; 650400, 4264600; 650000, 4264700; 
649900, 4265100; 649400, 4265100; 649100, 4265000; 648900, 4265100; 
648700, 4265100; 648700, 4265300; 648700, 4265500; 649900, 4265500; 
649900, 4266000; 648300, 4266000; 648300, 4266200; 648500, 4266400; 
648700, 4266200; 649000, 4266200; 649300, 4266400; 649400, 4266600; 
649635, 4266678; 649700, 4266700; 649794, 4266693; 650200, 4267100; 
650400, 4267000; 650600, 4267000; 650800, 4267200; 650900, 4267500; 
650800, 4267900; 650500, 4267800; 650300, 4268100; 649900, 4268400; 
649400, 4268100; 649100, 4267800; 649100, 4267500; 649400, 4267400; 
649200, 4267100; 648400, 4267100; 648300, 4267700; 648000, 4268000; 
648600, 4268500; 649400, 4268900; 649400, 4269200; 649600, 4269600; 
returning to 649800, 4269600.
    (18) Unit 14: Sacramento and Amador County, California.
    (i) Unit 14A: Sacramento and Amador County, California. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangle Carbondale, Sloughhouse, Goose Creek, and 
Clay. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates 
(E,N): 673200, 4256400; 672800, 4255100; 672800, 4254800; 673100, 
4254900; 673800, 4254900; 674000, 4254600; 674000, 4254400; 674500, 
4254000; 674500, 4253700; 674100, 4253500; 674100, 4252900; 674300, 
4252300; 674500, 4251900; 674500, 4251600; 673400, 4251500; 673300, 
4251400; 673300, 4251200; 673900, 4251000; 674000, 4250500; 674300, 
4250000; 674300, 4249800; 674200, 4249700; 673900, 4249700; 673600, 
4249900; 672500, 4249900; 672315, 4249992; 671900, 4250200; 671300, 
4250200; 671100, 4250500; 671000, 4250500; 671000, 4249800; 670700, 
4249800; 670700, 4249500; 670800, 4249300; 670800, 4249000; 670900, 
4248900; 670900, 4248500; 670500, 4248300; 670500, 4248125; 670400, 
4248100; 670400, 4248000; 670100, 4248000; 670100, 4247800; 670500, 
4247500; 671100, 4247500; 671600, 4247700; 671800, 4247600; 671900, 
4247300; 671900, 4247100; 671500, 4246800; 671600, 4246600; 671800, 
4246000; 671800, 4246000; 671255, 4245364; 670800, 4245000; 670000, 
4244200; 670000, 4244100; 670500, 4243800; 670200, 4243400; 670200, 
4243300; 670300, 4243200; 670400, 4243100; 670600, 4242600; 671200, 
4242900; 671600, 4243000; 671600, 4242700; 670700, 4242100; 669800, 
4242100; 669300, 4241900; 668900, 4241900; 668700, 4241800; 668500, 
4241600; 668400, 4241600; 668200, 4241700; 668000, 4242000; 667900, 
4242000; 667400, 4241600; 667400, 4241800; 666400, 4241700; 665400, 
4241700; 665400, 4242700; 665000, 4242700; 665000, 4242300; 664800, 
4242300; 664800, 4242200; 664700, 4242200; 664600, 4242100; 664500, 
4242100; 664500, 4241300; 664000, 4241300; 664000, 4241000; 663500, 
4241000; 663500, 4240900; 663400, 4240800; 663300, 4240800; 663300, 
4240600; 663100, 4240600; 663100, 4240900; 662800, 4240900; 662800, 
4240500; 662700, 4240400; 662700, 4240000; 662500, 4240000; 662500, 
4239600; 662100, 4239600; 662100, 4239400; 662000, 4239300; 661700, 
4239300; 661700, 4239200; 661400, 4239000; 661400, 4239900; 661500, 
4239900; 661500, 4241600; 661500, 4241900; 661700, 4242000; 662200, 
4242000; 662200, 4241600; 662900, 4241600; 662800, 4242300; 662500, 
4242300; 662600, 4243000; 662900, 4243100; 663400, 4243100; 663400, 
4243800; 663050, 4243800; 663029, 4243841; 663000, 4243900; 662500, 
4243900; 662700, 4244700; 662850, 4244800; 663000, 4244900; 663100, 
4245300; 663800, 4245300; 663900, 4245500; 664400, 4245600; 664500, 
4245200; 664600, 4245200; 664750, 4245238; 664900, 4245275; 665000, 
4245300; 664900, 4245700; 664900, 4246500; 664400, 4246500; 663900, 
4246700; 662500, 4246300; 662233, 4246300; 662100, 4246400; 661700, 
4246400; 661900, 4247000; 662000, 4247300; 661800, 4247500; 660900, 
4247500; 660900, 4247140; 660850, 4247100; 659700, 4247100; 659500, 
4247300; 659500, 4248300; 660000, 4248300; 659900, 4249600; 660000, 
4249900; 659900, 4250200; 659400, 4249700; 659400, 4249500; 659300, 
4249200; 659100, 4249000; 659100, 4248900; 659200, 4248800; 659100, 
4248700; 658900, 4248700; 658800, 4248600; 658600, 4248600; 658500, 
4248800; 658400, 4248900; 658200, 4249000; 658200, 4248900; 658300, 
4248700; 658500, 4248500; 658500, 4248400; 658400, 4248300; 658400, 
4247900; 658100, 4247900; 658000, 4248500; 656700, 4248500; 656300, 
4248900; 655900, 4248200; 656100, 4248100; 656100, 4248000; 656000, 
4247800; 655200, 4247800; 655200, 4247200; 654700, 4247200; 654700, 
4248750; 654800, 4248900; 654700, 4249000; 655100, 4249000; 655800, 
4249000; 656300, 4249700; 656600, 4249500; 657200, 4250200; 656700, 
4251100; 657700, 4251100; 657700, 4251500; 656700, 4251400; 656700, 
4252100; 656500, 4252300; 656500, 4252600; 657000, 4253700; 657400, 
4254600; 657800, 4254300; 657800, 4254200; 657800, 4254200; 658100, 
4254000; 658900, 4253500; 659000, 4253500; 659300, 4253300; 660000, 
4254500; 660100, 4254800; 660200, 4254900; 660300, 4255200; 660600, 
4255300; 660700, 4255400; 660800, 4256000; 660754, 4256046; 660777, 
4256046; 661541, 4256060; 661554, 4255796; 661731, 4252263; 661736, 
4252142; 662180, 4252172; 662313, 4252175; 662583, 4252191; 663009, 
4252217; 663119, 4252198; 663221, 4252234; 663275, 4252290; 663311, 
4252341; 663324, 4252391; 663344, 4252446; 663378, 4252511; 663390, 
4252591; 663409, 4252710; 663437, 4252770; 663510, 4252890; 663546, 
4252914; 663590, 4252922; 663630, 4252907; 663726, 4252900; 663761, 
4252901; 663800, 4252916; 663817, 4252959; 663824, 4252991; 663760, 
4253075; 663650, 4253199; 663651, 4253232; 663667, 4253286; 663741, 
4253408; 663807, 4253488; 663832, 4253490; 663904, 4253486; 663962, 
4253498; 664039, 4253560; 664088, 4253602; 664125, 4253617; 664219, 
4253695; 664248, 4253699; 664313, 4253672; 664369, 4253606; 664471, 
4253613; 664566, 4253675; 664591, 4253700; 664647, 4253753; 664752, 
4253850; 664854, 4253953; 664868, 4254000; 664877, 4254124; 664856, 
4254193; 664883, 4254238; 664977, 4254334; 665118, 4254420; 665174, 
4254468; 665227, 4254492; 665313, 4254463; 665390, 4254424; 665514, 
4254389; 665619, 4254438; 665656, 4254494; 665723, 4254546; 665757, 
4254558; 665800, 4254553; 665853, 4254513; 665880, 4254493; 665956, 
4254434; 665960, 4254402; 666029, 4254364; 666067, 4254367; 666114, 
4254379; 666168, 4254392; 666236, 4254440; 666273, 4254448; 666310, 
4254440; 666339, 4254435; 666417, 4254404; 666451, 4254362; 666491, 
4254319; 666523, 4254309; 666581, 4254312; 666652, 4254306; 666705, 
4254261; 666722, 4254230; 666740, 4254164; 666742, 4254084; 666763, 
4253987; 666791, 4253947; 666826, 4253919; 666849, 4253913; 666914, 
4253917; 666977, 4253951; 667057, 4253975; 667142, 4253997; 667253, 
4253980; 667277, 4253964; 667302, 4253968; 667313, 4253981; 667315, 
4254007; 667377, 4254034; 667482, 4254039; 667618,

[[Page 738]]

4254026; 667801, 4253975; 667959, 4253881; 668167, 4253821; 668360, 
4253834; 668422, 4253849; 668525, 4253837; 668643, 4253804; 668700, 
4253743; 668799, 4253665; 668877, 4253610; 668998, 4253531; 669098, 
4253487; 669171, 4253483; 669251, 4253471; 669328, 4253465; 669399, 
4253396; 669461, 4253324; 669558, 4253276; 669619, 4253256; 669665, 
4253257; 669859, 4253247; 670012, 4253179; 670143, 4253173; 670241, 
4253188; 670278, 4253185; 670320, 4253159; 670371, 4253105; 670419, 
4253074; 670499, 4253007; 670537, 4252992; 670594, 4252927; 670626, 
4252873; 670642, 4252848; 670663, 4252843; 670712, 4252851; 670732, 
4252875; 670716, 4252907; 670727, 4252921; 670756, 4252934; 670807, 
4252923; 670850, 4252924; 670883, 4252896; 670912, 4252829; 670949, 
4252789; 670975, 4252773; 671041, 4252762; 671109, 4252759; 671191, 
4252663; 671270, 4252568; 671315, 4252537; 671376, 4252519; 671438, 
4252504; 671509, 4252465; 671531, 4252448; 671559, 4252450; 671603, 
4252490; 671631, 4252509; 671674, 4252515; 671716, 4252510; 671773, 
4252503; 671827, 4252497; 671848, 4252476; 671934, 4252419; 671943, 
4252426; 671963, 4252453; 671990, 4252458; 672004, 4252435; 672042, 
4252400; 672107, 4252306; 672117, 4252284; 672129, 4252256; 672134, 
4252244; 672152, 4252230; 672159, 4252200; 672153, 4252190; 672148, 
4252180; 672110, 4252165; 672104, 4252149; 672109, 4252101; 672114, 
4252080; 672113, 4252055; 672107, 4251980; 672120, 4251908; 672151, 
4251893; 672177, 4251906; 672185, 4251900; 672199, 4251865; 672213, 
4251830; 672245, 4251802; 672263, 4251784; 672271, 4251775; 672271, 
4251787; 672265, 4252117; 672263, 4252199; 672247, 4252916; 672246, 
4252941; 672231, 4253670; 672225, 4253953; 672223, 4254006; 672220, 
4254157; 672219, 4254229; 672217, 4254287; 672192, 4255610; 672200, 
4255600; 672400, 4255600; 672700, 4256400; returning to 673200, 4256400.
    (ii) Unit 14B: Sacramento County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 
scale quadrangle Sloughhouse. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, 
NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 660660, 4256508; 660681, 4256119; 660600, 
4256200; 660300, 4256100; 660000, 4256200; 659800, 4256300; 659850, 
4256450; 659900, 4256600; 660200, 4256500; 660300, 4256800; 660515, 
4256728; 660633, 4256644; 660645, 4256626; returning to 660660, 4256508.

    (iii) Note: Units 13-14 (Map 4) follow:

[[Page 739]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10FE06.012

    (19) Unit 16: Solano County, California.
    (i) Unit 16A: Solano County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Elmira, Denverton, and Fairfield South. Land bounded by the 
following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 594915, 4234098; 
594916, 4233314; 595044, 4233310; 595068, 4233296; 595131, 4233266; 
595174, 4233226; 595189, 4233210; 595239,

[[Page 740]]

4233151; 595322, 4232978; 595423, 4232778; 595483, 4232667; 595553, 
4232524; 595699, 4232243; 595966, 4231717; 594927, 4231710; 594445, 
4231707; 594409, 4231673; 594410, 4231616; 594434, 4231540; 594474, 
4231494; 594495, 4231457; 594497, 4231414; 594510, 4231370; 594543, 
4231356; 594575, 4231342; 594603, 4231341; 594614, 4231338; 594616, 
4231325; 594618, 4231311; 594614, 4231290; 594605, 4231284; 594583, 
4231275; 594573, 4231268; 594557, 4231245; 594550, 4231209; 594543, 
4231179; 594500, 4231200; 593800, 4231200; 593600, 4230500; 593291, 
4230515; 593291, 4230514; 593700, 4229900; 594000, 4229700; 593900, 
4229600; 593900, 4229500; 594000, 4229400; 593900, 4229300; 593900, 
4229100; 594300, 4229000; 594300, 4228500; 593700, 4228400; 593500, 
4228100; 592800, 4228100; 592700, 4228000; 592600, 4228000; 592500, 
4227900; 592200, 4227800; 592000, 4227500; 591700, 4227400; 591500, 
4227200; 591200, 4227100; 590900, 4227000; 590700, 4227100; 590400, 
4227100; 589400, 4227400; 589265, 4227400; 589026, 4227463; 588707, 
4227579; 587979, 4227869; 587973, 4227872; 587467, 4228036; 587339, 
4228077; 587009, 4228197; 586933, 4228334; 586900, 4228400; 586700, 
4228500; 586600, 4229000; 586400, 4229100; 586200, 4229100; 586100, 
4229300; 585400, 4229900; 585400, 4230100; 585500, 4230200; 585000, 
4230300; 585100, 4230400; 585000, 4230500; 585111, 4230567; 585124, 
4230550; 585327, 4230585; 585319, 4230629; 585295, 4230649; 585270, 
4230662; 585500, 4230800; 585600, 4231100; 585903, 4231100; 585908, 
4231071; 585926, 4231064; 585956, 4231058; 586038, 4231061; 586045, 
4231073; 586045, 4231088; 586027, 4231096; 586022, 4231100; 586267, 
4231100; 586273, 4231084; 586323, 4231038; 586340, 4230994; 587435, 
4231016; 587882, 4231052; 587967, 4231111; 587991, 4231124; 588015, 
4231126; 588034, 4231123; 588075, 4231099; 588085, 4231097; 588116, 
4231095; 588700, 4230900; 588842, 4230900; 588842, 4230900; 588925, 
4230897; 588989, 4230899; 589090, 4230913; 589179, 4230901; 589179, 
4230901; 589240, 4230894; 589274, 4230890; 589315, 4230894; 589321, 
4230909; 589313, 4231179; 589015, 4231215; 589100, 4231300; 589100, 
4231700; 588600, 4231600; 588440, 4231680; 588417, 4232400; 588500, 
4232400; 588500, 4232500; 588600, 4232500; 588600, 4232800; 588400, 
4233000; 588600, 4233300; 588700, 4233500; 589300, 4233500; 589983, 
4233500; 590000, 4233500; 590100, 4233500; 590100, 4233300; 590600, 
4233300; 591100, 4232800; 591138, 4232825; 591143, 4232820; 591184, 
4232856; 591700, 4233200; 592513, 4233290; 592594, 4233291; 592594, 
4233299; 592600, 4233300; 592600, 4233800; 592900, 4233700; 592900, 
4233751; 592901, 4233751; 592900, 4233754; 592900, 4233800; 593400, 
4234100; 594200, 4234100; 594300, 4234900; 594500, 4234900; 594890, 
4235396; returning to 594915, 4234098.
    (ii) Unit 16B: Solano County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Elmira and Denverton. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 
10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 589698, 4236560; 589600, 4234900; 589700, 
4234900; 589700, 4234500; 590100, 4234500; 590100, 4234064; 590100, 
4234000; 589400, 4234000; 589000, 4234400; 588500, 4234400; 588500, 
4236400; 588549, 4236449; 588944, 4236551; 589524, 4236558; 589670, 
4236559; returning to 589698, 4236560.
    (iii) Unit 16C: Solano County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Elmira. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 
coordinates (E,N): 593200, 4242200; 593200, 4240600; 593211, 4240600; 
593255, 4239807; 592030, 4239793; 592062, 4240126; 592044, 4240137; 
592026, 4240170; 592026, 4240181; 592030, 4240261; 592300, 4240800; 
592100, 4240800; 591800, 4241000; 591700, 4241100; 591600, 4241200; 
591600, 4241300; 591600, 4241700; 591700, 4241700; 591800, 4241600; 
591900, 4241600; 592000, 4241500; 592200, 4241300; 592300, 4240900; 
returning to 593200, 4242200.
    (iv) Unit 16D: Solano County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Dozier. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 
coordinates (E,N): 600400, 4243000; 600400, 4242200; 601300, 4242200; 
601300, 4241416; 601002, 4241415; 600878, 4241415; 600446, 4241414; 
600021, 4241414; 599000, 4241412; 599000, 4242300; 599600, 4242300; 
599600, 4243000; returning to 600400, 4243000.
    (20) Unit 17: Napa County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Cuttings Wharf. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, 
NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 563200, 4230600; 563800, 4229500; 564100, 
4229600; 564300, 4229200; 563200, 4228900; 563000, 4228900; 562800, 
4228500; 562622, 4228500; 562261, 4228644; 561890, 4228781; 561756, 
4228832; 561798, 4228870; 561864, 4228920; 562198, 4229067; 562156, 
4229301; 562420, 4229359; 562483, 4229527; 562531, 4229524; 562620, 
4229552; 562652, 4229575; 562655, 4229641; 562604, 4229686; 562537, 
4229781; 562480, 4229857; 562528, 4230295; 562458, 4230498; 562480, 
4230568; 562477, 4230610; 562477, 4230692; 562464, 4230746; 562476, 
4230800; 562500, 4230800; 563200, 4230900; returning to 563200, 4230600.

    (21) Note: Units 16-17 (Map 5) follow:

[[Page 741]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10FE06.013

    (22) Unit 18: San Joaquin County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 
scale quadrangle Valley Springs SW, Linden, Farmington, and Peters. Land 
bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 676000, 
4212400; 676600, 4211200; 676300, 4211200; 676400, 4211000; 676300, 
4210600; 676200, 4210500; 676100, 4210500; 675800, 4210300; 675600, 
4210200; 675700,

[[Page 742]]

4210000; 675900, 4209700; 675900, 4209600; 676500, 4209600; 676700, 
4210100; 676700, 4210800; 676800, 4210900; 677200, 4211300; 678700, 
4211300; 678800, 4210500; 680200, 4210400; 680200, 4209700; 681100, 
4209700; 681800, 4210300; 682002, 4210263; 682013, 4209755; 682023, 
4209287; 681500, 4209100; 681300, 4208500; 680800, 4208400; 680800, 
4206100; 680500, 4205700; 680400, 4205100; 679700, 4204600; 679700, 
4203300; 679200, 4203300; 679200, 4203400; 679000, 4203400; 679000, 
4203300; 678500, 4203300; 678400, 4203100; 678300, 4203100; 678300, 
4203000; 678400, 4202900; 678400, 4202700; 677700, 4202200; 677600, 
4201700; 677500, 4201700; 677425, 4201625; 677367, 4201600; 675800, 
4201600; 675700, 4203000; 675900, 4203000; 675900, 4203200; 675700, 
4203200; 675700, 4204800; 672500, 4204700; 672500, 4205600; 672800, 
4205800; 672800, 4206300; 672100, 4206300; 672100, 4206500; 671800, 
4206500; 671600, 4206700; 671600, 4207100; 673200, 4207100; 673200, 
4207400; 674000, 4207400; 674000, 4207700; 674700, 4207500; 674700, 
4207200; 675100, 4207200; 675600, 4207400; 675600, 4208100; 675300, 
4208100; 675300, 4208000; 674500, 4208000; 674400, 4208100; 674200, 
4208200; 673930, 4208380; 673907, 4208701; 674800, 4208800; 674700, 
4209300; 674600, 4209300; 674600, 4209600; 673900, 4209600; 673900, 
4209800; 673500, 4209700; 673200, 4209600; 673200, 4209500; 673100, 
4209500; 673100, 4211900; 673500, 4211800; 673900, 4211700; 673900, 
4211400; 674100, 4211400; 674100, 4211500; 674300, 4211500; 674300, 
4211600; 674900, 4211400; 675200, 4211500; 675200, 4211700; 675300, 
4211800; 675300, 4211867; 675350, 4211900; 675500, 4211900; 675500, 
4212000; 675500, 4212400; returning to 676000, 4212400;
    (23) Unit 19: Contra Costa County, California.
    (i) Unit 19A: Contra Costa County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 
scale quadrangle Brentwood and Antioch South. Land bounded by the 
following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 612500, 4195900; 
611700, 4194500; 611700, 4194300; 611400, 4193400; 610900, 4193500; 
610200, 4193700; 609900, 4193900; 609700, 4194000; 609100, 4194000; 
608100, 4194300; 608500, 4194900; 608400, 4195100; 608600, 4195300; 
608600, 4195900; 609600, 4195900; 609500, 4195600; 609200, 4195100; 
609200, 4195000; 609300, 4194900; 609900, 4194800; 610200, 4194800; 
610500, 4195100; 611200, 4195900; 612100, 4196300; returning to 612500, 
4195900;
    (ii) Unit 19B: Contra Costa County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 
scale quadrangle Clifton Court Forebay and Byron Hot Springs. Land 
bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 621800, 
4191200; 622200, 4190700; 622275, 4190400; 622400, 4189900; 623000, 
4189300; 622900, 4188700; 622200, 4188700; 622100, 4188800; 621900, 
4189000; 621700, 4189300; 621400, 4189700; 621200, 4190000; 621200, 
4190400; 621100, 4190400; 621100, 4188700; 620900, 4188700; 620600, 
4188400; 620400, 4188600; 620400, 4188100; 620500, 4187900; 620600, 
4187800; 620700, 4187700; 620900, 4187700; 621100, 4187500; 620500, 
4187100; 620500, 4186900; 621319, 4187272; 621338, 4187281; 621600, 
4187400; 622000, 4187000; 622400, 4186400; 622600, 4186100; 622500, 
4186000; 622500, 4185800; 622000, 4185300; 621200, 4185300; 621000, 
4185500; 620800, 4185500; 620500, 4185200; 620200, 4185300; 619900, 
4185600; 619600, 4185500; 619400, 4185700; 618200, 4186600; 618100, 
4187100; 617700, 4187400; 617800, 4187900; 618200, 4188100; 618500, 
4188300; 618400, 4188600; 617700, 4188800; 617800, 4188900; 617618, 
4188855; 617400, 4189000; 617400, 4189200; 618200, 4189500; 618100, 
4189800; 618200, 4190100; 618700, 4190300; 618700, 4190700; 619000, 
4191000; 619300, 4191100; 619600, 4191100; 619800, 4190700; 619900, 
4190700; 620100, 4190900; 620400, 4190900; 620400, 4190900; 620500, 
4191200; returning to 621800, 4191200;
    (iii) Unit 19C: Alameda County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Altamont and Livermore. Land bounded by the following UTM 
Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 610800, 4177500; 610800, 4177200; 
611200, 4177200; 611900, 4176700; 612300, 4176700; 612400, 4176700; 
612400, 4177200; 613300, 4177200; 613300, 4177200; 613400, 4177000; 
613300, 4176900; 613300, 4176800; 613300, 4176700; 613200, 4176700; 
613200, 4176300; 613400, 4176300; 613400, 4176200; 613500, 4176200; 
613500, 4176300; 613600, 4176400; 613700, 4176400; 613700, 4176600; 
614400, 4175500; 614300, 4175400; 614200, 4175400; 614100, 4175300; 
614000, 4175300; 613900, 4175200; 613800, 4175100; 613700, 4175100; 
613700, 4175200; 613600, 4175200; 613600, 4176100; 613300, 4176100; 
613200, 4175900; 613100, 4175900; 612800, 4176100; 612700, 4176100; 
612500, 4175900; 612400, 4175900; 612400, 4176300; 612100, 4176300; 
612100, 4176400; 612000, 4176500; 611800, 4176500; 611600, 4176500; 
611600, 4175300; 611400, 4175300; 611200, 4175400; 610900, 4175400; 
610800, 4175900; 610400, 4175900; 610300, 4175200; 610200, 4175100; 
610000, 4175000; 610000, 4174800; 609100, 4175400; 608600, 4175600; 
608400, 4175900; 610000, 4175900; 610000, 4176500; 610400, 4176500; 
610400, 4178500; 610800, 4178300; returning to 610800, 4177500;
    (24) Unit 20: Stanislaus County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 
scale quadrangle Ripon. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 
83 coordinates (E,N): 662400, 4168300; 661600, 4168000; 661600, 4168300; 
660300, 4167800; 660600, 4167500; 660800, 4167200; 660000, 4167200; 
659500, 4168800; 661600, 4168800; 661600, 4169400; 662400, 4169400; 
returning to 662400, 4168300;

    (25) Note: Maps of Units 18, 19, and 20 (Maps 6 and 7) follow:

[[Page 743]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10FE06.014


[[Page 744]]


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10FE06.015

    (26) Unit 21: Stanislaus County, California.
    (i) Unit 21A: Stanislaus County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 
scale quadrangle Paulsell and Montpelier. Land bounded by the following 
UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 704200, 4166200; 704000, 4166200; 
703800, 4166400; 703400, 4166600; 703400, 4166800; 703500, 4166800; 
703600, 4166900; 703700, 4167000;

[[Page 745]]

703700, 4167200; 704600, 4167600; 704700, 4167600; 704800, 4167500; 
705000, 4167400; 705300, 4167400; 705300, 4166400; 705000, 4166300; 
704400, 4166300; returning to 704200, 4166200;
    (ii) Unit 21B: Stanislaus, Merced, and Mariposa Counties, 
California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle La Grange, Cooperstown, 
Paulsell, Turlock Lake, Snelling, Montpelier and Merced Falls. Land 
bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 725100, 
4167900; 725300, 4167200; 726200, 4167100; 726500, 4166800; 726500, 
4166600; 726727, 4166429; 727300, 4166000; 727700, 4165800; 729000, 
4165800; 730100, 4165400; 730400, 4165100; 730500, 4164900; 730700, 
4164100; 731300, 4164100; 731700, 4163800; 731800, 4163400; 732200, 
4162800; 732200, 4162500; 732700, 4162700; 733000, 4162600; 733600, 
4162100; 733700, 4161500; 733600, 4161000; 734600, 4160400; 734727, 
4160273; 734800, 4160200; 734800, 4160135; 734800, 4159500; 734400, 
4158700; 734300, 4158100; 734500, 4157900; 734700, 4158000; 734900, 
4158300; 735000, 4158800; 735500, 4158800; 735505, 4158795; 735700, 
4158600; 735674, 4158472; 735600, 4158100; 736171, 4157529; 736200, 
4157500; 736800, 4157300; 736900, 4157100; 736900, 4156500; 736712, 
4156500; 736300, 4156500; 736000, 4156300; 735500, 4156300; 734100, 
4156900; 733400, 4157100; 731700, 4156900; 730900, 4156500; 728900, 
4156600; 728700, 4156700; 728700, 4156800; 728600, 4156900; 728300, 
4156900; 728100, 4156800; 727900, 4156800; 727100, 4156800; 726900, 
4156600; 726700, 4156500; 726300, 4156500; 726100, 4156600; 725800, 
4156500; 725600, 4156400; 725500, 4156300; 725400, 4156200; 725100, 
4156100; 725000, 4156000; 724900, 4156000; 724800, 4156100; 724300, 
4156100; 724300, 4155700; 723800, 4155700; 723900, 4155300; 723300, 
4155400; 722700, 4155100; 722700, 4155400; 722300, 4155400; 722300, 
4156800; 722900, 4156800; 722900, 4157400; 723500, 4157400; 723500, 
4157000; 723700, 4157000; 723700, 4156900; 724300, 4156900; 724300, 
4157400; 724200, 4157400; 724200, 4157400; 724100, 4158200; 723800, 
4158200; 723700, 4159000; 722500, 4159000; 722500, 4159200; 722400, 
4159200; 722300, 4159300; 722200, 4159300; 721600, 4159300; 721600, 
4159500; 721500, 4159600; 721500, 4159800; 721600, 4159800; 721600, 
4159900; 721700, 4159900; 721700, 4160500; 721100, 4160500; 721100, 
4160100; 720800, 4160100; 720800, 4160500; 719500, 4160500; 719500, 
4160300; 720000, 4159600; 719600, 4159600; 719600, 4159500; 719500, 
4159500; 719400, 4159500; 719300, 4159400; 719100, 4159400; 719000, 
4159400; 718900, 4159300; 718700, 4159100; 718600, 4159000; 718600, 
4158900; 718400, 4158900; 718200, 4158800; 718200, 4158700; 718300, 
4158600; 718400, 4158500; 718500, 4158500; 718600, 4158400; 718700, 
4158400; 718900, 4158300; 719000, 4158100; 719000, 4157900; 718700, 
4157600; 718000, 4157700; 717800, 4157400; 717900, 4157200; 718000, 
4157000; 718400, 4157300; 718700, 4156700; 718700, 4156300; 717500, 
4156300; 717500, 4156700; 717100, 4156700; 717100, 4156300; 716600, 
4156300; 716600, 4155800; 716300, 4155700; 716200, 4155000; 715900, 
4154900; 715900, 4155100; 715800, 4155200; 715800, 4155300; 715700, 
4155400; 715600, 4155700; 715500, 4155800; 715400, 4155800; 715300, 
4156600; 715400, 4156600; 715400, 4157200; 715400, 4157400; 715500, 
4157400; 715500, 4157600; 717600, 4157600; 717600, 4159700; 718100, 
4160200; 718200, 4160500; 718400, 4160800; 718700, 4161100; 716800, 
4161100; 716800, 4160400; 715253, 4160400; 714900, 4160400; 714900, 
4160900; 715000, 4160900; 715000, 4161000; 715200, 4161000; 715200, 
4161100; 714400, 4161100; 714400, 4161200; 713700, 4161200; 713700, 
4161100; 713300, 4161100; 713200, 4161200; 713100, 4161100; 713100, 
4161000; 713400, 4160700; 713400, 4160600; 713600, 4160500; 713800, 
4160800; 713900, 4160800; 714000, 4160700; 714000, 4160400; 711133, 
4160301; 711100, 4161900; 709500, 4161900; 709500, 4163500; 707900, 
4163500; 707900, 4163100; 707000, 4163100; 707000, 4165600; 707400, 
4165600; 707400, 4165800; 706700, 4166100; 706500, 4165800; 706200, 
4166000; 706300, 4166300; 706200, 4166400; 706200, 4166500; 706300, 
4166500; 706300, 4166700; 706200, 4166700; 706200, 4167100; 706500, 
4167100; 706700, 4166700; 706800, 4166700; 706800, 4166300; 707000, 
4166300; 707000, 4166100; 707200, 4166100; 707200, 4166700; 707400, 
4166700; 707800, 4166000; 707800, 4165600; 708000, 4165800; 708200, 
4165800; 708400, 4165700; 708400, 4165500; 708200, 4165400; 708200, 
4165300; 708300, 4165200; 708400, 4165200; 708500, 4165300; 708600, 
4165400; 708800, 4165400; 709100, 4165100; 710200, 4165100; 710200, 
4166400; 710100, 4166400; 710100, 4166500; 710000, 4166500; 709900, 
4166500; 709900, 4166700; 709800, 4166700; 709800, 4167100; 710200, 
4166800; 711000, 4167600; 711600, 4167800; 712400, 4167800; 712400, 
4167300; 712900, 4167300; 712900, 4167200; 712600, 4166900; 711800, 
4167000; 711600, 4166800; 711600, 4166600; 711800, 4166500; 711800, 
4166600; 711900, 4166600; 712000, 4166300; 712100, 4166500; 712200, 
4166500; 712300, 4166400; 712500, 4166400; 712500, 4166200; 712700, 
4166200; 712700, 4166300; 712800, 4166300; 713000, 4166100; 712923, 
4166062; 712800, 4166000; 712700, 4165800; 712500, 4165800; 712500, 
4165600; 712700, 4165600; 712600, 4165400; 712400, 4165500; 712300, 
4165400; 712500, 4165300; 712500, 4165200; 712400, 4165100; 712600, 
4165100; 712600, 4165000; 712600, 4164900; 712700, 4164800; 712600, 
4164700; 712500, 4164800; 712400, 4164800; 712400, 4164300; 712800, 
4164500; 713100, 4164300; 713200, 4164100; 712900, 4163800; 712900, 
4163700; 713100, 4163800; 713500, 4164000; 713600, 4164000; 713600, 
4164100; 713700, 4164300; 714200, 4164300; 714400, 4164500; 714500, 
4164800; 714600, 4164800; 714800, 4164700; 714800, 4164200; 714400, 
4164000; 714400, 4163600; 714500, 4163500; 715200, 4164000; 715300, 
4164200; 715400, 4164200; 715300, 4163900; 715100, 4163700; 715000, 
4163500; 714800, 4163300; 714900, 4163200; 715000, 4163200; 715700, 
4163200; 715900, 4163100; 716000, 4162900; 716100, 4162800; 716200, 
4162800; 716300, 4162900; 716400, 4163000; 716500, 4163100; 716600, 
4163200; 716600, 4163500; 716500, 4163600; 716500, 4163800; 716600, 
4164100; 716800, 4164500; 716700, 4164900; 716800, 4165300; 717200, 
4165800; 717200, 4166100; 717000, 4166400; 716600, 4166400; 716400, 
4166300; 716400, 4166900; 716600, 4166900; 716800, 4167100; 716800, 
4167300; 717000, 4167400; 717500, 4167400; 718100, 4167300; 718500, 
4167100; 718600, 4166600; 718700, 4166400; 719100, 4166700; 719300, 
4166800; 719500, 4166800; 719500, 4166500; 719600, 4166400; 719600, 
4166100; 719800, 4166100; 719900, 4166300; 719900, 4166200; 720700, 
4166200; 720700, 4163700; 721533, 4163700; 721700, 4163700; 722400, 
4164100; 722400, 4164155; 722400, 4165300; 722200, 4165300; 722200, 
4165400; 721500, 4165400; 721500,

[[Page 746]]

4166100; 721000, 4166300; 720700, 4166500; 720900, 4166600; 721000, 
4166700; 721100, 4166900; 721000, 4167000; 720300, 4167000; 720100, 
4166900; 720200, 4166700; 720200, e 55'4166600; 720100, 4166500; 
720000,4166500; 719800,4166800; 719500,4167400; 719500,4167600; 
719700,4167800; 720500,4167800; 720700,4167700; 720900,4167500; 
721100,4167400; 721300,4167700; 721700,4167700; 722000,4167600; 
722500,4167600; 722900,4167500; 723300,4167400; 723000,4168400; 
723000,4169200; 723300,4169700; 723800,4169800; 724100,4169800; 
724600,4169200; 724700,4168300; returning to 725100,4167900;
    (iii) Unit 21C: Merced County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Turlock Lake. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 
83 coordinates (E,N): 713800,4155400; 712600,4155200; 712600,4156800; 
712900,4156800; 712900,4157100; 714800,4157200; 714800,4156800; 
714300,4156300; 714200,4156200; 714000,4155500; 714000,4155400; 
returning to 713800,4155400;
    (27) Unit 22: Merced County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Merced Falls, Snelling, Indian Gulch, Haystack Mtn., Yosemite 
Lake, Winton, Owens Reservoir, Planada, Le Grand, Plainsburg, and 
Merced. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates 
(E,N): 737800,4155000; 738200,4154200; 738300,4153300; 739000,4152800; 
739100,4152200; 740200,4151800; 740800,4151500; 740800,4150300; 
741100,4149900; 741700,4149400; 742100,4148500; 742100,4147100; 
743400,4146100; 744000,4145600; 744400,4144600; 744300,4143900; 
743900,4142700; 744000,4142000; 744200,4141700; 745500,4140300; 
745500,4139600; 745500,4139576; 745500,4139500; 745432,4139432; 
745400,4139400; 745339,4139307; 745338,4139306; 745334,4139300; 
745500,4139300; 745500,4139100; 745500,4137700; 746600,4137100; 
747300,4137300; 747200,4135800; 747600,4135300; 747600,4134800; 
748100,4134400; 747800,4133700; 748400,4133300; 748600,4133900; 
749500,4133400; 749600,4132100; 750400,4131600; 750100,4129800; 
751693,4129800; 751681,4129794; 751664,4129785; 751654,4129772; 
751560,4129753; 751457,4129733; 751416,4129705; 751410,4129701; 
751400,4129700; 751399,4129700; 751326,4129693; 751299,4129685; 
751191,4129530; 751123,4129507; 751088,4129488; 751053,4129470; 
751004,4129410; 751002,4129402; 750955,4129261; 750909,4129180; 
750848,4129037; 750790,4128977; 750766,4128953; 750609,4128861; 
750506,4128806; 750420,4128760; 750409,4128754; 750305,4128665; 
750239,4128660; 750017,4128694; 750006,4128700; 749963,4128723; 
749886,4128721; 749824,4128725; 749716,4128734; 749672,4128755; 
749591,4128753; 749563,4128739; 749458,4128596; 749410,4128574; 
749363,4128542; 749133,4128508; 749013,4128457; 749005,4128453; 
749002,4128451; 748903,4128379; 748906,4128277; 748917,4128239; 
748933,4128123; 748899,4128013; 748784,4127941; 748764,4127912; 
748753,4127851; 748635,4127644; 748439,4127570; 748396,4127553; 
748343,4127521; 748306,4127500; 748300,4127486; 748287,4127458; 
748295,4127296; 748300,4127277; 748320,4127203; 748332,4127134; 
748321,4127094; 748292,4127060; 748196,4126992; 748194,4126991; 
748166,4126932; 748141,4126839; 748080,4126756; 748085,4126672; 
748075,4126641; 748037,4126635; 747962,4126676; 747898,4126700; 
747863,4126691; 747823,4126667; 747794,4126628; 747766,4126528; 
747692,4126358; 747650,4126316; 747562,4126246; 747502,4126125; 
747478,4126053; 747451,4126022; 747406,4126011; 747358,4126000; 
747200,4126000; 747142,4125971; 747123,4125969; 747070,4125950; 
747003,4125902; 747000,4125900; 746900,4125900; 746600,4125800; 
746300,4125700; 746200,4125600; 746200,4125500; 745700,4125500; 
745700,4125100; 744500,4125100; 744500,4125300; 744400,4125300; 
744400,4125200; 743700,4125200; 743700,4125800; 744500,4125800; 
744500,4126200; 743700,4126200; 743700,4127000; 743600,4127000; 
742700,4127000; 742400,4127000; 742000,4127200; 742000,4128600; 
742800,4128600; 742800,4129100; 742900,4129100; 743000,4129100; 
743000,4129200; 743400,4129300; 743600,4129500; 743600,4130284; 
743605,4130284; 743600,4130493; 743600,4130700; 743595,4130700; 
743561,4132097; 743560,4132170; 743556,4132335; 744000,4133400; 
743530,4133400; 743523,4133729; 743518,4134016; 743515,4134159; 
743509,4134382; 743500,4134708; 743504,4134743; 743565,4134782; 
744447,4135329; 746234,4136439; 746230,4136445; 745985,4136865; 
745952,4136931; 745915,4136978; 745914,4136987; 745902,4137008; 
745748,4137298; 745669,4137403; 745620,4137437; 745503,4137487; 
745203,4138201; 744984,4138471; 744895,4138606; 744895,4138606; 
744830,4138711; 744596,4139085; 744234,4139637; 744233,4139645; 
744162,4139744; 744162,4139744; 744013,4140002; 744013,4140002; 
743998,4140029; 743996,4140030; 743973,4140072; 743907,4140195; 
743889,4140229; 743877,4140264; 743750,4140609; 743388,4140868; 
743091,4141131; 743053,4141165; 742997,4141268; 742771,4141692; 
742748,4141734; 742355,4142343; 742336,4142368; 742271,4142457; 
742238,4142503; 742139,4142637; 742056,4142749; 742002,4142823; 
741974,4142874; 741808,4143176; 741722,4143360; 741419,4144010; 
741385,4144081; 741316,4144328; 741297,4144395; 741245,4144456; 
741194,4144530; 741162,4144608; 741076,4144820; 740864,4144897; 
740843,4144899; 740750,4144952; 740641,4145056; 740535,4145175; 
740517,4145182; 740490,4145240; 740487,4145263; 740386,4145415; 
740321,4145847; 740320,4146066; 740303,4146114; 740276,4146159; 
740272,4146225; 740293,4146273; 740293,4146303; 740370,4146426; 
740415,4146474; 740536,4146602; 740735,4146722; 740825,4146775; 
741069,4147251; 741071,4147549; 741071,4147576; 740982,4147830; 
740955,4147883; 740914,4147967; 740822,4148059; 740772,4148182; 
740782,4148363; 740776,4148391; 740695,4148831; 740617,4149151; 
740447,4149311; 740396,4149534; 740344,4149561; 740303,4149575; 
740289,4149588; 740238,4149636; 740225,4149666; 740057,4149659; 
739993,4149678; 739917,4149678; 739791,4149621; 739705,4149597; 
739701,4149596; 739602,4149593; 739521,4149560; 739443,4149542; 
739197,4149515; 738714,4149273; 738694,4149252; 738674,4149251; 
738178,4148999; 737835,4148823; 737747,4148772; 737044,4148135; 
736672,4147809; 736430,4147669; 735929,4147379; 735716,4147219; 
735669,4147184; 735605,4147136; 735437,4147009; 735223,4146848; 
735183,4146809; 735156,4146798; 735151,4146778; 735022,4146655; 
734989,4146630; 734609,4146349; 734480,4146255; 734012,4145909; 
733808,4145758; 733765,4145739; 733763,4145732; 733370,4145442; 
732703,4144952; 732391,4144910;

[[Page 747]]

732197,4144885; 731993,4144850; 731062,4144594; 730371,4144363; 
729000,4143905; 728736,4143813; 728542,4143745; 728346,4143647; 
728018,4143482; 727340,4143194; 726795,4142958; 726607,4142867; 
726599,4142856; 726577,4142853; 725785,4142417; 725793,4142408; 
725843,4142361; 726002,4142378; 726117,4142355; 726204,4142264; 
726415,4142046; 726420,4141975; 726381,4141921; 726367,4141880; 
726261,4141732; 726182,4141648; 725935,4141477; 725916,4141451; 
725903,4141379; 725914,4141349; 725981,4141288; 726033,4141240; 
726145,4141137; 726156,4141109; 726147,4141073; 726096,4140993; 
726083,4140896; 726089,4140784; 726108,4140739; 726268,4140551; 
726269,4140436; 726283,4140368; 726313,4140308; 726412,4140209; 
726455,4140025; 726457,4140000; 726459,4139959; 726715,4139715; 
726786,4139647; 726804,4139630; 726822,4139625; 726822,4139611; 
726823,4139582; 726809,4139546; 726755,4139466; 726754,4139433; 
726931,4139179; 727174,4138842; 727220,4138823; 727261,4138819; 
727328,4138864; 727331,4138842; 727333,4138831; 727335,4138819; 
727343,4138816; 727396,4138803; 727406,4138800; 727414,4138798; 
727552,4138779; 727711,4138793; 727806,4138786; 727819,4138766; 
727845,4138644; 727858,4138617; 727881,4138590; 727700,4138500; 
727600,4138400; 727400,4138300; 727400,4137800; 727300,4137800; 
727300,4137600; 727400,4137600; 727400,4137500; 727300,4137500; 
727300,4137400; 727400,4137400; 727400,4137200; 726500,4137200; 
726500,4136500; 726400,4136400; 725800,4136400; 725800,4137200; 
725000,4137200; 724900,4138800; 725500,4138800; 725500,4138700; 
725800,4138700; 725800,4138800; 725900,4138800; 725900,4139500; 
726500,4139500; 726500,4139600; 725900,4139600; 725800,4139600; 
725800,4140200; 725900,4140200; 725900,4140900; 725400,4140900; 
725400,4140800; 725100,4140800; 725100,4141000; 724900,4141000; 
724900,4141200; 724100,4141200; 724100,4141600; 723400,4141600; 
723400,4141100; 723200,4141100; 723200,4140600; 723400,4140500; 
723400,4139500; 724000,4139500; 724000,4139400; 723900,4138900; 
723900,4138700; 723500,4138200; 723400,4138200; 723400,4138300; 
723000,4138300; 723000,4138700; 723000,4138900; 723100,4139100; 
723200,4139400; 723300,4139500; 722100,4139500; 722000,4140500; 
721900,4141100; 721900,4141900; 721900,4143400; 720800,4143400; 
720900,4141800; 721000,4141500; 721000,4141200; 721100,4141100; 
721000,4141000; 717800,4140900; 717700,4142500; 714500,4142400; 
714500,4144900; 715500,4144900; 715500,4145000; 715800,4145000; 
715900,4145000; 716000,4145000; 716100,4145100; 716100,4145200; 
716000,4145200; 715900,4145300; 715900,4145400; 716000,4145500; 
716000,4145600; 716100,4145700; 717000,4145700; 717700,4145300; 
717800,4145300; 717800,4145200; 717800,4145100; 717600,4144900; 
717600,4144800; 717600,4144700; 717800,4144500; 717900,4144600; 
718200,4144600; 718400,4144500; 718700,4144500; 718700,4144800; 
718600,4145000; 718700,4145100; 718700,4145600; 718600,4145600; 
718600,4145700; 718700,4145800; 718600,4145900; 718500,4146000; 
718500,4146100; 718600,4146200; 718600,4146500; 718300,4146500; 
718200,4146600; 718200,4146800; 718300,4146800; 718500,4146900; 
718600,4147000; 718600,4147100; 718400,4147200; 718500,4147300; 
718500,4147600; 718700,4147600; 718700,4147400; 719000,4147500; 
719100,4147700; 719300,4147600; 719600,4147900; 719700,4148000; 
719700,4148100; 719800,4148200; 720000,4148200; 720600,4148200; 
720600,4148300; 720700,4148400; 720800,4148400; 720900,4148500; 
722700,4148500; 722700,4148600; 722900,4148600; 723200,4148700; 
723400,4148700; 723200,4148600; 723100,4148500; 723000,4148400; 
723200,4148200; 723400,4148200; 723500,4148300; 723600,4148400; 
723600,4148500; 723800,4148500; 723800,4148400; 723900,4148400; 
723900,4148500; 724000,4148700; 724200,4148500; 724200,4148900; 
724300,4149000; 724300,4149100; 724500,4149000; 724500,4149300; 
724700,4149400; 724900,4149600; 725000,4149700; 725000,4150000; 
724900,4150100; 725000,4150200; 725200,4150200; 725300,4150400; 
725400,4150500; 725400,4150600; 725100,4150900; 724700,4150900; 
724700,4153400; 725000,4153500; 725400,4153900; 725600,4154100; 
725800,4154200; 726000,4154300; 726200,4154000; 726300,4153800; 
726300,4153700; 727800,4153600; 727800,4153400; 727900,4153400; 
727900,4153500; 728400,4153600; 728700,4153700; 729000,4153700; 
729000,4153600; 729100,4153500; 729300,4153400; 729400,4153400; 
729400,4153300; 729300,4153200; 729500,4153100; 729800,4153100; 
729900,4153200; 729900,4154200; 730000,4154200; 730100,4154300; 
730600,4154300; 730700,4154400; 731000,4154600; 731200,4154700; 
731500,4154700; 731800,4154900; 732200,4154900; 732600,4154800; 
733200,4154500; 733400,4154500; 733700,4154300; 734700,4154300; 
734900,4154600; 735100,4154800; 735100,4154900; 735500,4155300; 
735600,4155300; 735800,4155500; 736100,4155900; 737100,4155400; 
737157,4155367; returning to 737800,4155000;

    (28) Note: Units 21-22 (Map 8) follow:

[[Page 748]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10FE06.016

    (29) Unit 23: Merced County, California
    (i) Unit 23A: Merced County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Stevinson, Gustine, and San Luis Ranch. Land bounded by the 
following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 688300, 4129000; 
688600, 4128800; 689100, 4128900; 689200, 4128800; 689400, 4128600; 
689800, 4128500; 689900, 4128300;

[[Page 749]]

690200, 4128300; 690400, 4128200; 690500, 4128000; 690600, 4125500; 
692700, 4125500; 693200, 4125000; 693100, 4124800; 693100, 4124400; 
693300, 4123700; 693600, 4123400; 693800, 4123000; 694000, 4122900; 
694079, 4122821; 694035, 4122790; 692453, 4121671; 692300, 4121900; 
692200, 4122000; 692200, 4122500; 692100, 4122700; 691800, 4122800; 
691400, 4122800; 691261, 4123079; 691262, 4123097; 691263, 4123113; 
691267, 4123155; 691273, 4123198; 691267, 4123238; 691248, 4123272; 
691217, 4123291; 691200, 4123294; 691200, 4123500; 691110, 4123679; 
691126, 4123677; 691149, 4123682; 691156, 4123694; 691166, 4123718; 
691177, 4123739; 691191, 4123771; 691193, 4123793; 691200, 4123800; 
691195, 4123810; 691201, 4123850; 691215, 4123892; 691220, 4123942; 
691214, 4123980; 691192, 4124020; 691171, 4124049; 691150, 4124072; 
691127, 4124089; 691099, 4124095; 691071, 4124095; 691055, 4124090; 
690900, 4124400; 690559, 4124400; 690559, 4124402; 690569, 4124417; 
690582, 4124427; 690582, 4124447; 690576, 4124466; 690563, 4124483; 
690546, 4124493; 690525, 4124502; 690523, 4124502; 690523, 4124519; 
690500, 4124524; 690475, 4124530; 690469, 4124538; 690445, 4124570; 
690388, 4124590; 690353, 4124592; 690180, 4124650; 690127, 4124689; 
690083, 4124695; 690025, 4124783; 690020, 4124854; 689996, 4124900; 
689988, 4125006; 689952, 4125056; 689912, 4125095; 689856, 4125119; 
689819, 4125184; 689788, 4125210; 689747, 4125229; 689700, 4125300; 
689658, 4125595; 689665, 4125595; 689672, 4125603; 689645, 4125757; 
689630, 4125793; 689600, 4126000; 689700, 4126200; 689600, 4126600; 
689400, 4126600; 689275, 4126538; 689239, 4126581; 689188, 4126664; 
689134, 4126678; 689121, 4126682; 689069, 4126728; 689067, 4126852; 
689020, 4126961; 688990, 4126993; 688911, 4126978; 688903, 4126995; 
688913, 4127006; 689100, 4127100; 689024, 4127195; 689025, 4127207; 
688949, 4127292; 688931, 4127324; 688922, 4127322; 688854, 4127407; 
688823, 4127454; 688780, 4127503; 688735, 4127581; 688723, 4127621; 
688696, 4127650; 688684, 4128244; 688193, 4128235; 688100, 4128700; 
returning to 688300, 4129000;
    (ii) Unit 23B: Merced County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Stevinson and San Luis Ranch. Land bounded by the following 
UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 695400, 4125600; 695500, 4122000; 
694900, 4122400; 694700, 4122700; 694500, 4122900; 694500, 4123100; 
694100, 4123400; 693800, 4123500; 693800, 4123800; 693500, 4123900; 
693500, 4124500; 693700, 4124700; 693800, 4125000; 693600, 4125200; 
693400, 4125300; 693122, 4125670; 693100, 4125700; 693146, 4125746; 
693200, 4125800; 693700, 4125900; 693700, 4127300; 693800, 4127300; 
693900, 4127000; 694200, 4126900; 694600, 4126400; 694600, 4126200; 
694700, 4126000; 695179, 4125726; returning to 695400, 4125600;
    (iii) Unit 23C: Merced County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Arena, Stevinson, Turner Ranch, and San Luis Ranch. Land 
bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 699300, 
4126300; 699300, 4125400; 700100, 4125400; 700200, 4126000; 700600, 
4125700; 701100, 4125300; 701100, 4124300; 700300, 4124300; 700300, 
4123800; 700500, 4123800; 700600, 4123500; 701100, 4123400; 701200, 
4123200; 701400, 4123100; 701600, 4122700; 701900, 4122500; 702600, 
4122200; 702870, 4121705; 703200, 4121100; 703900, 4120500; 704600, 
4119800; 704600, 4119800; 704700, 4119700; 698900, 4119600; 698800, 
4119700; 698543, 4119957; 698558, 4119970; 698501, 4120012; 698504, 
4120069; 698626, 4120197; 698662, 4120077; 698694, 4120113; 698668, 
4121116; 698663, 4121510; 698594, 4121508; 698600, 4121600; 699900, 
4121600; 700000, 4120400; 700200, 4120400; 700200, 4122700; 697000, 
4122600; 696900, 4125100; 697700, 4125100; 697700, 4125300; 697600, 
4125400; 697700, 4125600; 698000, 4125700; 698200, 4125800; 698300, 
4126100; 698700, 4126500; 699500, 4126500; 699600, 4126300; returning to 
699300, 4126300;
    (iv) Unit 23D: Merced County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Arena and Turner Ranch. Land bounded by the following UTM 
Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 706700, 4122100; 706800, 4120900; 
706700, 4120500; 706700, 4119700; 708100, 4119700; 708100, 4119600; 
708000, 4119500; 707900, 4119200; 707900, 4119000; 708000, 4118900; 
708300, 4118900; 708300, 4118100; 707900, 4118100; 707500, 4118500; 
706500, 4118500; 706000, 4118900; 705600, 4119300; 705200, 4119700; 
704800, 4120000; 704700, 4120100; 704700, 4120400; 705100, 4120400; 
705100, 4120600; 704900, 4120700; 704900, 4120800; 705100, 4120800; 
704900, 4121000; 705000, 4121100; 705100, 4121700; 705200, 4121700; 
705300, 4122000; 705700, 4122100; 705700, 4122200; 705400, 4122300; 
705300, 4122400; 705500, 4122600; 705400, 4122600; 705300, 4122500; 
705200, 4122500; 705100, 4122500; 704900, 4122500; 704900, 4122700; 
704800, 4122800; 704500, 4122800; 704300, 4122900; 704000, 4122800; 
703900, 4122900; 703400, 4124400; 703300, 4124600; 701300, 4126500; 
700100, 4127600; 700467, 4129067; 700500, 4129200; 700500, 4130600; 
701000, 4130600; 701000, 4130100; 701100, 4129800; 701200, 4129800; 
701100, 4130100; 701100, 4130600; 701700, 4130600; 701700, 4129200; 
701800, 4129200; 702800, 4129200; 703000, 4128800; 703300, 4128800; 
703900,4128800; 703900, 4129000; 704200, 4129000; 704200, 4128500; 
703300,4128400; 703400, 4128300; 703400, 4127900; 703500,4127800; 
703800, 4127500; 703700, 4127300; 703500, 4127300; 703400,4127100; 
703400, 4126100; 703500, 4126100; 704400, 4126100; 704300, 4126000; 
704400, 4125900; 704500, 4125300; 704500, 4124800; 705000, 4124800; 
705000, 4125300; 705700, 4125300; 705700, 4124900; 706600, 4125000; 
706700, 4123700; returning to 706700, 4122100;
    (v) Unit 23E: Merced County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Sandy Mush and Turner Ranch. Land bounded by the following 
UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 706700, 4122100; 711500, 4122200; 
711500, 4121700; 711500, 4121200; 709900, 4121300; 709900, 4121900; 
709800, 4121900; 709800, 4121800; 709700, 4121500; 709500, 4121500; 
709300, 4121600; 708800, 4121400; 708700, 4121300; 706800, 4121300; 
returning to 706700, 4122100;
    (vi) Unit 23F: Merced County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Sandy Mush and Turner Ranch. Land bounded by the following 
UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 711200, 4120500; 711400, 4120400; 
711500, 4120500; 711600, 4119600; 711900, 4119600; 711900,4119400; 
712100, 4119300; 712300, 4119300; 712300, 4119200; 712600, 4119200; 
712800, 4118800; 711600, 4118700; 711600, 4118500; 711400, 4118500;

[[Page 750]]

711300, 4118400; 711100, 4118100; 709900, 4118100; 709900, 4118800; 
709900, 4119000; 709700, 4119000; 709700, 4119600; 710300, 4119600; 
710300, 4119900; 710700, 4119900; 710700, 4120000; 710600, 4120000; 
710600, 4120100; 710700, 4120200; 710600, 4120300; 710700, 4120400; 
710700, 4120500; 710900, 4120400; 711100, 4120400; returning to 711200, 
4120500;
    (vii) Unit 23G: Merced County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Sandy Mush. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 
coordinates (E,N): 714600, 4115000; 713300, 4115000; 713100, 4115300; 
713300, 4115300; 713800, 4115400; 713800, 4116600; 715400, 4116600; 
715500, 4116500; 715500, 4115818; 714600, 4115800; returning to 714600, 
4115000;
    (viii) Unit 23H: Merced County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle El Nido and Sandy Mush. Land bounded by the following UTM 
Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 718900, 4120900; 718900, 4120000; 
719300, 4120000; 719400, 4120200; 719600, 4120100; 720200, 4120100; 
720300, 4120200; 720700, 4120200; 720900, 4120000; 721500, 4120000; 
721600, 4120100; 722000, 4120100; 722100, 4120000; 722200, 4120200; 
722200, 4120300; 722900, 4120300; 722900, 4119600; 722100, 4119500; 
722200, 4118400; 725400, 4118500; 725400, 4118578; 726100, 4118600; 
726100, 4120100; 728600, 4120100; 728600, 4119200; 727800, 4119200; 
727700, 4118600; 727600, 4118500; 727500, 4118500; 727500, 4118400; 
727500, 4116900; 726800, 4116900; 726700, 4116900; 726800, 4115300; 
725900, 4115300; 725900, 4116900; 724300, 4116900; 724300, 4117600; 
722694, 4117506; 722600, 4117600; 721800, 4117600; 721800, 4118400; 
720200, 4118400; 720200, 4117600; 719400, 4117600; 719400, 4116700; 
718600, 4116700; 718600, 4117100; 718200, 4117100; 718200, 4117200; 
718300, 4117300; 718400, 4117400; 718600, 4117400; 718600, 4117500; 
718600, 4118291; 718900, 4118300; 718900, 4118900; 718800, 4119000; 
718700, 4119000; 718600, 4119100; 717700, 4119100; 717700, 4119900; 
718100, 4119900; 718100, 4119950; 718100, 4120000; 718500, 4120000; 
718500, 4120900; returning to 718900, 4120900;
    (ix) Unit 23I: Merced County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Sandy Mush. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 
coordinates (E,N): 721300, 4120800; 720500, 4120800; 720500, 4121600; 
721300, 4121600; 721300, 4121200; returning to 721300, 4120800;
    (x) Unit 23J: Merced County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle El Nido. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 
coordinates (E,N): 722900, 4121800; 721800, 4121800; 722200, 4122500; 
722900, 4122500; returning to 722900, 4121800;
    (xi) Unit 23K: Merced County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Plainsburg and El Nido. Land bounded by the following UTM 
Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 731700, 4117000; 730400, 4117000; 
730400, 4118600; 730200, 4118600; 730100, 4119300; 730000, 4119700; 
730000, 4119900; 730100, 4120200; 730900, 4120200; 730900, 4121400; 
731300, 4121500; 731800, 4121400; 732700, 4121300; 734000, 4121200; 
734200, 4121100; 734200, 4120300; 733400, 4120300; 733400, 4118700; 
731700, 4118700; returning to 731700, 4117000.

    (xii) Note: Unit 23 (Map 9) follows:

[[Page 751]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10FE06.017

    (30) Unit 24: Madera County, California.
    (i) Unit 24A: Madera County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Little Table Mountain, Daulton, Lanes Bridge, and Gregg. Land 
bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 775948, 
4105456; 775999, 4105450; 776120, 4105477; 776212, 4105561; 776272, 
4105591; 776338, 4105583; 776404,

[[Page 752]]

4105519; 776449, 4105460; 776460, 4105422; 776461, 4105333; 776454, 
4105310; 776453, 4105259; 776440, 4105190; 776403, 4105067; 776342, 
4104912; 776338, 4104874; 776344, 4104834; 776389, 4104794; 776390, 
4104794; 776511, 4104930; 776669, 4105060; 776888, 4105057; 777034, 
4105112; 777089, 4105117; 777174, 4105104; 777227, 4105114; 777322, 
4105160; 777452, 4105307; 777505, 4105311; 777525, 4105303; 777569, 
4105287; 777611, 4105253; 777630, 4105233; 777676, 4105204; 777716, 
4105178; 777254, 4104608; 776860, 4104161; 777386, 4103739; 777417, 
4103722; 777478, 4103724; 777556, 4103747; 777592, 4103745; 777628, 
4103729; 777649, 4103704; 777655, 4103686; 777652, 4103610; 777595, 
4103484; 777574, 4103361; 777542, 4103322; 777483, 4103277; 777424, 
4103214; 777425, 4103166; 777452, 4103116; 777471, 4103096; 777503, 
4103036; 777500, 4102977; 777455, 4102796; 777458, 4102704; 777472, 
4102666; 777490, 4102639; 777701, 4102491; 777761, 4102460; 777902, 
4102427; 778037, 4102384; 778066, 4102347; 778094, 4102274; 778118, 
4102255; 778167, 4102239; 778212, 4102243; 778340, 4102295; 778379, 
4102282; 778505, 4102141; 778562, 4102125; 778633, 4102132; 778720, 
4102092; 778766, 4102096; 778798, 4102120; 778918, 4102254; 778976, 
4102268; 778997, 4102264; 779059, 4102223; 779095, 4102209; 779762, 
4102193; 779897, 4102172; 780079, 4102219; 780132, 4102236; 780185, 
4102235; 780236, 4102217; 780360, 4102089; 780617, 4101823; 780666, 
4101774; 780673, 4101764; 780682, 4101751; 780688, 4101743; 780713, 
4101714; 780759, 4101634; 780761, 4101576; 780738, 4101514; 780687, 
4101446; 780591, 4101336; 780514, 4101212; 780513, 4101163; 780527, 
4101126; 780569, 4101089; 780939, 4100827; 781071, 4100686; 781076, 
4100683; 781136, 4100645; 781561, 4100454; 781645, 4100459; 781800, 
4100538; 781863, 4100561; 781925, 4100540; 781944, 4100528; 782075, 
4100451; 782128, 4100455; 782347, 4100528; 782403, 4100533; 782429, 
4100521; 782457, 4100499; 782535, 4100382; 782587, 4100338; 782809, 
4100244; 782840, 4100222; 782884, 4100193; 782929, 4100075; 783072, 
4099907; 783203, 4099779; 783268, 4099756; 783377, 4099744; 783662, 
4099749; 783703, 4099735; 783743, 4099676; 783751, 4099641; 783755, 
4099621; 783767, 4099609; 783768, 4099584; 783781, 4099548; 783795, 
4099504; 783827, 4099471; 783858, 4099445; 783890, 4099424; 783916, 
4099399; 783946, 4099382; 784056, 4099380; 784184, 4099372; 784246, 
4099369; 784263, 4099375; 784300, 4099370; 784342, 4099377; 784378, 
4099391; 784414, 4099405; 784438, 4099417; 784462, 4099430; 784493, 
4099442; 784516, 4099445; 784536, 4099439; 784561, 4099422; 784574, 
4099398; 784593, 4099356; 784601, 4099324; 784620, 4099288; 784627, 
4099259; 784651, 4099241; 784652, 4099240; 784671, 4099217; 784701, 
4099206; 784733, 4099188; 784758, 4099176; 784776, 4099164; 784801, 
4099153; 784820, 4099143; 784845, 4099124; 784876, 4099102; 784907, 
4099085; 784944, 4099056; 784970, 4099032; 784995, 4099006; 785020, 
4098984; 785040, 4098960; 785046, 4098935; 785059, 4098917; 785060, 
4098888; 785073, 4098858; 785074, 4098834; 785068, 4098801; 785061, 
4098785; 785052, 4098764; 785041, 4098739; 785024, 4098708; 785006, 
4098676; 784995, 4098640; 784978, 4098615; 784967, 4098591; 784960, 
4098572; 784968, 4098548; 784993, 4098525; 785024, 4098508; 785062, 
4098476; 785086, 4098473; 785117, 4098442; 785130, 4098431; 785143, 
4098395; 785152, 4098345; 785159, 4098279; 785168, 4098231; 785176, 
4098163; 785184, 4098120; 785184, 4098108; 785204, 4098054; 785220, 
4097988; 785238, 4097931; 785246, 4097885; 785247, 4097853; 785237, 
4097805; 785216, 4097736; 785199, 4097682; 785188, 4097625; 785182, 
4097596; 785190, 4097576; 785209, 4097535; 785235, 4097499; 785266, 
4097451; 785286, 4097422; 785312, 4097385; 785325, 4097349; 785320, 
4097300; 785329, 4097245; 785330, 4097202; 785337, 4097165; 785350, 
4097153; 785362, 4097142; 785387, 4097137; 785386, 4097154; 785380, 
4097178; 785336, 4098764; 785334, 4098821; 785334, 4098823; 785325, 
4099157; 785658, 4099178; 785746, 4097781; 787243, 4097875; 787331, 
4096478; 786932, 4096452; 786601, 4096933; 786208, 4096807; 786246, 
4096208; 786258, 4096009; 785453, 4095958; 784661, 4095908; 784661, 
4095908; 784662, 4095507; 784662, 4094305; 784681, 4094005; 780582, 
4093847; 779783, 4093796; 776583, 4093695; 776463, 4095591; 776657, 
4095704; 778160, 4095698; 778053, 4097395; 778858, 4097346; 778857, 
4098949; 779656, 4099000; 779555, 4100597; 776348, 4100594; 776551, 
4095797; 776451, 4095791; 773656, 4095615; 771760, 4095495; 771697, 
4096493; 771652, 4098795; 773554, 4098815; 773553, 4100418; 769954, 
4100291; 769935, 4100590; 771238, 4102176; 772086, 4103031; 772447, 
4103655; 772896, 4104485; 774373, 4106482; 774835, 4107052; 774846, 
4107045; 774850, 4107042; 774860, 4107038; 774885, 4106988; 774910, 
4106826; 774924, 4106643; 774919, 4106604; 774912, 4106536; 774917, 
4106473; 774975, 4106381; 774999, 4106361; 775134, 4106205; 775285, 
4106081; 775406, 4105942; 775604, 4105742; 775620, 4105713; 775682, 
4105659; 775765, 4105623; returning to 775948, 4105456;
    (ii) Unit 24B: Fresno County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Friant. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 
coordinates (E,N): 793782, 4099090; 793994, 4098902; 794194, 4098915; 
794306, 4098722; 794618, 4098541; 794831, 4098354; 795529, 4098398; 
795835, 4098317; 796228, 4098442; 796403, 4098854; 797089, 4099098; 
797289, 4099111; 797588, 4099129; 798930, 4098512; 798743, 4098300; 
798244, 4098269; 797832, 4098443; 797863, 4097944; 797670, 4097832; 
797577, 4097725; 797583, 4097626; 797589, 4097526; 797989, 4097551; 
798007, 4097252; 797708, 4097233; 797721, 4097033; 797920, 4097046; 
797926, 4096946; 797446, 4096615; 796479, 4096053; 796018, 4095422; 
794932, 4095153; 794203, 4094004; 794215, 4093805; 794515, 4093824; 
795494, 4094186; 796549, 4093351; 797229, 4093694; 797760, 4093226; 
797848, 4091829; 797655, 4091716; 797580, 4091310; 796372, 4090700; 
796318, 4090707; 796265, 4090961; 796301, 4090929; 796262, 4090975; 
796072, 4091876; 796159, 4092137; 796200, 4092206; 796282, 4092261; 
796330, 4092663; 796160, 4093099; 796056, 4093364; 795805, 4093706; 
795727, 4093853; 795710, 4093880; 795603, 4094060; 795291, 4093982; 
794825, 4093866; 794320, 4093746; 794171, 4093710; 794163, 4093773; 
794145, 4093931; 794183, 4094110; 794269, 4094203; 794321, 4094260; 
794475, 4094454; 794503, 4094666; 794724, 4094985; 794665, 4095138; 
794826, 4095644; 794644, 4095919; 794496, 4096144; 794468, 4096427; 
794455, 4096564; 793663, 4097789; 793626, 4098378; 793513, 4098371; 
793423, 4098551; 793475, 4098842; 793327, 4099109; 793333, 4099147; 
793270, 4099175; 793237, 4099239; 793463, 4099370; 793563, 4099377; 
793769, 4099289; returning to 793782, 4099090;

[[Page 753]]

    (31) Unit 25: Madera County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Millerton Lake East. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 
10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 804045, 4111166; 804569, 4110798; 804807, 
4110212; 804938, 4109719; 804571, 4109194; 803572, 4109131; 803260, 
4109312; 803222, 4109911; 803359, 4110922; 802579, 4110572; 802254, 
4110952; 801755, 4110921; 801473, 4112206; 801947, 4112637; 802009, 
4113242; 801391, 4113504; 801578, 4113716; 801627, 4114521; 801820, 
4114634; 803618, 4114748; 803836, 4114461; 803787, 4113656; 802720, 
4113087; 802839, 4112794; 803158, 4112513; 803788, 4112052; returning to 
804045, 4111166;

    (32) Note: Units 24-25 (Map 10) follow:

[[Page 754]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10FE06.018

    (33) Unit 26: Tulare and Kings Counties, California.
    (i) Unit 26A: Tulare and Kings Counties, California. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangle Monson, Traver, Burris Park, and Remnoy. Land 
bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 828797, 
4041134; 828810, 4040935; 829509, 4040978;

[[Page 755]]

829634, 4040585; 829709, 4039386; 830449, 4039621; 830453, 4039463; 
830420, 4039230; 829721, 4039186; 829521, 4039174; 829509, 4039374; 
828304, 4039399; 828279, 4039798; 827580, 4039755; 827605, 4039355; 
827205, 4039330; 827280, 4038132; 826381, 4038076; 826400, 4037776; 
825601, 4037726; 825582, 4038026; 824877, 4038082; 824895, 4037782; 
822892, 4037758; 822929, 4037159; 821031, 4037041; 821075, 4036342; 
820575, 4036310; 820606, 4035811; 820207, 4035786; 820157, 4034981; 
820200, 4034282; 818203, 4034157; 818222, 4033858; 817135, 4033589; 
816842, 4033471; 816667, 4033059; 816274, 4032935; 816181, 4032934; 
814570, 4032928; 813902, 4032386; 813727, 4031974; 813565, 4031362; 
813284, 4031044; 812996, 4030826; 812891, 4032523; 813790, 4032579; 
814252, 4033209; 814539, 4033428; 814851, 4034164; 814889, 4034252; 
815581, 4034395; 816256, 4034838; 817560, 4034819; 816992, 4035886; 
818490, 4035980; 819364, 4036436; 819770, 4036360; 820900, 4037534; 
821693, 4037683; 822542, 4038539; 824646, 4038569; 824846, 4038582; 
826344, 4038675; 826313, 4039175; 825507, 4039225; 825445, 4040223; 
827043, 4040323; 827100, 4041028; returning to 828797, 4041134;
    (ii) Unit 26B: Tulare County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Monson. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 
coordinates (E,N): 831257, 4040285; 831281, 4039895; 831228, 4039894; 
831226, 4040265; 830457, 4040256; 830452, 4040335; returning to 831257, 
4040285;
    (iii) Unit 26C: Tulare County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Monson. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 
coordinates (E,N): 835309, 4039635; 834510, 4039585; 834460, 4040384; 
835259, 4040434; returning to 835309, 4039635;
    (iv) Unit 26D: Tulare County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Ivanhoe. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 
coordinates (E,N): 837863, 4043705; 837178, 4043663; 837165, 4044455; 
837527, 4044471; 837510, 4044925; 837253, 4045186; 836546, 4045165; 
836550, 4044829; 836726, 4044828; 836732, 4044453; 836753, 4044453; 
836777, 4043638; 836764, 4043637; 836765, 4043628; 835983, 4043614; 
835959, 4043687; 836040, 4043993; 836433, 4044117; 836365, 4045216; 
837164, 4045266; 836733, 4045741; 838331, 4045841; 838338, 4045740; 
837838, 4045710; 837919, 4044411; 837819, 4044405; returning to 837863, 
4043705;
    (v) Unit 26E: Tulare County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Monson. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 
coordinates (E,N): 831258, 4037878; 830508, 4037831; 830507, 4037837; 
830510, 4037837; 830495, 4038113; 830867, 4038116; 831249, 4038123; 
returning to 831258, 4037878;
    (vi) Unit 26F: Tulare County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Monson. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 
coordinates (E,N): 832081, 4039935; 832106, 4039535; 832038, 4039531; 
831991, 4039595; 831752, 4039679; 831748, 4039853; 832035, 4039864; 
832031, 4039913; 831542, 4039901; 832081, 4039935; returning to 832081, 
4039935;

    (vii) Note: Unit 26 (Map 11) follows:

[[Page 756]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10FE06.019

    (34) Unit 27: Tulare County, California.
    (i) Unit 27A: Tulare County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Taylor Weir, Corcoran, and Alpaugh. Land bounded by the 
following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 816702, 4000178; 
816908, 4000090; 818306, 4000177; 818405, 3998578; 819903, 3998671; 
820002, 3997073; 818403, 3996974; 818502,

[[Page 757]]

3995377; 819301, 3995426; 819351, 3994627; 820149, 3994676; 820199, 
3993877; 820248, 3993078; 820297, 3992279; 819399, 3992224; 819497, 
3990626; 819996, 3990656; 820064, 3989558; 819765, 3989539; 819752, 
3989739; 819422, 3990220; 819310, 3990414; 819104, 3990501; 817899, 
3990527; 817644, 3991413; 817613, 3991913; 817214, 3991888; 816659, 
3992756; 816504, 3993649; 816691, 3993861; 816660, 3994360; 816960, 
3994379; 816910, 3995178; 816898, 3995378; 814901, 3995254; 814802, 
3996852; 815201, 3996877; 815164, 3997476; 815252, 3997682; 816051, 
3997731; 813905, 4000005; returning to 816702, 4000178.
    (ii) Unit 27B: Tulare County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Pixley and Alpaugh. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 
10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 829592, 3978113; 829568, 3978513; 829967, 
3978537; 829949, 3978837; 830348, 3978862; 830293, 3979761; 826897, 
3979551; 826585, 3979733; 826454, 3980226; 826324, 3980719; 826012, 
3980901; 825999, 3981101; 824601, 3981014; 824320, 3980697; 825480, 
3979765; 825492, 3979565; 825392, 3979559; 823495, 3979442; 822391, 
3981079; 823590, 3981153; 824008, 3980878; 824201, 3980990; 824189, 
3981190; 824476, 3981408; 824470, 3981508; 824570, 3981514; 824496, 
3982713; 827793, 3982915; 827743, 3983715; 828543, 3983764; 828598, 
3982865; 828997, 3982890; 829090, 3981391; 829090, 3981391; 830388, 
3981471; 830387, 3979867; 831991, 3979865; 831897, 3979759; 831947, 
3978960; 832946, 3979021; 832939, 3979121; 833039, 3979128; 832995, 
3978222; 832895, 3978216; 832845, 3977419; 832047, 3977387; 831990, 
3978261; 829992, 3978138; returning to 829592, 3978113;
    (iii) Unit 27C: Tulare County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Pixley and Alpaugh. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 
10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 829592, 3978113; 829641, 3977314; 828842, 
3977265; 828848, 3977165; 828848, 3977165; 828885, 3976566; 827487, 
3976480; 827450, 3977079; 827150, 3977060; 827144, 3977160; 826645, 
3977130; 826700, 3976231; 825601, 3976163; 824598, 3977806; returning to 
829592, 3978113;
    (iv) Unit 27D: Tulare County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Delano West. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 
83 coordinates (E,N): 831681, 3975979; 831682, 3975780; 832114, 3975799; 
832147, 3975004; 831304, 3974962; 831290, 3974961; 831213, 3976207; 
832099, 3976262; 832108, 3976000; returning to 831681, 3975979;

    (v) Note: Unit 27 (Map 12) follows:

[[Page 758]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10FE06.020

    (35) Unit 28: San Benito and Monterey Counties, California. From 
USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Hernandez Reservoir, Rock Springs Peak, 
Topo Peak, Hepsedam Peak, Lonoak, Pinalito Canyon, Monarch Peak, and 
Nattrass Valley. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 
coordinates (E,N): 682300, 4039700; 681300, 4038600; 681600,

[[Page 759]]

4037000; 681700, 4035800; 680800, 4034500; 678800, 4035200; 678000, 
4036000; 677600, 4037100; 677200, 4037800; 67680, 4037900; 676100, 
4038500; 675800, 4039000; 675000, 4038500; 675100, 4038000; 674700, 
4037600; 673100, 4037000; 673800, 4036500; 674000, 4035500; 674700, 
4035000; 675500, 4034700; 676000, 4033600; 676800, 4033300; 677600, 
4032700; 678100, 4032100; 679000, 4031400; 679600, 4031200; 679900, 
4031700; 679900, 4032700; 680500, 4033000; 681000, 4032500; 681500, 
4031500; 682600, 4031200; 684400, 4028700; 685200, 4028700; 685500, 
4028200; 687400, 4029500; 688000, 4030700; 688800, 4031100; 689700, 
4031200; 691200, 4032600; 692000, 4032300; 692500, 4031600; 693200, 
4031300; 693700, 4031300; 694300, 4030900; 693800, 4029500; 692600, 
4028500; 693500, 4028500; 694300, 4027800; 694300, 4027200; 695100, 
4026100; 696600, 4024900; 696600, 4023700; 697200, 4022600; 697900, 
4022600; 698300, 4021500; 699200, 4020500; 699100, 4019400; 698500, 
4019300; 698000, 4018700; 697100, 4018800; 695700, 4017900; 695400, 
4016900; 695100, 4016500; 694900, 4015900; 694900, 4015000; 694857, 
4014888; 694400, 4013700; 693800, 4013100; 693600, 4012100; 692400, 
4010900; 692000, 4009100; 691600, 4008600; 690800, 4008600; 689500, 
4009400; 689000, 4010100; 688900, 4010700; 687800, 4011000; 687100, 
4011000; 685400, 4012100; 684900, 4013300; 683600, 4014100; 683400, 
4014900; 682700, 4015200; 682500, 4016200; 683100, 4016600; 683100, 
4017044; 683100, 4017700; 684200, 4019500; 684200, 4020500; 683400, 
4022200; 681700, 4023500; 681100, 4023600; 680700, 4024400; 680600, 
4025500; 679800, 4025700; 679300, 4026900; 678700, 4027300; 678100, 
4026600; 677400, 4026400; 676000, 4025600; 676000, 4025000; 676600, 
4024500; 676800, 4023700; 675800, 4022500; 675702, 4021862; 675600, 
4021200; 675000, 4020200; 674200, 4019900; 672200, 4016700; 670800, 
4015700; 670000, 4015700; 669500, 4016000; 669100, 4016700; 669600, 
4017400; 669500, 4018600; 670100, 4019300; 670300, 4022200; 671000, 
4023000; 672700, 4024100; 673205, 4024226; 673500, 4024300; 674800, 
4026200; 674500, 4026500; 674600, 4027000; 674100, 4027300; 673000, 
4026800; 672400, 4027000; 671600, 4028700; 670700, 4028700; 669700, 
4028900; 669700, 4030100; 669800, 4030700; 670300, 4032100; 670700, 
4035100; 671300, 4037100; 669100, 4037700; 669200, 4038600; 668700, 
4040300; 669800, 4042700; 671900, 4043300; 674100, 4043500; 676000, 
4045600; 677300, 4046700; 683000, 4043300; 683800, 4042200; 683700, 
4040600; returning to 682300, 4039700.

    (36) Note: Unit 28 (Map 13) follows:

[[Page 760]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10FE06.021

    (37) Unit 29: Monterey County, California.
    (i) Unit 29A: Monterey County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Williams Hill and Jolon. Land bounded by the following UTM 
Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 668500, 3981900; 668700, 3981600; 
668500, 3981100; 668700, 3980600; 669400, 3980100; 669800, 3980500; 
670600, 3980700; 671400, 3980600; 671400,

[[Page 761]]

3979500; 671900, 3979500; 672700, 3978600; 674700, 3978600; 675400, 
3978200; 674600, 3976900; 674800, 3975700; 674900, 3975567; 674900, 
3975500; 674700, 3975500; 674640, 3975981; 674639, 3976224; 674609, 
3976226; 674600, 3976300; 673444, 3976300; 673418, 3976654; 673400, 
3976654; 673400, 3976700; 673032, 3976700; 673029, 3977031; 673830, 
3977043; 673838, 3977861; 673000, 3977858; 673000, 3977900; 672261, 
3977869; 672201, 3978658; 670585, 3978648; 670610, 3977800; 670600, 
3977800; 670600, 3977628; 670210, 3977909; 669793, 3978209; 669403, 
3978493; 669204, 3978638; 669009, 3978794; 668691, 3979047; 668676, 
3979059; 668631, 3979094; 668575, 3979139; 668542, 3979154; 668427, 
3979205; 668355, 3979245; 668300, 3979300; 667137, 3980172; 668155, 
3980187; 668138, 3980992; 667738, 3980995; 667723, 3981807; 667320, 
3981800; 667314, 3982100; 668000, 3982100; returning to 668500, 3981900;
    (ii) Unit 29B: Monterey County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Valleton, Wunpost, San Miguel. Land bounded by the following 
UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 706300, 3975100; 706500, 3974400; 
706400, 3971900; 706600, 3970800; 707000, 3970100; 707000, 3969400; 
706800, 3969200; 706800, 3968200; 706600, 3967499; 705500, 3965500; 
705400, 3965500; 705290, 3970469; 706068, 3970480; 706043, 3972930; 
705235, 3972918; 705200, 3974500; 705155, 3974500; 705155, 3974504; 
704931, 3974500; 704000, 3974500; 703700, 3973800; 703700, 3973400; 
703229, 3972552; 703170, 3972480; 702900, 3972300; 702600, 3972000; 
702500, 3971900; 701931, 3971236; 701923, 3971236; 701885, 3971200; 
701600, 3971200; 701300, 3971000; 700800, 3971000; 700000, 3971000; 
700000, 3970400; 699000, 3970410; 699000, 3970500; 699200, 3970700; 
699800, 3972200; 700200, 3972800; 700400, 3973600; 700800, 3974300; 
701300, 3974700; 701700, 3975500; 702900, 3976300; 703200, 3976900; 
704200, 3977800; 704800, 3977900; 705400, 3977900; 706100, 3978300; 
706700, 3978700; 706700, 3978300; 706200, 3976700; 706100, 3975500; 
returning to 706300, 3975100;
    (iii) Unit 29C: San Luis Obispo County, California. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangle Estrella, Paso Robles, Cholame Hills, Ranchito 
Canyon, and Creston. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 
coordinates (E,N): 725000, 3962100; 725600, 3961700; 726100, 3961700; 
726100, 3961300; 725200, 3960400; 725100, 3959200; 724700, 3958300; 
724300, 3956700; 724700, 3956500; 725200, 3955000; 724100, 3953600; 
723800, 3952700; 723400, 3952000; 723100, 3950600; 723500, 3949700; 
723500, 3949000; 724100, 3948500; 723500, 3948400; 722300, 3948900; 
719200, 3948900; 719200, 3949700; 718300, 3949700; 718300, 3948900; 
718900, 3948900; 719000, 3948700; 719200, 3948700; 719200, 3948100; 
720000, 3948100; 720000, 3946500; 720200, 3946400; 720800, 3945700; 
721000, 3945200; 721100, 3944900; 721100, 3943400; 720100, 3943400; 
718700, 3942200; 717700, 3941700; 717400, 3941700; 717000, 3941900; 
717200, 3942500; 715100, 3944900; 715300, 3945200; 714500, 3945900; 
714800, 3946200; 714600, 3946400; 714000, 3946400; 713200, 3947000; 
713200, 3947200; 713600, 3947800; 713500, 3948400; 713200, 3948700; 
712800, 3947900; 712600, 3947900; 712500, 3948000; 712500, 3948800; 
711600, 3949100; 711300, 3949300; 711200, 3949800; 710600, 3949900; 
710500, 3950000; 710500, 3950200; 710900, 3950400; 710900, 3950600; 
710600, 3950700; 709400, 3950500; 709300, 3952100; 709800, 3952800; 
709800, 3954800; 709500, 3955200; 709500, 3955600; 710200, 3955600; 
710400, 3955500; 711000, 3955300; 711500, 3954600; 711600, 3953600; 
713900, 3953600; 714200, 3954000; 714500, 3953800; 715000, 3953700; 
715300, 3953500; 715500, 3953400; 715700, 3953400; 716000, 3953700; 
716500, 3953700; 716800, 3953600; 717600, 3953700; 717900, 3954200; 
718500, 3954600; 718900, 3954800; 719300, 3954900; 720400, 3955600; 
721400, 3956700; 722200, 3958400; 722500, 3960400; 723300, 3962100; 
724200, 3962500; 724400, 3963300; 724657, 3963557; 725100, 3964000; 
725100, 3963563; 725100, 3963300; returning to 725000, 3962100;
    (iv) Unit 29D: San Luis Obispo and Monterey Counties, California. 
From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Bradley. Land bounded by the 
following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 695400, 3963500; 
695700, 3963400; 695755, 3963400; 695761, 3963087; 695592, 3963031; 
695500, 3963000; 695500, 3962966; 695470, 3962965; 695500, 3961632; 
695500, 3961400; 694300, 3961400; 694300, 3961200; 694200, 3961400; 
694800, 3961800; 694900, 3962400; 694700, 3962800; 694730, 3963011; 
694800, 3963500; 695400, 3963500;
    (v) Unit 29E: Monterey and San Luis Obispo County, NIT--NUM = 20D 
California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle San Miguel. Land bounded 
by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 707500, 3961300; 
706900, 3961300; 706900, 3961400; 706793, 3961480; 706792, 3961534; 
706809, 3962857; 706650, 3962895; 706543, 3962948; 706490, 3963003; 
706410, 3963007; 706288, 3963052; 706477, 3963218; 706800, 3963500; 
707600, 3963500; 707563, 3963241; 707500, 3962800; 707900, 3962500; 
708100, 3962000; returning to 707500, 3961300;
    (vi) Unit 29F: San Luis Obispo County, California. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangle San Miguel. Land bounded by the following UTM 
Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 705600, 3959800; 705900, 3959400; 
705949, 3959103; 705635, 3959098; 705626, 3959502; 705300, 3959498; 
705300, 3961100; 705464, 3961118; 706200, 3961125; 706200, 3961100; 
706000, 3961000; 705600, 3959800;
    (vii) Unit 29G: San Luis Obispo County, California. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangle San Miguel and Paso Robles. Land bounded by 
the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 705700, 3957100; 
705311, 3957100; 705300, 3957657; 705300, 3958689; 706287, 3958704; 
706600, 3958600; 706900, 3958000; 706900, 3957600; 706400, 3957200; 
returning to 705700, 3957100;
    (viii) Unit 29H: San Luis Obispo, California. From USGS 1:24,000 
scale quadrangle Paso Robles and Adelaida. Land bounded by the following 
UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 705800, 3956500; 706300, 3956000; 
707900, 3956100; 707900, 3955400; 708100, 3955100; 707600, 3954000; 
707300, 3953600; 705700, 3952600; 705000, 3952800; 703200, 3952200; 
703000, 3952200; 703000, 3953500; 702200, 3953500; 702113, 3954196; 
703041, 3955028; 705352, 3955079; 705351, 3955100; 705400,

[[Page 762]]

3955100; 705328, 3956248; 705319, 3956700; 705400, 3956700; returning to 
705800, 3956500;

    (ix) Note: Unit 29 (Map 14) follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10FE06.022
    

[[Page 763]]


    (38) Unit 30: San Luis Obispo County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 
scale quadrangle Simmler. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 
83 coordinates (E,N): 774375, 3914002; 777312, 3913479; 778710, 3913564; 
779726, 3913325; 780573, 3912575; 780827, 3911688; 779496, 3910506; 
779321, 3910094; 780960, 3909492; 781390, 3909017; 782948, 3908110; 
783520, 3906942; 783765, 3906725; 783760, 3906724; 782946, 3906690; 
782936, 3906690; 782156, 3906654; 782132, 3906653; 782082, 3908301; 
780768, 3908263; 780485, 3908255; 780490, 3908031; 780522, 3906619; 
779393, 3906593; 777627, 3906558; 777613, 3906978; 777456, 3906974; 
777388, 3907272; 777578, 3909087; 777442, 3909680; 774998, 3910333; 
772742, 3911198; 772708, 3913400; 773483, 3913848; returning to 774375, 
3914002;

    (39) Note: Unit 30 (Map 15) follows:

[[Page 764]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10FE06.023

    (40) Unit 31: Santa Barbara County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 
scale quadrangle Figueroa Mtn., Los Olivos, Lake Cachuma, and Santa 
Ynez. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates 
(E,N): 775060, 3831898; 774653, 3831857; 774200, 3831800; 773600, 
3831900; 772500, 3831800; 772100, 3831400; 771400, 3831500; 770400, 
3831000; 769800,

[[Page 765]]

3830900; 769300, 3831100; 769100, 3831300; 768500, 3832600; 768500, 
3833300; 768700, 3833700; 769900, 3834700; 770200, 3834700; 771157, 
3834982; 772300, 3835300; 772800, 3835000; 773100, 3835000; 773100, 
3835300; 773700, 3835300; 773700, 3835700; 773600, 3836100; 773200, 
3836900; 773800, 3837100; 774300, 3836500; 774928, 3836289; 774935, 
3836124; 775060, 3831898; UTM NAD83 Zone 11N: 225515, 3836830; 226600, 
3838500; 228200, 3839300; 229800, 3839000; 232200, 3840500; 232400, 
3841700; 232300, 3842700; 231600, 3843100; 230300, 3844900; 230000, 
3846200; 230800, 3846400; 231200, 3846200; 231700, 3846200; 232000, 
3846500; 232800, 3847000; 233800, 3847000; 234500, 3846400; 234700, 
3845600; 235200, 3845600; 235900, 3844500; 236400, 3844200; 236400, 
3843800; 235900, 3843600; 235500, 3843000; 235200, 3842900; 235100, 
3842800; 235100, 3842000; 235300, 3841300; 235200, 3840700; 234700, 
3840000; 234900, 3839700; 234600, 3839500; 234600, 3839300; 233800, 
3839300; 233100, 3838200; 232900, 3838000; 232300, 3837900; 232100, 
3838200; 231800, 3838400; 231400, 3838500; 230700, 3837700; 230800, 
3837200; 230300, 3836600; 230100, 3836100; 230000, 3835700; 229100, 
3835300; 228900, 3834900; 228800, 3833800; 228000, 3833300; 227400, 
3833200; 227000, 3832800; 226700, 3832400; 226100, 3832400; 225800, 
3832500; 225200, 3832000; 225000, 3831900; 224752, 3831904; 224835, 
3834499; 224871, 3835728; 224904, 3836287; 225100, 3836200; 225372, 
3836544; 225515, 3836830;

    (41) Note: Unit 31 (Map 16) follows:

[[Page 766]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10FE06.024

    (42) Unit 32: Ventura County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Alamo Mountain, Lockwood Valley, San Guillermo, Topatopa 
Mountains, Lion Canyon. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 
83 coordinates (E,N): 864689, 3849170; 865272, 3847801; 866149, 3846550; 
867028, 3843593; 867093, 3842494; 867037, 3842150; 866579, 3839353; 
865815,

[[Page 767]]

3838706; 865267, 3839476; 864068, 3839404; 863282, 3837452; 861766, 
3835957; 860385, 3835574; 859656, 3836032; 858662, 3835872; 857481, 
3835501; 856246, 3836030; 854941, 3836052; 853594, 3836774; 852265, 
3837196; 851706, 3838166; 850507, 3838094; 849284, 3838422; 848261, 
3838762; 847708, 3839632; 847788, 3841642; 849375, 3841937; 851020, 
3842938; 851266, 3843856; 853063, 3845668; 853362, 3847390; 854407, 
3848355; 855307, 3848409; 857217, 3848323; 859016, 3848430; 859968, 
3849289; 861343, 3849773; 862794, 3850662; 863971, 3849428; returning to 
864689, 3849170;

    (43) Note: Unit 32 (Map 17) follows:

[[Page 768]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10FE06.025

               Kentucky Cave Shrimp (Palaemonias ganteri)

    Kentucky, Edmonson County: The Roaring River passage of the Flint-
Mammoth Cave System in Mammoth Cave National Park.
    Note: Map follows:

[[Page 769]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.146

    Known constituent elements include a stream in a base level cave 
passage with abundant organic material and sediments consisting of 
coarse silt and very coarse to very fine sand.

             Vernal Pool Tadpole Shrimp (Lepidurus packardi)

    (1) Critical habitat units are depicted for Alameda, Amador, Butte, 
Colusa, Fresno, Kings, Madera, Mariposa, Merced, Sacramento, Shasta, 
Solano, Stanislaus, Tehama, Tulare, Yolo, and Yuba counties, California, 
on the map below.
    (2) The primary constituent elements of critical habitat for vernal 
pool tadpole shrimp (Lepidurus packardi) are the habitat components that 
provide:
    (i) Topographic features characterized by mounds and swales and 
depressions within a matrix of surrounding uplands that result in 
complexes of continuously, or intermittently, flowing surface water in 
the swales connecting the pools described below in paragraph (2)(ii), 
providing for dispersal and promoting hydroperiods of adequate length in 
the pools;
    (ii) Depressional features including isolated vernal pools with 
underlying restrictive soil layers that become inundated during winter 
rains and that continuously hold water for a minimum of 41 days, in all 
but the driest years; thereby providing adequate water for incubation, 
maturation, and reproduction. As these features are inundated on a 
seasonal basis, they do not promote the development of obligate wetland 
vegetation habitats typical of permanently flooded emergent wetlands;
    (iii) Sources of food, expected to be detritus occurring in the 
pools, contributed by overland flow from the pools' watershed, or the 
results of biological processes within the pools themselves, such as 
single-celled bacteria, algae, and dead organic matter, to provide for 
feeding; and
    (iv) Structure within the pools described above in paragraph 
(2)(ii), consisting of organic and inorganic materials, such as living 
and dead plants from plant species adapted to seasonally inundated 
environments, rocks, and other inorganic debris that may be washed, 
blown, or otherwise transported into the pools, that provide shelter.
    (3) Existing manmade features and structures, such as buildings, 
roads, railroads, airports, runways, other paved areas, lawns, and other 
urban landscaped areas do not contain one or more of the primary 
constituent elements. Federal actions limited to those areas, therefore, 
would not trigger a consultation under section 7 of the Act unless they 
may affect the species and/or primary constituent elements in adjacent 
critical habitat.
    (4) Unit 1: Shasta County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Palo Cedro, Enterprise, Balls Ferry, and Cottonwood. Land 
bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 562500, 
4487400; 562700, 4487100; 562900, 4487200; 563200, 4487200; 563300, 
4487000; 563300, 4486700; 563800, 4486400; 564300, 4484700; 564300, 
4484400; 564500, 4484100; 564500, 4483800; 564600, 4483700; 564600, 
4483400; 564400, 4483100; 564100, 4482800; 564100, 4482600; 564300, 
4482600; 564300, 4482400; 564300, 4482300; 564200, 4482200; 564100, 
4482100; 564000, 4482100; 564200, 4481800; 564200, 4480900; 563600, 
4480900; 563300, 4481000; 563100, 4480900; 562900, 4480900; 562500, 
4481200; 562400, 4481500; 562400, 4481700; 562300, 4482400; 562000, 
4482500; 561900, 4482800; 561800, 4483300; 561500, 4483700; 561000, 
4484000; 560700, 4485400; 560700, 4486500; 560800, 4486700; 561000, 
4486900; 561200, 4487000; 561300, 4487600; 561600, 4487900; 562000, 
4487900; returning to 562500, 4487400;
    (5) Unit 2: Shasta County, California.
    (i) Unit 2A: Shasta County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Balls Ferry. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 
83 coordinates (E,N): 570448, 4472017; 570459, 4471725; 570459, 4471725; 
570459, 4471724; 570408, 4471708; 570382, 4471714; 570356, 4471741; 
570335, 4471767; 570304, 4471767; 570298, 4471772; 570279, 4471768; 
570240, 4471758; 570210, 4471761; 570196, 4471743; 570183, 4471738; 
570173, 4471734; 570160, 4471705; 570156, 4471680; 570156, 4471678; 
570150, 4471671; 570139, 4471657; 570139, 4471654; 570139, 4471645; 
570118, 4471628; 570092, 4471624; 570089, 4471624; 570071, 4471623; 
570054, 4471623; 570006, 4471624; 569975, 4471641; 569952, 4471639; 
569913, 4471639; 569893, 4471626; 569866, 4471623; 569852, 4471624; 
569821, 4471597; 569810, 4471574; 569789, 4471573; 569761, 4471574; 
569757, 4471575; 569735, 4471544; 569722, 4471574; 569676, 4471581; 
569658, 4471581; 569644, 4471584; 569625, 4471584; 569605, 4471585; 
569557, 4471585; 569534, 4471593; 569517, 4471599; 569494, 4471607; 
569465, 4471615; 569438, 4471622; 569415, 4471629; 569400, 4471629; 
569400, 4471687; 569400, 4471800; 569600,

[[Page 770]]

4471900; 569600, 4472000; 569900, 4472200; 570200, 4472100; returning to 
570448, 4472017;
    (ii) Unit 2B: Shasta and Tehama Counties, California. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangle Shingletown, Tuscan Buttes NE, Balls Ferry, 
Dales, Bend, and Red Bluff East. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 
10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 583610, 4475072; 583700, 4475000; 584200, 
4475200; 584600, 4475200; 585400, 4474500; 586000, 4473600; 586100, 
4473400; 585800, 4472600; 585500, 4472100; 584800, 4471900; 584500, 
4471600; 584500, 4471400; 584700, 4471100; 584700, 4470800; 584500, 
4470500; 583400, 4469700; 583100, 4469400; 582600, 4468500; 582600, 
4467600; 582700, 4466900; 582700, 4466700; 581900, 4465800; 581000, 
4465500; 580600, 4465200; 580400, 4464000; 580200, 4463300; 578900, 
4462700; 578500, 4462300; 578100, 4462000; 577800, 4460900; 577700, 
4460000; 576700, 4459300; 576600, 4458800; 576800, 4458300; 576800, 
4457100; 576400, 4456700; 575500, 4456800; 574900, 4456800; 574100, 
4455900; 573500, 4455600; 572300, 4455300; 572000, 4455300; 571600, 
4455600; 571400, 4455400; 571100, 4454900; 570600, 4454900; 570200, 
4454800; 570200, 4455000; 570600, 4455900; 570000, 4456100; 569500, 
4456300; 569300, 4456500; 568900, 4456500; 568600, 4456500; 568000, 
4456800; 567900, 4457100; 567900, 4458000; 568400, 4458800; 569100, 
4459800; 569600, 4460500; 569500, 4460800; 569000, 4460600; 568300, 
4460700; 567500, 4460700; 566800, 4460000; 566400, 4460000; 565900, 
4461100; 565800, 4461400; 565800, 4461700; 566000, 4462000; 565800, 
4462300; 565900, 4462400; 565800, 4462500; 565900, 4462600; 565800, 
4462800; 565900, 4462900; 565900, 4463000; 566000, 4463100; 566300, 
4463100; 566500, 4463300; 566500, 4463600; 566700, 4463700; 566800, 
4463700; 566900, 4463600; 567100, 4463500; 567200, 4463600; 567600, 
4463400; 568300, 4463200; 569800, 4463200; 570600, 4463900; 570800, 
4464300; 572000, 4465200; 572000, 4466300; 572100, 4466600; 572800, 
4467300; 573500, 4468600; 573400, 4469000; 573100, 4469400; 572900, 
4469600; 572600, 4469600; 571800, 4468800; 571400, 4468100; 571000, 
4467900; 571000, 4468700; 571200, 4468700; 571100, 4469200; 571200, 
4469500; 571200, 4470500; 570500, 4470900; 570460, 4470920; 570460, 
4470932; 570466, 4470931; 570461, 4471354; 570786, 4471349; 571229, 
4471353; 571235, 4471908; 571236, 4471912; 571238, 4471962; 571244, 
4471992; 571237, 4472042; 571244, 4472069; 571247, 4472123; 571249, 
4472164; 571271, 4472165; 571363, 4472165; 571405, 4472139; 571460, 
4472143; 571460, 4472143; 571467, 4472144; 571524, 4472166; 571541, 
4472166; 571635, 4472166; 571647, 4472171; 571714, 4472199; 571723, 
4472200; 571739, 4472200; 571900, 4472200; 572154, 4472285; 572154, 
4472284; 572156, 4472284; 572159, 4472227; 572162, 4472225; 572168, 
4472227; 572181, 4472226; 572208, 4472225; 572219, 4472223; 572231, 
4472219; 572241, 4472217; 572282, 4472215; 572307, 4472215; 572325, 
4472213; 572332, 4472212; 572500, 4472100; 573900, 4472100; 574151, 
4472791; 574207, 4472814; 574212, 4472816; 574219, 4472814; 574238, 
4472808; 574256, 4472804; 574271, 4472800; 574293, 4472798; 574321, 
4472797; 574342, 4472798; 574360, 4472803; 574369, 4472807; 574384, 
4472811; 574403, 4472815; 574428, 4472823; 574450, 4472828; 574469, 
4472831; 574483, 4472832; 574489, 4472834; 574488, 4472924; 574488, 
4472933; 574488, 4472941; 574487, 4472952; 574487, 4472951; 574459, 
4472946; 574443, 4472942; 574425, 4472940; 574411, 4472938; 574397, 
4472937; 574391, 4472934; 574379, 4472930; 574373, 4472928; 574365, 
4472924; 574356, 4472921; 574353, 4472920; 574342, 4472919; 574346, 
4472925; 574358, 4472955; 574465, 4473021; 574448, 4473020; 574445, 
4473038; 574336, 4472971; 574326, 4472947; 574297, 4472920; 574278, 
4472922; 574261, 4472941; 574253, 4472951; 574231, 4472975; 574223, 
4472987; 574300, 4473200; 574754, 4473200; 574939, 4473200; 575100, 
4473200; 575456, 4473413; 575600, 4473500; 575624, 4473524; 576000, 
4473900; 576107, 4473900; 576460, 4473900; 576600, 4473900; 576883, 
4473900; 577069, 4473900; 577300, 4473900; 577344, 4473933; 577351, 
4473938; 577700, 4474200; 578600, 4474200; 578685, 4474224; 578803, 
4474258; 579300, 4474400; 579637, 4474400; 580000, 4474400; 580600, 
4474700; 580991, 4474700; 581447, 4474700; 581900, 4474700; 581931, 
4474738; 582400, 4475300; 583000, 4475400; 583200, 4475400; returning to 
583610, 4475072;

    (iii) Note: Units 1 and 2 (Map 1) follow:

[[Page 771]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10FE06.026

    (6) Unit 3: Tehama County, California.
    (i) Unit 3A: Tehama County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Acorn Hollow and Richardson Springs NW. Land bounded by the 
following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 588739, 4429822; 
588900, 4429500; 589500, 4429500; 589500, 4428600; 589500, 4428000; 
589800, 4427100; 590500, 4426400; 590500,

[[Page 772]]

4425300; 591200, 4424400; 591500, 4423300; 591562, 4422558; 590526, 
4423686; 589986, 4424273; 589816, 4424458; 589129, 4425207; 588454, 
4426221; 588425, 4426265; 588279, 4426485; 588213, 4426583; 588213, 
4426584; 588600, 4429100; 588733, 4429833; returning to 588739, 4429822;
    (ii) Unit 3B: Tehama County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Richard Springs NW. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 
10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 593700, 4420900; 593164, 4420815; 592329, 
4421723; 592258, 4421800; 593000, 4421800; 593100, 4421500; 593500, 
4421400; returning to 593700, 4420900;
    (iii) Unit 3C: Tehama County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Richard Springs NW. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 
10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 594500, 4420300; 593881, 4420035; 593371, 
4420590; 594000, 4420800; 594400, 4420600; returning to 594500, 4420300;
    (iv) Unit 3D: Tehama and Butte Counties, California. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangle Campbell Mound, Richardson Springs NW, and 
Richardson Springs. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 
coordinates (E,N): 597100, 4416400; 597100, 4415600; 597044, 4415525; 
596800, 4415200; 597100, 4415000; 597800, 4415500; 598100, 4415200; 
597600, 4414600; 597600, 4414400; 597300, 4413800; 597300, 4413300; 
598200, 4413900; 598400, 4413900; 598400, 4413600; 597422, 4411938; 
597281, 4412382; 596959, 4413403; 596640, 4414416; 596620, 4414481; 
596305, 4415484; 596303, 4415489; 596130, 4416040; 596091, 4416160; 
596028, 4416358; 596011, 4416411; 595993, 4416465; 595982, 4416500; 
596000, 4416500; 596100, 4416400; 596200, 4416500; 596300, 4416600; 
596400, 4416700; 596500, 4416700; 596500, 4416800; 596600, 4416800; 
597100, 4416400;
    (v) Unit 3E: Butte County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Richardson Springs. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 
10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 598900, 4411800; 599400, 4411700; 599800, 
4411700; 599800, 4411000; 599300, 4410700; 599100, 4410800; 599000, 
4410800; 598800, 4410600; 598500, 4410400; 598300, 4410100; 598100, 
4410000; 598070, 4409970; 598051, 4409993; 598038, 4410010; 598014, 
4410083; 597806, 4410737; 597725, 4410990; 597461, 4411816; 597434, 
4411900; 597600, 4411900; 598300, 4412700; 598500, 4413300; 598900, 
4413300; returning to 598900, 4411800;
    (vi) Unit 3F: Butte County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Richardson Springs. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 
10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 599500, 4406200; 600300, 4406000; 601200, 
4405600; 601800, 4405600; 602000, 4405500; 602200, 4405200; 602500, 
4405200; 602700, 4404900; 603300, 4404700; 604500, 4404200; 605200, 
4404200; 605600, 4404000; 605600, 4403600; 605100, 4403300; 604700, 
4403400; 604500, 4403300; 604475, 4403175; 604400, 4403100; 604300, 
4403100; 604200, 4403000; 604100, 4402900; 604000, 4402900; 603800, 
4402800; 603800, 4402600; 603600, 4402400; 603400, 4402400; 603200, 
4402500; 603100, 4402400; 602900, 4402400; 602900, 4402100; 602700, 
4402100; 602300, 4402600; 602300, 4402700; 601800, 4403300; 601714, 
4403300; 601553, 4403500; 601501, 4403499; 601465, 4403621; 601319, 
4403663; 601226, 4403595; 601089, 4403571; 600979, 4403503; 600901, 
4403569; 600860, 4403446; 600704, 4403566; 600542, 4403475; 600507, 
4403530; 600473, 4403563; 600453, 4403580; 600369, 4403651; 600344, 
4403642; 600232, 4403605; 599983, 4403679; 599973, 4403678; 599801, 
4403662; 599725, 4403718; 599651, 4403697; 599493, 4403839; 599328, 
4403862; 599302, 4403865; 599269, 4403870; 599084, 4403634; 599024, 
4403611; 598987, 4404400; 598980, 4404543; 598971, 4404723; 598955, 
4405388; 598953, 4405458; 598951, 4405529; 598947, 4405677; 598934, 
4405719; 598919, 4405750; 599000, 4405800; 598900, 4406100; 598700, 
4406000; 598694, 4406000; 598635, 4406058; 598598, 4406103; 598583, 
4406127; 598567, 4406159; 598549, 4406210; 598544, 4406234; 598540, 
4406255; 598533, 4406421; 598522, 4406815; 598516, 4407133; 598511, 
4407496; 598513, 4407515; 598525, 4407568; 598527, 4407571; 598527, 
4407589; 598580, 4407812; 598800, 4407900; 598900, 4408100; 599200, 
4408400; 600200, 4408900; 600300, 4408800; 600300, 4408400; 600000, 
4408100; 600400, 4407600; 599500, 4406700; returning to 599500, 4406200.

    (vii) Note: Unit 3 (Map 2) follows:

[[Page 773]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10FE06.027

    (7) Unit 4: Butte County, California.
    (i) Unit 4A: Butte County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Chico. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 
coordinates (E,N): 605100, 4399600; 606500, 4399500; 606797, 4399330; 
606777, 4399300; 606724, 4399252; 606568, 4399265; 606528, 4399272; 
606479, 4399279; 606478, 4399279; 606394, 4399264; 606362,

[[Page 774]]

4399238; 606329, 4399210; 606274, 4399169; 606209, 4399135; 606125, 
4399122; 606060, 4399122; 605967, 4399131; 605899, 4399134; 605857, 
4399134; 605822, 4399130; 605789, 4399116; 605781, 4399138; 605775, 
4399149; 605764, 4399152; 605763, 4399152; 605701, 4399142; 605589, 
4399116; 605504, 4399107; 605432, 4399110; 605319, 4399064; 605233, 
4399045; 605173, 4399034; 605135, 4399023; 605134, 4399023; 605127, 
4399023; 605109, 4399023; 605080, 4399025; 605063, 4399025; 605002, 
4399051; 604957, 4399069; 604907, 4399092; 604029, 4399508; 603896, 
4399435; 603886, 4399435; 603879, 4399436; 603300, 4399523; 603300, 
4399600; 602900, 4399600; 603500, 4399800; 604700, 4400200; returning to 
605100, 4399600;
    (ii) Unit 4B: Butte County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Hamlin Canyon and Chico. Land bounded by the following UTM 
Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 606028, 4393143; 606288, 4392851; 
606346, 4392785; 606490, 4392637; 606537, 4392593; 607117, 4392045; 
607644, 4391539; 607748, 4391438; 607826, 4391363; 608227, 4390978; 
608537, 4390636; 608852, 4390288; 609145, 4389965; 609391, 4389694; 
609721, 4389330; 609736, 4389313; 609890, 4389143; 610122, 4388889; 
610187, 4388819; 610239, 4388754; 610321, 4388664; 610359, 4388624; 
610400, 4388500; 609300, 4388100; 609300, 4387900; 608800, 4387800; 
608800, 4389300; 607600, 4389300; 607600, 4389500; 607500, 4389600; 
607400, 4389600; 607400, 4389900; 607300, 4390000; 607400, 4390000; 
607500, 4390100; 607400, 4390300; 607400, 4390500; 607300, 4390600; 
607300, 4390800; 607100, 4391000; 605700, 4392300; 605800, 4392300; 
606000, 4392500; 606100, 4392700; 605900, 4392900; 605800, 4392900; 
605600, 4392800; returning to 606028, 4393143;
    (iii) Unit 4C: Butte County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Hamlin Canyon and Shippee. Land bounded by the following UTM 
Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 610300, 4383000; 610400, 4382900; 
610500, 4382900; 610500, 4382800; 610500, 4382700; 610500, 4382600; 
610200, 4382300; 610100, 4382400; 610200, 4382500; 610200, 4382600; 
610200, 4382700; 610100, 4382600; 609900, 4382400; 609814, 4382314; 
608500, 4383300; 608800, 4383800; 609500, 4384200; 609500, 4384500; 
609300, 4385000; 609600, 4385300; 609300, 4385800; 609500, 4386000; 
609900, 4386100; 610100, 4386100; 610100, 4386400; 610200, 4386500; 
610500, 4386700; 611100, 4387100; 611400, 4387400; 611364, 4387515; 
611887, 4386936; 612214, 4386572; 612293, 4386410; 612300, 4386300; 
612000, 4386100; 611300, 4384500; 611000, 4384500; 611000, 4383600; 
610400, 4383600; 610400, 4383200; 610300, 4383200; 610300, 4383100; 
610200, 4383000; returning to 610300, 4383000;
    (iv) Unit 4D: Butte County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Cherokee and Hamlin Canyon. Land bounded by the following UTM 
Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 617200, 4387700; 616864, 4387566; 
616852, 4387659; 616841, 4388048; 616843, 4388082; 616851, 4388261; 
616929, 4388656; 616982, 4388850; 617175, 4389518; 617195, 4389572; 
617301, 4390087; 617309, 4390125; 617361, 4390354; 617380, 4390409; 
617409, 4390495; 617442, 4390589; 617469, 4390681; 618600, 4390600; 
618800, 4390200; 618800, 4389700; 617800, 4388300; returning to 617200, 
4387700;
    (v) Unit 4E: Butte County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Cherokee, Shippee, and Oroville. Land bounded by the 
following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 620700, 4388400; 
620700, 4387200; 621300, 4387200; 621600, 4386500; 621400, 4385600; 
620900, 4385500; 620600, 4384900; 620400, 4384800; 619600, 4385100; 
618600, 4384500; 618592, 4384506; 618592, 4384506; 618560, 4384544; 
618512, 4384601; 618377, 4384762; 618358, 4384795; 618286, 4384915; 
618226, 4385148; 618207, 4385219; 618185, 4385338; 618017, 4386021; 
617998, 4386107; 617951, 4386211; 617930, 4386256; 617902, 4386281; 
617839, 4386361; 617731, 4386441; 617685, 4386463; 617667, 4386465; 
617664, 4386478; 617425, 4386625; 617700, 4386900; 618000, 4386700; 
618200, 4386700; 618700, 4386900; 619000, 4387000; 619200, 4387200; 
619300, 4387200; 619500, 4387400; 619500, 4387600; 619700, 4387600; 
619800, 4387700; 619900, 4388000; 620200, 4388000; 620600, 4388400; 
returning to 620700, 4388400;
    (vi) Unit 4F: Butte County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Oroville and Shippe. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 
10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 618368, 4382306; 618445, 4382277; 618444, 
4382301; 618457, 4382372; 618463, 4382408; 618500, 4382501; 618500, 
4382500; 619300, 4381300; 619500, 4381000; 619500, 4380500; 620800, 
4378900; 620900, 4378400; 620300, 4377700; 618800, 4377000; 617800, 
4376400; 617100, 4376200; 616900, 4376000; 617500, 4374800; 617500, 
4374500; 617300, 4374200; 615415, 4374121; 615404, 4374354; 615319, 
4374453; 614883, 4374120; 614665, 4374382; 614570, 4374749; 614300, 
4374727; 614300, 4375700; 614600, 4375700; 614600, 4376600; 614800, 
4376600; 614900, 4376700; 615100, 4376800; 615100, 4377000; 615900, 
4377000; 616300, 4377000; 616300, 4378100; 614900, 4378100; 614900, 
4378300; 614700, 4378300; 614700, 4378500; 614500, 4378500; 614500, 
4378800; 614600, 4378900; 614600, 4379700; 614200, 4379700; 614200, 
4381300; 612600, 4381300; 612600, 4382900; 613500, 4383000; 613700, 
4383100; 613800, 4383200; 614000, 4383500; 614200, 4384000; 614200, 
4384200; 614800, 4384200; 615073, 4384200; 615806, 4383804; 616704, 
4383304; 617266, 4382991; 617327, 4382957; 617563, 4382829; 617589, 
4382812; 617987, 4382563; 618347, 4382330; returning to 618368, 4382306.

    (vii) Note: Unit 4 (Map 3) follows:

[[Page 775]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10FE06.028

    (8) Unit 6: Colusa County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Meridian and Colusa. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 
10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 585800, 4337200; 585900, 4337200; 585900, 
4337200; 585900, 4338200; 586100, 4338200; 586100, 4338400; 586800, 
4338900; 587000, 4338500; 587000, 4338400; 586800, 4338200; 587000, 
4338100; 587500, 4337600; 587700,

[[Page 776]]

4337800; 588800, 4336700; 588900, 4336700; 589100, 4336500; 589100, 
4336900; 589200, 4336900; 589200, 4335900; 587900, 4335900; 587900, 
4336000; 587400, 4336600; 587300, 4336800; 586900, 4337800; 586700, 
4337800; 586700, 4337700; 586400, 4337700; 586400, 4336800; 586300, 
4336600; 586000, 4336600; 585800, 4336900; returning to 585800, 4337200;
    (9) Unit 7: Yuba County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Browns Valley and Wheatland. Land bounded by the following 
UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 635000, 4332200; 635000, 4329900; 
634600, 4329900; 633800, 4329900; 633600, 4330100; 633500, 4330100; 
633300, 4330100; 633300, 4330300; 632700, 4330100; 632400, 4329900; 
632400, 4329000; 631300, 4329000; 631300, 4329200; 631600, 4329200; 
631600, 4329800; 631900, 4329800; 631900, 4330600; 632800, 4330600; 
633000, 4330900; 633000, 4331300; 633100, 4331500; 633500, 4331700; 
633800, 4331500; 633800, 4332200; returning to 635000, 4332200;

    (10) Note: Units 6 and 7 (Map 4) follow:

[[Page 777]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10FE06.029

    (11) Unit 8: Sacramento County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Carmichael. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 
coordinates (E,N): 649800, 4269600; 649800, 4268700; 650400, 4268900; 
650800, 4268800; 651000, 4268800; 651000, 4269400; 651800, 4269300; 
651500, 4268800; 651600, 4267900; 651600, 4266500; 651500, 4266400; 
651500, 4266300;

[[Page 778]]

651100, 4266300; 651100, 4266000; 651570, 4265812; 651589, 4265075; 
651600, 4264400; 651400, 4264400; 651400, 4264200; 650500, 4264200; 
650500, 4264300; 650400, 4264300; 650400, 4264600; 650000, 4264700; 
649900, 4265100; 649400, 4265100; 649100, 4265000; 648900, 4265100; 
648700, 4265100; 648700, 4265300; 648700, 4265500; 649900, 4265500; 
649900, 4266000; 648300, 4266000; 648300, 4266200; 648500, 4266400; 
648700, 4266200; 649000, 4266200; 649300, 4266400; 649400, 4266600; 
649635, 4266678; 649700, 4266700; 649794, 4266693; 650200, 4267100; 
650400, 4267000; 650600, 4267000; 650800, 4267200; 650900, 4267500; 
650800, 4267900; 650500, 4267800; 650300, 4268100; 649900, 4268400; 
649400, 4268100; 649100, 4267800; 649100, 4267500; 649400, 4267400; 
649200, 4267100; 648400, 4267100; 648300, 4267700; 648000, 4268000; 
648600, 4268500; 649400, 4268900; 649400, 4269200; 649600, 4269600; 
returning to 649800, 4269600;
    (12) Unit 9: Sacramento County, California.
    (i) Unit 9A: Sacramento County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Sloughhouse. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 
83 coordinates (E,N): 660660, 4256508; 660681, 4256119; 660600, 4256200; 
660300, 4256100; 660000, 4256200; 659800, 4256300; 659850, 4256450; 
659900, 4256600; 660200, 4256500; 660300, 4256800; 660515, 4256728; 
660633, 4256644; 660645, 4256626; returning to 660660, 4256508;
    (ii) Unit 9B: Sacramento and Amador Counties, California. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangle Carbondale, Sloughhouse, Goose Creek, and 
Clay. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates 
(E,N): 673200, 4256400; 672800, 4255100; 672800, 4254800; 673100, 
4254900; 673800, 4254900; 674000, 4254600; 674000, 4254400; 674500, 
4254000; 674500, 4253700; 674100, 4253500; 674100, 4252900; 674300, 
4252300; 674500, 4251900; 674500, 4251600; 673400, 4251500; 673300, 
4251400; 673300, 4251200; 673900, 4251000; 674000, 4250500; 674300, 
4250000; 674300, 4249800; 674200, 4249700; 673900, 4249700; 673600, 
4249900; 672500, 4249900; 672315, 4249992; 671900, 4250200; 671300, 
4250200; 671100, 4250500; 671000, 4250500; 671000, 4249800; 670700, 
4249800; 670700, 4249500; 670800, 4249300; 670800, 4249000; 670900, 
4248900; 670900, 4248500; 670500, 4248300; 670500, 4248125; 670400, 
4248100; 670400, 4248000; 670100, 4248000; 670100, 4247800; 670500, 
4247500; 671100, 4247500; 671600, 4247700; 671800, 4247600; 671900, 
4247300; 671900, 4247100; 671500, 4246800; 671600, 4246600; 671800, 
4246000; 671800, 4246000; 671255, 4245364; 670800, 4245000; 670000, 
4244200; 670000, 4244100; 670500, 4243800; 670200, 4243400; 670200, 
4243300; 670300, 4243200; 670400, 4243100; 670600, 4242600; 671200, 
4242900; 671600, 4243000; 671600, 4242700; 670700, 4242100; 669800, 
4242100; 669300, 4241900; 668900, 4241900; 668700, 4241800; 668500, 
4241600; 668400, 4241600; 668200, 4241700; 668000, 4242000; 667900, 
4242000; 667400, 4241600; 667400, 4241800; 666400, 4241700; 665400, 
4241700; 665400, 4242700; 665000, 4242700; 665000, 4242300; 664800, 
4242300; 664800, 4242200; 664700, 4242200; 664600, 4242100; 664500, 
4242100; 664500, 4241300; 664000, 4241300; 664000, 4241000; 663500, 
4241000; 663500, 4240900; 663400, 4240800; 663300, 4240800; 663300, 
4240600; 663100, 4240600; 663100, 4240900; 662800, 4240900; 662800, 
4240500; 662700, 4240400; 662700, 4240000; 662500, 4240000; 662500, 
4239600; 662100, 4239600; 662100, 4239400; 662000, 4239300; 661700, 
4239300; 661700, 4239200; 661400, 4239000; 661400, 4239900; 661500, 
4239900; 661500, 4241600; 661500, 4241900; 661700, 4242000; 662200, 
4242000; 662200, 4241600; 662900, 4241600; 662800, 4242300; 662500, 
4242300; 662600, 4243000; 662900, 4243100; 663400, 4243100; 663400, 
4243800; 663050, 4243800; 663029, 4243841; 663000, 4243900; 662500, 
4243900; 662700, 4244700; 662850, 4244800; 663000, 4244900; 663100, 
4245300; 663800, 4245300; 663900, 4245500; 664400, 4245600; 664500, 
4245200; 664600, 4245200; 664750, 4245238; 664900, 4245275; 665000, 
4245300; 664900, 4245700; 664900, 4246500; 664400, 4246500; 663900, 
4246700; 662500, 4246300; 662233, 4246300; 662100, 4246400; 661700, 
4246400; 661900, 4247000; 662000, 4247300; 661800, 4247500; 660900, 
4247500; 660900, 4247140; 660850, 4247100; 659700, 4247100; 659500, 
4247300; 659500, 4248300; 660000, 4248300; 659900, 4249600; 660000, 
4249900; 659900, 4250200; 659400, 4249700; 659400, 4249500; 659300, 
4249200; 659100, 4249000; 659100, 4248900; 659200, 4248800; 659100, 
4248700; 658900, 4248700; 658800, 4248600; 658600, 4248600; 658500, 
4248800; 658400, 4248900; 658200, 4249000; 658200, 4248900; 658300, 
4248700; 658500, 4248500; 658500, 4248400; 658400, 4248300; 658400, 
4247900; 658100, 4247900; 658000, 4248500; 656700, 4248500; 656300, 
4248900; 655900, 4248200; 656100, 4248100; 656100, 4248000; 656000, 
4247800; 655200, 4247800; 655200, 4247200; 654700, 4247200; 654700, 
4248750; 654800, 4248900; 654700, 4249000; 655100, 4249000; 655800, 
4249000; 656300, 4249700; 656600, 4249500; 657200, 4250200; 656700, 
4251100; 657700, 4251100; 657700, 4251500; 656700, 4251400; 656700, 
4252100; 656500, 4252300; 656500, 4252600; 657000, 4253700; 657400, 
4254600; 657800, 4254300; 657800, 4254200; 657800, 4254200; 658100, 
4254000; 658900, 4253500; 659000, 4253500; 659300, 4253300; 660000, 
4254500; 660100, 4254800; 660200, 4254900; 660300, 4255200; 660600, 
4255300; 660700, 4255400; 660800, 4256000; 660754, 4256046; 660777, 
4256046; 661541, 4256060; 661554, 4255796; 661731, 4252263; 661736, 
4252142; 662180, 4252172; 662313, 4252175; 662583, 4252191; 663009, 
4252217; 663119, 4252198; 663221, 4252234; 663275, 4252290; 663311, 
4252341; 663324, 4252391; 663344, 4252446; 663378, 4252511; 663390, 
4252591; 663409, 4252710; 663437, 4252770; 663510, 4252890; 663546, 
4252914; 663590, 4252922; 663630, 4252907; 663726, 4252900; 663761, 
4252901; 663800, 4252916; 663817, 4252959; 663824, 4252991; 663760, 
4253075; 663650, 4253199; 663651, 4253232; 663667, 4253286; 663741, 
4253408; 663807, 4253488; 663832, 4253490; 663904, 4253486; 663962, 
4253498; 664039, 4253560; 664088, 4253602; 664125, 4253617; 664219, 
4253695; 664248, 4253699; 664313, 4253672; 664369, 4253606; 664471, 
4253613; 664566, 4253675; 664591, 4253700; 664647, 4253753; 664752, 
4253850; 664854, 4253953; 664868, 4254000; 664877, 4254124; 664856, 
4254193; 664883, 4254238; 664977, 4254334; 665118, 4254420; 665174, 
4254468; 665227, 4254492; 665313, 4254463; 665390, 4254424; 665514, 
4254389; 665619, 4254438; 665656, 4254494; 665723, 4254546; 665757, 
4254558; 665800, 4254553; 665853, 4254513; 665880, 4254493; 665956, 
4254434; 665960, 4254402; 666029, 4254364; 666067, 4254367; 666114, 
4254379; 666168, 4254392; 666236, 4254440; 666273, 4254448; 666310, 
4254440; 666339, 4254435; 666417, 4254404; 666451,

[[Page 779]]

4254362; 666491, 4254319; 666523, 4254309; 666581, 4254312; 666652, 
4254306; 666705, 4254261; 666722, 4254230; 666740, 4254164; 666742, 
4254084; 666763, 4253987; 666791, 4253947; 666826, 4253919; 666849, 
4253913; 666914, 4253917; 666977, 4253951; 667057, 4253975; 667142, 
4253997; 667253, 4253980; 667277, 4253964; 667302, 4253968; 667313, 
4253981; 667315, 4254007; 667377, 4254034; 667482, 4254039; 667618, 
4254026; 667801, 4253975; 667959, 4253881; 668167, 4253821; 668360, 
4253834; 668422, 4253849; 668525, 4253837; 668643, 4253804; 668700, 
4253743; 668799, 4253665; 668877, 4253610; 668998, 4253531; 669098, 
4253487; 669171, 4253483; 669251, 4253471; 669328, 4253465; 669399, 
4253396; 669461, 4253324; 669558, 4253276; 669619, 4253256; 669665, 
4253257; 669859, 4253247; 670012, 4253179; 670143, 4253173; 670241, 
4253188; 670278, 4253185; 670320, 4253159; 670371, 4253105; 670419, 
4253074; 670499, 4253007; 670537, 4252992; 670594, 4252927; 670626, 
4252873; 670642, 4252848; 670663, 4252843; 670712, 4252851; 670732, 
4252875; 670716, 4252907; 670727, 4252921; 670756, 4252934; 670807, 
4252923; 670850, 4252924; 670883, 4252896; 670912, 4252829; 670949, 
4252789; 670975, 4252773; 671041, 4252762; 671109, 4252759; 671191, 
4252663; 671270, 4252568; 671315, 4252537; 671376, 4252519; 671438, 
4252504; 671509, 4252465; 671531, 4252448; 671559, 4252450; 671603, 
4252490; 671631, 4252509; 671674, 4252515; 671716, 4252510; 671773, 
4252503; 671827, 4252497; 671848, 4252476; 671934, 4252419; 671943, 
4252426; 671963, 4252453; 671990, 4252458; 672004, 4252435; 672042, 
4252400; 672107, 4252306; 672117, 4252284; 672129, 4252256; 672134, 
4252244; 672152, 4252230; 672159, 4252200; 672153, 4252190; 672148, 
4252180; 672110, 4252165; 672104, 4252149; 672109, 4252101; 672114, 
4252080; 672113, 4252055; 672107, 4251980; 672120, 4251908; 672151, 
4251893; 672177, 4251906; 672185, 4251900; 672199, 4251865; 672213, 
4251830; 672245, 4251802; 672263, 4251784; 672271, 4251775; 672271, 
4251787; 672265, 4252117; 672263, 4252199; 672247, 4252916; 672246, 
4252941; 672231, 4253670; 672225, 4253953; 672223, 4254006; 672220, 
4254157; 672219, 4254229; 672217, 4254287; 672192, 4255610; 672200, 
4255600; 672400, 4255600; 672700, 4256400; returning to 673200, 4256400;

    (iii) Note: Units 8 and 9 (Map 5) follow:

[[Page 780]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10FE06.030

    (13) Unit 10: Yolo County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Davis. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 
coordinates (E,N): 615400, 4262300; 615400, 4260700; 614500, 4260700; 
614500, 4261500; 614200, 4261500; 614200, 4261800; 614000, 4261800; 
614000, 4262300; returning to 615400, 4262300;
    (14) Unit 11: Solano County, California

[[Page 781]]

    (i) Unit 11A: Solano County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Dozier. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 
coordinates (E,N): 600400, 4243000; 600400, 4242200; 601300, 4242200; 
601300, 4241416; 601002, 4241415; 600878, 4241415; 600446, 4241414; 
600021, 4241414; 599000, 4241412; 599000, 4242300; 599600, 4242300; 
599600, 4243000; returning to 600400, 4243000;
    (ii) Unit 11B: Solano County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Elmira. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 
coordinates (E,N): 593200, 4242200; 593200, 4240600; 593211, 4240600; 
593255, 4239807; 592030, 4239793; 592062, 4240126; 592044, 4240137; 
592026, 4240170; 592026, 4240181; 592030, 4240261; 592300, 4240800; 
592100, 4240800; 591800, 4241000; 591700, 4241100; 591600, 4241200; 
591600, 4241300; 591600, 4241700; 591700, 4241700; 591800, 4241600; 
591900, 4241600; 592000, 4241500; 592200, 4241300; 592300, 4240900; 
returning to 593200, 4242200;
    (iii) Unit 11C: Solano County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Elmira and Denverton. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 
10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 589698, 4236560; 589600, 4234900; 589700, 
4234900; 589700, 4234500; 590100, 4234500; 590100, 4234064; 589400, 
4234000; 589000, 4234400; 588500, 4234400; 588500, 4236400; 588549, 
4236449; 588944, 4236551; 589524, 4236558; 589670, 4236559; returning to 
589698, 4236560;
    (iv) Unit 11D: Solano County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Elmira, Denverton, and Fairfield South. Land bounded by the 
following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 594915, 4234098; 
594916, 4233314; 595044, 4233310; 595068, 4233296; 595131, 4233266; 
595174, 4233226; 595189, 4233210; 595239, 4233151; 595322, 4232978; 
595423, 4232778; 595483, 4232667; 595553, 4232524; 595699, 4232243; 
595966, 4231717; 594927, 4231710; 594445, 4231707; 594409, 4231673; 
594410, 4231616; 594434, 4231540; 594474, 4231494; 594495, 4231457; 
594497, 4231414; 594510, 4231370; 594543, 4231356; 594575, 4231342; 
594603, 4231341; 594614, 4231338; 594616, 4231325; 594618, 4231311; 
594614, 4231290; 594605, 4231284; 594583, 4231275; 594573, 4231268; 
594557, 4231245; 594550, 4231209; 594543, 4231179; 594500, 4231200; 
593800, 4231200; 593600, 4230500; 593291, 4230515; 593291, 4230514; 
593700, 4229900; 594000, 4229700; 593900, 4229600; 593900, 4229500; 
594000, 4229400; 593900, 4229300; 593900, 4229100; 594300, 4229000; 
594300, 4228500; 593700, 4228400; 593500, 4228100; 592800, 4228100; 
592700, 4228000; 592600, 4228000; 592500, 4227900; 592200, 4227800; 
592000, 4227500; 591700, 4227400; 591500, 4227200; 591200, 4227100; 
590900, 4227000; 590700, 4227100; 590400, 4227100; 589400, 4227400; 
589265, 4227400; 589026, 4227463; 588707, 4227579; 587979, 4227869; 
587973, 4227872; 587467, 4228036; 587339, 4228077; 587009, 4228197; 
586933, 4228334; 586900, 4228400; 586700, 4228500; 586600, 4229000; 
586400, 4229100; 586200, 4229100; 586100, 4229300; 585400, 4229900; 
585400, 4230100; 585500, 4230200; 585000, 4230300; 585100, 4230400; 
585000, 4230500; 585111, 4230567; 585124, 4230550; 585327, 4230585; 
585319, 4230629; 585295, 4230649; 585270, 4230662; 585500, 4230800; 
585600, 4231100; 585903, 4231100; 585908, 4231071; 585926, 4231064; 
585956, 4231058; 586038, 4231061; 586045, 4231073; 586045, 4231088; 
586027, 4231096; 586022, 4231100; 586267, 4231100; 586273, 4231084; 
586323, 4231038; 586340, 4230994; 587435, 4231016; 587882, 4231052; 
587967, 4231111; 587991, 4231124; 588015, 4231126; 588034, 4231123; 
588075, 4231099; 588085, 4231097; 588116, 4231095; 588700, 4230900; 
588842, 4230900; 588842, 4230900; 588925, 4230897; 588989, 4230899; 
589090, 4230913; 589179, 4230901; 589179, 4230901; 589240, 4230894; 
589274, 4230890; 589315, 4230894; 589321, 4230909; 589313, 4231179; 
589015, 4231215; 589100, 4231300; 589100, 4231700; 588600, 4231600; 
588440, 4231680; 588417, 4232400; 588500, 4232400; 588500, 4232500; 
588600, 4232500; 588600, 4232800; 588400, 4233000; 588600, 4233300; 
588700, 4233500; 589300, 4233500; 589983, 4233500; 590000, 4233500; 
590100, 4233500; 590100, 4233300; 590600, 4233300; 591100, 4232800; 
591138, 4232825; 591143, 4232820; 591184, 4232856; 591700, 4233200; 
592513, 4233290; 592594, 4233291; 592594, 4233299; 592600, 4233300; 
592600, 4233800; 592900, 4233700; 592900, 4233751; 592901, 4233751; 
592900, 4233754; 592900, 4233800; 593400, 4234100; 594200, 4234100; 
594300, 4234900; 594500, 4234900; 594890, 4235396; returning to 594915, 
4234098;

    (v) Note: Units 10 and 11 (Map 6) follow:

[[Page 782]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10FE06.031

    (15) Unit 13: Stanislaus County, California.
    (i) Unit 13A: Stanislaus County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 
scale quadrangle Paulsell. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, 
NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 703100, 4177500; 703000, 4177300; 702911, 
4177359; 702906, 4177503; 703100, 4177507; returning to 703100, 4177500;

[[Page 783]]

    (ii) Unit 13B: Stanislaus County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 
scale quadrangle Paulsell and Waterford. Land bounded by the following 
UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 701282, 4176830; 701345, 4176765; 
701756, 4176778; 701600, 4176700; 701600, 4176500; 701600, 4176200; 
701700, 4175900; 701800, 4175800; 702000, 4175800; 702000, 4175100; 
701600, 4175100; 701600, 4174200; 701900, 4173700; 701800, 4173600; 
701700, 4173500; 701700, 4173300; 701700, 4173200; 701600, 4173200; 
701500, 4173100; 701500, 4173000; 701600, 4173000; 701600, 4172800; 
701500, 4172600; 701300, 4172500; 701100, 4172600; 700700, 4172600; 
700600, 4172600; 700500, 4172700; 700500, 4172900; 700400, 4172900; 
700400, 4172800; 700100, 4172700; 699600, 4172700; 699500, 4172800; 
699300, 4172800; 699100, 4172500; 698800, 4172500; 698700, 4172600; 
698400, 4172400; 698100, 4172800; 698200, 4173000; 697400, 4174300; 
697300, 4174300; 697300, 4174500; 697800, 4174500; 697800, 4176300; 
697700, 4176300; 697700, 4176437; 698090, 4176397; 698085, 4176613; 
698084, 4176642; 699300, 4176684; 700500, 4176726; 701204, 4176750; 
returning to 701282, 4176830;
    (iii) Unit 13C: Stanislaus County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 
scale quadrangle Paulsell. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, 
NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 702000, 4171800; 702000, 4169800; 702000, 
4169700; 701000, 4169700; 700700, 4169700; 700700, 4170400; 700700, 
4170500; 700550, 4170500; 700500, 4170500; 700500, 4170533; 700500, 
4170900; 700300, 4170900; 700300, 4171100; 700300, 4171800; 701200, 
4171800; returning to 702000, 4171800.

    (iv) Note: Unit 13 (Map 7) follows:

[[Page 784]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10FE06.032

    (16) Unit 14: Alameda County, California.
    (i) Unit 14A: Alameda County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Milpitas. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 
coordinates (E,N): 590100, 4150400; 590481, 4150210; 590452, 4150159; 
590383, 4150201; 590320, 4150230; 590312, 4150216; 590309, 4150216; 
590306, 4150215; 590303, 4150215;

[[Page 785]]

590300, 4150214; 590297, 4150213; 590294, 4150212; 590291, 4150212; 
590202, 4150262; 590201, 4150263; 590199, 4150264; 590197, 4150265; 
590195, 4150266; 590193, 4150267; 590191, 4150267; 590189, 4150268; 
590187, 4150269; 590185, 4150269; 590183, 4150269; 590180, 4150270; 
590178, 4150270; 590176, 4150270; 590174, 4150270; 590172, 4150270; 
590170, 4150270; 590168, 4150270; 590165, 4150270; 590163, 4150270; 
590161, 4150269; 590159, 4150269; 590157, 4150269; 590155, 4150268; 
590153, 4150267; 590151, 4150266; 590149, 4150266; 590147, 4150265; 
590145, 4150264; 590143, 4150263; 590141, 4150262; 590140, 4150261; 
590138, 4150260; 590136, 4150258; 590134, 4150257; 590133, 4150256; 
589930, 4150084; 589926, 4150080; 589921, 4150076; 589916, 4150073; 
589911, 4150070; 589906, 4150066; 589901, 4150064; 589896, 4150061; 
589891, 4150059; 589885, 4150056; 589880, 4150054; 589874, 4150052; 
589869, 4150050; 589863, 4150049; 589857, 4150048; 589852, 4150046; 
589846, 4150045; 589840, 4150045; 589834, 4150044; 589829, 4150044; 
589823, 4150044; 589817, 4150044; 589811, 4150044; 589805, 4150045; 
589799, 4150045; 589794, 4150046; 589788, 4150047; 589782, 4150048; 
589776, 4150050; 589771, 4150052; 589765, 4150053; 589760, 4150055; 
589754, 4150058; 589749, 4150060; 589744, 4150063; 589739, 4150066; 
589734, 4150068; 589729, 4150072; 589724, 4150075; 589719, 4150078; 
589715, 4150082; 589710, 4150086; 589706, 4150090; 589702, 4150094; 
589698, 4150098; 589694, 4150103; 589641, 4150165; 589900, 4150100; 
returning to 590100, 4150400;
    (ii) Unit 14B: Alameda County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Milpitas. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 
coordinates (E,N): 592000, 4150900; 592300, 4150600; 592300, 4150582; 
592274, 4150603; 592276, 4150615; 592213, 4150675; 592195, 4150689; 
592081, 4150769; 592026, 4150768; 591957, 4150835; 591831, 4150703; 
591824, 4150696; 591604, 4150449; 591601, 4150449; 591598, 4150449; 
591595, 4150449; 591592, 4150449; 591589, 4150448; 591586, 4150448; 
591583, 4150448; 591581, 4150447; 591578, 4150446; 591575, 4150446; 
591572, 4150445; 591569, 4150444; 591567, 4150443; 591564, 4150441; 
591561, 4150440; 591559, 4150439; 591556, 4150437; 591554, 4150436; 
591552, 4150434; 591549, 4150433; 591547, 4150431; 591545, 4150429; 
591542, 4150427; 591540, 4150425; 591538, 4150423; 591536, 4150421; 
591534, 4150419; 591533, 4150416; 591531, 4150414; 591529, 4150412; 
591528, 4150409; 591526, 4150407; 591525, 4150404; 591523, 4150401; 
591522, 4150399; 591521, 4150396; 591520, 4150393; 591519, 4150391; 
591518, 4150388; 591518, 4150385; 591517, 4150382; 591516, 4150379; 
591516, 4150376; 591516, 4150374; 591515, 4150371; 591515, 4150368; 
591515, 4150365; 591515, 4150362; 591515, 4150359; 591516, 4150356; 
591516, 4150354; 591442, 4150273; 591396, 4150319; 591243, 4150156; 
591255, 4150145; 591269, 4150133; 591300, 4150104; 591331, 4150075; 
591473, 4149942; 591550, 4149873; 591589, 4149840; 591620, 4149817; 
591665, 4149787; 591688, 4149775; 591721, 4149761; 591777, 4149738; 
591825, 4149720; 591872, 4149707; 591913, 4149697; 591958, 4149690; 
592001, 4149686; 592064, 4149684; 592119, 4149689; 592237, 4150383; 
592245, 4150384; 592244, 4150388; 592251, 4150389; 592252, 4150385; 
592298, 4150392; 592200, 4150000; 592100, 4149600; 592000, 4149500; 
591984, 4149500; 592103, 4149649; 592088, 4149647; 592058, 4149645; 
592030, 4149647; 591994, 4149650; 591954, 4149655; 591886, 4149666; 
591844, 4149677; 591783, 4149697; 591717, 4149723; 591651, 4149757; 
591594, 4149794; 591557, 4149824; 591530, 4149850; 591453, 4149920; 
591310, 4150053; 591279, 4150082; 591248, 4150110; 591235, 4150123; 
591222, 4150134; 591220, 4150131; 591045, 4149947; 590916, 4150021; 
591500, 4150800; 591600, 4150700; 591800, 4150700; returning to 592000, 
4150900;

    (iii) Note: Unit 14 (Map 8) follows:

[[Page 786]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10FE06.033

    (17) Unit 15: Merced, Madera, and Mariposa Counties, California. 
From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle Raynor Creek, Le Grand, and 
Plainsburg. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 
coordinates (E,N): 747003, 4125902; 747142, 4125971; 747303, 4125987; 
747358, 4126000; 747200, 4126000; 747142, 4125971; 747123, 4125969; 
747070, 4125950; 747003,

[[Page 787]]

4125902; 747000, 4125900; 746900, 4125900; 746600, 4125800; 746300, 
4125700; 746200, 4125600; 746200, 4125500; 745700, 4125500; 745700, 
4125100; 744500, 4125100; 744500, 4125300; 744400, 4125300; 744400, 
4125200; 743700, 4125200; 743700, 4125800; 744500, 4125800; 744500, 
4126200; 743700, 4126200; 743700, 4127000; 743600, 4127000; 742700, 
4127000; 742400, 4127000; 742000, 4127200; 742000, 4128600; 742800, 
4128600; 742800, 4129100; 742900, 4129100; 743000, 4129100; 743000, 
4129200; 743400, 4129300; 743600, 4129500; 743600, 4130284; 743605, 
4130284; 743600, 4130493; 743600, 4130700; 743595, 4130700; 743561, 
4132097; 743560, 4132170; 743556, 4132335; 743549, 4132692; 743537, 
4133202; 743529, 4133301; 743531, 4133352; 743530, 4133400; 743523, 
4133729; 743518, 4134016; 743515, 4134159; 743509, 4134382; 743500, 
4134708; 743504, 4134743; 743565, 4134782; 744447, 4135329; 746234, 
4136439; 746230, 4136445; 745985, 4136865; 745952, 4136931; 745915, 
4136978; 745914, 4136987; 745902, 4137008; 745748, 4137298; 745669, 
4137403; 745620, 4137437; 745503, 4137487; 745203, 4138201; 744984, 
4138471; 744895, 4138606; 744893, 4138653; 744892, 4138670; 744854, 
4138756; 744852, 4138807; 744873, 4138873; 744890, 4138973; 744922, 
4139007; 745038, 4139064; 745171, 4139174; 745299, 4139239; 745334, 
4139300; 745338, 4139306; 745339, 4139307; 745400, 4139400; 745432, 
4139432; 745432, 4139432; 745368, 4139567; 745324, 4139603; 745219, 
4139621; 745269, 4139653; 745281, 4139676; 745422, 4139619; 745490, 
4139575; 745500, 4139576; 745500, 4139600; 745500, 4140300; 746100, 
4139500; 746800, 4138500; 747700, 4137700; 748500, 4135800; 748700, 
4135100; 749500, 4134000; 749501, 4133999; 750173, 4132710; 750700, 
4131700; 751600, 4130500; 752000, 4130200; 752094, 4130188; 752157, 
4130180; 752800, 4130100; 753300, 4130400; 753500, 4130400; 753900, 
4130200; 754000, 4129300; 753400, 4128400; 753900, 4127700; 754400, 
4127700; 754600, 4127400; 755300, 4128400; 755400, 4128400; 755600, 
4127700; 756900, 4126400; 757800, 4125800; 758400, 4126300; 758500, 
4126300; 758600, 4126000; 757900, 4125100; 757400, 4125100; 757800, 
4124400; 757800, 4124000; 758200, 4124000; 758500, 4123600; 758800, 
4123600; 759000, 4123900; 759300, 4123900; 759700, 4123500; 759700, 
4123400; 759200, 4122900; 760300, 4121300; 761000, 4121000; 761300, 
4120300; 761955, 4119563; 761968, 4119549; 761718, 4119265; 761701, 
4119258; 761698, 4119256; 761644, 4119235; 761519, 4119174; 761497, 
4119158; 761476, 4119142; 761412, 4119094; 761355, 4119052; 761244, 
4118969; 761107, 4118894; 760858, 4118839; 760750, 4118755; 760594, 
4118634; 760278, 4118609; 760228, 4118605; 760119, 4118597; 760084, 
4118594; 760084, 4118594; 760008, 4118588; 759742, 4118512; 759529, 
4118452; 759375, 4118358; 759330, 4118326; 759173, 4118214; 758783, 
4118084; 758541, 4118070; 758036, 4117982; 757933, 4117964; 757910, 
4117955; 757910, 4117955; 757811, 4117918; 757808, 4117917; 757797, 
4117914; 757694, 4117865; 757622, 4117811; 757620, 4117809; 757616, 
4117808; 757591, 4117800; 757532, 4117781; 757485, 4117741; 757476, 
4117726; 757475, 4117726; 757450, 4117700; 757411, 4117661; 757378, 
4117627; 757377, 4117626; 757352, 4117600; 757350, 4117598; 757221, 
4117467; 757182, 4117433; 757117, 4117417; 757086, 4117410; 757047, 
4117400; 756985, 4117385; 756917, 4117369; 756872, 4117341; 756823, 
4117300; 756785, 4117267; 756759, 4117243; 756745, 4117231; 756634, 
4117128; 756624, 4117124; 756592, 4117112; 756590, 4117110; 756590, 
4117110; 756500, 4117200; 756223, 4117292; 756200, 4117300; 755800, 
4117200; 755700, 4117200; 755700, 4117160; 755700, 4116700; 755700, 
4116600; 755500, 4116500; 755400, 4116500; 754900, 4116300; 754800, 
4116300; 754800, 4116600; 753700, 4116600; 753700, 4116400; 753300, 
4116400; 753300, 4115600; 753100, 4115500; 752700, 4115400; 752400, 
4115300; 752200, 4115200; 752200, 4115600; 751800, 4115600; 752000, 
4115800; 751900, 4116000; 751400, 4116100; 751100, 4116300; 751300, 
4116300; 751300, 4116900; 751100, 4116900; 750815, 4116900; 750800, 
4116900; 750700, 4117000; 750000, 4116800; 749300, 4116800; 749300, 
4116611; 749300, 4116500; 746800, 4116500; 746000, 4116500; 746000, 
4116520; 746000, 4116600; 745200, 4116600; 745200, 4117800; 744600, 
4117800; 744600, 4118600; 743600, 4118600; 743600, 4119000; 745400, 
4119000; 745400, 4119700; 744700, 4119700; 744700, 4120500; 745300, 
4120500; 745500, 4120600; 745600, 4120700; 746000, 4120700; 746000, 
4121400; 746200, 4121500; 746200, 4121600; 746400, 4121700; 746400, 
4121800; 747600, 4120700; 746500, 4120700; 746500, 4119700; 747000, 
4119700; 747000, 4120300; 747800, 4120300; 747800, 4120000; 748400, 
4120000; 747800, 4120500; 747800, 4121400; 748600, 4121400; 748600, 
4121900; 747800, 4121900; 747800, 4123300; 748300, 4123300; 748300, 
4123500; 748500, 4123500; 748600, 4123500; 748600, 4123900; 747800, 
4123900; 747800, 4124600; 747400, 4125100; 747400, 4125500; 746900, 
4125500; 746900, 4125763; 746902, 4125767; 746921, 4125818; 746971, 
4125871; 746997, 4125897; returning to 747003, 4125902; excluding 
757175, 4117475; 757117, 4117435; 757138, 4117438; 757146, 4117439; 
757245, 4117516; 757255, 4117530; returning to 757175, 4117475.

    (18) Note: Unit 15 (Map 9) follows:

[[Page 788]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10FE06.034

    (19) Unit 16: Merced County, California.
    (i) Unit 16A: Merced County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Stevinson, Gustine, and San Luis Ranch. Land bounded by the 
following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 688300, 4129000; 
688600, 4128800; 689100, 4128900; 689200, 4128800; 689400, 4128600; 
689800, 4128500; 689900, 4128300;

[[Page 789]]

690200, 4128300; 690400, 4128200; 690500, 4128000; 690600, 4125500; 
692700, 4125500; 693200, 4125000; 693100, 4124800; 693100, 4124400; 
693300, 4123700; 693600, 4123400; 693800, 4123000; 694000, 4122900; 
694079, 4122821; 694035, 4122790; 692453, 4121671; 692300, 4121900; 
692200, 4122000; 692200, 4122500; 692100, 4122700; 691800, 4122800; 
691400, 4122800; 691261, 4123079; 691262, 4123097; 691263, 4123113; 
691267, 4123155; 691273, 4123198; 691267, 4123238; 691248, 4123272; 
691217, 4123291; 691200, 4123294; 691200, 4123500; 691110, 4123679; 
691126, 4123677; 691149, 4123682; 691156, 4123694; 691166, 4123718; 
691177, 4123739; 691191, 4123771; 691193, 4123793; 691200, 4123800; 
691195, 4123810; 691201, 4123850; 691215, 4123892; 691220, 4123942; 
691214, 4123980; 691192, 4124020; 691171, 4124049; 691150, 4124072; 
691127, 4124089; 691099, 4124095; 691071, 4124095; 691055, 4124090; 
690900, 4124400; 690559, 4124400; 690559, 4124402; 690569, 4124417; 
690582, 4124427; 690582, 4124447; 690576, 4124466; 690563, 4124483; 
690546, 4124493; 690525, 4124502; 690523, 4124502; 690523, 4124519; 
690500, 4124524; 690475, 4124530; 690469, 4124538; 690445, 4124570; 
690388, 4124590; 690353, 4124592; 690180, 4124650; 690127, 4124689; 
690083, 4124695; 690025, 4124783; 690020, 4124854; 689996, 4124900; 
689988, 4125006; 689952, 4125056; 689912, 4125095; 689856, 4125119; 
689819, 4125184; 689788, 4125210; 689747, 4125229; 689700, 4125300; 
689658, 4125595; 689665, 4125595; 689672, 4125603; 689645, 4125757; 
689630, 4125793; 689600, 4126000; 689700, 4126200; 689600, 4126600; 
689400, 4126600; 689275, 4126538; 689239, 4126581; 689188, 4126664; 
689134, 4126678; 689121, 4126682; 689069, 4126728; 689067, 4126852; 
689020, 4126961; 688990, 4126993; 688911, 4126978; 688903, 4126995; 
688913, 4127006; 689100, 4127100; 689024, 4127195; 689025, 4127207; 
688949, 4127292; 688931, 4127324; 688922, 4127322; 688854, 4127407; 
688823, 4127454; 688780, 4127503; 688735, 4127581; 688723, 4127621; 
688696, 4127650; 688684, 4128244; 688193, 4128235; 688100, 4128700; 
returning to 688300, 4129000;
    (ii) Unit 16B: Merced County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Stevinson and San Luis Ranch. Land bounded by the following 
UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 695400, 4125600; 695500, 4122000; 
694900, 4122400; 694700, 4122700; 694500, 4122900; 694500, 4123100; 
694100, 4123400; 693800, 4123500; 693800, 4123800; 693500, 4123900; 
693500, 4124500; 693700, 4124700; 693800, 4125000; 693600, 4125200; 
693400, 4125300; 693122, 4125670; 693100, 4125700; 693146, 4125746; 
693200, 4125800; 693700, 4125900; 693700, 4127300; 693800, 4127300; 
693900, 4127000; 694200, 4126900; 694600, 4126400; 694600, 4126200; 
694700, 4126000; 695179, 4125726; returning to 695400, 4125600;
    (iii) Unit 16C: Merced County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Arena, Stevinson, Turner Ranch, and San Luis Ranch. Land 
bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 699300, 
4126300; 699300, 4125400; 700100, 4125400; 700200, 4126000; 700600, 
4125700; 701100, 4125300; 701100, 4124300; 700300, 4124300; 700300, 
4123800; 700500, 4123800; 700600, 4123500; 701100, 4123400; 701200, 
4123200; 701400, 4123100; 701600, 4122700; 701900, 4122500; 702600, 
4122200; 702870, 4121705; 703200, 4121100; 703900, 4120500; 704600, 
4119800; 704600, 4119800; 704700, 4119700; 698900, 4119600; 698800, 
4119700; 698543, 4119957; 698558, 4119970; 698501, 4120012; 698504, 
4120069; 698626, 4120197; 698662, 4120077; 698694, 4120113; 698668, 
4121116; 698663, 4121510; 698594, 4121508; 698600, 4121600; 699900, 
4121600; 700000, 4120400; 700200, 4120400; 700200, 4122700; 697000, 
4122600; 696900, 4125100; 697700, 4125100; 697700, 4125300; 697600, 
4125400; 697700, 4125600; 698000, 4125700; 698200, 4125800; 698300, 
4126100; 698700, 4126500; 699500, 4126500; 699600, 4126300; returning to 
699300, 4126300;
    (iv) Unit 16D: Merced County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Arena and Turner Ranch. Land bounded by the following UTM 
Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 706700, 4122100; 706800, 4120900; 
706700, 4120500; 706700, 4119700; 708100, 4119700; 708100, 4119600; 
708000, 4119500; 707900, 4119200; 707900, 4119000; 708000, 4118900; 
708300, 4118900; 708300, 4118100; 707900, 4118100; 707500, 4118500; 
706500, 4118500; 706000, 4118900; 705600, 4119300; 705200, 4119700; 
704800, 4120000; 704700, 4120100; 704700, 4120400; 705100, 4120400; 
705100, 4120600; 704900, 4120700; 704900, 4120800; 705100, 4120800; 
704900, 4121000; 705000, 4121100; 705100, 4121700; 705200, 4121700; 
705300, 4122000; 705700, 4122100; 705700, 4122200; 705400, 4122300; 
705300, 4122400; 705500, 4122600; 705400, 4122600; 705300, 4122500; 
705200, 4122500; 705100, 4122500; 704900, 4122500; 704900, 4122700; 
704800, 4122800; 704500, 4122800; 704300, 4122900; 704000, 4122800; 
703900, 4122900; 703400, 4124400; 703300, 4124600; 701300, 4126500; 
700100, 4127600; 700467, 4129067; 700500, 4129200; 700500, 4130600; 
701000, 4130600; 701000, 4130100; 701100, 4129800; 701200, 4129800; 
701100, 4130100; 701100, 4130600; 701700, 4130600; 701700, 4129200; 
701800, 4129200; 702800, 4129200; 703000, 4128800; 703300, 4128800; 
703900, 4128800; 703900, 4129000; 704200, 4129000; 704200, 4128500; 
703300, 4128400; 703400, 4128300; 703400, 4127900; 703500, 4127800; 
703800, 4127500; 703700, 4127300; 703500, 4127300; 703400, 4127100; 
703400, 4126100; 703500, 4126100; 704400, 4126100; 704300, 4126000; 
704400, 4125900; 704500, 4125300; 704500, 4124800; 705000, 4124800; 
705000, 4125300; 705700, 4125300; 705700, 4124900; 706600, 4125000; 
706700, 4123700; returning to 706700, 4122100;
    (v) Unit 16E: Merced County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Sandy Mush and Turner Ranch. Land bounded by the following 
UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 706700, 4122100; 711500, 4122200; 
711500, 4121700; 711500, 4121200; 709900, 4121300; 709900, 4121900; 
709800, 4121900; 709800, 4121800; 709700, 4121500; 709500, 4121500; 
709300, 4121600; 708800, 4121400; 708700, 4121300; 706800, 4121300; 
returning to 706700, 4122100;
    (vi) Unit 16F: Merced County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Sandy Mush and Turner Ranch. Land bounded by the following 
UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 711200, 4120500; 711400, 4120400; 
711500, 4120500; 711600, 4119600; 711900, 4119600; 711900, 4119400; 
712100, 4119300; 712300, 4119300; 712300, 4119200; 712600, 4119200; 
712800, 4118800; 711600, 4118700; 711600, 4118500; 711400, 4118500;

[[Page 790]]

711300, 4118400; 711100, 4118100; 709900, 4118100; 709900, 4118800; 
709900, 4119000; 709700, 4119000; 709700, 4119600; 710300, 4119600; 
710300, 4119900; 710700, 4119900; 710700, 4120000; 710600, 4120000; 
710600, 4120100; 710700, 4120200; 710600, 4120300; 710700, 4120400; 
710700, 4120500; 710900, 4120400; 711100, 4120400; returning to 711200, 
4120500;
    (vii) Unit 16G: Merced County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Sandy Mush. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 
coordinates (E,N): 714600, 4115000; 713300, 4115000; 713100, 4115300; 
713300, 4115300; 713800, 4115400; 713800, 4116600; 715400, 4116600; 
715500, 4116500; 715500, 4115818; 714600, 4115800; returning to 714600, 
4115000;
    (viii) Unit 16H: Merced County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle El Nido and Sandy Mush. Land bounded by the following UTM 
Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 718900, 4120900; 718900, 4120000; 
719300, 4120000; 719400, 4120200; 719600, 4120100; 720200, 4120100; 
720300, 4120200; 720700, 4120200; 720900, 4120000; 721500, 4120000; 
721600, 4120100; 722000, 4120100; 722100, 4120000; 722200, 4120200; 
722200, 4120300; 722900, 4120300; 722900, 4119600; 722100, 4119500; 
722200, 4118400; 725400, 4118500; 725400, 4118578; 726100, 4118600; 
726100, 4120100; 728600, 4120100; 728600, 4119200; 727800, 4119200; 
727700, 4118600; 727600, 4118500; 727500, 4118500; 727500, 4118400; 
727500, 4116900; 726800, 4116900; 726700, 4116900; 726800, 4115300; 
725900, 4115300; 725900, 4116900; 724300, 4116900; 724300, 4117600; 
722694, 4117506; 722600, 4117600; 721800, 4117600; 721800, 4118400; 
720200, 4118400; 720200, 4117600; 719400, 4117600; 719400, 4116700; 
718600, 4116700; 718600, 4117100; 718200, 4117100; 718200, 4117200; 
718300, 4117300; 718400, 4117400; 718600, 4117400; 718600, 4117500; 
718600, 4118291; 718900, 4118300; 718900, 4118900; 718800, 4119000; 
718700, 4119000; 718600, 4119100; 717700, 4119100; 717700, 4119900; 
718100, 4119900; 718100, 4119950; 718100, 4120000; 718500, 4120000; 
718500, 4120900; returning to 718900, 4120900;
    (ix) Unit 16I: Merced County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Sandy Mush. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 
coordinates (E,N): 721300, 4120800; 720500, 4120800; 720500, 4121600; 
721300, 4121600; 721300, 4121200; returning to 721300, 4120800;
    (x) Unit 16J: Merced County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle El Nido. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 
coordinates (E,N): 722900, 4121800; 721800, 4121800; 722200, 4122500; 
722900, 4122500; returning to 722900, 4121800;
    (xi) Unit 16K: Merced County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Plainsburg and El Nido. Land bounded by the following UTM 
Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 731700, 4117000; 730400, 4117000; 
730400, 4118600; 730200, 4118600; 730100, 4119300; 730000, 4119700; 
730000, 4119900; 730100, 4120200; 730900, 4120200; 730900, 4121400; 
731300, 4121500; 731800, 4121400; 732700, 4121300; 734000, 4121200; 
734200, 4121100; 734200, 4120300; 733400, 4120300; 733400, 4118700; 
731700, 4118700; returning to 731700, 4117000;

    (xii) Note: Unit 16 (Map 10) follows:

[[Page 791]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10FE06.035

    (20) Unit 17, Fresno County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Millerton Lake East and Academy. Land bounded by the 
following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 802663, 4106066; 
803207, 4105399; 803781, 4105836; 803880, 4105842; 804343, 4104869; 
804150, 4104757; 803962, 4104544; 803981, 4104245; 804206, 4103858; 
804331, 4103465; 804238,

[[Page 792]]

4103359; 803957, 4103040; 803171, 4102790; 802073, 4102721; 801886, 
4102509; 801898, 4102309; 802217, 4102028; 802435, 4101741; 802554, 
4101448; 802573, 4101149; 802511, 4100543; 802424, 4100337; 802343, 
4100031; 802056, 4099812; 801769, 4099594; 801276, 4099463; 800877, 
4099437; 800958, 4099743; 801712, 4100492; 801987, 4100911; 801974, 
4101110; 801862, 4101304; 801218, 4101965; 801187, 4102464; 801455, 
4102983; 801816, 4103607; 802316, 4103638; 802834, 4103370; 803333, 
4103402; 803520, 4103614; 803607, 4103820; 803264, 4104500; 802852, 
4104675; 802227, 4105036; 802264, 4106041; 802663, 4106066.

    (21) Note: Unit 17 (Map 11) follows:

[[Page 793]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10FE06.036

    (22) Unit 18: Tulare and Kings Counties, California.
    (i) Unit 18A: Tulare and Kings Counties, California. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangle Monson, Traver, Burris Park, and Remnoy. Land 
bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 coordinates (E,N): 828797, 
4041134; 828810, 4040935; 829509, 4040978;

[[Page 794]]

829634, 4040585; 829709, 4039386; 830449, 4039621; 830453, 4039463; 
830420, 4039230; 829721, 4039186; 829521, 4039174; 829509, 4039374; 
828304, 4039399; 828279, 4039798; 827580, 4039755; 827605, 4039355; 
827205, 4039330; 827280, 4038132; 826381, 4038076; 826400, 4037776; 
825601, 4037726; 825582, 4038026; 824877, 4038082; 824895, 4037782; 
822892, 4037758; 822929, 4037159; 821031, 4037041; 821075, 4036342; 
820575, 4036310; 820606, 4035811; 820207, 4035786; 820157, 4034981; 
820200, 4034282; 818203, 4034157; 818222, 4033858; 817135, 4033589; 
816842, 4033471; 816667, 4033059; 816274, 4032935; 816181, 4032934; 
814570, 4032928; 813902, 4032386; 813727, 4031974; 813565, 4031362; 
813284, 4031044; 812996, 4030826; 812891, 4032523; 813790, 4032579; 
814252, 4033209; 814539, 4033428; 814851, 4034164; 814889, 4034252; 
815581, 4034395; 816256, 4034838; 817560, 4034819; 816992, 4035886; 
818490, 4035980; 819364, 4036436; 819770, 4036360; 820900, 4037534; 
821693, 4037683; 822542, 4038539; 824646, 4038569; 824846, 4038582; 
826344, 4038675; 826313, 4039175; 825507, 4039225; 825445, 4040223; 
827043, 4040323; 827100, 4041028; returning to 828797, 4041134;
    (ii) Unit 18B: Tulare County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Monson. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 
coordinates (E,N): 831257, 4040285; 831281, 4039895; 831228, 4039894; 
831226, 4040265; 830457, 4040256; 830452, 4040335; returning to 831257, 
4040285;
    (iii) Unit 18C: Tulare County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Monson. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 
coordinates (E,N): 832081, 4039935; 832106, 4039535; 832038, 4039531; 
831991, 4039595; 831752, 4039679; 831748, 4039853; 832035, 4039864; 
832031, 4039913; 831542, 4039901; 832081, 4039935; returning to 832081, 
4039935;
    (iv) Unit 18D: Tulare County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Monson. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 
coordinates (E,N): 831258, 4037878; 830508, 4037831; 830507, 4037837; 
830510, 4037837; 830495, 4038113; 830867, 4038116; 831249, 4038123; 
returning to 831258, 4037878;
    (v) Unit 18E: Tulare County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Monson. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 
coordinates (E, N): 835309, 4039635; 834510, 4039585; 834460, 4040384; 
835259, 4040434; returning to 835309, 4039635;
    (vi) Unit 18F: Tulare County, California. From USGS 1:24,000 scale 
quadrangle Ivanhoe. Land bounded by the following UTM Zone 10, NAD 83 
coordinates (E,N): 837863, 4043705; 837178, 4043663; 837165, 4044455; 
837527, 4044471; 837510, 4044925; 837253, 4045186; 836546, 4045165; 
836550, 4044829; 836726, 4044828; 836732, 4044453; 836753, 4044453; 
836777, 4043638; 836764, 4043637; 836765, 4043628; 835983, 4043614; 
835959, 4043687; 836040, 4043993; 836433, 4044117; 836365, 4045216; 
837164, 4045266; 836733, 4045741; 838331, 4045841; 838338, 4045740; 
837838, 4045710; 837919, 4044411; 837819, 4044405; returning to 837863, 
4043705;

    (vii) Note: Unit 18 (Map 12) follows:

[[Page 795]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10FE06.037


[[Page 796]]


    (i) Insects.

         Comal Springs dryopid beetle (Stygoparnus comalensis).

    (1) Critical habitat units are depicted for Comal and Hays Counties, 
Texas, on the maps below.
    (2) The primary constituent elements of critical habitat for the 
Comal Springs dryopid beetle are:
    (i) High-quality water with no or minimal levels of pollutants, such 
as soaps and detergents (Brown 1987, p. 261) and other compounds 
containing surfactants, heavy metals, pesticides, fertilizer nutrients, 
petroleum hydrocarbons, pharmaceuticals and veterinary medicines, and 
semi-volatile compounds, such as industrial cleaning agents, and 
including:
    (A) Low salinity with total dissolved solids that generally range 
from 307 to 368 mg/L; and
    (B) Low turbidity that generally is less than 5 nephelometric 
turbidity units;
    (ii) Aquifer water temperatures that range from approximately 68 to 
75 [deg]F (20 to 24 [deg]C);
    (iii) A hydrologic regime that allows for adequate spring flows that 
provide levels of dissolved oxygen in the approximate range of 4.0 to 
10.0 mg/L for respiration of the Comal Springs dryopid beetle; and
    (iv) Food supply that includes detritus (decomposed materials), leaf 
litter, living plant material, algae, fungi, bacteria and other 
microorganisms, and decaying roots.
    (3) Critical habitat does not include manmade structures (such as 
buildings, aqueducts, roads, and other paved areas) and the land on 
which they are located existing with the legal boundaries on the 
effective date of this rule. Where lakes are designated, critical 
habitat is only designated for areas where springs occur and does not 
include areas of the lake bottom beyond a radius of 50 ft (15.2 m) from 
the spring outlet.
    (4) Critical habitat map units. Data layers defining map units were 
created by using ArcGIS. All coordinates are UTM zone 14 coordinate 
pairs, referenced to North American Horizontal Datum 1983. Coordinates 
were derived from 2004 digital orthophotographs. All acreage and mileage 
calculations were performed using GIS.
    (5) Note: Index map of the critical habitat units for Comal Springs 
dryopid beetle (Map 1) follows:

[[Page 797]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17JY07.003

    (6) Comal Springs Unit, Comal County, Texas.
    (i) Aquatic habitat areas bounded by the UTM Zone 14 NAD 83 
coordinates (meters E, meters N): 583387, 3287251; 583392, 3287264; 
583405, 3287280; 583404, 3287290; 583407, 3287301; 583414, 3287307; 
583425, 3287308; 583425, 3287320; 583433, 3287328; 583444, 3287330; 
583454, 3287325;

[[Page 798]]

583463, 3287301; 583482, 3287272; 583486, 3287286; 583501, 3287296; 
583520, 3287314; 583547, 3287326; 583557, 3287333; 583572, 3287335; 
583586, 3287342; 583567, 3287387; 583560, 3287408; 583559, 3287423; 
583534, 3287403; 583499, 3287359; 583491, 3287347; 583484, 3287340; 
583471, 3287334; 583461, 3287334; 583452, 3287340; 583450, 3287350; 
583454, 3287364; 583465, 3287374; 583494, 3287415; 583521, 3287443; 
583526, 3287453; 583563, 3287477; 583589, 3287503; 583613, 3287519; 
583643, 3287547; 583662, 3287561; 583719, 3287617; 583759, 3287669; 
583780, 3287701; 583811, 3287743; 583833, 3287764; 583848, 3287784; 
583892, 3287826; 583911, 3287850; 583970, 3287907; 584008, 3287938; 
584047, 3287963; 584055, 3287964; 584065, 3287960; 584073, 3287948; 
584074, 3287941; 584081, 3287952; 584131, 3288011; 584164, 3288044; 
584183, 3288062; 584197, 3288071; 584216, 3288093; 584236, 3288110; 
584258, 3288138; 584284, 3288161; 584325, 3288209; 584343, 3288223; 
584364, 3288233; 584375, 3288243; 584386, 3288244; 584401, 3288234; 
584403, 3288218; 584433, 3288201; 584437, 3288193; 584436, 3288184; 
584416, 3288167; 584405, 3288167; 584375, 3288184; 584365, 3288180; 
584344, 3288156; 584329, 3288131; 584320, 3288125; 584298, 3288103; 
584273, 3288067; 584204, 3287997; 584187, 3287985; 584176, 3287973; 
584152, 3287943; 584147, 3287933; 584105, 3287880; 584080, 3287862; 
584049, 3287844; 584026, 3287815; 584021, 3287805; 584013, 3287798; 
584009, 3287787; 583999, 3287775; 583971, 3287751; 583947, 3287735; 
583927, 3287725; 583920, 3287718; 583890, 3287704; 583850, 3287673; 
583845, 3287665; 583851, 3287662; 583860, 3287650; 583865, 3287640; 
583865, 3287629; 583863, 3287622; 583854, 3287609; 583840, 3287600; 
583836, 3287584; 583829, 3287576; 583838, 3287552; 583841, 3287535; 
583841, 3287520; 583835, 3287501; 583804, 3287452; 583790, 3287435; 
583766, 3287416; 583727, 3287406; 583706, 3287406; 583695, 3287398; 
583686, 3287370; 583699, 3287298; 583698, 3287288; 583694, 3287282; 
583617, 3287257; 583610, 3287258; 583605, 3287262; 583597, 3287280; 
583584, 3287277; 583565, 3287270; 583541, 3287255; 583534, 3287244; 
583518, 3287233; 583510, 3287211; 583496, 3287192; 583480, 3287183; 
583459, 3287177; 583436, 3287178; 583419, 3287184; 583400, 3287198; 
583396, 3287205; 583387, 3287251.
    (ii) Note: Comal Springs Unit (Map 2) follows:

[[Page 799]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17JY07.004

    (7) Fern Bank Springs Unit, Hays County, Texas.
    (i) Aquatic habitat areas bounded by the UTM Zone 14 NAD 83 
coordinates (meters E, meters N): 595131, 3317374; 595131, 3317375; 
595132, 3317376; 595132, 3317377; 595132, 3317378; 595132, 3317379; 
595133, 3317380; 595133, 3317381; 595133, 3317382; 595134, 3317383; 
595135, 3317383; 595135, 3317384; 595136, 3317385; 595137, 3317386; 
595137, 3317386; 595138, 3317387; 595139, 3317387; 595140, 3317388; 
595141, 3317388; 595141, 3317388; 595168, 3317398; 595181, 3317411; 
595198, 3317428; 595198, 3317428; 595199, 3317429; 595199, 3317430; 
595200, 3317430; 595201, 3317431; 595202, 3317431; 595203, 3317432; 
595204, 3317432; 595205, 3317432; 595206, 3317432; 595207, 3317433; 
595208, 3317433;

[[Page 800]]

595209, 3317433; 595210, 3317433; 595211, 3317433; 595212, 3317433; 
595213, 3317432; 595214, 3317432; 595214, 3317432; 595215, 3317431; 
595216, 3317431; 595217, 3317430; 595218, 3317430; 595219, 3317429; 
595219, 3317428; 595220, 3317428; 595221, 3317427; 595237, 3317406; 
595237, 3317406; 595238, 3317405; 595238, 3317404; 595239, 3317404; 
595239, 3317403; 595239, 3317402; 595240, 3317401; 595240, 3317400; 
595240, 3317400; 595240, 3317399; 595240, 3317398; 595240, 3317397; 
595240, 3317396; 595240, 3317395; 595240, 3317394; 595240, 3317394; 
595240, 3317393; 595239, 3317392; 595239, 3317391; 595239, 3317390; 
595238, 3317389; 595238, 3317388; 595237, 3317388; 595237, 3317388; 
595223, 3317369; 595223, 3317369; 595222, 3317368; 595221, 3317367; 
595221, 3317366; 595220, 3317366; 595219, 3317365; 595218, 3317365; 
595217, 3317364; 595217, 3317364; 595173, 3317343; 595173, 3317343; 
595172, 3317343; 595171, 3317342; 595170, 3317342; 595169, 3317342; 
595168, 3317342; 595167, 3317342; 595166, 3317342; 595165, 3317342; 
595164, 3317342; 595163, 3317342; 595162, 3317343; 595146, 3317347; 
595146, 3317348; 595145, 3317348; 595144, 3317348; 595143, 3317349; 
595142, 3317349; 595141, 3317350; 595141, 3317350; 595141, 3317350; 
595140, 3317351; 595139, 3317352; 595139, 3317352; 595139, 3317353; 
595138, 3317353; 595138, 3317354; 595137, 3317355; 595137, 3317356; 
595136, 3317357; 595136, 3317357; 595132, 3317369; 595132, 3317370; 
595132, 3317370; 595132, 3317371; 595132, 3317372; 595131, 3317373; 
595131, 3317374.
    (ii) Note: Fern Bank Springs Unit (Map 3) follows:

[[Page 801]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17JY07.005

          Comal Springs riffle beetle (Heterelmis comalensis).

    (1) Critical habitat units are depicted for Comal and Hays Counties, 
Texas, on the maps below.
    (2) The primary constituent elements of critical habitat for Comal 
Springs riffle beetle are:

[[Page 802]]

    (i) High-quality water with no or minimal levels of pollutants, such 
as soaps and detergents (Brown 1987, p. 261) and other compounds 
containing surfactants, heavy metals, pesticides, fertilizer nutrients, 
petroleum hydrocarbons, pharmaceuticals and veterinary medicines, and 
semi-volatile compounds, such as industrial cleaning agents, and 
including:
    (A) Low salinity with total dissolved solids that generally range 
from 307 to 368 mg/L; and
    (B) Low turbidity that generally is less than 5 nephelometric 
turbidity units;
    (ii) Aquifer water temperatures that range from approximately 68 to 
75 [deg]F (20 to 24 [deg]C);
    (iii) A hydrologic regime that allows for adequate spring flows that 
provide levels of dissolved oxygen in the approximate range of 4.0 to 
10.0 mg/L for respiration of the Comal Springs riffle beetle;
    (iv) Food supply that includes detritus (decomposed materials), leaf 
litter, living plant material, algae, fungi, bacteria and other 
microorganisms, and decaying roots; and
    (v) Bottom substrate in surface water habitat of the Comal Springs 
riffle beetle that is free of sand and silt, and is composed of gravel 
and cobble ranging in size from 0.3 to 5.0 inches (8 to 128 
millimeters).
    (3) Critical habitat does not include manmade structures (such as 
buildings, aqueducts, roads, and other paved areas) and the land on 
which they are located existing within the legal boundaries on the 
effective date of this rule.
    (4) Critical habitat map units. Data layers defining map units were 
created by using ArcGIS. All coordinates are UTM zone 14 coordinate 
pairs, referenced to North American Horizontal Datum 1983. Coordinates 
were derived from 2004 digital orthophotographs. All acreage and mileage 
calculations were performed using GIS.
    (5) Note: Index map of the critical habitat units for Comal Springs 
riffle beetle (Map 1) follows:

[[Page 803]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17JY07.006

    (6) Comal Springs Unit, Comal County, Texas.
    (i) Aquatic habitat areas bounded by the UTM Zone 14 NAD 83 
coordinates (meters E, meters N): 583420, 3287293; 583423, 3287293; 
583426, 3287293; 583428, 3287290; 583429, 3287285; 583428, 3287280; 
583426, 3287273; 583422, 3287268; 583416, 3287259; 583415, 3287255; 
583415, 3287249;

[[Page 804]]

583417, 3287238; 583418, 3287233; 583419, 3287228; 583418, 3287222; 
583421, 3287221; 583427, 3287216; 583429, 3287207; 583435, 3287204; 
583442, 3287203; 583455, 3287203; 583464, 3287203; 583468, 3287205; 
583475, 3287209; 583479, 3287213; 583479, 3287217; 583483, 3287224; 
583486, 3287232; 583490, 3287246; 583491, 3287248; 583485, 3287247; 
583481, 3287245; 583476, 3287243; 583471, 3287241; 583461, 3287239; 
583460, 3287242; 583460, 3287248; 583459, 3287255; 583459, 3287261; 
583458, 3287266; 583455, 3287272; 583455, 3287277; 583452, 3287282; 
583449, 3287284; 583446, 3287288; 583445, 3287295; 583441, 3287307; 
583439, 3287314; 583443, 3287315; 583444, 3287309; 583446, 3287303; 
583449, 3287293; 583450, 3287291; 583453, 3287288; 583457, 3287284; 
583461, 3287278; 583466, 3287271; 583468, 3287263; 583469, 3287255; 
583470, 3287251; 583480, 3287257; 583484, 3287256; 583488, 3287254; 
583492, 3287253; 583493, 3287254; 583496, 3287255; 583500, 3287257; 
583503, 3287258; 583507, 3287260; 583509, 3287261; 583509, 3287262; 
583509, 3287265; 583508, 3287266; 583504, 3287270; 583502, 3287270; 
583499, 3287270; 583497, 3287271; 583497, 3287273; 583498, 3287276; 
583500, 3287277; 583502, 3287279; 583505, 3287281; 583508, 3287282; 
583512, 3287285; 583516, 3287291; 583521, 3287294; 583525, 3287298; 
583528, 3287301; 583531, 3287303; 583535, 3287305; 583540, 3287306; 
583544, 3287309; 583551, 3287311; 583556, 3287313; 583560, 3287317; 
583563, 3287319; 583567, 3287320; 583571, 3287320; 583575, 3287320; 
583578, 3287321; 583580, 3287322; 583583, 3287324; 583587, 3287326; 
583592, 3287328; 583595, 3287329; 583597, 3287330; 583600, 3287331; 
583603, 3287332; 583604, 3287333; 583605, 3287337; 583605, 3287340; 
583604, 3287344; 583601, 3287346; 583598, 3287353; 583593, 3287363; 
583589, 3287371; 583587, 3287378; 583581, 3287392; 583580, 3287400; 
583575, 3287411; 583574, 3287420; 583575, 3287430; 583575, 3287435; 
583575, 3287438; 583575, 3287441; 583574, 3287442; 583573, 3287442; 
583572, 3287442; 583569, 3287441; 583567, 3287442; 583563, 3287442; 
583558, 3287441; 583553, 3287437; 583549, 3287435; 583542, 3287429; 
583539, 3287428; 583536, 3287425; 583533, 3287420; 583524, 3287415; 
583516, 3287405; 583510, 3287398; 583505, 3287392; 583499, 3287383; 
583494, 3287378; 583486, 3287368; 583482, 3287361; 583479, 3287356; 
583475, 3287353; 583467, 3287349; 583465, 3287349; 583466, 3287355; 
583468, 3287356; 583470, 3287357; 583471, 3287359; 583473, 3287361; 
583475, 3287362; 583479, 3287367; 583485, 3287377; 583491, 3287386; 
583498, 3287395; 583506, 3287406; 583509, 3287407; 583511, 3287412; 
583523, 3287423; 583533, 3287434; 583535, 3287437; 583537, 3287442; 
583549, 3287449; 583558, 3287455; 583565, 3287461; 583571, 3287464; 
583576, 3287468; 583584, 3287478; 583598, 3287491; 583610, 3287498; 
583623, 3287507; 583635, 3287519; 583653, 3287536; 583672, 3287549; 
583685, 3287562; 583697, 3287574; 583731, 3287607; 583739, 3287618; 
583753, 3287634; 583761, 3287645; 583772, 3287660; 583784, 3287679; 
583792, 3287692; 583809, 3287716; 583823, 3287733; 583844, 3287754; 
583859, 3287773; 583870, 3287784; 583883, 3287797; 583903, 3287816; 
583913, 3287829; 583922, 3287839; 583933, 3287849; 583941, 3287857; 
583951, 3287867; 583961, 3287878; 583971, 3287886; 583980, 3287896; 
583991, 3287905; 584005, 3287917; 584017, 3287926; 584024, 3287931; 
584038, 3287941; 584049, 3287948; 584052, 3287949; 584055, 3287948; 
584056, 3287945; 584059, 3287941; 584059, 3287937; 584055, 3287935; 
584054, 3287932; 584055, 3287929; 584060, 3287926; 584067, 3287926; 
584071, 3287924; 584078, 3287920; 584081, 3287921; 584085, 3287929; 
584093, 3287942; 584108, 3287958; 584116, 3287970; 584128, 3287984; 
584142, 3288000; 584150, 3288007; 584157, 3288014; 584163, 3288021; 
584169, 3288027; 584174, 3288033; 584181, 3288039; 584187, 3288044; 
584192, 3288050; 584207, 3288060; 584216, 3288071; 584227, 3288082; 
584239, 3288093; 584247, 3288099; 584251, 3288104; 584255, 3288109; 
584261, 3288116; 584265, 3288121; 584270, 3288128; 584277, 3288132; 
584282, 3288138; 584289, 3288144; 584296, 3288151; 584303, 3288161; 
584313, 3288171; 584318, 3288178; 584328, 3288188; 584336, 3288198; 
584342, 3288201; 584347, 3288204; 584349, 3288207; 584352, 3288210; 
584357, 3288212; 584360, 3288215; 584366, 3288217; 584371, 3288219; 
584374, 3288221; 584378, 3288225; 584382, 3288229; 584388, 3288225; 
584388, 3288224; 584388, 3288220; 584388, 3288216; 584388, 3288214; 
584389, 3288211; 584389, 3288209; 584395, 3288205; 584401, 3288203; 
584422, 3288191; 584411, 3288181; 584393, 3288192; 584382, 3288198; 
584376, 3288200; 584371, 3288199; 584363, 3288197; 584355, 3288191; 
584348, 3288183; 584340, 3288175; 584332, 3288165; 584326, 3288157; 
584319, 3288147; 584316, 3288143; 584317, 3288141; 584316, 3288140; 
584314, 3288141; 584309, 3288136; 584303, 3288129; 584286, 3288113; 
584277, 3288100; 584269, 3288089; 584261, 3288077; 584253, 3288071; 
584240, 3288057; 584236, 3288052; 584228, 3288045; 584219, 3288035; 
584210, 3288026; 584203, 3288019; 584193, 3288008; 584183, 3288002; 
584176, 3287996; 584169, 3287987; 584165, 3287984; 584158, 3287974; 
584150, 3287966; 584139, 3287951; 584135, 3287942; 584127, 3287933; 
584114, 3287915; 584105, 3287905; 584094, 3287891; 584082, 3287884; 
584072, 3287875; 584059, 3287867; 584047, 3287862; 584038, 3287855; 
584033, 3287848; 584025, 3287840; 584019, 3287830; 584016, 3287827; 
584016, 3287827; 584013, 3287824; 584011, 3287820; 584009, 3287814; 
584005, 3287811; 584000, 3287806; 583996, 3287795; 583988, 3287786; 
583982, 3287780; 583972, 3287771; 583962, 3287764; 583950, 3287757; 
583939, 3287748; 583928, 3287743; 583917, 3287737; 583917, 3287737; 
583912, 3287731; 583895, 3287724; 583881, 3287717; 583872, 3287708; 
583860, 3287701; 583847, 3287692; 583838, 3287683; 583829, 3287669; 
583828, 3287663; 583830, 3287659; 583835, 3287653; 583840, 3287651; 
583843, 3287647; 583847, 3287642; 583850, 3287636; 583850, 3287630; 
583847, 3287625; 583842, 3287619; 583836, 3287616; 583829, 3287611; 
583824, 3287603; 583823, 3287597; 583822, 3287591; 583820, 3287588; 
583814, 3287587; 583813, 3287583; 583812, 3287580; 583814, 3287575; 
583815, 3287570; 583817, 3287565; 583820, 3287558; 583824, 3287548; 
583826, 3287541; 583826, 3287534; 583826, 3287522; 583823, 3287515; 
583821, 3287507; 583813, 3287493; 583807, 3287485; 583803, 3287481; 
583803, 3287478; 583799, 3287472; 583792, 3287462; 583779, 3287446; 
583769, 3287437; 583757, 3287428; 583753, 3287427; 583746, 3287426; 
583734, 3287423; 583725, 3287421; 583715, 3287420; 583709, 3287421; 
583702, 3287421; 583696, 3287418; 583689, 3287413; 583683, 3287407; 
583679, 3287400; 583677, 3287393; 583674, 3287383; 583671, 3287371; 
583672, 3287360; 583675, 3287341; 583678, 3287324; 583680, 3287312; 
583684, 3287297; 583684, 3287293; 583616, 3287272; 583615, 3287275; 
583610, 3287289; 583606, 3287294;

[[Page 805]]

583601, 3287295; 583595, 3287296; 583592, 3287294; 583580, 3287292; 
583569, 3287288; 583557, 3287283; 583548, 3287276; 583539, 3287271; 
583531, 3287267; 583525, 3287260; 583523, 3287255; 583517, 3287253; 
583513, 3287248; 583507, 3287243; 583502, 3287236; 583500, 3287228; 
583497, 3287219; 583493, 3287213; 583486, 3287203; 583474, 3287197; 
583458, 3287192; 583447, 3287192; 583439, 3287193; 583434, 3287196; 
583430, 3287198; 583428, 3287197; 583424, 3287198; 583422, 3287201; 
583419, 3287203; 583415, 3287205; 583411, 3287209; 583409, 3287221; 
583406, 3287230; 583404, 3287240; 583402, 3287251; 583405, 3287256; 
583408, 3287259; 583412, 3287263; 583417, 3287270; 583420, 3287276; 
583422, 3287279; 583421, 3287282; 583419, 3287285; 583419, 3287288; 
583420, 3287293.
    (ii) Note: Comal Springs Unit (Map 2) follows:

[[Page 806]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17JY07.007

    (7) San Marcos Springs Unit, Hays County, Texas.
    (i) Aquatic habitat areas bounded by the UTM Zone 14 NAD 83 
coordinates (meters E, meters N): 602869, 3307092; 602870, 3307100; 
602877, 3307131; 602892, 3307172; 602926, 3307215; 602936, 3307229; 
602942, 3307237; 602945, 3307243; 602957, 3307286; 603007, 3307329; 
603072, 3307386; 603154, 3307462; 603158, 3307463; 603166, 3307466; 
603175, 3307465; 603186, 3307473; 603219, 3307486; 603258, 3307508; 
603288, 3307526; 603307, 3307541; 603317, 3307544; 603326, 3307539; 
603329, 3307527; 603319, 3307512; 603251, 3307456; 603234, 3307439; 
603224, 3307433; 603218, 3307419; 603206, 3307412;

[[Page 807]]

603192, 3307406; 603175, 3307418; 603170, 3307419; 603153, 3307414; 
603144, 3307404; 603141, 3307389; 603145, 3307379; 603147, 3307369; 
603152, 3307352; 603141, 3307339; 603135, 3307339; 603124, 3307337; 
603120, 3307336; 603116, 3307335; 603114, 3307325; 603109, 3307318; 
603105, 3307315; 603104, 3307314; 603100, 3307310; 603024, 3307239; 
603023, 3307240; 603019, 3307237; 603017, 3307233; 603026, 3307203; 
603035, 3307187; 603038, 3307178; 603038, 3307166; 603033, 3307148; 
603027, 3307138; 603018, 3307123; 603002, 3307117; 602983, 3307109; 
602968, 3307097; 602962, 3307105; 602962, 3307105; 602965, 3307112; 
602963, 3307116; 602958, 3307119; 602954, 3307123; 602946, 3307126; 
602938, 3307129; 602928, 3307129; 602921, 3307129; 602913, 3307128; 
602896, 3307105; 602894, 3307101; 602887, 3307097; 602881, 3307091; 
602883, 3307087; 602877, 3307082; 602875, 3307084; 602872, 3307087; 
602869, 3307092.
    (ii) Note: San Marcos Springs Unit (Map 3) follows:

[[Page 808]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17JY07.008

              Delta Green Ground Beetle (Elaphrus viridis)

    California. Solano County. T.5N. R.1E. West \1/2\ Sec. 12, southwest 
\1/4\ Sec. 13, southeast \1/4\ Sec. 14, northeast \1/4\ Sec. 23, 
northwest \1/4\ Sec. 24.
    Note: Map follows:

[[Page 809]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.147

                Helotes Mold Beetle (Batrisodes venyivi)

    (1) Critical habitat for the Helotes mold beetle occurs in Units 
1e1, 3, and 5 as described below and depicted on Map 1 (index map) and 
Maps 2 through 4 below. All coordinates are geographic longitude and 
latitude, decimal degree coordinate pairs, referenced to North American 
Horizontal Datum 1983. Coordinates were derived from 2001 digital 
orthophotographs.
    (2) Map 1--Index map of critical habitat units for karst 
invertebrate species in Bexar County, Texas--follows:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR08AP03.007

    (3) The primary constituent elements include:
    (i) The physical features of karst-forming rock containing 
subterranean spaces with stable temperatures, high humidities (near 
saturation), and suitable substrates (for example, spaces between and 
underneath rocks suitable for foraging and sheltering); and

[[Page 810]]

    (ii) The biological features of a healthy surface community of 
native plants (for example, juniper-oak woodland) and animals (for 
example, cave crickets) surrounding the karst feature that provide 
nutrient input and buffer the karst ecosystem from adverse effects 
(from, for example, nonnative species invasions, contaminants, and 
fluctuations in temperature and humidity).
    (4) Existing human-constructed, above ground, impervious structures 
do not contain the primary constituent elements and are not considered 
to be critical habitat. Such features and structures include, but are 
not limited to, buildings and paved roads. However, subsurface areas 
under these structures are considered to be critical habitat since 
subterranean spaces containing these species and/or transmitting 
moisture and nutrients through the karst ecosystem extend, in some 
cases, underneath these existing human-constructed structures. 
Landscaped areas associated with existing human-constructed structures 
are also not considered critical habitat.
    (5) Two caves, Helotes Blowhole and Helotes Hilltop caves, and their 
associated approximately 10 ha (25 ac) karst management area established 
under the La Cantera section 10 permit, are within the boundaries of 
Unit 3 but are not designated as critical habitat.
    (6) Unit 1e1 (15 ha (38 ac)) is an area bounded by points with the 
following coordinates: -98.7273522, 29.5853221; -98.7276682, 29.5844887; 
-98.7282285, 29.5840393; -98.7289978, 29.5838347; -98.7296876, 
29.5839736; -98.7302983, 29.5843184; -98.7305603, 29.5848409; -
98.7317069, 29.5879827; -98.7287776, 29.5890153; -98.7285230, 
29.5883695; -98.7273522, 29.5853221.
    (7) Map 2--Unit 1e1 (which also depicts Units 1e2 and 1e3) follows:

[[Page 811]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR08AP03.008

    (8) Unit 3 (17 ha (41 ac)) is an area bounded by points with the 
following coordinates: -98.6924522, 29.5880654; -98.6884953, 29.5878232; 
-98.6883750, 29.5869448; -98.6879295, 29.5850798; -98.6894469, 
29.5850833; -98.6906186, 29.5841182; -98.6929315, 29.5855036; -
98.6936461, 29.5865268; -98.6931713, 29.5875652; -98.6924522, 
29.5880654.
    (9) Map 3--Unit 3 (which also depicts Units 4 and 18) follows:

[[Page 812]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR08AP03.009

    (10) Unit 5 (16 ha (40 ac)) is an area bounded by points with the 
following coordinates: -98.6935478, 29.6136095; -98.6890212, 29.6135990; 
-98.6890205, 29.6111931; -98.6891305, 29.6109546; -98.6896239, 
29.6104067; -98.6903350, 29.6101696; -98.6935582, 29.6101663; -
98.6935478, 29.6136095.
    (11) Map 4--Unit 5 (which also depicts Unit 17) follows:

[[Page 813]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR08AP03.010

                Beetle (no common name) (Rhadine exilis)

    (1) Critical habitat for the beetle Rhadine exilis in Bexar County, 
Texas, occurs in Units 1e1, 3, and 5 as provided in the critical habitat 
unit descriptions and depicted on Maps 1 through 4 in the entry for 
Helotes mold beetle in this paragraph (i). Critical habitat for this 
species also occurs in Units 1e3 and 4 as described below and depicted 
on Maps 2 and 3 in the entry for Helotes mold beetle in this paragraph 
(i). In addition, critical habitat for this species occurs in Units 2, 
6, 7, 8a, 8b,

[[Page 814]]

9, 12, 13, and 21 as described below and depicted on Maps 5 through 12 
below. The primary constituent elements and statements regarding 
existing structures and associated landscaping, as described in the 
entry for Helotes mold beetle in this paragraph (i), are identical for 
this species.
    (2) Four caves and their associated karst management areas 
established under the La Cantera section 10(a)(1)(B) permit are within 
the boundaries of units but are not designated as critical habitat. 
These include Helotes Blowhole and Helotes Hilltop caves and the 
surrounding approximately 10 ha (25 ac) (within Unit 3); John Wagner 
Ranch Cave No. 3 and the surrounding approximately 1.6 ha (4 ac) (within 
Unit 6); and Hills and Dales Pit and the surrounding approximately 28 ha 
(70 ac) (within Unit 8b).
    (3) Unit 1e3 (19 ha (46 ac)) is an area bounded by points with the 
following coordinates: -98.7330644, 29.5808303; -98.7317429, 29.5817323; 
-98.7300245, 29.5817484; -98.7287834, 29.5808858; -98.7278797, 
29.5794152; -98.7277522, 29.5779929; -98.7299554, 29.5788393; -
98.7305067, 29.5770049; -98.7316838, 29.5770266; -98.7331986, 
29.5789722; -98.7332119, 29.5796238; -98.7330644, 29.5808303.
    (4) A map of Unit 1e3 is provided in Map 2 of the entry for Helotes 
mold beetle in this paragraph (i).
    (5) Unit 2 (37 ha (92 ac)) is an area bounded by points with the 
following coordinates: -98.7233687, 29.6171088; -98.7232109, 29.6176729; 
-98.7226506, 29.6187073; -98.7223227, 29.6191855; -98.7219946, 
29.6195016; -98.7215653, 29.6198980; -98.7214108, 29.6206847; -
98.7175298, 29.6206847; -98.7174011, 29.6219810; -98.7170539, 
29.6225993; -98.7162170, 29.6229506; -98.7153881, 29.6229101; -
98.7147133, 29.6225995; -98.7143375, 29.6220053; -98.7142667, 
29.6214953; -98.7144462, 29.6206782; -98.7144750, 29.6170924; -
98.7145361, 29.6170162; -98.7165027, 29.6170258; -98.7163850, 
29.6174867; -98.7177246, 29.6172351; -98.7177252, 29.6170317; -
98.7211420, 29.6170764; -98.7233687, 29.6171088.
    (6) Map 5--Unit 2 follows:

[[Page 815]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR08AP03.011

    (7) Unit 4 (16 ha (40 ac)) is an area bounded by points with the 
following coordinates: -98.6867019, 29.5907363; -98.6858306, 29.5913949; 
-98.6821967, 29.5933020; -98.6821915, 29.5888925; -98.6838368, 
29.5884340; -98.6861597, 29.5888524; -98.6867424, 29.5898281; -
98.6867019, 29.5907363.
    (8) A map of Unit 4 is provided in Map 3 of the entry for Helotes 
mold beetle in this paragraph (i).
    (9) Unit 6 (16 ha (40 ac)) is an area bounded by points with the 
following coordinates: -98.6754738, 29.6114940; -98.6754991, 29.6076989;

[[Page 816]]

-98.6783407, 29.6077443; -98.6790700, 29.6080113; -98.6795845, 
29.6087581; -98.6796498, 29.6115041; -98.6754738, 29.6114940.
    (10) Map 6--Unit 6 follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR08AP03.012
    

[[Page 817]]


    (11) Unit 7 (16 ha (40 ac)) is an area bounded by points with the 
following coordinates: -98.6713696, 29.6269338; -98.6713466, 29.6298459; 
-98.6696115, 29.6299251; -98.6688040, 29.6303752; -98.6666183, 
29.6303712; -98.6666569, 29.6269341; -98.6713696, 29.6269338.
    (12) Map 7--Unit 7 follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR08AP03.013
    

[[Page 818]]


    (13) Unit 8a (16 ha (40 ac)) is an area bounded by points with the 
following coordinates: -98.6467402, 29.6026321; -98.6447253, 29.6024097; 
-98.6447648, 29.5992959; -98.6494110, 29.5993090; -98.6494384, 
29.6013452; -98.6489127, 29.6023010; -98.6482203, 29.6027779; -
98.6476087, 29.6028598; -98.6467402, 29.6026321.
    (14) Unit 8b (28 ha (69 ac)) is an area bounded by points with the 
following coordinates: -98.6429582, 29.5992695; -98.6395799, 29.6005152; 
-98.6381868, 29.6000556; -98.6378758, 29.5991778; -98.6383595, 
29.5973398; -98.6370868, 29.5969511; -98.6383585, 29.5959854; -
98.6384179, 29.5941526; -98.6395017, 29.5934820; -98.6411044, 
29.5935108; -98.6417193, 29.5949384; -98.6417849, 29.5965421; -
98.6429721, 29.5983417; -98.6429582, 29.5992695.
    (15) Map 8--Units 8a and 8b follows:

[[Page 819]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR08AP03.014

    (16) Unit 9 (16 ha (40 ac)) is an area bounded by points with the 
following coordinates: -98.6166421, 29.5881679; -98.6097995, 29.5889549; 
-98.6094772, 29.5865751; -98.6141408, 29.5862370; -98.6158210, 
29.5862418; -98.6165749, 29.5871541; -98.6166421, 29.5881679.
    (17) Map 9--Unit 9 follows:

[[Page 820]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR08AP03.015

    (18) Unit 12 (21 ha (51 ac)) is an area bounded by points with the 
following coordinates: -98.4631439, 29.6393535; -98.4620337, 29.6395912; 
-98.4610270, 29.6393230; -98.4604275, 29.6383078; -98.4601340, 
29.6376003; -98.4602053, 29.6369053; -98.4599272, 29.6355399; -
98.4604201, 29.6346170; -98.4608048, 29.6344781; -98.4611518, 
29.6336481; -98.4621637, 29.6330425; -98.4636173, 29.6333332; -
98.4641049, 29.6342973; -98.4640055, 29.6350951; -98.4634444, 
29.6356360; -98.4627791, 29.6368420; -98.4635574, 29.6374176; -
98.4637899, 29.6381796; -98.4637898, 29.6382043; -98.4631439, 
29.6393535.

[[Page 821]]

    (19) Map 10--Unit 12 follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR08AP03.016
    
    (20) Unit 13 (16 ha (40 ac)) is an area bounded by points with the 
following coordinates: -98.4218888, 29.6404393; -98.4212080, 29.6405040; 
-98.4208242, 29.6372953; -98.4239377, 29.6367357; -98.4241724, 
29.6382709; -98.4250182, 29.6383670; -98.4255670, 29.6386096; -
98.4260182, 29.6390832; -98.4257350, 29.6392361; -98.4260492, 
29.6397945;

[[Page 822]]

-98.4250314, 29.6403527; -98.4246243, 29.6411168; -98.4229768, 
29.6409069; -98.4218888, 29.6404393.
    (21) Map 11--Unit 13 follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR08AP03.017
    
    (22) Unit 21 (27 ha (68 ac)) is an area bounded by points with the 
following coordinates: -98.4716469, 29.6499842; -98.4730641, 29.6507507; 
-98.4730857, 29.6517491; -98.4715209, 29.6547384;

[[Page 823]]

-98.4726672, 29.6552447; -98.4728036, 29.6567962; -98.4712860, 
29.6577112; -98.4695532, 29.6569100; -98.4696535, 29.6556282; -
98.4692815, 29.6535131; -98.4685518, 29.6532365; -98.4678845, 
29.6527093; -98.4677417, 29.6516106; -98.4683879, 29.6507722; -
98.4716469, 29.6499842.
    (23) Map 12--Unit 21 follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR08AP03.018
    

[[Page 824]]



              Beetle (no common name) (Rhadine infernalis)

    (1) Critical habitat for the beetle Rhadine infernalis in Bexar 
County, Texas, occurs in Units 1e1, 3 and 5 as provided in the critical 
habitat unit descriptions and depicted on Maps 1 through 4 in the entry 
for Helotes mold beetle in this paragraph (i). This species also occurs 
in the following units: Unit 1e2 as described below and depicted on Map 
2 in the entry for Helotes mold beetle in this paragraph (i); Units 2, 
6, 8a, and 8b as described in the text and depicted on Maps 5, 6, and 8 
in the entry for beetle (Rhadine exilis) in this paragraph (i); Unit 4 
as provided in the critical habitat descriptions for beetle (Rhadine 
exilis) and depicted on Map 3 in the entry for Helotes mold beetle in 
this paragraph (i); Units 17 and 18 described below and depicted on Maps 
3 and 4 found in the entry for Helotes mold beetle in this paragraph 
(i); and Units 14, 15, 16, and 19 as described below and depicted on 
Maps 13 through 16 below. The primary constituent elements and 
statements regarding existing structures and associated landscaping, as 
described in the entry for Helotes mold beetle in this paragraph (i), 
are identical for this species.
    (2) Five caves and their associated karst management areas 
established under the La Cantera section 10(a)(1)(B) permit are within 
the boundaries of units but are not designated as critical habitat 
designation. These include Helotes Blowhole and Helotes Hilltop caves 
and the surrounding approximately 10 ha (25 ac) (within Unit 3); John 
Wagner Ranch Cave No. 3 and the surrounding approximately 1.6 ha (4 ac) 
(within Unit 6); and Hills and Dales Pit and the surrounding 
approximately 28 ha (70 ac) (within Unit 8b); and Madla Cave and the 
surrounding 2 ha (5 ac) (within Unit 17).
    (3) Unit 1e2 (16 ha (40 ac)) is an area bounded by points with the 
following coordinates: -98.7238284, 29.5847161; -98.7201061, 29.5861352; 
-98.7189558, 29.5844029; -98.7194474, 29.5832652; -98.7230107, 
29.5818492; -98.7245095, 29.5824623; -98.7247550, 29.5841155; -
98.7238284, 29.5847161.
    (4) A map of unit 1e2 is provided in Map 2 of the entry for Helotes 
mold beetle in this paragraph (i).
    (5) Unit 14 (26 ha (64 ac)) is an area bounded by points with the 
following coordinates: -98.7863612, 29.4495294; -98.7869725, 29.4489471; 
-98.7875551, 29.4486522; -98.7883435, 29.4486781; -98.7889905, 
29.4489913; -98.7918932, 29.4524710; -98.7918632, 29.4533747; -
98.7904052, 29.4548676; -98.7899060, 29.4556966; -98.7887880, 
29.4561713; -98.7872743, 29.4556964; -98.7870331, 29.4543351; -
98.7888385, 29.4523567; -98.7868531, 29.4511085; -98.7863591, 
29.4505317; -98.7863612, 29.4495294.
    (6) Map 13--Unit 14 follows:

[[Page 825]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR08AP03.019

    (7) Unit 15 (34 ha (85 ac)) is an area bounded by points with the 
following coordinates: -98.7631005, 29.4388531; -98.7600316, 29.4394009; 
-98.7598094, 29.4392533; -98.7587180, 29.4382984; -98.7558932, 
29.4384257; -98.7556537, 29.4383265; -98.7547983, 29.4359982; -
98.7550418, 29.4352415; -98.7555963, 29.4347910; -98.7573878, 
29.4337784; -98.7580646, 29.4338220; -98.7586605, 29.4340159; -
98.7612682, 29.4363049; -98.7623440, 29.4362183; -98.7633120, 
29.4363085; -98.7638206, 29.4366668; -98.7641806, 29.4371861; -
98.7641397, 29.4377268; -98.7639175, 29.4385170; -98.7631005, 
29.4388531.

[[Page 826]]

    (8) Map 14--Unit 15 follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR08AP03.020
    
    (9) Unit 16 (16 ha (40 ac)) is an area bounded by points with the 
following coordinates: -98.7154218, 29.4533018; -98.7153995, 29.4573801; 
-98.7119857, 29.4573751; -98.7119610, 29.4558232; -98.7111540, 
29.4557860; -98.7106973, 29.4556731; -98.7105899, 29.4554235; -
98.7105693, 29.4552002;

[[Page 827]]

-98.7107385, 29.4550044; -98.7110558, 29.4549040; -98.7119873, 
29.4548136; -98.7119764, 29.4532848; -98.7154218, 29.4533018.
    (10) Map 15--Unit 16 follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR08AP03.021
    

[[Page 828]]


    (11) Unit 17 (16 ha (40 ac)) is an area bounded by points with the 
following coordinates: --98.6986633, 29.6061189; -98.6978901, 
29.6064178; -98.6968967, 29.6060042; -98.6955470, 29.6059909; -
98.6944214, 29.6056088; -98.6944325, 29.6018959; -98.6967798, 
29.6018910; -98.6967762, 29.6031320; -98.6986774, 29.6031773; -
98.6986633, 29.6061189.
    (12) A map of Unit 17 is provided in Map 4 in the entry for Helotes 
mold beetle in this paragraph (i).
    (13) Unit 18 (16 ha (40 ac)) is an area bounded by points with the 
following coordinates: -98.6879353, 29.5840278; -98.6871403, 29.5838597; 
-98.6859450, 29.5845069; -98.6838609, 29.5817508; -98.6870156, 
29.5791593; -98.6889591, 29.5810380; -98.6883743, 29.5818521; -
98.6879353, 29.5840278.
    (14) A map of Unit 18 is provided in Map 3 in the entry for Helotes 
mold beetle in this paragraph (i).
    (15) Unit 19 (5 ha (12 ac)) is an area bounded by points with the 
following coordinates: -98.4945129, 29.6147150; -98.4940750, 29.6145674; 
-98.4938755, 29.6141954; -98.4939880, 29.6138063; -98.4942787, 
29.6135970; -98.4952809, 29.6135500; -98.4956056, 29.6133414; -
98.4963069, 29.6130155; -98.4967699, 29.6130881; -98.4966492, 
29.6123219; -98.4973783, 29.6125657; -98.4978516, 29.6131158; -
98.4974600, 29.6135445; -98.4971077, 29.6136897; -98.4970745, 
29.6140495; -98.4968571, 29.6142911; -98.4962556, 29.6145285; -
98.4954870, 29.6146791; -98.4945129, 29.6147150.
    (16) Map 16--Unit 19 follows:

[[Page 829]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR08AP03.022

        Salt Creek Tiger Beetle (Cicindela nevadica lincolniana)

    (1) Critical habitat units are depicted for Lancaster and Saunders 
Counties, Nebraska, on the maps below.
    (2) The primary constituent elements of critical habitat for the 
Salt Creek tiger beetle are the following habitat components:
    (i) Non-vegetated streambanks and mid-channel areas, located 
adjacent to and between saline stream edges and barren salt

[[Page 830]]

flats in saline and freshwater wetlands, in assemblages that are within 
4 miles (6 kilometers) of one another;
    (ii) Moist, barren salt flats with:
    (A) Salmo and Saltillo soils or Lamo, Gibbon-Saltine, Obert, and Zoe 
soils with Salmo and Saltillo inclusions;
    (B) Soil electroconductivity ranging from 2,016.0 mS/m to 2,992.2 
mS/m;
    (C) Soil moisture ranging from 43.5 percent to 51.7 percent; and
    (D) Differential hydraulic pressures that create evaporation and 
result in exposed salt on soil surfaces;
    (iii) A natural hydrologic regime resulting in annual high flows in 
saline streams in the early spring and summer, and natural elevation 
changes in groundwater levels to hydrate saline wetlands located on the 
floodplain; and
    (iv) The presence of abundant and diverse flying and non-flying 
invertebrate prey species belonging to the orders Coleoptera, 
Orthoptera, Hemiptera, Hymenoptera, Odonata, Diptera, or Lepidoptera.
    (3) Critical habitat does not include manmade structures (such as 
buildings, aqueducts, airports, roads, and other paved areas) and the 
land on which they are located existing on the effective date of this 
rule. In the future, we will be able to distinguish structures that 
existed at the time of critical habitat designation from structures 
created since critical habitat designation by using dated detailed 
aerial imagery maps.
    (4) Critical habitat map units. Data layers defining map units were 
created using GIS software. We defined critical habitat boundaries as 
follows. We utilized the Resource Categorization Study (RCS) (Gilbert 
and Stutheit 1994) to define boundaries of the Salt Creek tiger beetle's 
historic range. Within the RCS boundaries, we then identified existing 
saline wetlands containing the features essential to the conservation of 
the Salt Creek tiger beetle; we also identified saline stream segments 
flowing through the saline wetlands, as represented by National 
Hydrography Data and further refined with aerial photography. Coordinate 
points defining critical habitat unit boundaries were created through an 
automated GIS process using Universal Transverse Mercator as the 
reference coordinate system.
    (5) Note: Index map (Map 1) follows:

[[Page 831]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR06AP10.004

    (6) Unit 1: Upper Little Salt Creek North, Lancaster County, 
Nebraska.
    (i) Tract 1a. Land bounded by the following Universal Transverse 
Mercator (UTM) Zone 14N, North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83) 
coordinates (E, N): 692489, 4536054; 692486, 4536053; 692479, 4536054; 
692476, 4536059; 692474, 4536062; 692471, 4536063; 692466, 4536064; 
692464, 4536067; 692463, 4536072; 692464, 4536076; 692465, 4536079; 
692468, 4536080; 692471, 4536081; 692475, 4536082; 692485, 4536083; 
692494, 4536069; 692495,

[[Page 832]]

4536064; 692495, 4536062; 692493, 4536057; 692489, 4536054.
    (ii) Tract 1b. Land bounded by the following Universal Transverse 
Mercator (UTM) Zone 14N, North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83) 
coordinates (E, N): 691216, 4538366; 691216, 4538366; 691216, 4538366; 
691216, 4538366; 691217, 4538375; 691222, 4538376; 691225, 4538377; 
691229, 4538381; 691230, 4538384; 691232, 4538389; 691231, 4538394; 
691231, 4538399; 691230, 4538404; 691229, 4538408; 691226, 4538412; 
691224, 4538415; 691221, 4538418; 691216, 4538420; 691214, 4538420; 
691212, 4538419; 691209, 4538418; 691201, 4538419; 691204, 4538432; 
691205, 4538438; 691206, 4538444; 691207, 4538449; 691210, 4538460; 
691213, 4538465; 691220, 4538467; 691224, 4538466; 691227, 4538461; 
691229, 4538455; 691234, 4538451; 691241, 4538452; 691248, 4538455; 
691255, 4538458; 691262, 4538458; 691264, 4538451; 691265, 4538442; 
691262, 4538431; 691257, 4538418; 691256, 4538405; 691257, 4538394; 
691258, 4538384; 691256, 4538379; 691251, 4538371; 691244, 4538366; 
691236, 4538364; 691229, 4538364; 691219, 4538366; 691217, 4538364; 
691231, 4538347; 691235, 4538342; 691241, 4538334; 691244, 4538328; 
691246, 4538323; 691248, 4538317; 691250, 4538311; 691252, 4538306; 
691253, 4538302; 691255, 4538297; 691255, 4538294; 691264, 4538279; 
691262, 4538279; 691188, 4538214; 691189, 4538210; 691194, 4538199; 
691201, 4538189; 691208, 4538181; 691215, 4538174; 691221, 4538167; 
691226, 4538162; 691231, 4538154; 691237, 4538147; 691240, 4538143; 
691242, 4538138; 691244, 4538135; 691243, 4538122; 691242, 4538107; 
691240, 4538097; 691236, 4538087; 691234, 4538081; 691234, 4538075; 
691236, 4538061; 691240, 4538050; 691245, 4538042; 691253, 4538029; 
691259, 4538018; 691268, 4538007; 691276, 4537998; 691281, 4537992; 
691288, 4537983; 691291, 4537975; 691295, 4537967; 691297, 4537958; 
691300, 4537948; 691302, 4537937; 691305, 4537928; 691306, 4537923; 
691308, 4537920; 691310, 4537917; 691314, 4537915; 691318, 4537914; 
691320, 4537914; 691322, 4537915; 691324, 4537915; 691332, 4537900; 
691337, 4537891; 691341, 4537883; 691344, 4537879; 691349, 4537871; 
691353, 4537864; 691356, 4537859; 691357, 4537856; 691359, 4537850; 
691361, 4537845; 691363, 4537840; 691364, 4537837; 691365, 4537830; 
691378, 4537824; 691384, 4537822; 691395, 4537823; 691405, 4537824; 
691412, 4537826; 691415, 4537828; 691416, 4537832; 691417, 4537834; 
691419, 4537835; 691422, 4537836; 691423, 4537836; 691425, 4537835; 
691430, 4537849; 691432, 4537852; 691435, 4537854; 691439, 4537857; 
691444, 4537857; 691449, 4537854; 691454, 4537848; 691456, 4537842; 
691460, 4537835; 691468, 4537827; 691475, 4537836; 691478, 4537839; 
691483, 4537839; 691490, 4537837; 691494, 4537833; 691499, 4537828; 
691505, 4537821; 691511, 4537812; 691515, 4537804; 691519, 4537789; 
691521, 4537780; 691522, 4537772; 691521, 4537765; 691519, 4537759; 
691519, 4537755; 691520, 4537752; 691522, 4537750; 691526, 4537748; 
691528, 4537746; 691530, 4537743; 691532, 4537739; 691532,4537732; 
691543, 4537717; 691550, 4537706; 691561, 4537690; 691571, 4537679; 
691577, 4537672; 691585, 4537663; 691591, 4537658; 691597, 4537653; 
691602, 4537646; 691607, 4537633; 691610, 4537621; 691612, 4537609; 
691611, 4537599; 691612, 4537588; 691613, 4537576; 691614, 4537563; 
691616, 4537551; 691618, 4537540; 691621, 4537530; 691625, 4537514; 
691630, 4537497; 691635, 4537484; 691641, 4537472; 691645, 4537460; 
691651, 4537449; 691659, 4537438; 691666, 4537430; 691682, 4537419; 
691687, 4537415; 691692, 4537405; 691698, 4537398; 691710, 4537388; 
691714, 4537384; 691723, 4537377; 691729, 4537370; 691734, 4537362; 
691743, 4537327; 691745, 4537316; 691747, 4537304; 691749, 4537298; 
691751, 4537284; 691753, 4537275; 691755, 4537267; 691759, 4537254; 
691762, 4537244; 691764, 4537236; 691765, 4537230; 691767, 4537224; 
691767, 4537218; 691767, 4537215; 691768, 4537209; 691759, 4537194; 
691758, 4537188; 691761, 4537175; 691764, 4537164; 691766, 4537151; 
691767, 4537136; 691767, 4537121; 691769, 4537110; 691771, 4537094; 
691772, 4537082; 691772, 4537071; 691774, 4537065; 691779, 4537058; 
691785, 4537053; 691794, 4537047; 691798, 4537040; 691801, 4537029; 
691800, 4537019; 691798, 4537009; 691796, 4536995; 691798, 4536979; 
691800, 4536965; 691804, 4536953; 691810, 4536944; 691819, 4536938; 
691827, 4536934; 691835, 4536927; 691840, 4536915; 691844, 4536902; 
691847, 4536890; 691852, 4536878; 691860, 4536865; 691869, 4536859; 
691875, 4536855; 691883, 4536852; 691890, 4536851; 691895, 4536851; 
691897, 4536679; 691851, 4536677; 691863, 4536657; 691865, 4536656; 
691867, 4536655; 691870, 4536655; 691901, 4536654; 691902, 4536607; 
691926, 4536599; 691925, 4536654; 692006, 4536656; 692010, 4536647; 
692015, 4536642; 692020, 4536639; 692024, 4536633; 692027, 4536623; 
692029, 4536614; 692035, 4536598; 692040, 4536587; 692047, 4536579; 
692055, 4536570; 692061, 4536561; 692071, 4536551; 692077, 4536544; 
692082, 4536539; 692086, 4536536; 692093, 4536538; 692097, 4536542; 
692099, 4536548; 692102, 4536554; 692104, 4536559; 692105, 4536564; 
692107, 4536567; 692108, 4536569; 692109, 4536569; 692107, 4536589; 
692106, 4536596; 692106, 4536606; 692105, 4536613; 692107, 4536624; 
692108, 4536634; 692110, 4536641; 692112, 4536646; 692114, 4536650; 
692118, 4536653; 692122, 4536655; 692129, 4536657; 692136, 4536657; 
692141, 4536655; 692146, 4536652; 692150, 4536647; 692150, 4536638; 
692150, 4536627; 692150, 4536619; 692149, 4536611; 692147, 4536599; 
692144, 4536591; 692143, 4536583; 692142, 4536578; 692138, 4536568; 
692146, 4536559; 692146, 4536555; 692150, 4536543; 692150, 4536537; 
692149, 4536533; 692147, 4536527; 692145, 4536518; 692143, 4536508; 
692145, 4536500; 692149, 4536493; 692156, 4536488; 692159, 4536485; 
692164, 4536480; 692167, 4536475; 692169, 4536467; 692168, 4536457; 
692165, 4536448; 692162, 4536440; 692159, 4536433; 692157, 4536427; 
692158, 4536418; 692161, 4536408; 692167, 4536398; 692173, 4536390; 
692183, 4536385; 692191, 4536382; 692195, 4536377; 692197, 4536371; 
692197, 4536364; 692194, 4536357; 692189, 4536351; 692182, 4536345; 
692179, 4536342; 692170, 4536335; 692166, 4536332; 692158, 4536326; 
692162, 4536314; 692162, 4536311; 692163, 4536309; 692174, 4536308; 
692180, 4536304; 692185, 4536299; 692189, 4536290; 692193, 4536280; 
692197, 4536273; 692204, 4536268; 692214, 4536264; 692225, 4536263; 
692230, 4536264; 692237, 4536268; 692245, 4536271; 692254, 4536270; 
692265, 4536266; 692272, 4536260; 692278, 4536254; 692284, 4536246; 
692290, 4536239; 692294, 4536233; 692297, 4536226; 692300, 4536216; 
692301, 4536209; 692303, 4536202; 692307, 4536191; 692316, 4536176; 
692319, 4536172; 692321, 4536168; 692326, 4536163; 692333, 4536158; 
692342, 4536155; 692350, 4536153; 692361, 4536152; 692369, 4536150; 
692378, 4536147; 692387, 4536143;

[[Page 833]]

692394, 4536139; 692400, 4536135; 692407, 4536132; 692415, 4536131; 
692421, 4536130; 692425, 4536130; 692435, 4536134; 692442, 4536142; 
692445, 4536151; 692446, 4536160; 692448, 4536169; 692451, 4536181; 
692456, 4536192; 692462, 4536202; 692470, 4536214; 692476, 4536225; 
692482, 4536233; 692487, 4536240; 692493, 4536246; 692497, 4536249; 
692504, 4536251; 692514, 4536252; 692524, 4536251; 692534, 4536249; 
692544, 4536248; 692554, 4536245; 692563, 4536243; 692570, 4536241; 
692575, 4536239; 692580, 4536237; 692584, 4536235; 692587, 4536233; 
692587, 4536232; 692609, 4536242; 692618, 4536262; 692623, 4536267; 
692627, 4536272; 692631, 4536276; 692638, 4536278; 692649, 4536280; 
692668, 4536284; 692675, 4536285; 692682, 4536284; 692686, 4536284; 
692688, 4536282; 692692, 4536280; 692698, 4536274; 692693, 4536246; 
692691, 4536238; 692685, 4536228; 692682, 4536220; 692679, 4536214; 
692675, 4536210; 692671, 4536204; 692667, 4536199; 692663, 4536194; 
692658, 4536192; 692656, 4536192; 692637, 4536160; 692639, 4536159; 
692645, 4536156; 692649, 4536153; 692654, 4536143; 692658, 4536135; 
692662, 4536125; 692665, 4536115; 692669, 4536100; 692671, 4536088; 
692673, 4536072; 692674, 4536057; 692674, 4536048; 692671, 4536039; 
692669, 4536033; 692668, 4536026; 692670, 4536014; 692676, 4536005; 
692684, 4535997; 692692, 4535990; 692699, 4535984; 692707, 4535977; 
692712, 4535971; 692718, 4535958; 692721, 4535945; 692723, 4535933; 
692725, 4535924; 692729, 4535913; 692735, 4535907; 692742, 4535903; 
692749, 4535899; 692754, 4535893; 692759, 4535882; 692760, 4535871; 
692759, 4535860; 692763, 4535846; 692767, 4535839; 692771, 4535833; 
692773, 4535825; 692774, 4535809; 692774, 4535793; 692772, 4535781; 
692771, 4535770; 692770, 4535759; 692770, 4535750; 692770, 4535737; 
692772, 4535728; 692775, 4535719; 692790, 4535682; 692799, 4535665; 
692805, 4535654; 692812, 4535639; 692818, 4535625; 692823, 4535615; 
692830, 4535605; 692836, 4535596; 692843, 4535584; 692846, 4535575; 
692849, 4535563; 692854, 4535548; 692856, 4535532; 692859, 4535516; 
692861, 4535505; 692864, 4535488; 692868, 4535473; 692872, 4535461; 
692876, 4535448; 692877, 4535436; 692879, 4535425; 692881, 4535413; 
692883, 4535399; 692885, 4535384; 692885, 4535371; 692884, 4535360; 
692884, 4535354; 692884, 4535344; 692879, 4535340; 692869, 4535358; 
692864, 4535365; 692854, 4535373; 692845, 4535377; 692834, 4535379; 
692823, 4535381; 692810, 4535381; 692797, 4535378; 692787, 4535377; 
692773, 4535378; 692759, 4535380; 692744, 4535382; 692734, 4535384; 
692724, 4535388; 692716, 4535392; 692708, 4535399; 692703, 4535407; 
692701, 4535413; 692700, 4535419; 692700, 4535424; 692699, 4535429; 
692684, 4535431; 692680, 4535432; 692676, 4535434; 692671, 4535437; 
692667, 4535439; 692662, 4535440; 692657, 4535441; 692652, 4535442; 
692645, 4535442; 692643, 4535440; 692642, 4535434; 692644, 4535421; 
692651, 4535411; 692656, 4535405; 692660, 4535399; 692663, 4535392; 
692664, 4535387; 692663, 4535383; 692656, 4535377; 692648, 4535375; 
692645, 4535369; 692647, 4535358; 692651, 4535345; 692659, 4535334; 
692668, 4535325; 692672, 4535322; 692678, 4535317; 692680, 4535309; 
692680, 4535303; 692681, 4535294; 692682, 4535286; 692686, 4535279; 
692689, 4535274; 692697, 4535270; 692705, 4535269; 692716, 4535273; 
692724, 4535279; 692730, 4535286; 692736, 4535296; 692740, 4535302; 
692744, 4535308; 692751, 4535313; 692761, 4535317; 692766, 4535317; 
692774, 4535315; 692782, 4535310; 692788, 4535305; 692794, 4535296; 
692797, 4535289; 692801, 4535285; 692810, 4535282; 692817, 4535281; 
692821, 4535279; 692825, 4535275; 692828, 4535267; 692829, 4535258; 
692827, 4535249; 692824, 4535243; 692820, 4535236; 692820, 4535229; 
692823, 4535215; 692825, 4535207; 692829, 4535196; 692831, 4535191; 
692833, 4535182; 692832, 4535178; 692833, 4535173; 692835, 4535166; 
692827, 4535159; 692826, 4535156; 692826, 4535153; 692826, 4535147; 
692827, 4535143; 692827, 4535137; 692845, 4535142; 692850, 4535145; 
692854, 4535148; 692858, 4535152; 692862, 4535155; 692870, 4535161; 
692878, 4535164; 692883, 4535166; 692891, 4535167; 692897, 4535169; 
692904, 4535169; 692910, 4535170; 692915, 4535169; 692919, 4535166; 
692926, 4535163; 692930, 4535162; 692934, 4535162; 692938, 4535163; 
692940, 4535166; 692948, 4535175; 692958, 4535168; 692965, 4535164; 
692971, 4535160; 692977, 4535158; 692981, 4535156; 692984, 4535156; 
692987, 4535156; 692989, 4535154; 692981, 4535147; 692975, 4535144; 
692968, 4535140; 692963, 4535136; 692959, 4535133; 692956, 4535131; 
692953, 4535128; 692952, 4535127; 692950, 4535125; 692948, 4535123; 
692947, 4535121; 692945, 4535118; 692828, 4535116; 692744, 4535111; 
692741, 4535111; 692741, 4535110; 692738, 4535113; 692735, 4535116; 
692735, 4535120; 692734, 4535123; 692734, 4535126; 692730, 4535140; 
692729, 4535144; 692725, 4535148; 692720, 4535156; 692714, 4535164; 
692705, 4535170; 692695, 4535174; 692683, 4535175; 692670, 4535177; 
692658, 4535181; 692648, 4535183; 692641, 4535186; 692632, 4535189; 
692625, 4535192; 692618, 4535193; 692613, 4535194; 692607, 4535197; 
692602, 4535201; 692599, 4535207; 692599, 4535213; 692598, 4535217; 
692598, 4535218; 692604, 4535224; 692612, 4535226; 692618, 4535227; 
692628, 4535228; 692637, 4535232; 692644, 4535236; 692650, 4535241; 
692654, 4535248; 692655, 4535255; 692652, 4535265; 692650, 4535277; 
692643, 4535290; 692637, 4535301; 692632, 4535311; 692625, 4535324; 
692616, 4535334; 692609, 4535342; 692599, 4535351; 692592, 4535361; 
692574, 4535375; 692569, 4535378; 692561, 4535382; 692556, 4535384; 
692549, 4535387; 692545, 4535388; 692539, 4535391; 692537, 4535394; 
692536, 4535398; 692537, 4535401; 692542, 4535404; 692550, 4535405; 
692559, 4535405; 692567, 4535408; 692576, 4535414; 692583, 4535422; 
692588, 4535434; 692592, 4535446; 692592, 4535453; 692592, 4535465; 
692594, 4535478; 692597, 4535496; 692597, 4535509; 692595, 4535527; 
692592, 4535540; 692587, 4535552; 692582, 4535560; 692578, 4535566; 
692571, 4535578; 692568, 4535585; 692564, 4535595; 692562, 4535602; 
692561, 4535607; 692562, 4535614; 692565, 4535619; 692569, 4535623; 
692572, 4535626; 692577, 4535630; 692578, 4535631; 692568, 4535638; 
692560, 4535643; 692554, 4535647; 692549, 4535651; 692545, 4535654; 
692540, 4535657; 692538, 4535658; 692534, 4535665; 692520, 4535671; 
692518, 4535674; 692515, 4535680; 692515, 4535688; 692514, 4535695; 
692515, 4535701; 692515, 4535705; 692516, 4535716; 692537, 4535713; 
692541, 4535712; 692548, 4535711; 692551, 4535710; 692554, 4535710; 
692558, 4535710; 692570, 4535711; 692580, 4535724; 692583, 4535726; 
692585, 4535729; 692585, 4535733; 692582, 4535741; 692567, 4535747; 
692547, 4535749; 692540, 4535749; 692532, 4535749; 692528, 4535750; 
692519, 4535750; 692514, 4535763; 692513, 4535766; 692512, 4535771; 
692503, 4535789; 692500, 4535795; 692493, 4535804; 692489, 4535810; 
692483, 4535817; 692479, 4535824;

[[Page 834]]

692475, 4535831; 692469, 4535840; 692467, 4535847; 692464, 4535855; 
692463, 4535861; 692459, 4535873; 692470, 4535884; 692472, 4535886; 
692475, 4535888; 692480, 4535888; 692484, 4535886; 692487, 4535882; 
692489, 4535879; 692493, 4535872; 692496, 4535866; 692499, 4535863; 
692500, 4535861; 692505, 4535861; 692509, 4535866; 692511, 4535875; 
692511, 4535881; 692511, 4535887; 692511, 4535900; 692521, 4535893; 
692528, 4535892; 692537, 4535892; 692544, 4535893; 692555, 4535895; 
692563, 4535898; 692572, 4535902; 692580, 4535905; 692586, 4535908; 
692592, 4535911; 692598, 4535915; 692601, 4535918; 692603, 4535923; 
692602, 4535927; 692597, 4535934; 692587, 4535936; 692577, 4535938; 
692572, 4535940; 692565, 4535948; 692559, 4535953; 692557, 4535961; 
692557, 4535972; 692560, 4535985; 692562, 4535991; 692564, 4535998; 
692565, 4536002; 692565, 4536004; 692565, 4536006; 692579, 4536010; 
692582, 4536011; 692586, 4536014; 692588, 4536018; 692589, 4536024; 
692588, 4536029; 692585, 4536037; 692579, 4536046; 692572, 4536056; 
692567, 4536064; 692561, 4536071; 692556, 4536076; 692551, 4536080; 
692547, 4536083; 692542, 4536087; 692539, 4536092; 692538, 4536096; 
692538, 4536104; 692538, 4536107; 692543, 4536112; 692537, 4536127; 
692537, 4536131; 692539, 4536137; 692544, 4536142; 692551, 4536149; 
692556, 4536153; 692562, 4536156; 692567, 4536159; 692571, 4536162; 
692573, 4536163; 692575, 4536163; 692576, 4536168; 692576, 4536185; 
692561, 4536183; 692553, 4536182; 692544, 4536183; 692539, 4536184; 
692532, 4536184; 692525, 4536180; 692521, 4536174; 692518, 4536164; 
692516, 4536155; 692513, 4536146; 692505, 4536135; 692495, 4536126; 
692483, 4536114; 692474, 4536106; 692465, 4536100; 692458, 4536096; 
692448, 4536091; 692440, 4536089; 692430, 4536087; 692420, 4536088; 
692412, 4536089; 692408, 4536090; 692403, 4536091; 692401, 4536088; 
692399, 4536081; 692399, 4536073; 692394, 4536065; 692388, 4536060; 
692387, 4536057; 692383, 4536053; 692368, 4536058; 692362, 4536059; 
692355, 4536060; 692344, 4536058; 692331, 4536054; 692323, 4536050; 
692316, 4536047; 692309, 4536043; 692301, 4536041; 692292, 4536043; 
692280, 4536047; 692263, 4536058; 692254, 4536064; 692248, 4536069; 
692246, 4536071; 692244, 4536075; 692243, 4536085; 692244, 4536094; 
692246, 4536103; 692247, 4536112; 692248, 4536125; 692246, 4536137; 
692243, 4536151; 692239, 4536165; 692234, 4536171; 692227, 4536174; 
692216, 4536174; 692207, 4536172; 692197, 4536169; 692188, 4536167; 
692182, 4536166; 692177, 4536167; 692173, 4536168; 692170, 4536170; 
692165, 4536173; 692162, 4536168; 692159, 4536165; 692148, 4536154; 
692143, 4536141; 692141, 4536135; 692140, 4536126; 692138, 4536116; 
692137, 4536108; 692136, 4536104; 692142, 4536065; 692149, 4536061; 
692154, 4536061; 692162, 4536062; 692173, 4536063; 692182, 4536067; 
692187, 4536073; 692191, 4536077; 692198, 4536078; 692206, 4536076; 
692209, 4536073; 692211, 4536067; 692212, 4536059; 692212, 4536050; 
692212, 4536038; 692213, 4536026; 692215, 4536019; 692220, 4536013; 
692232, 4536009; 692244, 4536008; 692253, 4536010; 692263, 4536013; 
692273, 4536013; 692281, 4536012; 692288, 4536007; 692291, 4536001; 
692295, 4535995; 692299, 4535988; 692306, 4535980; 692315, 4535973; 
692327, 4535967; 692339, 4535963; 692349, 4535963; 692352, 4535965; 
692360, 4535965; 692366, 4535964; 692369, 4535961; 692370, 4535955; 
692369, 4535950; 692366, 4535944; 692364, 4535941; 692359, 4535936; 
692354, 4535930; 692349, 4535928; 692338, 4535925; 692330, 4535925; 
692323, 4535927; 692316, 4535931; 692311, 4535935; 692307, 4535940; 
692304, 4535946; 692300, 4535953; 692295, 4535959; 692288, 4535963; 
692281, 4535965; 692274, 4535966; 692264, 4535966; 692252, 4535967; 
692243, 4535967; 692236, 4535969; 692230, 4535973; 692218, 4535981; 
692210, 4535981; 692206, 4535984; 692202, 4535986; 692198, 4535989; 
692192, 4535995; 692186, 4535999; 692181, 4536003; 692172, 4536006; 
692165, 4536009; 692157, 4536011; 692147, 4536014; 692137, 4536020; 
692133, 4536025; 692129, 4536031; 692129, 4536032; 692087, 4536080; 
692086, 4536081; 692082, 4536085; 692078, 4536093; 692074, 4536101; 
692071, 4536106; 692069, 4536112; 692059, 4536124; 692050, 4536143; 
692046, 4536150; 692040, 4536157; 692037, 4536160; 692034, 4536164; 
692029, 4536167; 692025, 4536169; 692023, 4536169; 692020, 4536169; 
692004, 4536172; 691997, 4536173; 691997, 4536173; 691900, 4536175; 
691899, 4536174; 691897, 4536174; 691895, 4536172; 691892, 4536169; 
691886, 4536163; 691880, 4536156; 691873, 4536150; 691864, 4536141; 
691854, 4536135; 691845, 4536130; 691836, 4536124; 691827, 4536117; 
691821, 4536107; 691819, 4536098; 691815, 4536087; 691811, 4536078; 
691807, 4536072; 691801, 4536068; 691789, 4536063; 691785, 4536064; 
691779, 4536064; 691769, 4536065; 691766, 4536048; 691765, 4536041; 
691760, 4536033; 691755, 4536029; 691748, 4536026; 691739, 4536024; 
691729, 4536024; 691717, 4536025; 691711, 4536027; 691710, 4536027; 
691704, 4536032; 691698, 4536039; 691695, 4536045; 691694, 4536054; 
691693, 4536065; 691693, 4536076; 691693, 4536084; 691694, 4536090; 
691698, 4536095; 691700, 4536099; 691707, 4536102; 691717, 4536104; 
691717, 4536105; 691718, 4536108; 691718, 4536114; 691719, 4536119; 
691718, 4536127; 691718, 4536135; 691718, 4536141; 691717, 4536153; 
691714, 4536162; 691713, 4536171; 691711, 4536180; 691709, 4536191; 
691706, 4536201; 691702, 4536212; 691701, 4536224; 691702, 4536235; 
691704, 4536243; 691709, 4536247; 691716, 4536251; 691722, 4536251; 
691730, 4536250; 691737, 4536246; 691744, 4536244; 691752, 4536237; 
691755, 4536233; 691758, 4536229; 691760, 4536225; 691763, 4536223; 
691768, 4536220; 691780, 4536220; 691791, 4536219; 691800, 4536220; 
691807, 4536220; 691815, 4536221; 691816, 4536222; 691823, 4536224; 
691832, 4536230; 691837, 4536237; 691838, 4536238; 691841, 4536238; 
691858, 4536248; 691879, 4536269; 691888, 4536284; 691890, 4536284; 
691949, 4536311; 691950, 4536312; 691957, 4536315; 691963, 4536318; 
691967, 4536320; 691971, 4536325; 691974, 4536329; 691975, 4536334; 
691977, 4536342; 691981, 4536351; 691984, 4536354; 691989, 4536357; 
691995, 4536358; 691998, 4536357; 692004, 4536354; 692006, 4536349; 
692007, 4536344; 692007, 4536336; 692007, 4536328; 692008, 4536318; 
692009, 4536312; 692013, 4536302; 692020, 4536295; 692028, 4536291; 
692039, 4536288; 692048, 4536289; 692058, 4536290; 692067, 4536291; 
692075, 4536293; 692080, 4536297; 692083, 4536301; 692084, 4536304; 
692084, 4536311; 692082, 4536319; 692074, 4536327; 692069, 4536332; 
692064, 4536336; 692056, 4536343; 692054, 4536346; 692053, 4536352; 
692054, 4536357; 691999, 4536379; 691820, 4536407; 691708, 4536428; 
691599, 4536568; 691581, 4536673; 691556, 4536672; 691543, 4536678; 
691540, 4536680; 691534, 4536686; 691526, 4536694; 691522, 4536700; 
691520, 4536705; 691517, 4536711; 691515, 4536715; 691513, 4536721; 
691512, 4536724; 691512, 4536732;

[[Page 835]]

691520, 4536738; 691520, 4536741; 691519, 4536745; 691520, 4536753; 
691519, 4536760; 691514, 4536771; 691511, 4536774; 691501, 4536779; 
691492, 4536781; 691486, 4536782; 691475, 4536781; 691459, 4536779; 
691443, 4536778; 691426, 4536782; 691414, 4536787; 691404, 4536795; 
691398, 4536806; 691395, 4536815; 691396, 4536826; 691399, 4536835; 
691404, 4536841; 691412, 4536843; 691418, 4536844; 691430, 4536841; 
691438, 4536839; 691447, 4536834; 691457, 4536828; 691467, 4536820; 
691478, 4536814; 691489, 4536814; 691500, 4536823; 691505, 4536838; 
691505, 4536847; 691503, 4536856; 691500, 4536865; 691499, 4536877; 
691501, 4536889; 691505, 4536902; 691509, 4536915; 691515, 4536942; 
691518, 4536946; 691528, 4536952; 691547, 4536971; 691540, 4536973; 
691538, 4536976; 691534, 4536980; 691530, 4536986; 691525, 4536990; 
691518, 4536997; 691513, 4537000; 691490, 4537017; 691480, 4537031; 
691475, 4537038; 691469, 4537046; 691463, 4537054; 691459, 4537062; 
691455, 4537066; 691451, 4537072; 691451, 4537074; 691448, 4537078; 
691446, 4537080; 691442, 4537084; 691439, 4537089; 691426, 4537079; 
691417, 4537075; 691414, 4537073; 691408, 4537074; 691401, 4537081; 
691398, 4537084; 691394, 4537087; 691387, 4537090; 691382, 4537089; 
691377, 4537084; 691371, 4537076; 691363, 4537068; 691354, 4537065; 
691345, 4537066; 691336, 4537069; 691331, 4537074; 691326, 4537079; 
691322, 4537082; 691316, 4537084; 691307, 4537084; 691304, 4537100; 
691301, 4537108; 691294, 4537115; 691288, 4537123; 691284, 4537126; 
691274, 4537131; 691263, 4537135; 691247, 4537139; 691234, 4537143; 
691221, 4537144; 691209, 4537145; 691199, 4537150; 691186, 4537161; 
691176, 4537169; 691169, 4537176; 691163, 4537181; 691156, 4537187; 
691151, 4537191; 691144, 4537195; 691138, 4537197; 691133, 4537197; 
691123, 4537193; 691110, 4537184; 691095, 4537174; 691080, 4537168; 
691067, 4537164; 691056, 4537162; 691045, 4537161; 691034, 4537165; 
691020, 4537175; 691002, 4537190; 690991, 4537196; 690979, 4537205; 
690971, 4537211; 690966, 4537214; 690958, 4537217; 690954, 4537216; 
690946, 4537216; 690934, 4537215; 690920, 4537215; 690909, 4537214; 
690899, 4537214; 690897, 4537214; 690894, 4537212; 690867, 4537205; 
690857, 4537203; 690850, 4537204; 690842, 4537204; 690833, 4537205; 
690825, 4537205; 690819, 4537204; 690812, 4537203; 690811, 4537203; 
690800, 4537202; 690784, 4537198; 690775, 4537194; 690768, 4537190; 
690761, 4537186; 690751, 4537183; 690740, 4537183; 690731, 4537187; 
690723, 4537192; 690717, 4537198; 690711, 4537207; 690703, 4537215; 
690696, 4537224; 690687, 4537233; 690679, 4537240; 690673, 4537246; 
690669, 4537251; 690666, 4537255; 690664, 4537259; 690662, 4537261; 
690657, 4537273; 690653, 4537276; 690651, 4537277; 690650, 4537279; 
690647, 4537280; 690632, 4537292; 690629, 4537294; 690622, 4537301; 
690613, 4537310; 690608, 4537316; 690602, 4537322; 690598, 4537325; 
690595, 4537328; 690592, 4537332; 690590, 4537333; 690588, 4537334; 
690584, 4537336; 690577, 4537335; 690561, 4537340; 690555, 4537339; 
690547, 4537338; 690541, 4537335; 690536, 4537333; 690529, 4537332; 
690521, 4537335; 690513, 4537339; 690505, 4537346; 690498, 4537351; 
690491, 4537358; 690484, 4537361; 690478, 4537364; 690473, 4537367; 
690467, 4537369; 690464, 4537371; 690451, 4537378; 690444, 4537381; 
690435, 4537381; 690427, 4537379; 690413, 4537376; 690406, 4537378; 
690398, 4537380; 690389, 4537386; 690381, 4537392; 690374, 4537398; 
690371, 4537401; 690359, 4537409; 690355, 4537412; 690341, 4537411; 
690329, 4537411; 690319, 4537415; 690311, 4537419; 690305, 4537420; 
690299, 4537422; 690298, 4537424; 690297, 4537426; 690270, 4537435; 
690270, 4537434; 690254, 4537440; 690243, 4537444; 690228, 4537449; 
690221, 4537451; 690214, 4537455; 690211, 4537458; 690204, 4537464; 
690201, 4537468; 690201, 4537470; 690194, 4537476; 690192, 4537479; 
690190, 4537486; 690186, 4537503; 690184, 4537515; 690181, 4537531; 
690178, 4537541; 690175, 4537550; 690173, 4537555; 690174, 4537560; 
690175, 4537563; 690178, 4537565; 690178, 4537565; 690174, 4537569; 
690173, 4537579; 690174, 4537589; 690173, 4537601; 690172, 4537610; 
690171, 4537623; 690168, 4537635; 690166, 4537643; 690162, 4537651; 
690154, 4537659; 690147, 4537669; 690144, 4537680; 690144, 4537686; 
690145, 4537694; 690154, 4537711; 690155, 4537711; 690164, 4537754; 
690163, 4537758; 690165, 4537769; 690168, 4537778; 690175, 4537794; 
690181, 4537804; 690191, 4537816; 690198, 4537823; 690203, 4537828; 
690208, 4537834; 690209, 4537835; 690209, 4537838; 690209, 4537842; 
690207, 4537846; 690204, 4537849; 690195, 4537848; 690186, 4537846; 
690172, 4537845; 690167, 4537844; 690161, 4537846; 690159, 4537847; 
690158, 4537850; 690157, 4537853; 690156, 4537860; 690162, 4537874; 
690166, 4537879; 690170, 4537883; 690176, 4537886; 690187, 4537889; 
690197, 4537891; 690203, 4537890; 690214, 4537888; 690221, 4537882; 
690228, 4537874; 690232, 4537866; 690239, 4537856; 690243, 4537849; 
690246, 4537840; 690248, 4537827; 690250, 4537813; 690254, 4537800; 
690259, 4537783; 690264, 4537767; 690269, 4537752; 690272, 4537738; 
690273, 4537721; 690275, 4537710; 690276, 4537699; 690273, 4537690; 
690271, 4537683; 690269, 4537682; 690257, 4537655; 690264, 4537644; 
690266, 4537637; 690268, 4537631; 690270, 4537624; 690271, 4537616; 
690269, 4537609; 690262, 4537588; 690258, 4537564; 690268, 4537560; 
690269, 4537559; 690298, 4537585; 690298, 4537586; 690298, 4537588; 
690305, 4537588; 690313, 4537587; 690322, 4537583; 690333, 4537581; 
690343, 4537583; 690351, 4537587; 690361, 4537594; 690367, 4537597; 
690377, 4537597; 690387, 4537591; 690394, 4537581; 690400, 4537571; 
690405, 4537559; 690410, 4537550; 690414, 4537542; 690422, 4537535; 
690432, 4537531; 690444, 4537530; 690458, 4537531; 690471, 4537535; 
690481, 4537537; 690500, 4537535; 690514, 4537531; 690526, 4537530; 
690535, 4537530; 690543, 4537535; 690548, 4537540; 690551, 4537546; 
690554, 4537549; 690560, 4537551; 690568, 4537550; 690576, 4537543; 
690584, 4537532; 690597, 4537505; 690602, 4537496; 690608, 4537486; 
690614, 4537475; 690623, 4537470; 690631, 4537469; 690637, 4537470; 
690642, 4537471; 690648, 4537472; 690665, 4537475; 690677, 4537478; 
690682, 4537479; 690682, 4537482; 690683, 4537488; 690679, 4537498; 
690673, 4537505; 690659, 4537517; 690649, 4537528; 690644, 4537537; 
690641, 4537548; 690638, 4537562; 690632, 4537577; 690628, 4537586; 
690624, 4537592; 690616, 4537599; 690607, 4537602; 690595, 4537604; 
690583, 4537606; 690567, 4537608; 690555, 4537609; 690540, 4537611; 
690529, 4537613; 690521, 4537619; 690514, 4537627; 690503, 4537640; 
690493, 4537650; 690486, 4537659; 690480, 4537667; 690473, 4537677; 
690470, 4537682; 690459, 4537689; 690451, 4537691; 690441, 4537692; 
690434, 4537691; 690424, 4537691; 690420, 4537690; 690413, 4537689; 
690406, 4537688; 690400, 4537688; 690395, 4537688; 690392, 4537690; 
690390, 4537693; 690388, 4537699;

[[Page 836]]

690388, 4537706; 690388, 4537713; 690390, 4537722; 690390, 4537731; 
690390, 4537738; 690390, 4537742; 690390, 4537747; 690391, 4537751; 
690397, 4537758; 690405, 4537762; 690413, 4537761; 690422, 4537757; 
690429, 4537751; 690434, 4537746; 690443, 4537745; 690451, 4537748; 
690457, 4537750; 690462, 4537749; 690470, 4537747; 690478, 4537746; 
690480, 4537745; 690485, 4537744; 690487, 4537742; 690488, 4537740; 
690489, 4537734; 690483, 4537724; 690482, 4537722; 690480, 4537716; 
690482, 4537710; 690489, 4537705; 690501, 4537707; 690514, 4537710; 
690530, 4537715; 690539, 4537717; 690554, 4537717; 690566, 4537714; 
690578, 4537711; 690594, 4537706; 690607, 4537701; 690618, 4537692; 
690631, 4537685; 690646, 4537678; 690666, 4537663; 690682, 4537656; 
690696, 4537654; 690706, 4537656; 690716, 4537660; 690723, 4537663; 
690733, 4537666; 690743, 4537665; 690755, 4537660; 690764, 4537655; 
690771, 4537650; 690777, 4537646; 690782, 4537643; 690785, 4537639; 
690789, 4537634; 690791, 4537631; 690791, 4537627; 690791, 4537625; 
690790, 4537622; 690802, 4537603; 690809, 4537597; 690816, 4537592; 
690826, 4537586; 690834, 4537581; 690843, 4537577; 690850, 4537573; 
690859, 4537567; 690866, 4537562; 690876, 4537557; 690885, 4537554; 
690896, 4537551; 690905, 4537551; 690913, 4537549; 690916, 4537548; 
690919, 4537546; 690921, 4537542; 690921, 4537537; 690926, 4537533; 
690932, 4537529; 690935, 4537525; 690937, 4537520; 690937, 4537515; 
690938, 4537513; 690947, 4537498; 690954, 4537488; 690961, 4537481; 
690966, 4537475; 690974, 4537469; 690981, 4537465; 690991, 4537464; 
691000, 4537465; 691007, 4537467; 691012, 4537469; 691015, 4537469; 
691021, 4537469; 691022, 4537469; 691067, 4537476; 691075, 4537481; 
691079, 4537486; 691086, 4537496; 691089, 4537503; 691091, 4537513; 
691091, 4537522; 691090, 4537532; 691088, 4537542; 691085, 4537553; 
691083, 4537566; 691082, 4537573; 691081, 4537580; 691080, 4537583; 
691080, 4537588; 691078, 4537591; 691076, 4537595; 691073, 4537599; 
691069, 4537601; 691060, 4537602; 691049, 4537604; 691036, 4537608; 
691023, 4537614; 691013, 4537621; 691002, 4537634; 690995, 4537640; 
690989, 4537645; 690974, 4537654; 690963, 4537663; 690958, 4537671; 
690954, 4537680; 690950, 4537691; 690948, 4537702; 690944, 4537714; 
690937, 4537726; 690931, 4537736; 690928, 4537739; 690913, 4537749; 
690906, 4537754; 690898, 4537760; 690891, 4537766; 690885, 4537772; 
690880, 4537777; 690875, 4537781; 690872, 4537782; 690868, 4537786; 
690866, 4537791; 690864, 4537796; 690864, 4537802; 690863, 4537807; 
690866, 4537811; 690868, 4537815; 690871, 4537816; 690875, 4537817; 
690880, 4537816; 690889, 4537813; 690895, 4537810; 690900, 4537805; 
690906, 4537802; 690914, 4537799; 690922, 4537797; 690930, 4537794; 
690940, 4537790; 690951, 4537787; 690962, 4537782; 690970, 4537780; 
690981, 4537776; 690990, 4537772; 690997, 4537766; 691003, 4537759; 
691008, 4537753; 691013, 4537745; 691020, 4537734; 691025, 4537726; 
691033, 4537714; 691036, 4537709; 691038, 4537706; 691041, 4537701; 
691041, 4537700; 691044, 4537699; 691046, 4537697; 691065, 4537683; 
691071, 4537682; 691080, 4537680; 691089, 4537675; 691104, 4537665; 
691110, 4537662; 691118, 4537655; 691122, 4537647; 691126, 4537637; 
691131, 4537625; 691136, 4537612; 691140, 4537601; 691145, 4537589; 
691148, 4537580; 691151, 4537575; 691156, 4537567; 691166, 4537562; 
691176, 4537561; 691183, 4537559; 691190, 4537558; 691199, 4537555; 
691203, 4537552; 691207, 4537544; 691211, 4537536; 691214, 4537527; 
691215, 4537519; 691215, 4537511; 691214, 4537503; 691211, 4537496; 
691210, 4537494; 691210, 4537493; 691204, 4537488; 691211, 4537473; 
691213, 4537466; 691214, 4537456; 691215, 4537448; 691213, 4537439; 
691208, 4537434; 691203, 4537430; 691198, 4537429; 691193, 4537425; 
691192, 4537418; 691194, 4537409; 691203, 4537403; 691208, 4537396; 
691211, 4537390; 691213, 4537384; 691215, 4537379; 691222, 4537372; 
691232, 4537371; 691246, 4537374; 691259, 4537378; 691270, 4537384; 
691281, 4537392; 691290, 4537401; 691297, 4537409; 691305, 4537419; 
691310, 4537431; 691313, 4537441; 691315, 4537454; 691315, 4537466; 
691312, 4537481; 691306, 4537497; 691302, 4537510; 691297, 4537524; 
691294, 4537536; 691289, 4537545; 691288, 4537551; 691286, 4537557; 
691286, 4537564; 691287, 4537570; 691288, 4537573; 691292, 4537574; 
691303, 4537572; 691313, 4537570; 691322, 4537570; 691329, 4537570; 
691335, 4537572; 691340, 4537576; 691346, 4537581; 691354, 4537589; 
691363, 4537597; 691367, 4537602; 691371, 4537606; 691375, 4537611; 
691377, 4537615; 691377, 4537619; 691375, 4537622; 691366, 4537627; 
691354, 4537632; 691344, 4537639; 691339, 4537645; 691332, 4537654; 
691328, 4537665; 691323, 4537675; 691319, 4537681; 691312, 4537689; 
691303, 4537699; 691299, 4537705; 691294, 4537714; 691289, 4537723; 
691287, 4537729; 691286, 4537734; 691285, 4537741; 691287, 4537746; 
691290, 4537754; 691294, 4537758; 691297, 4537758; 691300, 4537760; 
691302, 4537762; 691304, 4537764; 691309, 4537767; 691303, 4537781; 
691303, 4537787; 691303, 4537792; 691303, 4537796; 691305, 4537801; 
691304, 4537804; 691305, 4537807; 691305, 4537808; 691305, 4537810; 
691311, 4537818; 691307, 4537843; 691305, 4537856; 691302, 4537868; 
691299, 4537877; 691297, 4537880; 691292, 4537883; 691284, 4537885; 
691280, 4537886; 691276, 4537891; 691272, 4537900; 691270, 4537909; 
691267, 4537919; 691264, 4537928; 691260, 4537940; 691252, 4537949; 
691244, 4537958; 691237, 4537965; 691230, 4537972; 691222, 4537983; 
691216, 4537995; 691211, 4538009; 691208, 4538026; 691208, 4538042; 
691208, 4538055; 691208, 4538066; 691206, 4538076; 691200, 4538088; 
691197, 4538095; 691193, 4538101; 691190, 4538104; 691188, 4538107; 
691183, 4538111; 691171, 4538122; 691167, 4538126; 691161, 4538132; 
691159, 4538140; 691158, 4538152; 691159, 4538166; 691160, 4538191; 
691161, 4538201; 691162, 4538208; 691162, 4538215; 691074, 4538281; 
691082, 4538281; 691074, 4538281; 691072, 4538296; 691073, 4538303; 
691074, 4538313; 691077, 4538323; 691078, 4538329; 691080, 4538338; 
691079, 4538348; 691075, 4538359; 691072, 4538367; 691068, 4538373; 
691064, 4538377; 691061, 4538380; 691059, 4538383; 691057, 4538387; 
691057, 4538393; 691059, 4538399; 691062, 4538403; 691071, 4538404; 
691078, 4538404; 691089, 4538400; 691094, 4538395; 691097, 4538386; 
691102, 4538375; 691107, 4538368; 691115, 4538360; 691128, 4538355; 
691142, 4538352; 691158, 4538351; 691176, 4538354; 691188, 4538357; 
691193, 4538360; 691200, 4538363; 691205, 4538364; 691209, 4538365; 
691216, 4538366.
    (iii) Note: Map of Unit 1, Upper Little Salt Creek North (Map 2), 
follows:

[[Page 837]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR06AP10.005

    (7) Unit 2: Little Salt Creek--Arbor Lake, Lancaster County, 
Nebraska.
    (i) Tract 2a. Land bounded by the following Universal Transverse 
Mercator (UTM) Zone 14N, North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83) 
coordinates (E, N): 695582, 4530097; 695584, 4530093; 695585, 4530092; 
695590, 4530091; 695596, 4530091; 695600, 4530088; 695602, 4530085; 
695602, 4530078; 695598, 4530070; 695591, 4530064; 695583, 4530058; 
695572, 4530054; 695561, 4530051; 695555, 4530050; 695547, 4530048; 
695541, 4530045; 695538, 4530043; 695530, 4530040; 695515, 4530031; 
695496, 4530025; 695488, 4530021; 695482, 4530016; 695476, 4530013; 
695471, 4530009; 695465, 4530008; 695457, 4530008; 695450, 4530009; 
695444, 4530012; 695439, 4530017; 695434, 4530023; 695432, 4530031; 
695428,

[[Page 838]]

4530042; 695426, 4530044; 695422, 4530044; 695418, 4530043; 695413, 
4530044; 695411, 4530046; 695409, 4530050; 695409, 4530056; 695411, 
4530061; 695417, 4530065; 695427, 4530068; 695434, 4530074; 695438, 
4530080; 695439, 4530087; 695439, 4530092; 695439, 4530098; 695441, 
4530104; 695443, 4530106; 695450, 4530107; 695458, 4530105; 695467, 
4530103; 695478, 4530101; 695488, 4530099; 695496, 4530097; 695506, 
4530099; 695513, 4530102; 695522, 4530107; 695528, 4530111; 695534, 
4530116; 695540, 4530120; 695548, 4530122; 695558, 4530122; 695565, 
4530124; 695571, 4530123; 695576, 4530122; 695580, 4530116; 695581, 
4530109; 695582, 4530104; 695582, 4530097.
    (ii) Tract 2b. Land bounded by the following Universal Transverse 
Mercator (UTM) Zone 14N, North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83) 
coordinates (E, N): 695752, 4530111; 695749, 4530108; 695745, 4530108; 
695738, 4530109; 695729, 4530109; 695722, 4530108; 695716, 4530106; 
695708, 4530104; 695701, 4530104; 695694, 4530104; 695689, 4530105; 
695683, 4530106; 695671, 4530106; 695669, 4530107; 695664, 4530110; 
695662, 4530115; 695659, 4530124; 695658, 4530135; 695659, 4530146; 
695661, 4530154; 695665, 4530165; 695670, 4530172; 695677, 4530181; 
695681, 4530185; 695689, 4530190; 695695, 4530195; 695704, 4530200; 
695710, 4530203; 695715, 4530205; 695721, 4530206; 695731, 4530204; 
695738, 4530200; 695743, 4530198; 695748, 4530194; 695752, 4530190; 
695755, 4530184; 695758, 4530177; 695761, 4530171; 695763, 4530163; 
695764, 4530155; 695764, 4530146; 695762, 4530136; 695760, 4530128; 
695758, 4530122; 695756, 4530117; 695752, 4530111.
    (iii) Tract 2c. Land bounded by the following Universal Transverse 
Mercator (UTM) Zone 14N, North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83) 
coordinates (E, N): 694865, 4531575; 694912, 4531436; 694913, 4531436; 
694921, 4531431; 694932, 4531426; 694944, 4531421; 694955, 4531418; 
694964, 4531416; 694970, 4531412; 694975, 4531403; 694979, 4531392; 
694982, 4531380; 694987, 4531366; 694993, 4531353; 695000, 4531342; 
695007, 4531330; 695014, 4531318; 695021, 4531310; 695028, 4531306; 
695034, 4531309; 695037, 4531312; 695041, 4531317; 695045, 4531325; 
695048, 4531333; 695050, 4531344; 695056, 4531359; 695061, 4531374; 
695067, 4531381; 695076, 4531387; 695085, 4531390; 695095, 4531394; 
695102, 4531397; 695106, 4531402; 695104, 4531408; 695103, 4531413; 
695102, 4531419; 695105, 4531424; 695111, 4531427; 695119, 4531430; 
695126, 4531435; 695130, 4531439; 695133, 4531441; 695139, 4531441; 
695148, 4531441; 695155, 4531442; 695163, 4531445; 695170, 4531447; 
695174, 4531447; 695177, 4531446; 695180, 4531441; 695182, 4531436; 
695184, 4531433; 695188, 4531427; 695193, 4531418; 695198, 4531408; 
695203, 4531398; 695206, 4531388; 695209, 4531375; 695210, 4531361; 
695209, 4531348; 695206, 4531336; 695202, 4531326; 695197, 4531314; 
695191, 4531307; 695186, 4531301; 695179, 4531294; 695173, 4531284; 
695169, 4531276; 695164, 4531266; 695161, 4531256; 695159, 4531246; 
695160, 4531234; 695160, 4531221; 695167, 4531206; 695178, 4531196; 
695185, 4531193; 695195, 4531190; 695206, 4531187; 695213, 4531183; 
695219, 4531174; 695222, 4531165; 695224, 4531154; 695225, 4531141; 
695225, 4531132; 695224, 4531122; 695223, 4531116; 695222, 4531114; 
695220, 4531104; 695219, 4531097; 695220, 4531087; 695222, 4531077; 
695227, 4531064; 695230, 4531058; 695232, 4531050; 695235, 4531044; 
695237, 4531037; 695238, 4531027; 695239, 4531024; 695238, 4531017; 
695236, 4531013; 695235, 4531012; 695260, 4530964; 695263, 4530964; 
695267, 4530964; 695271, 4530963; 695275, 4530961; 695278, 4530958; 
695284, 4530953; 695288, 4530951; 695293, 4530948; 695311, 4530942; 
695321, 4530947; 695323, 4530952; 695325, 4530958; 695324, 4530964; 
695321, 4530968; 695318, 4530972; 695315, 4530974; 695308, 4530977; 
695302, 4530980; 695295, 4530982; 695287, 4530985; 695282, 4530987; 
695275, 4530990; 695271, 4530995; 695270, 4531001; 695271, 4531006; 
695274, 4531012; 695276, 4531015; 695278, 4531017; 695290, 4531020; 
695302, 4531024; 695308, 4531024; 695314, 4531023; 695318, 4531022; 
695322, 4531019; 695324, 4531017; 695327, 4531014; 695333, 4531011; 
695340, 4531009; 695349, 4531011; 695355, 4531012; 695360, 4531012; 
695365, 4531010; 695368, 4531007; 695372, 4531001; 695376, 4530996; 
695380, 4530991; 695384, 4530988; 695387, 4530987; 695398, 4530981; 
695402, 4530981; 695412, 4530983; 695419, 4530987; 695425, 4530991; 
695430, 4530994; 695436, 4530994; 695445, 4530992; 695452, 4530989; 
695459, 4530985; 695463, 4530979; 695466, 4530974; 695470, 4530966; 
695475, 4530959; 695484, 4530953; 695491, 4530950; 695500, 4530948; 
695509, 4530945; 695516, 4530942; 695522, 4530940; 695527, 4530936; 
695529, 4530933; 695536, 4530924; 695545, 4530917; 695548, 4530913; 
695550, 4530908; 695551, 4530904; 695551, 4530900; 695552, 4530897; 
695552, 4530895; 695552, 4530892; 695564, 4530890; 695568, 4530887; 
695572, 4530885; 695576, 4530882; 695580, 4530878; 695584, 4530872; 
695586, 4530869; 695596, 4530862; 695608, 4530867; 695610, 4530873; 
695611, 4530880; 695613, 4530884; 695616, 4530890; 695618, 4530894; 
695627, 4530904; 695634, 4530909; 695640, 4530914; 695646, 4530917; 
695650, 4530921; 695655, 4530924; 695661, 4530927; 695664, 4530927; 
695667, 4530925; 695672, 4530920; 695674, 4530915; 695676, 4530908; 
695676, 4530900; 695676, 4530892; 695675, 4530884; 695672, 4530872; 
695667, 4530861; 695665, 4530856; 695665, 4530849; 695668, 4530839; 
695674, 4530825; 695679, 4530818; 695685, 4530809; 695692, 4530801; 
695696, 4530792; 695697, 4530779; 695698, 4530768; 695700, 4530754; 
695702, 4530742; 695704, 4530731; 695708, 4530719; 695711, 4530708; 
695714, 4530696; 695716, 4530683; 695714, 4530663; 695709, 4530649; 
695702, 4530635; 695698, 4530627; 695692, 4530618; 695689, 4530608; 
695686, 4530594; 695684, 4530577; 695684, 4530569; 695683, 4530559; 
695680, 4530554; 695675, 4530545; 695670, 4530540; 695667, 4530536; 
695666, 4530533; 695665, 4530530; 695664, 4530517; 695664, 4530514; 
695663, 4530509; 695663, 4530491; 695676, 4530483; 695684, 4530482; 
695690, 4530481; 695698, 4530479; 695705, 4530476; 695711, 4530473; 
695717, 4530471; 695723, 4530469; 695728, 4530466; 695733, 4530462; 
695736, 4530458; 695735, 4530451; 695731, 4530441; 695724, 4530432; 
695714, 4530423; 695706, 4530417; 695693, 4530407; 695681, 4530397; 
695669, 4530384; 695662, 4530374; 695657, 4530364; 695652, 4530356; 
695646, 4530347; 695642, 4530339; 695636, 4530335; 695630, 4530332; 
695623, 4530326; 695617, 4530320; 695609, 4530314; 695603, 4530311; 
695597, 4530309; 695590, 4530308; 695586, 4530305; 695582, 4530300; 
695580, 4530292; 695579, 4530284; 695579, 4530276; 695580, 4530268; 
695582, 4530263; 695587, 4530257; 695594, 4530253; 695599, 4530250; 
695604, 4530245; 695607, 4530241; 695609, 4530234; 695608, 4530226;

[[Page 839]]

695607, 4530217; 695605, 4530208; 695600, 4530201; 695596, 4530195; 
695591, 4530191; 695581, 4530189; 695574, 4530189; 695565, 4530191; 
695559, 4530192; 695552, 4530193; 695544, 4530192; 695538, 4530184; 
695533, 4530176; 695530, 4530172; 695528, 4530169; 695518, 4530178; 
695514, 4530180; 695510, 4530182; 695506, 4530183; 695502, 4530187; 
695492, 4530195; 695486, 4530201; 695483, 4530206; 695480, 4530213; 
695477, 4530219; 695476, 4530222; 695474, 4530224; 695471, 4530227; 
695467, 4530230; 695465, 4530230; 695463, 4530230; 695462, 4530230; 
695453, 4530228; 695443, 4530224; 695441, 4530222; 695441, 4530219; 
695441, 4530211; 695440, 4530203; 695440, 4530195; 695440, 4530189; 
695438, 4530180; 695436, 4530173; 695434, 4530168; 695432, 4530162; 
695425, 4530149; 695412, 4530154; 695407, 4530158; 695402, 4530166; 
695398, 4530173; 695396, 4530182; 695393, 4530192; 695391, 4530202; 
695390, 4530211; 695389, 4530221; 695389, 4530229; 695389, 4530234; 
695390, 4530240; 695389, 4530244; 695389, 4530247; 695387, 4530249; 
695379, 4530255; 695377, 4530256; 695375, 4530259; 695373, 4530261; 
695372, 4530264; 695372, 4530267; 695371, 4530271; 695371, 4530279; 
695368, 4530292; 695367, 4530298; 695366, 4530302; 695363, 4530305; 
695360, 4530307; 695354, 4530307; 695347, 4530308; 695339, 4530307; 
695333, 4530307; 695326, 4530305; 695320, 4530303; 695316, 4530301; 
695313, 4530298; 695310, 4530296; 695307, 4530292; 695307, 4530289; 
695308, 4530283; 695310, 4530271; 695311, 4530260; 695311, 4530249; 
695310, 4530240; 695307, 4530234; 695306, 4530226; 695304, 4530218; 
695302, 4530212; 695301, 4530209; 695299, 4530205; 695295, 4530204; 
695290, 4530205; 695293, 4529952; 695234, 4529971; 695176, 4530206; 
695176, 4530206; 695173, 4530204; 695169, 4530200; 695164, 4530196; 
695160, 4530192; 695156, 4530189; 695147, 4530186; 695137, 4530186; 
695127, 4530187; 695117, 4530190; 695109, 4530193; 695103, 4530198; 
695099, 4530202; 695096, 4530208; 695092, 4530213; 695086, 4530216; 
695083, 4530217; 695076, 4530217; 695071, 4530216; 695064, 4530216; 
695060, 4530215; 695051, 4530206; 695053, 4530191; 695052, 4530187; 
695048, 4530180; 695041, 4530177; 695034, 4530174; 695025, 4530171; 
695016, 4530169; 695008, 4530166; 695000, 4530164; 694992, 4530162; 
694984, 4530160; 694978, 4530160; 694972, 4530161; 694967, 4530163; 
694960, 4530167; 694955, 4530170; 694950, 4530172; 694949, 4530173; 
694926, 4530179; 694915, 4530181; 694913, 4530180; 694909, 4530176; 
694907, 4530176; 694907, 4530175; 694903, 4530174; 694899, 4530174; 
694899, 4530174; 694891, 4530177; 694885, 4530178; 694884, 4530178; 
694873, 4530173; 694866, 4530170; 694859, 4530169; 694851, 4530167; 
694839, 4530170; 694821, 4530178; 694815, 4530180; 694807, 4530182; 
694801, 4530182; 694793, 4530182; 694785, 4530181; 694774, 4530179; 
694766, 4530176; 694762, 4530174; 694756, 4530171; 694752, 4530169; 
694750, 4530167; 694749, 4530165; 694747, 4530164; 694737, 4530175; 
694735, 4530178; 694746, 4530203; 694752, 4530211; 694759, 4530218; 
694766, 4530223; 694776, 4530229; 694783, 4530232; 694791, 4530235; 
694795, 4530238; 694795, 4530243; 694795, 4530253; 694793, 4530264; 
694792, 4530272; 694793, 4530281; 694795, 4530285; 694803, 4530290; 
694822, 4530291; 694832, 4530291; 694846, 4530288; 694859, 4530286; 
694869, 4530283; 694881, 4530285; 694890, 4530289; 694896, 4530293; 
694905, 4530298; 694914, 4530300; 694925, 4530303; 694936, 4530302; 
694948, 4530298; 694957, 4530298; 694967, 4530298; 694973, 4530300; 
694978, 4530300; 694986, 4530300; 694988, 4530300; 694992, 4530300; 
694996, 4530299; 694997, 4530299; 695013, 4530296; 695021, 4530293; 
695028, 4530291; 695037, 4530291; 695046, 4530293; 695054, 4530297; 
695060, 4530299; 695067, 4530301; 695074, 4530302; 695081, 4530302; 
695086, 4530301; 695092, 4530298; 695096, 4530295; 695109, 4530291; 
695121, 4530292; 695129, 4530292; 695137, 4530292; 695146, 4530291; 
695153, 4530290; 695157, 4530289; 695163, 4530288; 695147, 4530420; 
695146, 4530419; 695143, 4530415; 695136, 4530411; 695130, 4530410; 
695124, 4530411; 695116, 4530415; 695108, 4530422; 695105, 4530424; 
695102, 4530431; 695100, 4530435; 695098, 4530440; 695096, 4530443; 
695092, 4530447; 695087, 4530450; 695084, 4530450; 695081, 4530449; 
695061, 4530437; 695057, 4530435; 695051, 4530432; 695045, 4530431; 
695038, 4530431; 695032, 4530436; 695027, 4530443; 695024, 4530451; 
695021, 4530457; 695017, 4530461; 695009, 4530465; 695002, 4530466; 
694993, 4530467; 694984, 4530465; 694976, 4530457; 694968, 4530451; 
694961, 4530449; 694951, 4530448; 694945, 4530447; 694936, 4530445; 
694926, 4530440; 694916, 4530437; 694904, 4530435; 694894, 4530433; 
694885, 4530432; 694876, 4530430; 694868, 4530428; 694863, 4530426; 
694859, 4530423; 694847, 4530415; 694835, 4530406; 694829, 4530401; 
694821, 4530396; 694813, 4530391; 694804, 4530387; 694798, 4530383; 
694790, 4530379; 694785, 4530376; 694780, 4530374; 694772, 4530372; 
694766, 4530371; 694763, 4530371; 694758, 4530377; 694756, 4530385; 
694755, 4530392; 694756, 4530398; 694759, 4530403; 694763, 4530408; 
694769, 4530411; 694775, 4530412; 694782, 4530412; 694791, 4530413; 
694798, 4530414; 694803, 4530417; 694814, 4530423; 694821, 4530428; 
694827, 4530432; 694830, 4530434; 694835, 4530437; 694838, 4530439; 
694838, 4530440; 694844, 4530453; 694846, 4530456; 694850, 4530461; 
694856, 4530464; 694862, 4530466; 694868, 4530468; 694871, 4530470; 
694872, 4530474; 694874, 4530478; 694875, 4530489; 694874, 4530510; 
694872, 4530518; 694869, 4530524; 694862, 4530532; 694855, 4530535; 
694847, 4530539; 694839, 4530543; 694836, 4530545; 694831, 4530547; 
694827, 4530550; 694825, 4530555; 694823, 4530562; 694823, 4530569; 
694824, 4530574; 694827, 4530580; 694828, 4530583; 694834, 4530590; 
694837, 4530592; 694840, 4530594; 694844, 4530596; 694849, 4530597; 
694851, 4530597; 694853, 4530598; 694869, 4530603; 694873, 4530605; 
694879, 4530607; 694884, 4530609; 694888, 4530610; 694896, 4530616; 
694907, 4530626; 694909, 4530628; 694912, 4530630; 694920, 4530632; 
694929, 4530632; 694937, 4530631; 694943, 4530629; 694950, 4530627; 
694955, 4530625; 694960, 4530623; 694963, 4530622; 694964, 4530622; 
694966, 4530620; 694977, 4530618; 694983, 4530621; 694987, 4530626; 
694989, 4530631; 694993, 4530635; 694997, 4530638; 695003, 4530639; 
695012, 4530639; 695020, 4530636; 695030, 4530632; 695038, 4530628; 
695045, 4530626; 695050, 4530625; 695054, 4530625; 695068, 4530623; 
695078, 4530632; 695079, 4530637; 695080, 4530642; 695080, 4530647; 
695079, 4530651; 695079, 4530658; 695078, 4530672; 695079, 4530679; 
695079, 4530689; 695076, 4530699; 695072, 4530708; 695068, 4530715; 
695064, 4530720; 695057, 4530726; 695050, 4530732; 695044, 4530737; 
695036, 4530743; 695028, 4530749; 695022, 4530755; 695018, 4530761; 
695013, 4530774; 695011, 4530784; 695010, 4530794; 695010, 4530807; 
695011, 4530818; 695012, 4530825;

[[Page 840]]

695013, 4530832; 695013, 4530839; 695013, 4530845; 695007, 4530856; 
694999, 4530865; 694989, 4530873; 694981, 4530879; 694970, 4530887; 
694961, 4530895; 694951, 4530903; 694941, 4530912; 694929, 4530922; 
694915, 4530933; 694904, 4530939; 694896, 4530943; 694888, 4530948; 
694884, 4530953; 694879, 4530963; 694873, 4530975; 694870, 4530982; 
694870, 4530990; 694870, 4530998; 694871, 4531004; 694874, 4531012; 
694877, 4531022; 694880, 4531032; 694879, 4531041; 694877, 4531047; 
694871, 4531059; 694864, 4531067; 694855, 4531079; 694846, 4531090; 
694836, 4531101; 694830, 4531108; 694829, 4531110; 694824, 4531114; 
694819, 4531118; 694815, 4531119; 694811, 4531119; 694804, 4531118; 
694797, 4531115; 694791, 4531110; 694786, 4531108; 694779, 4531106; 
694776, 4531106; 694769, 4531108; 694763, 4531111; 694756, 4531114; 
694752, 4531115; 694750, 4531116; 694732, 4531126; 694725, 4531127; 
694716, 4531126; 694705, 4531124; 694697, 4531123; 694686, 4531122; 
694678, 4531122; 694671, 4531122; 694664, 4531122; 694654, 4531118; 
694638, 4531120; 694631, 4531122; 694620, 4531126; 694610, 4531131; 
694603, 4531135; 694599, 4531138; 694596, 4531141; 694592, 4531143; 
694588, 4531144; 694587, 4531144; 694578, 4531142; 694568, 4531144; 
694562, 4531148; 694555, 4531152; 694546, 4531160; 694540, 4531167; 
694535, 4531177; 694530, 4531186; 694526, 4531191; 694520, 4531194; 
694518, 4531195; 694510, 4531198; 694504, 4531201; 694500, 4531206; 
694497, 4531213; 694493, 4531223; 694490, 4531233; 694489, 4531244; 
694489, 4531254; 694492, 4531263; 694495, 4531276; 694499, 4531293; 
694501, 4531304; 694503, 4531316; 694503, 4531330; 694501, 4531342; 
694498, 4531352; 694496, 4531363; 694495, 4531375; 694498, 4531389; 
694501, 4531405; 694502, 4531418; 694502, 4531430; 694503, 4531442; 
694503, 4531453; 694504, 4531459; 694504, 4531464; 694505, 4531469; 
694506, 4531472; 694506, 4531475; 694507, 4531478; 694507, 4531481; 
694506, 4531490; 694505, 4531494; 694505, 4531497; 694506, 4531500; 
694507, 4531502; 694509, 4531504; 694512, 4531505; 694518, 4531506; 
694523, 4531506; 694529, 4531506; 694534, 4531506; 694540, 4531506; 
694545, 4531506; 694552, 4531507; 694562, 4531506; 694570, 4531506; 
694575, 4531505; 694671, 4531593; 694865, 4531575.
    (iv) Tract 2d. Land bounded by the following Universal Transverse 
Mercator (UTM) Zone 14N, North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83) 
coordinates (E, N): 694708, 4530350; 694706, 4530341; 694705, 4530336; 
694703, 4530331; 694701, 4530326; 694699, 4530322; 694698, 4530321; 
694697, 4530318; 694696, 4530316; 694697, 4530314; 694697, 4530313; 
694699, 4530312; 694706, 4530302; 694708, 4530300; 694710, 4530297; 
694712, 4530293; 694712, 4530290; 694712, 4530284; 694710, 4530279; 
694708, 4530271; 694705, 4530263; 694703, 4530258; 694702, 4530255; 
694698, 4530252; 694695, 4530250; 694692, 4530249; 694689, 4530251; 
694684, 4530253; 694679, 4530257; 694676, 4530258; 694666, 4530264; 
694650, 4530270; 694641, 4530271; 694633, 4530270; 694629, 4530270; 
694624, 4530269; 694618, 4530269; 694614, 4530271; 694609, 4530275; 
694605, 4530279; 694603, 4530283; 694601, 4530288; 694602, 4530292; 
694604, 4530296; 694608, 4530301; 694615, 4530305; 694622, 4530305; 
694631, 4530303; 694638, 4530301; 694649, 4530299; 694656, 4530298; 
694663, 4530296; 694667, 4530296; 694670, 4530298; 694673, 4530302; 
694672, 4530306; 694671, 4530313; 694668, 4530317; 694664, 4530320; 
694658, 4530322; 694652, 4530324; 694646, 4530327; 694644, 4530329; 
694642, 4530334; 694642, 4530336; 694643, 4530340; 694644, 4530344; 
694646, 4530348; 694652, 4530349; 694661, 4530349; 694666, 4530347; 
694671, 4530344; 694674, 4530344; 694677, 4530343; 694679, 4530346; 
694682, 4530352; 694684, 4530357; 694686, 4530361; 694687, 4530365; 
694690, 4530369; 694693, 4530372; 694697, 4530372; 694700, 4530370; 
694703, 4530367; 694705, 4530363; 694706, 4530358; 694708, 4530350.
    (v) Tract 2e. Land bounded by the following Universal Transverse 
Mercator (UTM) Zone 14N, North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83) 
coordinates (E, N): 694483, 4530368; 694487, 4530364; 694488, 4530362; 
694491, 4530343; 694494, 4530332; 694493, 4530323; 694490, 4530315; 
694485, 4530306; 694482, 4530299; 694481, 4530288; 694484, 4530276; 
694486, 4530272; 694494, 4530266; 694502, 4530265; 694513, 4530265; 
694521, 4530265; 694530, 4530264; 694538, 4530260; 694545, 4530257; 
694550, 4530253; 694555, 4530247; 694561, 4530241; 694565, 4530236; 
694567, 4530233; 694569, 4530231; 694570, 4530228; 694572, 4530227; 
694581, 4530223; 694587, 4530217; 694591, 4530212; 694593, 4530207; 
694591, 4530203; 694590, 4530200; 694586, 4530199; 694579, 4530196; 
694575, 4530194; 694598, 4530176; 694605, 4530177; 694613, 4530178; 
694622, 4530177; 694632, 4530176; 694645, 4530175; 694654, 4530177; 
694661, 4530179; 694667, 4530181; 694675, 4530179; 694683, 4530176; 
694688, 4530171; 694693, 4530163; 694697, 4530156; 694700, 4530150; 
694704, 4530140; 694704, 4530135; 694704, 4530123; 694709, 4530112; 
694706, 4530105; 694700, 4530098; 694696, 4530091; 694694, 4530086; 
694693, 4530078; 694695, 4530070; 694673, 4530067; 694663, 4530063; 
694656, 4530060; 694648, 4530056; 694639, 4530052; 694631, 4530049; 
694622, 4530045; 694613, 4530041; 694605, 4530039; 694600, 4530037; 
694593, 4530038; 694589, 4530039; 694586, 4530041; 694583, 4530042; 
694582, 4530043; 694573, 4530048; 694570, 4530047; 694566, 4530045; 
694564, 4530042; 694562, 4530037; 694561, 4530032; 694559, 4530026; 
694557, 4530019; 694553, 4530014; 694548, 4530010; 694543, 4530007; 
694540, 4530006; 694536, 4530004; 694534, 4530002; 694532, 4529998; 
694531, 4529994; 694531, 4529991; 694532, 4529989; 694522, 4529987; 
694517, 4529985; 694514, 4529985; 694511, 4529988; 694510, 4529993; 
694508, 4530003; 694508, 4530016; 694509, 4530030; 694512, 4530044; 
694515, 4530054; 694519, 4530066; 694523, 4530075; 694528, 4530084; 
694533, 4530092; 694539, 4530099; 694544, 4530104; 694549, 4530106; 
694535, 4530130; 694532, 4530129; 694523, 4530126; 694511, 4530125; 
694502, 4530127; 694494, 4530131; 694488, 4530135; 694481, 4530143; 
694475, 4530149; 694471, 4530156; 694468, 4530164; 694467, 4530171; 
694466, 4530178; 694472, 4530197; 694472, 4530213; 694471, 4530219; 
694469, 4530223; 694464, 4530226; 694459, 4530227; 694456, 4530227; 
694453, 4530229; 694449, 4530233; 694448, 4530237; 694448, 4530246; 
694448, 4530256; 694446, 4530266; 694440, 4530276; 694434, 4530286; 
694428, 4530292; 694423, 4530299; 694417, 4530306; 694413, 4530312; 
694408, 4530323; 694408, 4530331; 694410, 4530338; 694413, 4530342; 
694420, 4530346; 694428, 4530350; 694433, 4530352; 694436, 4530355; 
694437, 4530358; 694435, 4530364; 694431, 4530367; 694424, 4530368; 
694415, 4530367; 694406, 4530368;

[[Page 841]]

694400, 4530371; 694395, 4530378; 694391, 4530384; 694389, 4530390; 
694387, 4530395;
694383, 4530406; 694400, 4530410; 694408, 4530409; 694420, 4530406; 
694432, 4530403; 694444, 4530400; 694452, 4530396; 694458, 4530394; 
694463, 4530391; 694468, 4530387; 694472, 4530382; 694476, 4530378; 
694480, 4530372; 694483, 4530368.
    (vi) Note: Map of Units 2 and 3, Little Salt Creek--Arbor Lake and 
Little Salt Creek--Roper (Map 3), follows:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR06AP10.006

    (8) Unit 3: Little Salt Creek--Roper, Lancaster County, Nebraska.
    (i) Tract 3a. Land bounded by the following Universal Transverse 
Mercator (UTM) Zone 14N, North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83) 
coordinates (E, N): 696382, 4529523; 696387, 4529519; 696387, 4529517; 
696387, 4529512; 696385, 4529506; 696384, 4529499; 696383, 4529491; 
696379, 4529481; 696372, 4529468; 696364, 4529460; 696359, 4529455; 
696352, 4529446; 696347, 4529433; 696344, 4529427; 696339, 4529417; 
696336, 4529410; 696333, 4529405; 696328, 4529398; 696326, 4529392; 
696324, 4529388; 696323, 4529385; 696322, 4529384; 696316, 4529376; 
696316, 4529374; 696315, 4529371; 696316, 4529356; 696313, 4529341; 
696314, 4529331; 696317, 4529323; 696320, 4529310; 696325, 4529295; 
696329, 4529281; 696332, 4529264; 696335, 4529246; 696338, 4529232; 
696342, 4529218; 696345, 4529201; 696349, 4529187; 696353, 4529172; 
696357, 4529157; 696361, 4529143; 696366, 4529132; 696370, 4529123; 
696372, 4529113; 696376, 4529101; 696380, 4529089; 696385, 4529082; 
696389, 4529074; 696392, 4529064; 696394, 4529053; 696394, 4529034; 
696396, 4529008; 696395, 4528995; 696393, 4528975; 696394, 4528956; 
696395, 4528938; 696397, 4528925; 696401, 4528909; 696406, 4528898; 
696416, 4528883; 696424, 4528870; 696430, 4528860; 696436, 4528851; 
696440, 4528843; 696443, 4528830; 696446, 4528817; 696450, 4528806; 
696454, 4528795; 696457, 4528780; 696457, 4528766; 696458, 4528751; 
696460, 4528731; 696461, 4528714; 696461, 4528701; 696460, 4528687; 
696458, 4528674; 696454, 4528669; 696447, 4528661; 696440, 4528652; 
696435, 4528644; 696428, 4528632; 696424, 4528620; 696422, 4528607; 
696425, 4528596; 696427, 4528584; 696431, 4528575; 696434, 4528565; 
696437, 4528560; 696442, 4528557; 696450, 4528555; 696456, 4528558; 
696464, 4528561; 696471, 4528564; 696477, 4528564; 696487, 4528559; 
696499, 4528551; 696507, 4528544; 696513,

[[Page 842]]

4528542; 696523, 4528540; 696530, 4528543; 696535, 4528547; 696539, 
4528552; 696543, 4528555; 696547, 4528559; 696551, 4528561; 696556, 
4528560; 696560, 4528556; 696564, 4528551; 696566, 4528544; 696567, 
4528542; 696569, 4528539; 696577, 4528546; 696582, 4528548; 696587, 
4528549; 696589, 4528550; 696594, 4528550; 696598, 4528548; 696600, 
4528545; 696603, 4528540; 696605, 4528536; 696606, 4528533; 696610, 
4528529; 696615, 4528526; 696621, 4528525; 696627, 4528523; 696632, 
4528519; 696636, 4528513; 696636, 4528510; 696636, 4528503; 696636, 
4528494; 696634, 4528488; 696631, 4528469; 696648, 4528449; 696653, 
4528447; 696660, 4528446; 696669, 4528446; 696677, 4528444; 696687, 
4528438; 696695, 4528432; 696706, 4528426; 696711, 4528423; 696717, 
4528422; 696723, 4528420; 696726, 4528419; 696728, 4528418; 696737, 
4528422; 696742, 4528424; 696745, 4528426; 696750, 4528431; 696754, 
4528437; 696758, 4528443; 696761, 4528447; 696765, 4528449; 696768, 
4528450; 696774, 4528449; 696782, 4528447; 696787, 4528446; 696794, 
4528443; 696801, 4528438; 696806, 4528433; 696810, 4528427; 696814, 
4528420; 696816, 4528415; 696816, 4528381; 696829, 4528377; 696832, 
4528376; 696834, 4528376; 696837, 4528375; 696837, 4528374; 696841, 
4528383; 696843, 4528385; 696845, 4528389; 696853, 4528399; 696854, 
4528401; 696857, 4528403; 696862, 4528403; 696868, 4528402; 696879, 
4528398; 696885, 4528395; 696889, 4528392; 696892, 4528388; 696893, 
4528385; 696893, 4528382; 696892, 4528378; 696890, 4528375; 696887, 
4528370; 696884, 4528365; 696878, 4528354; 696888, 4528342; 696892, 
4528334; 696896, 4528325; 696899, 4528314; 696903, 4528307; 696909, 
4528303; 696917, 4528299; 696929, 4528297; 696942, 4528297; 696954, 
4528297; 696966, 4528297; 696979, 4528298; 696989, 4528299; 696999, 
4528298; 697009, 4528298; 697017, 4528297; 697027, 4528295; 697034, 
4528294; 697041, 4528293; 697046, 4528293; 697048, 4528292; 697060, 
4528288; 697063, 4528289; 697067, 4528291; 697073, 4528293; 697078, 
4528293; 697081, 4528293; 697083, 4528294; 697089, 4528292; 697095, 
4528291; 697100, 4528291; 697109, 4528290; 697121, 4528287; 697130, 
4528287; 697139, 4528288; 697150, 4528290; 697159, 4528294; 697170, 
4528298; 697181, 4528301; 697192, 4528301; 697203, 4528301; 697213, 
4528299; 697221, 4528297; 697233, 4528296; 697242, 4528296; 697252, 
4528300; 697261, 4528305; 697268, 4528309; 697279, 4528312; 697288, 
4528313; 697298, 4528311; 697304, 4528309; 697309, 4528306; 697314, 
4528302; 697318, 4528298; 697320, 4528293; 697323, 4528288; 697324, 
4528281; 697325, 4528268; 697331, 4528262; 697339, 4528259; 697347, 
4528259; 697354, 4528258; 697361, 4528259; 697367, 4528263; 697376, 
4528270; 697383, 4528277; 697389, 4528288; 697395, 4528305; 697399, 
4528316; 697403, 4528324; 697411, 4528325; 697418, 4528323; 697423, 
4528318; 697425, 4528311; 697428, 4528299; 697432, 4528289; 697438, 
4528286; 697447, 4528285; 697458, 4528287; 697470, 4528289; 697480, 
4528294; 697495, 4528299; 697509, 4528301; 697519, 4528299; 697525, 
4528296; 697529, 4528290; 697532, 4528281; 697536, 4528268; 697542, 
4528256; 697547, 4528249; 697562, 4528239; 697579, 4528232; 697584, 
4528230; 697590, 4528227; 697595, 4528223; 697598, 4528217; 697600, 
4528203; 697605, 4528192; 697608, 4528183; 697614, 4528174; 697617, 
4528166; 697618, 4528159; 697613, 4528147; 697605, 4528139; 697592, 
4528134; 697582, 4528133; 697566, 4528133; 697557, 4528136; 697550, 
4528140; 697543, 4528147; 697539, 4528156; 697536, 4528161; 697533, 
4528167; 697530, 4528172; 697525, 4528177; 697520, 4528180; 697467, 
4528169; 697446, 4528160; 697445, 4528159; 697441, 4528151; 697436, 
4528141; 697425, 4528126; 697420, 4528114; 697417, 4528103; 697413, 
4528090; 697408, 4528075; 697406, 4528064; 697402, 4528048; 697395, 
4528034; 697388, 4528026; 697379, 4528022; 697373, 4528020; 697368, 
4528015; 697361, 4528010; 697352, 4528011; 697346, 4528020; 697335, 
4528021; 697330, 4528023; 697327, 4528028; 697326, 4528037; 697329, 
4528059; 697330, 4528066; 697329, 4528076; 697324, 4528087; 697318, 
4528101; 697314, 4528111; 697311, 4528120; 697307, 4528127; 697300, 
4528134; 697294, 4528138; 697286, 4528139; 697279, 4528138; 697270, 
4528137; 697264, 4528136; 697257, 4528134; 697251, 4528133; 697246, 
4528131; 697241, 4528128; 697237, 4528118; 697238, 4528108; 697240, 
4528101; 697241, 4528092; 697241, 4528087; 697238, 4528083; 697235, 
4528079; 697250, 4528075; 697252, 4528073; 697255, 4528063; 697253, 
4528045; 697251, 4528039; 697245, 4528032; 697242, 4528025; 697241, 
4528015; 697241, 4528004; 697234, 4527993; 697228, 4527991; 697224, 
4527990; 697220, 4527992; 697215, 4527995; 697211, 4527999; 697208, 
4528004; 697198, 4528001; 697192, 4527998; 697187, 4527997; 697185, 
4527997; 697181, 4527997; 697174, 4527993; 697169, 4527990; 697160, 
4527984; 697150, 4527984; 697139, 4527991; 697126, 4527999; 697117, 
4528005; 697109, 4528013; 697093, 4528026; 697088, 4528031; 697083, 
4528036; 697080, 4528044; 697078, 4528052; 697077, 4528063; 697077, 
4528069; 697071, 4528076; 697065, 4528079; 697060, 4528077; 697055, 
4528074; 697050, 4528072; 697042, 4528068; 697032, 4528066; 697026, 
4528067; 697012, 4528075; 696994, 4528097; 696985, 4528109; 696980, 
4528117; 696973, 4528131; 696970, 4528130; 696968, 4528129; 696961, 
4528130; 696957, 4528131; 696955, 4528132; 696948, 4528140; 696934, 
4528143; 696927, 4528141; 696918, 4528138; 696910, 4528137; 696899, 
4528138; 696889, 4528138; 696878, 4528139; 696868, 4528138; 696859, 
4528138; 696852, 4528137; 696847, 4528136; 696838, 4528134; 696832, 
4528132; 696827, 4528129; 696823, 4528129; 696820, 4528128; 696824, 
4528116; 696826, 4528112; 696828, 4528106; 696828, 4528099; 696822, 
4528096; 696812, 4528089; 696800, 4528083; 696786, 4528074; 696779, 
4528068; 696771, 4528063; 696763, 4528059; 696758, 4528055; 696756, 
4528052; 696756, 4528046; 696756, 4528038; 696756, 4528033; 696755, 
4528027; 696751, 4528022; 696743, 4528020; 696734, 4528019; 696728, 
4528021; 696719, 4528029; 696713, 4528019; 696713, 4528011; 696714, 
4528004; 696715, 4527998; 696717, 4527993; 696722, 4527987; 696727, 
4527984; 696730, 4527983; 696733, 4527982; 696736, 4527981; 696740, 
4527980; 696744, 4527978; 696745, 4527977; 696746, 4527974; 696746, 
4527974; 696735, 4527969; 696734, 4527968; 696802, 4527881; 696803, 
4527883; 696809, 4527891; 696812, 4527895; 696819, 4527909; 696826, 
4527916; 696827, 4527921; 696829, 4527929; 696831, 4527936; 696837, 
4527946; 696843, 4527955; 696852, 4527968; 696860, 4527981; 696867, 
4527990; 696872, 4527998; 696877, 4528005; 696884, 4528011; 696894, 
4528018; 696901, 4528021; 696909, 4528022; 696917, 4528021; 696923, 
4528018; 696928, 4528016; 696937, 4528014; 696944, 4528014; 696948, 
4528016; 696951, 4528018; 696955, 4528021; 696960, 4528023; 696972, 
4528022; 696980, 4528019; 696984, 4528018; 696986, 4528017; 696992, 
4528017; 696998, 4528015; 697005,

[[Page 843]]

4528012; 697012, 4528009; 697018, 4528008; 697022, 4528005; 697025, 
4527999; 697027, 4527992; 697026, 4527986; 697025, 4527982; 697023, 
4527980; 697019, 4527978; 697017, 4527977; 697007, 4527976; 697000, 
4527963; 696996, 4527958; 696992, 4527952; 696987, 4527944; 696977, 
4527936; 696972, 4527935; 696964, 4527936; 696960, 4527937; 696956, 
4527940; 696953, 4527947; 696954, 4527956; 696959, 4527963; 696965, 
4527967; 696968, 4527970; 696970, 4527974; 696970, 4527978; 696970, 
4527986; 696969, 4527987; 696966, 4527988; 696963, 4527989; 696959, 
4527991; 696957, 4527991; 696945, 4527991; 696943, 4527992; 696940, 
4527993; 696937, 4527994; 696934, 4527996; 696930, 4527996; 696924, 
4527996; 696917, 4527996; 696911, 4527996; 696904, 4527994; 696899, 
4527990; 696894, 4527985; 696887, 4527977; 696881, 4527965; 696876, 
4527957; 696870, 4527944; 696864, 4527931; 696862, 4527922; 696858, 
4527916; 696850, 4527906; 696850, 4527901; 696846, 4527891; 696840, 
4527879; 696835, 4527869; 696825, 4527856; 696824, 4527855; 696872, 
4527797; 696761, 4527763; 696356, 4527948; 696344, 4527943; 696334, 
4527942; 696329, 4527943; 696321, 4527944; 696315, 4527946; 696276, 
4527939; 696274, 4527938; 696269, 4527938; 696264, 4527936; 696256, 
4527936; 696244, 4527936; 696235, 4527937; 696226, 4527940; 696217, 
4527946; 696213, 4527954; 696210, 4527962; 696208, 4527973; 696206, 
4527985; 696208, 4527996; 696212, 4528005; 696219, 4528017; 696224, 
4528024; 696231, 4528032; 696239, 4528040; 696247, 4528048; 696251, 
4528053; 696259, 4528081; 696257, 4528083; 696253, 4528084; 696247, 
4528085; 696242, 4528086; 696229, 4528085; 696219, 4528091; 696213, 
4528096; 696209, 4528101; 696204, 4528108; 696201, 4528114; 696198, 
4528120; 696136, 4528145; 696001, 4528185; 695847, 4528311; 695845, 
4528311; 695835, 4528310; 695827, 4528311; 695818, 4528315; 695811, 
4528320; 695803, 4528325; 695789, 4528338; 695776, 4528351; 695770, 
4528359; 695763, 4528367; 695747, 4528396; 695745, 4528408; 695747, 
4528419; 695751, 4528430; 695757, 4528440; 695762, 4528448; 695773, 
4528461; 695787, 4528477; 695795, 4528482; 695806, 4528491; 695808, 
4528492; 695825, 4528576; 695777, 4528860; 695771, 4528866; 695764, 
4528873; 695755, 4528879; 695747, 4528885; 695738, 4528892; 695733, 
4528897; 695727, 4528903; 695723, 4528910; 695722, 4528911; 695720, 
4528914; 695716, 4528917; 695715, 4528918; 695714, 4528919; 695700, 
4528914; 695681, 4528930; 695672, 4528934; 695658, 4528938; 695649, 
4528942; 695642, 4528946; 695638, 4528951; 695632, 4528953; 695626, 
4528957; 695621, 4528960; 695611, 4528964; 695618, 4528976; 695622, 
4528982; 695627, 4528989; 695633, 4528994; 695638, 4529000; 695647, 
4529007; 695656, 4529011; 695666, 4529015; 695676, 4529020; 695685, 
4529022; 695697, 4529024; 695709, 4529025; 695719, 4529027; 695728, 
4529027; 695737, 4529028; 695746, 4529029; 695754, 4529028; 695760, 
4529028; 695768, 4529026; 695775, 4529022; 695782, 4529016; 695786, 
4529012; 695794, 4529004; 695798, 4528996; 695802, 4528989; 695804, 
4528983; 695804, 4528978; 695806, 4528970; 695809, 4528963; 695810, 
4528957; 695810, 4528954; 695822, 4528886; 695825, 4528870; 695827, 
4528863; 695833, 4528852; 695839, 4528843; 695848, 4528836; 695857, 
4528833; 695867, 4528833; 695878, 4528831; 695891, 4528827; 695900, 
4528824; 695913, 4528822; 695926, 4528821; 695935, 4528820; 695945, 
4528820; 695954, 4528822; 695963, 4528826; 695968, 4528831; 695974, 
4528839; 695980, 4528847; 695984, 4528854; 695987, 4528862; 695990, 
4528872; 695990, 4528884; 695989, 4528895; 695986, 4528909; 695984, 
4528923; 695981, 4528937; 695977, 4528950; 695976, 4528962; 695977, 
4528974; 695978, 4528980; 695980, 4528986; 695983, 4528991; 695986, 
4528996; 695990, 4529000; 695994, 4529000; 696000, 4528997; 696004, 
4528991; 696007, 4528986; 696014, 4528982; 696019, 4528983; 696026, 
4528987; 696029, 4528994; 696031, 4528999; 696033, 4529001; 696038, 
4529005; 696042, 4529005; 696044, 4529004; 696070, 4529040; 696070, 
4529042; 696074, 4529048; 696079, 4529055; 696086, 4529060; 696094, 
4529067; 696101, 4529072; 696108, 4529077; 696116, 4529083; 696138, 
4529097; 696145, 4529105; 696151, 4529113; 696157, 4529123; 696162, 
4529129; 696166, 4529136; 696170, 4529143; 696173, 4529151; 696178, 
4529164; 696182, 4529176; 696184, 4529188; 696185, 4529203; 696187, 
4529219; 696187, 4529234; 696186, 4529244; 696188, 4529269; 696187, 
4529280; 696186, 4529296; 696186, 4529309; 696186, 4529320; 696187, 
4529328; 696187, 4529339; 696190, 4529348; 696191, 4529354; 696191, 
4529361; 696191, 4529365; 696192, 4529367; 696192, 4529371; 696192, 
4529373; 696191, 4529382; 696192, 4529386; 696191, 4529389; 696191, 
4529394; 696191, 4529398; 696185, 4529413; 696181, 4529426; 696183, 
4529438; 696185, 4529448; 696190, 4529456; 696193, 4529459; 696198, 
4529461; 696205, 4529462; 696215, 4529459; 696223, 4529454; 696230, 
4529447; 696238, 4529440; 696246, 4529435; 696257, 4529436; 696266, 
4529439; 696274, 4529444; 696276, 4529447; 696279, 4529450; 696282, 
4529453; 696283, 4529453; 696283, 4529460; 696285, 4529466; 696287, 
4529473; 696289, 4529484; 696291, 4529495; 696295, 4529505; 696301, 
4529515; 696304, 4529520; 696310, 4529522; 696318, 4529522; 696327, 
4529522; 696335, 4529523; 696349, 4529523; 696363, 4529524; 696376, 
4529523; 696382, 4529523.
    (ii) Tract 3b. Land bounded by the following Universal Transverse 
Mercator (UTM) Zone 14N, North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83) 
coordinates (E, N): 695565, 4528354; 695574, 4528353; 695580, 4528356; 
695586, 4528359; 695593, 4528366; 695599, 4528367; 695606, 4528366; 
695613, 4528361; 695619, 4528360; 695624, 4528359; 695632, 4528361; 
695636, 4528361; 695641, 4528362; 695644, 4528361; 695663, 4528357; 
695667, 4528353; 695675, 4528347; 695683, 4528338; 695693, 4528329; 
695700, 4528322; 695707, 4528313; 695714, 4528306; 695722, 4528299; 
695730, 4528293; 695741, 4528289; 695752, 4528286; 695763, 4528282; 
695774, 4528277; 695782, 4528275; 695793, 4528271; 695802, 4528268; 
695811, 4528263; 695814, 4528261; 695818, 4528260; 695822, 4528258; 
695824, 4528256; 695826, 4528253; 695828, 4528245; 695826, 4528238; 
695823, 4528232; 695822, 4528228; 695816, 4528219; 695813, 4528210; 
695812, 4528203; 695811, 4528197; 695812, 4528189; 695814, 4528184; 
695816, 4528179; 695821, 4528175; 695827, 4528170; 695832, 4528167; 
695837, 4528167; 695842, 4528167; 695846, 4528165; 695846, 4528165; 
695848, 4528159; 695942, 4528107; 695946, 4528107; 695954, 4528106; 
695962, 4528102; 695966, 4528098; 695966, 4528094; 695966, 4528088; 
695965, 4528083; 695963, 4528079; 695960, 4528069; 695958, 4528060; 
695960, 4528050; 695963, 4528045; 695973, 4528042; 695981, 4528040; 
695995, 4528039; 696008, 4528037; 696014, 4528033; 696021, 4528028; 
696028, 4528022; 696037, 4528007; 696043, 4527992; 696046, 4527985;

[[Page 844]]

696047, 4527977; 696047, 4527969; 696043, 4527964; 696034, 4527955; 
696024, 4527948; 696014, 4527941; 696003, 4527934; 695996, 4527928; 
695987, 4527924; 695979, 4527917; 695972, 4527911; 695966, 4527904; 
695960, 4527891; 695954, 4527881; 695947, 4527866; 695939, 4527854; 
695928, 4527841; 695919, 4527832; 695909, 4527827; 695899, 4527824; 
695887, 4527822; 695876, 4527818; 695868, 4527809; 695864, 4527799; 
695859, 4527786; 695854, 4527776; 695845, 4527766; 695836, 4527757; 
695826, 4527751; 695811, 4527746; 695795, 4527744; 695783, 4527747; 
695774, 4527753; 695768, 4527757; 695761, 4527761; 695751, 4527760; 
695740, 4527755; 695731, 4527745; 695725, 4527736; 695718, 4527730; 
695708, 4527729; 695698, 4527729; 695685, 4527732; 695676, 4527733; 
695672, 4527733; 695669, 4527730; 695667, 4527728; 695654, 4527714; 
695652, 4527711; 695649, 4527707; 695648, 4527699; 695646, 4527689; 
695642, 4527680; 695638, 4527675; 695631, 4527673; 695625, 4527673; 
695620, 4527675; 695617, 4527677; 695600, 4527673; 695590, 4527663; 
695584, 4527659; 695575, 4527656; 695567, 4527654; 695559, 4527656; 
695553, 4527658; 695547, 4527664; 695541, 4527673; 695536, 4527682; 
695532, 4527693; 695529, 4527702; 695527, 4527706; 695522, 4527712; 
695518, 4527718; 695514, 4527722; 695506, 4527725; 695496, 4527728; 
695487, 4527733; 695483, 4527738; 695478, 4527750; 695476, 4527759; 
695476, 4527768; 695477, 4527785; 695481, 4527799; 695485, 4527813; 
695485, 4527827; 695485, 4527841; 695484, 4527866; 695482, 4527877; 
695480, 4527888; 695478, 4527897; 695476, 4527906; 695472, 4527914; 
695469, 4527921; 695462, 4527928; 695457, 4527936; 695450, 4527947; 
695443, 4527956; 695438, 4527965; 695434, 4527974; 695430, 4527984; 
695429, 4527991; 695429, 4528000; 695431, 4528012; 695432, 4528022; 
695435, 4528042; 695436, 4528050; 695437, 4528058; 695437, 4528065; 
695436, 4528070; 695434, 4528076; 695432, 4528080; 695428, 4528083; 
695422, 4528086; 695414, 4528088; 695404, 4528090; 695395, 4528093; 
695390, 4528094; 695383, 4528097; 695378, 4528100; 695373, 4528107; 
695368, 4528118; 695365, 4528132; 695364, 4528144; 695363, 4528151; 
695362, 4528155; 695360, 4528166; 695357, 4528172; 695354, 4528179; 
695340, 4528211; 695337, 4528220; 695334, 4528228; 695332, 4528237; 
695330, 4528244; 695329, 4528253; 695331, 4528261; 695332, 4528269; 
695334, 4528275; 695336, 4528280; 695340, 4528284; 695343, 4528285; 
695347, 4528287; 695353, 4528287; 695360, 4528288; 695371, 4528287; 
695382, 4528284; 695393, 4528278; 695403, 4528271; 695412, 4528266; 
695424, 4528264; 695434, 4528266; 695443, 4528270; 695450, 4528279; 
695453, 4528289; 695457, 4528300; 695461, 4528308; 695466, 4528314; 
695472, 4528320; 695476, 4528326; 695482, 4528336; 695489, 4528346; 
695495, 4528354; 695502, 4528364; 695507, 4528368; 695515, 4528368; 
695525, 4528365; 695533, 4528363; 695542, 4528361; 695555, 4528356; 
695565, 4528354.
    (iii) Tract 3c. Land bounded by the following Universal Transverse 
Mercator (UTM) Zone 14N, North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83) 
coordinates (E, N): 695160, 4528323; 695149, 4528321; 695141, 4528322; 
695137, 4528325; 695132, 4528330; 695129, 4528332; 695119, 4528334; 
695103, 4528336; 695093, 4528337; 695084, 4528340; 695076, 4528344; 
695070, 4528348; 695064, 4528355; 695060, 4528363; 695058, 4528370; 
695056, 4528380; 695055, 4528388; 695057, 4528396; 695062, 4528410; 
695066, 4528420; 695072, 4528429; 695077, 4528435; 695083, 4528441; 
695091, 4528446; 695098, 4528450; 695107, 4528452; 695115, 4528454; 
695120, 4528455; 695127, 4528456; 695131, 4528455; 695139, 4528455; 
695146, 4528453; 695150, 4528451; 695155, 4528448; 695167, 4528438; 
695175, 4528426; 695180, 4528420; 695184, 4528417; 695187, 4528416; 
695194, 4528412; 695204, 4528405; 695209, 4528403; 695218, 4528401; 
695227, 4528401; 695236, 4528401; 695243, 4528400; 695252, 4528397; 
695259, 4528393; 695264, 4528388; 695268, 4528381; 695269, 4528370; 
695265, 4528362; 695260, 4528356; 695247, 4528349; 695237, 4528345; 
695223, 4528343; 695209, 4528340; 695200, 4528337; 695190, 4528334; 
695180, 4528330; 695169, 4528326; 695160, 4528323.
    (iv) Tract 3d. Land bounded by the following Universal Transverse 
Mercator (UTM) Zone 14N, North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83) 
coordinates (E, N): 695576, 4528864; 695583, 4528864; 695587, 4528864; 
695595, 4528864; 695602, 4528863; 695606, 4528862; 695608, 4528861; 
695613, 4528857; 695628, 4528846; 695637, 4528842; 695645, 4528841; 
695652, 4528840; 695660, 4528839; 695666, 4528838; 695673, 4528832; 
695677, 4528826; 695681, 4528818; 695686, 4528807; 695690, 4528798; 
695693, 4528790; 695696, 4528781; 695698, 4528771; 695698, 4528763; 
695700, 4528752; 695703, 4528743; 695706, 4528737; 695710, 4528728; 
695711, 4528721; 695710, 4528712; 695706, 4528705; 695697, 4528698; 
695688, 4528695; 695675, 4528694; 695662, 4528694; 695648, 4528697; 
695633, 4528700; 695616, 4528704; 695601, 4528706; 695588, 4528707; 
695576, 4528704; 695562, 4528703; 695551, 4528704; 695541, 4528705; 
695535, 4528708; 695531, 4528714; 695530, 4528725; 695533, 4528735; 
695537, 4528741; 695545, 4528748; 695553, 4528751; 695563, 4528754; 
695567, 4528757; 695571, 4528763; 695572.
    (v) Note: Map of Unit 3 is provided at paragraph (7)(vi) of this 
entry.
    (9) Unit 4: Jack Sinn--Rock Creek, Lancaster and Saunders Counties, 
Nebraska.
    (i) Tract 4a. Land bounded by the following Universal Transverse 
Mercator (UTM) Zone 14N, North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83) 
coordinates (E, N): 698696, 4546073; 698716, 4546073; 698725, 4546074; 
698733, 4546072; 698745, 4546068; 698753, 4546065; 698769, 4546054; 
698781, 4546042; 698795, 4546021; 698802, 4546011; 698806, 4546005; 
698811, 4546003; 698816, 4546001; 698820, 4546002; 698827, 4546004; 
698832, 4546006; 698836, 4546006; 698844, 4546005; 698850, 4546004; 
698855, 4546005; 698862, 4546007; 698866, 4546009; 698869, 4546012; 
698874, 4546020; 698877, 4546027; 698883, 4546036; 698887, 4546039; 
698893, 4546042; 698899, 4546045; 698902, 4546045; 698909, 4546044; 
698919, 4546038; 698929, 4546024; 698941, 4546017; 698948, 4546013; 
698955, 4546010; 698960, 4546009; 698966, 4546008; 698969, 4546007; 
698978, 4546005; 698985, 4546009; 698993, 4546013; 699000, 4546017; 
699008, 4546019; 699018, 4546023; 699030, 4546027; 699039, 4546027; 
699046, 4546027; 699053, 4546025; 699061, 4546021; 699072, 4546017; 
699083, 4546016; 699089, 4546012; 699093, 4546007; 699096, 4546002; 
699097, 4545995; 699097, 4545991; 699094, 4545986; 699090, 4545982; 
699086, 4545978; 699080, 4545975; 699072, 4545974; 699068, 4545973; 
699060, 4545971; 699054, 4545968; 699049, 4545965; 699045, 4545959; 
699040,

[[Page 845]]

4545952; 699037, 4545945; 699032, 4545935; 699026, 4545928; 699020, 
4545925; 699011, 4545921; 699001, 4545916; 698995, 4545914; 698988, 
4545914; 698979, 4545913; 698973, 4545909; 698967, 4545906; 698958, 
4545901; 698948, 4545885; 698943, 4545878; 698936, 4545861; 698934, 
4545838; 698946, 4545838; 698961, 4545838; 698970, 4545841; 698982, 
4545846; 698997, 4545852; 699012, 4545860; 699031, 4545867; 699038, 
4545858; 699044, 4545846; 699046, 4545839; 699047, 4545831; 699047, 
4545823; 699045, 4545820; 699042, 4545816; 699039, 4545814; 699030, 
4545812; 699023, 4545807; 699013, 4545806; 699003, 4545806; 698983, 
4545797; 698975, 4545798; 698967, 4545796; 698961, 4545793; 698954, 
4545788; 698951, 4545785; 698944, 4545778; 698934, 4545764; 698912, 
4545736; 698906, 4545722; 698899, 4545717; 698898, 4545710; 698897, 
4545701; 698898, 4545694; 698898, 4545690; 698900, 4545682; 698900, 
4545672; 698901, 4545661; 698902, 4545653; 698903, 4545648; 698903, 
4545648; 698907, 4545646; 698914, 4545647; 698926, 4545651; 698935, 
4545654; 698953, 4545653; 698950, 4545640; 698949, 4545625; 698946, 
4545603; 698943, 4545580; 698939, 4545557; 698934, 4545540; 698926, 
4545524; 698921, 4545512; 698913, 4545507; 698901, 4545503; 698888, 
4545503; 698874, 4545504; 698866, 4545489; 698863, 4545484; 698859, 
4545479; 698854, 4545474; 698850, 4545474; 698845, 4545472; 698838, 
4545471; 698831, 4545469; 698813, 4545460; 698795, 4545444; 698787, 
4545439; 698780, 4545428; 698775, 4545420; 698772, 4545414; 698770, 
4545406; 698770, 4545397; 698771, 4545387; 698774, 4545362; 698779, 
4545340; 698780, 4545335; 698781, 4545329; 698781, 4545321; 698782, 
4545310; 698782, 4545299; 698781, 4545289; 698780, 4545274; 698780, 
4545260; 698782, 4545250; 698784, 4545236; 698785, 4545228; 698783, 
4545215; 698782, 4545207; 698780, 4545191; 698776, 4545175; 698768, 
4545149; 698765, 4545139; 698762, 4545130; 698761, 4545119; 698761, 
4545109; 698762, 4545086; 698763, 4545077; 698764, 4545065; 698763, 
4545058; 698760, 4545049; 698757, 4545044; 698744, 4545028; 698724, 
4545013; 698713, 4545003; 698709, 4544998; 698705, 4544992; 698701, 
4544985; 698699, 4544978; 698697, 4544972; 698697, 4544964; 698694, 
4544959; 698692, 4544956; 698686, 4544953; 698676, 4544946; 698669, 
4544942; 698662, 4544939; 698654, 4544933; 698646, 4544928; 698639, 
4544920; 698634, 4544910; 698628, 4544890; 698620, 4544868; 698628, 
4544864; 698632, 4544860; 698635, 4544852; 698636, 4544846; 698636, 
4544841; 698632, 4544838; 698629, 4544836; 698626, 4544836; 698619, 
4544837; 698610, 4544849; 698516, 4544847; 698412, 4544848; 698414, 
4544857; 698415, 4544870; 698416, 4544873; 698421, 4544895; 698411, 
4544904; 698404, 4544909; 698402, 4544924; 698401, 4545010; 698401, 
4545076; 698400, 4545183; 698403, 4545252; 698403, 4545337; 698403, 
4545408; 698401, 4545495; 698402, 4545558; 698406, 4545612; 698403, 
4545663; 698402, 4545729; 698404, 4545810; 698406, 4545866; 698406, 
4545890; 698406, 4545932; 698405, 4545976; 698407, 4546025; 698419, 
4546030; 698426, 4546032; 698430, 4546034; 698444, 4546040; 698453, 
4546042; 698466, 4546043; 698478, 4546040; 698495, 4546033; 698504, 
4546029; 698509, 4546030; 698517, 4546031; 698523, 4546035; 698528, 
4546037; 698533, 4546043; 698538, 4546048; 698542, 4546053; 698549, 
4546060; 698556, 4546069; 698562, 4546076; 698573, 4546086; 698586, 
4546095; 698602, 4546098; 698615, 4546101; 698625, 4546104; 698634, 
4546102; 698640, 4546101; 698650, 4546097; 698658, 4546092; 698667, 
4546086; 698674, 4546080; 698684, 4546075; 698696, 4546073.
    (ii) Tract 4b. Land bounded by the following Universal Transverse 
Mercator (UTM) Zone 14N, North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83) 
coordinates (E, N): 700784, 4546113; 700789, 4546099; 700792, 4546088; 
700794, 4546075; 700791, 4546060; 700787, 4546048; 700783, 4546038; 
700774, 4546032; 700758, 4546027; 700740, 4546022; 700727, 4546015; 
700715, 4546004; 700704, 4545992; 700695, 4545976; 700689, 4545963; 
700682, 4545950; 700674, 4545938; 700660, 4545924; 700646, 4545915; 
700632, 4545907; 700612, 4545902; 700591, 4545899; 700573, 4545895; 
700557, 4545890; 700547, 4545880; 700540, 4545867; 700538, 4545853; 
700537, 4545839; 700531, 4545824; 700524, 4545818; 700506, 4545810; 
700493, 4545806; 700478, 4545806; 700466, 4545808; 700459, 4545814; 
700452, 4545822; 700445, 4545832; 700439, 4545839; 700429, 4545843; 
700415, 4545844; 700402, 4545842; 700390, 4545844; 700380, 4545850; 
700373, 4545858; 700366, 4545865; 700359, 4545872; 700352, 4545874; 
700342, 4545877; 700318, 4545875; 700307, 4545871; 700293, 4545865; 
700281, 4545861; 700268, 4545856; 700256, 4545856; 700244, 4545860; 
700237, 4545861; 700215, 4545858; 700200, 4545855; 700179, 4545843; 
700165, 4545836; 700153, 4545832; 700142, 4545833; 700129, 4545831; 
700116, 4545825; 700109, 4545819; 700094, 4545809; 700081, 4545806; 
700066, 4545809; 700049, 4545807; 700038, 4545805; 700027, 4545805; 
700018, 4545808; 700016, 4545813; 700015, 4545822; 700017, 4545841; 
700023, 4545855; 700027, 4545866; 700034, 4545874; 700045, 4545879; 
700059, 4545879; 700069, 4545881; 700083, 4545887; 700097, 4545894; 
700112, 4545899; 700126, 4545902; 700144, 4545905; 700163, 4545906; 
700189, 4545903; 700209, 4545901; 700229, 4545900; 700249, 4545902; 
700264, 4545908; 700278, 4545915; 700288, 4545922; 700300, 4545928; 
700317, 4545936; 700361, 4545952; 700384, 4545961; 700398, 4545968; 
700411, 4545974; 700422, 4545982; 700433, 4545989; 700443, 4545994; 
700454, 4545994; 700466, 4545993; 700481, 4545994; 700490, 4545996; 
700497, 4546000; 700500, 4546008; 700500, 4546018; 700499, 4546028; 
700496, 4546037; 700491, 4546044; 700481, 4546050; 700468, 4546052; 
700458, 4546055; 700449, 4546060; 700445, 4546067; 700442, 4546077; 
700443, 4546089; 700444, 4546095; 700450, 4546102; 700468, 4546109; 
700477, 4546113; 700486, 4546115; 700495, 4546115; 700508, 4546116; 
700519, 4546118; 700531, 4546120; 700545, 4546123; 700559, 4546125; 
700572, 4546123; 700581, 4546122; 700591, 4546124; 700598, 4546126; 
700605, 4546128; 700615, 4546132; 700637, 4546116; 700652, 4546111; 
700668, 4546112; 700677, 4546114; 700688, 4546118; 700694, 4546123; 
700699, 4546129; 700704, 4546132; 700713, 4546135; 700727, 4546136; 
700740, 4546133; 700752, 4546131; 700763, 4546129; 700773, 4546127; 
700779, 4546122; 700784, 4546113.
    (iii) Tract 4c. Land bounded by the following Universal Transverse 
Mercator (UTM) Zone 14N, North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83) 
coordinates (E, N): 699777, 4546178; 699783, 4546168; 699790, 4546156; 
699798, 4546147; 699810, 4546141; 699822, 4546136; 699830, 4546132; 
699841, 4546126; 699849, 4546120; 699855, 4546111; 699857, 4546100; 
699858, 4546088; 699853, 4546074; 699845, 4546058; 699834, 4546045; 
699826, 4546036;

[[Page 846]]

699816, 4546025; 699803, 4546014; 699794, 4546005; 699784, 4545993; 
699776, 4545979; 699773, 4545968; 699772, 4545962; 699775, 4545951; 
699779, 4545946; 699787, 4545940; 699795, 4545937; 699798, 4545937; 
699801, 4545934; 699805, 4545929; 699784, 4545920; 699778, 4545920; 
699770, 4545918; 699766, 4545914; 699762, 4545911; 699746, 4545927; 
699744, 4545930; 699740, 4545939; 699739, 4545947; 699742, 4545963; 
699748, 4545977; 699754, 4545988; 699763, 4545998; 699775, 4546009; 
699785, 4546019; 699793, 4546026; 699801, 4546036; 699807, 4546044; 
699811, 4546050; 699815, 4546060; 699821, 4546068; 699825, 4546078; 
699826, 4546083; 699826, 4546090; 699825, 4546097; 699820, 4546103; 
699809, 4546109; 699797, 4546110; 699788, 4546113; 699782, 4546122; 
699779, 4546133; 699775, 4546138; 699768, 4546140; 699760, 4546144; 
699756, 4546150; 699754, 4546158; 699754, 4546165; 699753, 4546170; 
699752, 4546170; 699744, 4546172; 699733, 4546169; 699724, 4546161; 
699717, 4546154; 699709, 4546149; 699696, 4546145; 699684, 4546142; 
699671, 4546139; 699661, 4546135; 699655, 4546129; 699646, 4546118; 
699639, 4546105; 699639, 4546098; 699643, 4546081; 699644, 4546073; 
699642, 4546065; 699641, 4546059; 699634, 4546045; 699627, 4546029; 
699623, 4546017; 699621, 4546002; 699618, 4545991; 699616, 4545983; 
699615, 4545977; 699611, 4545972; 699608, 4545968; 699602, 4545963; 
699600, 4545963; 699594, 4545963; 699588, 4545962; 699583, 4545964; 
699577, 4545965; 699571, 4545968; 699565, 4545972; 699560, 4545978; 
699555, 4545986; 699552, 4545991; 699546, 4546008; 699542, 4546024; 
699540, 4546038; 699536, 4546055; 699527, 4546075; 699521, 4546089; 
699511, 4546100; 699504, 4546107; 699497, 4546111; 699484, 4546114; 
699457, 4546112; 699449, 4546112; 699439, 4546109; 699428, 4546104; 
699423, 4546100; 699418, 4546095; 699414, 4546089; 699409, 4546081; 
699406, 4546066; 699404, 4546061; 699402, 4546059; 699399, 4546060; 
699395, 4546062; 699392, 4546063; 699390, 4546068; 699387, 4546076; 
699386, 4546084; 699386, 4546094; 699386, 4546102; 699388, 4546113; 
699395, 4546124; 699399, 4546131; 699403, 4546136; 699410, 4546142; 
699433, 4546149; 699455, 4546150; 699467, 4546154; 699481, 4546152; 
699499, 4546146; 699506, 4546143; 699513, 4546138; 699523, 4546129; 
699532, 4546120; 699537, 4546115; 699542, 4546104; 699547, 4546095; 
699550, 4546082; 699555, 4546069; 699561, 4546052; 699572, 4546024; 
699579, 4546008; 699584, 4546003; 699588, 4546000; 699601, 4546001; 
699601, 4546029; 699604, 4546036; 699606, 4546041; 699611, 4546053; 
699615, 4546065; 699616, 4546080; 699616, 4546097; 699617, 4546110; 
699619, 4546121; 699625, 4546131; 699632, 4546141; 699643, 4546150; 
699658, 4546154; 699667, 4546158; 699681, 4546165; 699691, 4546174; 
699700, 4546182; 699712, 4546189; 699722, 4546195; 699731, 4546198; 
699742, 4546199; 699753, 4546199; 699760, 4546194; 699767, 4546186; 
699777, 4546178.
    (iv) Tract 4d. Land bounded by the following Universal Transverse 
Mercator (UTM) Zone 14N, North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83) 
coordinates (E, N): 701389, 4546232; 701381, 4546222; 701438, 4546226; 
701441, 4546228; 701446, 4546228; 701448, 4546228; 701457, 4546225; 
701461, 4546231; 701468, 4546239; 701472, 4546242; 701474, 4546244; 
701479, 4546248; 701482, 4546249; 701488, 4546249; 701492, 4546248; 
701495, 4546249; 701495, 4546249; 701505, 4546261; 701511, 4546263; 
701518, 4546264; 701525, 4546264; 701533, 4546261; 701539, 4546255; 
701544, 4546245; 701548, 4546238; 701555, 4546233; 701565, 4546229; 
701573, 4546227; 701580, 4546223; 701586, 4546218; 701589, 4546212; 
701589, 4546206; 701582, 4546198; 701583, 4546185; 701583, 4546184; 
701596, 4546181; 701599, 4546177; 701600, 4546158; 701598, 4546144; 
701597, 4546134; 701594, 4546123; 701591, 4546115; 701586, 4546108; 
701579, 4546104; 701567, 4546101; 701551, 4546099; 701537, 4546098; 
701521, 4546092; 701511, 4546082; 701503, 4546070; 701493, 4546055; 
701489, 4546048; 701481, 4546038; 701474, 4546028; 701467, 4546018; 
701460, 4546009; 701452, 4546001; 701447, 4545998; 701444, 4545995; 
701439, 4545995; 701435, 4545999; 701432, 4546005; 701429, 4546010; 
701427, 4546018; 701425, 4546023; 701427, 4546031; 701431, 4546039; 
701436, 4546047; 701440, 4546055; 701443, 4546062; 701444, 4546070; 
701444, 4546081; 701443, 4546084; 701436, 4546089; 701429, 4546092; 
701422, 4546097; 701418, 4546104; 701414, 4546116; 701413, 4546124; 
701414, 4546135; 701418, 4546148; 701421, 4546155; 701425, 4546164; 
701428, 4546171; 701431, 4546176; 701432, 4546180; 701432, 4546188; 
701432, 4546189; 701369, 4546194; 701369, 4546194; 701357, 4546193; 
701343, 4546193; 701331, 4546194; 701322, 4546195; 701275, 4546175; 
701283, 4546167; 701290, 4546157; 701299, 4546147; 701308, 4546138; 
701315, 4546130; 701320, 4546123; 701323, 4546119; 701326, 4546110; 
701329, 4546098; 701329, 4546091; 701340, 4546095; 701342, 4546094; 
701345, 4546092; 701347, 4546090; 701349, 4546085; 701352, 4546079; 
701353, 4546068; 701351, 4546056; 701348, 4546043; 701342, 4546027; 
701333, 4546014; 701322, 4546003; 701306, 4545995; 701291, 4545988; 
701270, 4545982; 701250, 4545977; 701228, 4545972; 701208, 4545967; 
701185, 4545960; 701165, 4545955; 701148, 4545951; 701139, 4545948; 
701132, 4545947; 701126, 4545949; 701122, 4545951; 701120, 4545954; 
701119, 4545958; 701119, 4545963; 701131, 4545970; 701145, 4545976; 
701159, 4545982; 701169, 4545990; 701174, 4545996; 701177, 4546003; 
701181, 4546010; 701191, 4546014; 701207, 4546018; 701216, 4546022; 
701223, 4546028; 701226, 4546034; 701224, 4546042; 701219, 4546046; 
701209, 4546051; 701207, 4546055; 701206, 4546061; 701211, 4546069; 
701221, 4546072; 701231, 4546073; 701240, 4546074; 701252, 4546077; 
701248, 4546092; 701248, 4546100; 701248, 4546109; 701250, 4546119; 
701251, 4546125; 701252, 4546130; 701253, 4546135; 701252, 4546142; 
701249, 4546147; 701242, 4546154; 701229, 4546161; 701216, 4546167; 
701205, 4546172; 701195, 4546177; 701187, 4546180; 701182, 4546182; 
701180, 4546184; 701180, 4546187; 701178, 4546191; 701179, 4546194; 
701182, 4546198; 701188, 4546202; 701199, 4546202; 701209, 4546200; 
701220, 4546197; 701292, 4546219; 701292, 4546222; 701295, 4546226; 
701302, 4546230; 701307, 4546230; 701312, 4546229; 701317, 4546228; 
701321, 4546225; 701328, 4546224; 701336, 4546219; 701344, 4546231; 
701344, 4546236; 701342, 4546241; 701341, 4546245; 701341, 4546254; 
701344, 4546264; 701347, 4546272; 701353, 4546279; 701361, 4546284; 
701369, 4546288; 701378, 4546290; 701385, 4546290; 701392, 4546289; 
701397, 4546286; 701402, 4546280; 701404, 4546274; 701405, 4546267; 
701405, 4546260; 701402, 4546251; 701398, 4546243; 701394, 4546237; 
701389, 4546232.
    (v) Tract 4e. Land bounded by the following Universal Transverse 
Mercator (UTM)

[[Page 847]]

Zone 14N, North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83) coordinates (E, N): 
703097, 4546215; 703095, 4546208; 703095, 4546196; 703096, 4546183; 
703098, 4546171; 703101, 4546160; 703107, 4546150; 703112, 4546145; 
703122, 4546142; 703130, 4546142; 703136, 4546143; 703153, 4546145; 
703164, 4546146; 703171, 4546147; 703179, 4546148; 703189, 4546150; 
703194, 4546149; 703198, 4546146; 703200, 4546143; 703202, 4546138; 
703204, 4546131; 703204, 4546124; 703203, 4546118; 703201, 4546112; 
703199, 4546106; 703198, 4546100; 703202, 4546086; 703205, 4546074; 
703205, 4546074; 703161, 4546071; 703137, 4546072; 703137, 4546043; 
703157, 4546008; 703170, 4545997; 703168, 4545988; 703169, 4545981; 
703175, 4545979; 703181, 4545977; 703189, 4545974; 703197, 4545969; 
703198, 4545963; 703201, 4545949; 703208, 4545936; 703213, 4545921; 
703212, 4545906; 703208, 4545899; 703199, 4545894; 703191, 4545893; 
703185, 4545895; 703132, 4545967; 703084, 4546028; 703072, 4546066; 
703041, 4546051; 703009, 4546024; 702961, 4545994; 702924, 4545972; 
702914, 4545880; 702925, 4545838; 702923, 4545836; 702921, 4545825; 
702920, 4545812; 702922, 4545794; 702928, 4545784; 702930, 4545777; 
702929, 4545769; 702925, 4545763; 702921, 4545757; 702915, 4545754; 
702908, 4545750; 702899, 4545746; 702887, 4545742; 702876, 4545740; 
702865, 4545739; 702854, 4545741; 702837, 4545752; 702830, 4545759; 
702827, 4545766; 702826, 4545779; 702826, 4545780; 702856, 4545857; 
702872, 4545878; 702862, 4545934; 702848, 4545989; 702801, 4546000; 
702766, 4545977; 702742, 4545931; 702746, 4545886; 702751, 4545874; 
702750, 4545869; 702751, 4545853; 702753, 4545840; 702759, 4545827; 
702763, 4545819; 702762, 4545814; 702758, 4545808; 702754, 4545804; 
702747, 4545804; 702738, 4545807; 702731, 4545812; 702727, 4545818; 
702722, 4545829; 702717, 4545838; 702710, 4545844; 702705, 4545847; 
702693, 4545848; 702625, 4545934; 702526, 4545955; 702459, 4545968; 
702386, 4545999; 702363, 4545999; 702362, 4546000; 702357, 4546011; 
702352, 4546016; 702349, 4546021; 702344, 4546025; 702337, 4546029; 
702332, 4546031; 702321, 4546034; 702315, 4546036; 702307, 4546037; 
702301, 4546038; 702280, 4546038; 702266, 4546038; 702256, 4546036; 
702247, 4546032; 702238, 4546029; 702233, 4546024; 702229, 4546015; 
702229, 4546009; 702231, 4546003; 702235, 4545996; 702242, 4545992; 
702250, 4545989; 702261, 4545988; 702276, 4545986; 702290, 4545981; 
702295, 4545974; 702294, 4545969; 702290, 4545964; 702290, 4545960; 
702293, 4545955; 702302, 4545945; 702310, 4545936; 702317, 4545921; 
702318, 4545915; 702315, 4545907; 702313, 4545904; 702307, 4545902; 
702296, 4545901; 702283, 4545901; 702270, 4545902; 702258, 4545903; 
702245, 4545907; 702237, 4545911; 702234, 4545916; 702231, 4545927; 
702229, 4545939; 702227, 4545948; 702223, 4545957; 702217, 4545971; 
702210, 4545981; 702202, 4545988; 702192, 4545991; 702184, 4545993; 
702173, 4545994; 702159, 4545996; 702146, 4545999; 702136, 4546005; 
702127, 4546015; 702118, 4546023; 702108, 4546026; 702097, 4546025; 
702082, 4546025; 702073, 4546026; 702063, 4546031; 702059, 4546037; 
702049, 4546044; 702036, 4546047; 702024, 4546047; 702013, 4546044; 
701997, 4546040; 701981, 4546038; 701971, 4546039; 701961, 4546044; 
701953, 4546049; 701945, 4546054; 701935, 4546060; 701924, 4546066; 
701912, 4546073; 701900, 4546079; 701892, 4546086; 701891, 4546087; 
701886, 4546097; 701887, 4546104; 701890, 4546110; 701899, 4546114; 
701909, 4546117; 701915, 4546121; 701980, 4546084; 702085, 4546064; 
702113, 4546063; 702113, 4546063; 702113, 4546059; 702114, 4546056; 
702117, 4546054; 702119, 4546053; 702126, 4546052; 702133, 4546052; 
702140, 4546052; 702151, 4546054; 702159, 4546055; 702166, 4546057; 
702176, 4546061; 702184, 4546069; 702188, 4546075; 702187, 4546079; 
702184, 4546086; 702219, 4546104; 702250, 4546155; 702334, 4546162; 
702350, 4546138; 702357, 4546132; 702365, 4546130; 702379, 4546131; 
702392, 4546132; 702404, 4546130; 702415, 4546124; 702422, 4546117; 
702429, 4546110; 702450, 4546096; 702462, 4546097; 702476, 4546097; 
702490, 4546099; 702505, 4546099; 702516, 4546097; 702530, 4546096; 
702546, 4546095; 702562, 4546094; 702576, 4546096; 702590, 4546099; 
702607, 4546103; 702653, 4546101; 702665, 4546099; 702682, 4546100; 
702693, 4546103; 702710, 4546107; 702728, 4546110; 702741, 4546110; 
702758, 4546109; 702770, 4546104; 702780, 4546097; 702789, 4546089; 
702801, 4546085; 702816, 4546089; 702823, 4546094; 702828, 4546101; 
702838, 4546106; 702849, 4546109; 702860, 4546112; 702870, 4546117; 
702881, 4546126; 702887, 4546132; 702965, 4546131; 703012, 4546142; 
703030, 4546165; 703029, 4546188; 703041, 4546209; 703063, 4546216; 
703071, 4546209; 703072, 4546216; 703074, 4546227; 703077, 4546238; 
703079, 4546247; 703085, 4546253; 703094, 4546258; 703104, 4546260; 
703112, 4546261; 703119, 4546262; 703126, 4546264; 703130, 4546264; 
703136, 4546266; 703138, 4546268; 703140, 4546273; 703139, 4546281; 
703139, 4546289; 703140, 4546298; 703141, 4546306; 703143, 4546312; 
703146, 4546314; 703152, 4546317; 703156, 4546317; 703161, 4546317; 
703166, 4546315; 703169, 4546312; 703169, 4546306; 703168, 4546297; 
703169, 4546285; 703168, 4546271; 703162, 4546258; 703153, 4546249; 
703145, 4546244; 703133, 4546240; 703119, 4546234; 703110, 4546228; 
703104, 4546223; 703097, 4546215.
    (vi) Tract 4f. Land bounded by the following Universal Transverse 
Mercator (UTM) Zone 14N, North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83) 
coordinates (E, N): 701018, 4546521; 701025, 4546516; 701031, 4546509; 
701035, 4546497; 701036, 4546487; 701039, 4546475; 701045, 4546464; 
701054, 4546454; 701069, 4546442; 701085, 4546431; 701121, 4546421; 
701139, 4546419; 701158, 4546417; 701174, 4546416; 701187, 4546415; 
701198, 4546413; 701208, 4546412; 701217, 4546408; 701220, 4546405; 
701222, 4546401; 701223, 4546396; 701223, 4546392; 701223, 4546388; 
701223, 4546384; 701223, 4546382; 701222, 4546378; 701211, 4546385; 
701207, 4546385; 701202, 4546384; 701196, 4546380; 701190, 4546369; 
701186, 4546360; 701180, 4546350; 701173, 4546344; 701167, 4546340; 
701156, 4546338; 701144, 4546337; 701137, 4546337; 701128, 4546338; 
701118, 4546336; 701108, 4546335; 701101, 4546336; 701096, 4546338; 
701086, 4546338; 701081, 4546324; 701077, 4546318; 701070, 4546312; 
701061, 4546306; 701049, 4546302; 701038, 4546299; 701027, 4546300; 
701016, 4546300; 701009, 4546295; 701003, 4546286; 700997, 4546280; 
700990, 4546274; 700979, 4546272; 700970, 4546273; 700963, 4546276; 
700953, 4546279; 700944, 4546280; 700935, 4546279; 700929, 4546277; 
700926, 4546274; 700918, 4546268; 700927, 4546263; 700930, 4546260; 
700932, 4546254; 700933, 4546247; 700931, 4546242; 700924, 4546236; 
700912, 4546231; 700903, 4546229; 700890, 4546228; 700879, 4546229; 
700866, 4546229; 700859, 4546230; 700854, 4546233; 700852, 4546236;

[[Page 848]]

700850, 4546243; 700851, 4546248; 700851, 4546255; 700848, 4546259; 
700836, 4546260; 700829, 4546259; 700822, 4546258; 700815, 4546257; 
700810, 4546258; 700809, 4546259; 700781, 4546246; 700768, 4546248; 
700763, 4546251; 700757, 4546258; 700750, 4546265; 700743, 4546268; 
700729, 4546271; 700718, 4546270; 700705, 4546268; 700695, 4546266; 
700684, 4546263; 700675, 4546258; 700670, 4546251; 700667, 4546243; 
700666, 4546231; 700662, 4546223; 700656, 4546217; 700645, 4546214; 
700635, 4546210; 700623, 4546199; 700614, 4546191; 700583, 4546171; 
700575, 4546169; 700566, 4546166; 700560, 4546164; 700554, 4546163; 
700547, 4546162; 700542, 4546166; 700540, 4546171; 700537, 4546178; 
700535, 4546184; 700533, 4546189; 700531, 4546193; 700528, 4546196; 
700525, 4546199; 700522, 4546200; 700517, 4546203; 700500, 4546195; 
700493, 4546194; 700485, 4546193; 700474, 4546192; 700466, 4546192; 
700459, 4546194; 700454, 4546197; 700448, 4546200; 700441, 4546201; 
700434, 4546199; 700425, 4546195; 700417, 4546191; 700408, 4546187; 
700398, 4546181; 700392, 4546179; 700385, 4546176; 700378, 4546174; 
700374, 4546173; 700373, 4546174; 700357, 4546150; 700351, 4546147; 
700341, 4546145; 700329, 4546142; 700320, 4546140; 700308, 4546138; 
700299, 4546133; 700292, 4546128; 700282, 4546124; 700275, 4546115; 
700271, 4546110; 700267, 4546107; 700261, 4546101; 700256, 4546099; 
700248, 4546096; 700245, 4546096; 700231, 4546087; 700223, 4546087; 
700214, 4546088; 700204, 4546090; 700200, 4546092; 700196, 4546095; 
700188, 4546100; 700182, 4546104; 700177, 4546107; 700169, 4546107; 
700162, 4546107; 700156, 4546108; 700145, 4546113; 700144, 4546112; 
700140, 4546111; 700134, 4546111; 700128, 4546114; 700125, 4546119; 
700125, 4546120; 700104, 4546121; 700097, 4546122; 700092, 4546126; 
700088, 4546135; 700085, 4546141; 700083, 4546151; 700081, 4546159; 
700078, 4546169; 700073, 4546182; 700066, 4546193; 700055, 4546203; 
700048, 4546210; 700040, 4546217; 700033, 4546222; 700028, 4546224; 
700025, 4546227; 700025, 4546229; 699990, 4546189; 699988, 4546182; 
699979, 4546176; 699969, 4546173; 699961, 4546173; 699955, 4546176; 
699945, 4546176; 699936, 4546186; 699929, 4546188; 699921, 4546187; 
699910, 4546182; 699900, 4546179; 699893, 4546177; 699886, 4546178; 
699881, 4546182; 699880, 4546187; 699882, 4546192; 699886, 4546198; 
699891, 4546201; 699895, 4546203; 699922, 4546240; 699916, 4546237; 
699908, 4546239; 699903, 4546244; 699896, 4546245; 699882, 4546240; 
699874, 4546241; 699866, 4546246; 699859, 4546257; 699854, 4546267; 
699848, 4546277; 699843, 4546283; 699839, 4546287; 699830, 4546290; 
699818, 4546288; 699807, 4546282; 699798, 4546277; 699787, 4546278; 
699778, 4546282; 699768, 4546283; 699756, 4546277; 699744, 4546267; 
699735, 4546260; 699722, 4546254; 699698, 4546250; 699689, 4546252; 
699679, 4546255; 699670, 4546258; 699662, 4546259; 699651, 4546256; 
699642, 4546249; 699635, 4546240; 699633, 4546236; 699628, 4546229; 
699621, 4546225; 699615, 4546223; 699601, 4546223; 699595, 4546220; 
699595, 4546220; 699587, 4546219; 699579, 4546216; 699572, 4546208; 
699568, 4546204; 699559, 4546200; 699549, 4546196; 699529, 4546192; 
699521, 4546192; 699513, 4546193; 699503, 4546192; 699480, 4546195; 
699457, 4546199; 699423, 4546197; 699408, 4546199; 699400, 4546199; 
699397, 4546200; 699382, 4546202; 699372, 4546202; 699367, 4546202; 
699364, 4546202; 699361, 4546200; 699359, 4546200; 699350, 4546195; 
699344, 4546192; 699316, 4546183; 699310, 4546184; 699308, 4546183; 
699299, 4546181; 699293, 4546178; 699285, 4546174; 699272, 4546169; 
699261, 4546166; 699253, 4546166; 699248, 4546166; 699243, 4546166; 
699238, 4546166; 699229, 4546163; 699215, 4546155; 699209, 4546152; 
699205, 4546152; 699202, 4546153; 699199, 4546158; 699193, 4546165; 
699190, 4546167; 699182, 4546174; 699174, 4546176; 699166, 4546179; 
699158, 4546179; 699144, 4546177; 699119, 4546173; 699115, 4546173; 
699110, 4546173; 699105, 4546175; 699102, 4546176; 699099, 4546180; 
699096, 4546184; 699095, 4546190; 699094, 4546196; 699093, 4546202; 
699090, 4546203; 699087, 4546204; 699083, 4546202; 699070, 4546197; 
699064, 4546195; 699059, 4546193; 699053, 4546189; 699033, 4546176; 
699028, 4546171; 699025, 4546167; 699020, 4546164; 699017, 4546162; 
699011, 4546159; 699005, 4546158; 698999, 4546158; 698994, 4546158; 
698984, 4546160; 698980, 4546161; 698977, 4546161; 698973, 4546160; 
698969, 4546159; 698957, 4546150; 698948, 4546142; 698946, 4546140; 
698942, 4546138; 698938, 4546138; 698927, 4546141; 698917, 4546145; 
698906, 4546148; 698898, 4546153; 698891, 4546158; 698889, 4546160; 
698887, 4546164; 698886, 4546170; 698884, 4546181; 698887, 4546190; 
698890, 4546193; 698893, 4546193; 698903, 4546192; 698916, 4546190; 
698934, 4546190; 698949, 4546191; 698960, 4546191; 698971, 4546194; 
698982, 4546196; 698993, 4546198; 699008, 4546205; 699018, 4546210; 
699022, 4546215; 699023, 4546220; 699024, 4546226; 699022, 4546234; 
699019, 4546239; 699013, 4546244; 699006, 4546247; 699000, 4546248; 
698989, 4546246; 698976, 4546247; 698969, 4546239; 698962, 4546235; 
698956, 4546234; 698953, 4546234; 698928, 4546234; 698905, 4546232; 
698883, 4546230; 698863, 4546231; 698854, 4546231; 698849, 4546230; 
698845, 4546227; 698839, 4546223; 698821, 4546208; 698816, 4546202; 
698809, 4546197; 698796, 4546193; 698780, 4546190; 698769, 4546188; 
698762, 4546190; 698754, 4546189; 698747, 4546187; 698739, 4546181; 
698733, 4546178; 698723, 4546177; 698717, 4546176; 698709, 4546176; 
698702, 4546180; 698694, 4546184; 698685, 4546190; 698676, 4546198; 
698669, 4546207; 698662, 4546215; 698653, 4546223; 698647, 4546227; 
698638, 4546233; 698623, 4546240; 698613, 4546245; 698603, 4546250; 
698593, 4546251; 698584, 4546252; 698571, 4546251; 698559, 4546246; 
698559, 4546242; 698559, 4546236; 698557, 4546231; 698554, 4546224; 
698552, 4546220; 698547, 4546211; 698543, 4546205; 698538, 4546197; 
698534, 4546192; 698534, 4546188; 698535, 4546182; 698537, 4546174; 
698540, 4546167; 698544, 4546162; 698550, 4546159; 698556, 4546158; 
698572, 4546159; 698559, 4546133; 698549, 4546115; 698541, 4546105; 
698524, 4546096; 698501, 4546091; 698468, 4546083; 698446, 4546070; 
698434, 4546065; 698424, 4546062; 698416, 4546063; 698410, 4546063; 
698408, 4546141; 698410, 4546191; 698411, 4546216; 698412, 4546240; 
698413, 4546250; 698411, 4546265; 698408, 4546282; 698405, 4546293; 
698401, 4546313; 698403, 4546329; 698393, 4546334; 698391, 4546336; 
698388, 4546342; 698386, 4546349; 698385, 4546361; 698385, 4546371; 
698392, 4546378; 698395, 4546383; 698396, 4546386; 698396, 4546390; 
698395, 4546402; 698391, 4546427; 698390, 4546448; 698390, 4546460; 
698394, 4546470; 698403, 4546478; 698411, 4546482; 698419, 4546486; 
698438, 4546485; 698460, 4546486; 698480, 4546489; 698506, 4546492; 
698533, 4546494; 698540, 4546495; 698551, 4546497; 698559, 4546496; 
698566, 4546493; 698577, 4546482;

[[Page 849]]

698584, 4546475; 698591, 4546470; 698595, 4546468; 698603, 4546467; 
698611, 4546466; 698618, 4546471; 698640, 4546484; 698648, 4546488; 
698657, 4546495; 698669, 4546497; 698679, 4546498; 698687, 4546496; 
698695, 4546493; 698701, 4546489; 698709, 4546488; 698742, 4546485; 
698777, 4546487; 698832, 4546488; 698891, 4546491; 698944, 4546492; 
699004, 4546496; 699049, 4546494; 699110, 4546500; 699218, 4546503; 
699320, 4546505; 699421, 4546505; 699587, 4546513; 699988, 4546508; 
699988, 4546506; 700033, 4546506; 700033, 4546506; 700039, 4546507; 
700238, 4546510; 700245, 4546509; 700252, 4546502; 700261, 4546492; 
700270, 4546487; 700277, 4546480; 700287, 4546473; 700301, 4546467; 
700308, 4546460; 700318, 4546453; 700330, 4546447; 700343, 4546446; 
700355, 4546440; 700365, 4546432; 700374, 4546429; 700386, 4546428; 
700400, 4546426; 700413, 4546430; 700420, 4546432; 700425, 4546436; 
700428, 4546442; 700430, 4546454; 700429, 4546468; 700429, 4546477; 
700431, 4546487; 700435, 4546496; 700442, 4546503; 700453, 4546507; 
700464, 4546509; 700474, 4546510; 700486, 4546511; 700489, 4546511; 
700534, 4546513; 700546, 4546512; 700556, 4546512; 700564, 4546511; 
700565, 4546511; 700565, 4546508; 700566, 4546503; 700563, 4546499; 
700559, 4546488; 700557, 4546481; 700559, 4546471; 700564, 4546463; 
700572, 4546458; 700586, 4546460; 700597, 4546458; 700606, 4546453; 
700612, 4546443; 700617, 4546436; 700632, 4546431; 700664, 4546430; 
700675, 4546427; 700687, 4546425; 700695, 4546421; 700708, 4546417; 
700725, 4546416; 700745, 4546414; 700760, 4546415; 700774, 4546417; 
700788, 4546420; 700801, 4546423; 700810, 4546426; 700817, 4546430; 
700820, 4546436; 700820, 4546446; 700818, 4546456; 700819, 4546469; 
700823, 4546482; 700824, 4546493; 700825, 4546503; 700826, 4546511; 
700829, 4546517; 700838, 4546523; 700849, 4546523; 700896, 4546521; 
700919, 4546524; 700936, 4546525; 700945, 4546525; 700949, 4546525; 
700966, 4546525; 700981, 4546525; 701000, 4546524; 701010, 4546524; 
701018, 4546521; 699928, 4546248; 699925, 4546244; 699932, 4546252; 
699933, 4546259; 699932, 4546257; 699928, 4546248.
    (vii) Tract 4g. Land bounded by the following Universal Transverse 
Mercator (UTM) Zone 14N, North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83) 
coordinates (E, N): 701602, 4546442; 701600, 4546428; 701597, 4546415; 
701592, 4546405; 701586, 4546395; 701578, 4546386; 701567, 4546378; 
701556, 4546373; 701547, 4546372; 701534, 4546374; 701521, 4546377; 
701505, 4546383; 701494, 4546389; 701484, 4546395; 701473, 4546402; 
701460, 4546408; 701445, 4546411; 701431, 4546414; 701415, 4546414; 
701401, 4546414; 701391, 4546415; 701384, 4546416; 701377, 4546418; 
701372, 4546421; 701369, 4546424; 701367, 4546428; 701367, 4546432; 
701371, 4546435; 701379, 4546437; 701389, 4546437; 701398, 4546437; 
701410, 4546437; 701422, 4546436; 701429, 4546435; 701437, 4546433; 
701447, 4546432; 701456, 4546432; 701475, 4546434; 701493, 4546438; 
701512, 4546444; 701527, 4546451; 701539, 4546460; 701547, 4546468; 
701553, 4546478; 701558, 4546489; 701561, 4546500; 701563, 4546510; 
701565, 4546519; 701568, 4546525; 701570, 4546531; 701573, 4546535; 
701578, 4546539; 701583, 4546539; 701588, 4546539; 701595, 4546534; 
701598, 4546528; 701599, 4546518; 701600, 4546507; 701598, 4546493; 
701596, 4546482; 701595, 4546472; 701597, 4546460; 701600, 4546452; 
701602, 4546442.
    (viii) Tract 4h. Land bounded by the following Universal Transverse 
Mercator (UTM) Zone 14N, North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83) 
coordinates (E, N): 703217, 4546589; 703217, 4546586; 703217, 4546579; 
703049, 4546561; 702942, 4546563; 702869, 4546558; 702844, 4546498; 
702818, 4546496; 702872, 4546437; 702928, 4546418; 702978, 4546411; 
703039, 4546410; 703095, 4546436; 703144, 4546479; 703218, 4546537; 
703218, 4546519; 703216, 4546517; 703212, 4546515; 703210, 4546512; 
703206, 4546510; 703200, 4546506; 703192, 4546498; 703186, 4546493; 
703171, 4546473; 703188, 4546474; 703194, 4546477; 703200, 4546478; 
703203, 4546478; 703205, 4546477; 703206, 4546471; 703204, 4546466; 
703199, 4546458; 703192, 4546450; 703182, 4546443; 703172, 4546437; 
703164, 4546433; 703156, 4546430; 703149, 4546428; 703142, 4546428; 
703141, 4546429; 703139, 4546435; 703135, 4546434; 703129, 4546431; 
703123, 4546428; 703118, 4546423; 703111, 4546415; 703107, 4546405; 
703103, 4546387; 703095, 4546382; 703088, 4546378; 703082, 4546375; 
703074, 4546371; 703062, 4546366; 703051, 4546363; 703036, 4546359; 
703021, 4546356; 703006, 4546353; 702992, 4546350; 702979, 4546347; 
702966, 4546345; 702954, 4546346; 702943, 4546350; 702925, 4546354; 
702924, 4546357; 702924, 4546358; 702921, 4546364; 702918, 4546373; 
702914, 4546386; 702910, 4546397; 702903, 4546402; 702892, 4546407; 
702880, 4546410; 702865, 4546413; 702855, 4546419; 702850, 4546427; 
702844, 4546434; 702836, 4546437; 702822, 4546437; 702809, 4546440; 
702801, 4546449; 702793, 4546458; 702781, 4546464; 702768, 4546472; 
702764, 4546481; 702762, 4546493; 702762, 4546499; 702764, 4546504; 
702769, 4546508; 702776, 4546512; 702785, 4546514; 702796, 4546515; 
702811, 4546517; 702826, 4546521; 702835, 4546531; 702835, 4546540; 
702833, 4546546; 702828, 4546547; 702817, 4546549; 702807, 4546549; 
702796, 4546548; 702785, 4546545; 702768, 4546545; 702753, 4546545; 
702735, 4546547; 702721, 4546550; 702715, 4546557; 702715, 4546564; 
702716, 4546570; 702718, 4546573; 702720, 4546574; 702723, 4546575; 
702727, 4546576; 702733, 4546577; 702742, 4546579; 702750, 4546580; 
702762, 4546578; 702771, 4546577; 702785, 4546577; 702797, 4546580; 
702807, 4546583; 702818, 4546586; 702831, 4546589; 702842, 4546591; 
702849, 4546591; 702860, 4546587; 703205, 4546592; 703210, 4546593; 
703215, 4546592; 703217, 4546590; 703217, 4546589.
    (ix) Tract 4i. Land bounded by the following Universal Transverse 
Mercator (UTM) Zone 14N, North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83) 
coordinates (E, N): 704760, 4546632; 704759, 4546528; 704759, 4546503; 
704757, 4546504; 704757, 4546463; 704759, 4546463; 704759, 4546435; 
704751, 4546435; 704745, 4546436; 704737, 4546436; 704723, 4546436; 
704708, 4546436; 704693, 4546437; 704676, 4546438; 704651, 4546439; 
704611, 4546438; 704596, 4546439; 704580, 4546440; 704567, 4546437; 
704548, 4546430; 704533, 4546428; 704516, 4546430; 704503, 4546433; 
704489, 4546440; 704478, 4546444; 704468, 4546444; 704456, 4546442; 
704444, 4546439; 704430, 4546434; 704416, 4546431; 704398, 4546427; 
704381, 4546424; 704361, 4546421; 704342, 4546421; 704329, 4546422; 
704318, 4546425; 704304, 4546435; 704289, 4546434; 704278, 4546456; 
704240, 4546480; 704187, 4546472; 704136, 4546441; 704137, 4546396; 
704167, 4546390; 704206, 4546403; 704264, 4546386; 704303, 4546371; 
704316, 4546313; 704309, 4546288;

[[Page 850]]

704358, 4546279; 704381, 4546306; 704439, 4546354; 704483, 4546377; 
704545, 4546377; 704584, 4546378; 704588, 4546328; 704599, 4546295; 
704651, 4546314; 704692, 4546344; 704762, 4546389; 704763, 4546387; 
704762, 4546381; 704761, 4546372; 704761, 4546359; 704761, 4546342; 
704705, 4546307; 704662, 4546281; 704665, 4546258; 704701, 4546251; 
704723, 4546227; 704761, 4546227; 704761, 4546216; 704761, 4546201; 
704763, 4546181; 704764, 4546161; 704764, 4546137; 704765, 4546123; 
704765, 4546106; 704764, 4546091; 704765, 4546056; 704766, 4546038; 
704766, 4546022; 704766, 4546008; 704765, 4545994; 704766, 4545983; 
704767, 4545974; 704765, 4545968; 704761, 4545963; 704757, 4545960; 
704749, 4545957; 704741, 4545956; 704734, 4545954; 704732, 4545953; 
704731, 4545945; 704730, 4545934; 704729, 4545922; 704727, 4545909; 
704725, 4545901; 704720, 4545898; 704709, 4545894; 704703, 4545898; 
704699, 4545904; 704698, 4545911; 704696, 4545920; 704696, 4545929; 
704696, 4545937; 704694, 4545946; 704693, 4545951; 704690, 4545957; 
704685, 4545961; 704679, 4545962; 704669, 4545965; 704657, 4545965; 
704645, 4545964; 704636, 4545960; 704629, 4545953; 704622, 4545947; 
704615, 4545934; 704612, 4545925; 704608, 4545914; 704608, 4545903; 
704610, 4545895; 704610, 4545892; 704608, 4545889; 704607, 4545883; 
704609, 4545876; 704611, 4545868; 704611, 4545861; 704609, 4545853; 
704607, 4545843; 704604, 4545837; 704602, 4545834; 704598, 4545832; 
704590, 4545831; 704587, 4545834; 704583, 4545842; 704580, 4545857; 
704578, 4545866; 704577, 4545873; 704571, 4545879; 704564, 4545884; 
704557, 4545888; 704551, 4545891; 704547, 4545896; 704545, 4545902; 
704544, 4545914; 704548, 4545924; 704551, 4545932; 704553, 4545937; 
704553, 4545945; 704548, 4545952; 704543, 4545959; 704542, 4545968; 
704545, 4545977; 704552, 4545982; 704564, 4545983; 704574, 4545986; 
704578, 4545992; 704580, 4546009; 704585, 4546021; 704598, 4546029; 
704611, 4546033; 704624, 4546037; 704636, 4546041; 704652, 4546042; 
704664, 4546041; 704676, 4546037; 704689, 4546037; 704698, 4546040; 
704709, 4546044; 704719, 4546050; 704729, 4546057; 704738, 4546065; 
704742, 4546074; 704742, 4546085; 704740, 4546096; 704735, 4546109; 
704727, 4546122; 704723, 4546130; 704720, 4546139; 704719, 4546147; 
704719, 4546155; 704720, 4546161; 704722, 4546164; 704727, 4546169; 
704729, 4546170; 704732, 4546173; 704726, 4546180; 704723, 4546184; 
704715, 4546189; 704708, 4546194; 704702, 4546198; 704694, 4546202; 
704689, 4546205; 704681, 4546209; 704678, 4546214; 704675, 4546224; 
704672, 4546228; 704662, 4546233; 704650, 4546236; 704640, 4546237; 
704629, 4546235; 704617, 4546233; 704605, 4546232; 704592, 4546230; 
704581, 4546232; 704569, 4546233; 704562, 4546234; 704554, 4546235; 
704548, 4546236; 704543, 4546235; 704538, 4546235; 704535, 4546236; 
704533, 4546236; 704533, 4546236; 704524, 4546234; 704520, 4546234; 
704515, 4546234; 704508, 4546234; 704499, 4546232; 704494, 4546229; 
704489, 4546225; 704487, 4546219; 704486, 4546212; 704485, 4546204; 
704482, 4546197; 704471, 4546189; 704463, 4546170; 704454, 4546161; 
704444, 4546153; 704435, 4546148; 704427, 4546144; 704415, 4546141; 
704406, 4546137; 704399, 4546130; 704393, 4546125; 704388, 4546119; 
704380, 4546116; 704373, 4546115; 704365, 4546116; 704354, 4546116; 
704347, 4546111; 704341, 4546105; 704336, 4546098; 704332, 4546094; 
704325, 4546088; 704323, 4546087; 704317, 4546085; 704313, 4546085; 
704312, 4546088; 704310, 4546092; 704310, 4546097; 704311, 4546103; 
704317, 4546113; 704326, 4546125; 704332, 4546133; 704334, 4546136; 
704335, 4546139; 704338, 4546147; 704338, 4546154; 704337, 4546160; 
704333, 4546165; 704325, 4546169; 704315, 4546171; 704305, 4546175; 
704298, 4546178; 704297, 4546179; 704294, 4546184; 704291, 4546193; 
704292, 4546204; 704294, 4546213; 704296, 4546220; 704294, 4546225; 
704286, 4546234; 704279, 4546236; 704272, 4546240; 704268, 4546248; 
704262, 4546256; 704256, 4546261; 704249, 4546264; 704239, 4546266; 
704220, 4546261; 704210, 4546257; 704200, 4546251; 704189, 4546243; 
704181, 4546235; 704175, 4546225; 704168, 4546215; 704162, 4546207; 
704155, 4546203; 704143, 4546201; 704135, 4546202; 704126, 4546206; 
704119, 4546209; 704112, 4546210; 704102, 4546209; 704094, 4546207; 
704093, 4546207; 704086, 4546203; 704086, 4546222; 704088, 4546234; 
704089, 4546240; 704091, 4546246; 704092, 4546255; 704078, 4546258; 
704068, 4546261; 704061, 4546266; 704058, 4546268; 704055, 4546272; 
704052, 4546276; 704050, 4546281; 704048, 4546286; 704046, 4546293; 
704048, 4546301; 704042, 4546301; 704036, 4546304; 704029, 4546314; 
704026, 4546326; 704026, 4546340; 704026, 4546354; 704028, 4546367; 
704032, 4546382; 704037, 4546396; 704043, 4546406; 704050, 4546414; 
704058, 4546419; 704068, 4546419; 704078, 4546416; 704086, 4546409; 
704091, 4546401; 704098, 4546391; 704108, 4546405; 704109, 4546410; 
704109, 4546418; 704109, 4546424; 704106, 4546432; 704103, 4546437; 
704101, 4546443; 704099, 4546455; 704099, 4546455; 704096, 4546455; 
704093, 4546457; 704086, 4546459; 704077, 4546462; 704066, 4546463; 
704056, 4546463; 704044, 4546462; 704032, 4546455; 704027, 4546449; 
704023, 4546439; 704019, 4546431; 704015, 4546418; 704011, 4546399; 
704008, 4546387; 704004, 4546371; 703999, 4546351; 703994, 4546334; 
703990, 4546301; 703978, 4546297; 703974, 4546302; 703971, 4546307; 
703969, 4546315; 703965, 4546323; 703963, 4546328; 703960, 4546334; 
703956, 4546339; 703953, 4546344; 703950, 4546347; 703945, 4546351; 
703938, 4546353; 703931, 4546352; 703926, 4546347; 703924, 4546341; 
703924, 4546333; 703925, 4546322; 703930, 4546311; 703937, 4546299; 
703942, 4546290; 703948, 4546279; 703951, 4546269; 703952, 4546258; 
703949, 4546242; 703943, 4546231; 703933, 4546222; 703916, 4546217; 
703899, 4546212; 703882, 4546210; 703866, 4546211; 703841, 4546215; 
703830, 4546217; 703816, 4546219; 703802, 4546219; 703791, 4546217; 
703780, 4546213; 703771, 4546208; 703767, 4546203; 703764, 4546198; 
703762, 4546190; 703762, 4546187; 703762, 4546184; 703771, 4546185; 
703790, 4546182; 703798, 4546179; 703806, 4546177; 703819, 4546173; 
703832, 4546169; 703847, 4546165; 703866, 4546161; 703877, 4546159; 
703891, 4546158; 703906, 4546157; 703915, 4546159; 703925, 4546162; 
703936, 4546168; 703945, 4546174; 703941, 4546158; 703934, 4546150; 
703921, 4546142; 703906, 4546136; 703889, 4546133; 703875, 4546129; 
703864, 4546122; 703852, 4546113; 703842, 4546100; 703836, 4546084; 
703830, 4546071; 703824, 4546064; 703817, 4546058; 703811, 4546056; 
703804, 4546057; 703799, 4546062; 703797, 4546067; 703797, 4546072; 
703799, 4546075; 703802, 4546079; 703803, 4546082; 703802, 4546086; 
703797, 4546090; 703793, 4546092; 703791, 4546094; 703790, 4546099; 
703789, 4546106; 703792, 4546111; 703794, 4546118; 703796, 4546124; 
703795, 4546130; 703794, 4546135; 703791, 4546139; 703785, 4546144; 
703780, 4546146; 703733, 4546145;

[[Page 851]]

703740, 4546111; 703742, 4546096; 703743, 4546083; 703743, 4546067; 
703742, 4546055; 703739, 4546040; 703734, 4546027; 703727, 4546015; 
703719, 4546005; 703710, 4545998; 703699, 4545993; 703687, 4545989; 
703677, 4545988; 703679, 4545980; 703679, 4545974; 703678, 4545968; 
703676, 4545966; 703667, 4545964; 703654, 4545963; 703644, 4545967; 
703638, 4545968; 703630, 4545966; 703627, 4545963; 703627, 4545960; 
703630, 4545956; 703635, 4545952; 703638, 4545948; 703638, 4545943; 
703635, 4545940; 703632, 4545937; 703626, 4545934; 703620, 4545930; 
703618, 4545926; 703619, 4545922; 703620, 4545910; 703623, 4545908; 
703627, 4545906; 703631, 4545904; 703641, 4545900; 703649, 4545896; 
703656, 4545893; 703670, 4545889; 703687, 4545882; 703700, 4545875; 
703708, 4545869; 703715, 4545858; 703720, 4545847; 703725, 4545832; 
703730, 4545818; 703736, 4545799; 703741, 4545785; 703746, 4545768; 
703752, 4545754; 703759, 4545743; 703768, 4545735; 703777, 4545728; 
703789, 4545721; 703799, 4545715; 703807, 4545708; 703812, 4545702; 
703816, 4545693; 703819, 4545681; 703819, 4545673; 703816, 4545666; 
703812, 4545663; 703808, 4545662; 703805, 4545663; 703802, 4545664; 
703797, 4545668; 703792, 4545674; 703775, 4545692; 703765, 4545702; 
703755, 4545713; 703733, 4545740; 703726, 4545746; 703718, 4545746; 
703707, 4545748; 703698, 4545753; 703694, 4545760; 703690, 4545773; 
703690, 4545782; 703692, 4545790; 703695, 4545801; 703694, 4545811; 
703689, 4545818; 703683, 4545824; 703675, 4545826; 703669, 4545825; 
703662, 4545821; 703658, 4545816; 703652, 4545809; 703647, 4545805; 
703637, 4545801; 703627, 4545801; 703618, 4545803; 703607, 4545807; 
703602, 4545812; 703598, 4545820; 703593, 4545830; 703583, 4545834; 
703573, 4545833; 703562, 4545831; 703548, 4545831; 703541, 4545833; 
703548, 4545846; 703552, 4545868; 703539, 4545891; 703514, 4545893; 
703467, 4545892; 703437, 4545886; 703412, 4545876; 703391, 4545877; 
703381, 4545878; 703370, 4545880; 703361, 4545882; 703353, 4545886; 
703345, 4545890; 703339, 4545892; 703334, 4545891; 703328, 4545884; 
703321, 4545875; 703310, 4545868; 703302, 4545867; 703295, 4545869; 
703289, 4545874; 703285, 4545881; 703276, 4545887; 703265, 4545889; 
703256, 4545891; 703251, 4545894; 703249, 4545899; 703250, 4545906; 
703255, 4545919; 703255, 4545928; 703251, 4545936; 703243, 4545940; 
703239, 4545948; 703239, 4545954; 703244, 4545961; 703251, 4545965; 
703263, 4545966; 703282, 4545963; 703298, 4545964; 703315, 4545967; 
703325, 4545972; 703336, 4545975; 703344, 4545975; 703347, 4545975; 
703350, 4545973; 703354, 4545969; 703356, 4545969; 703358, 4545972; 
703360, 4545974; 703361, 4545977; 703361, 4545985; 703360, 4545990; 
703358, 4545994; 703356, 4545997; 703350, 4546002; 703345, 4546004; 
703374, 4546019; 703405, 4546043; 703398, 4546098; 703361, 4546163; 
703286, 4546236; 703260, 4546291; 703261, 4546292; 703263, 4546303; 
703267, 4546308; 703274, 4546310; 703281, 4546309; 703289, 4546305; 
703294, 4546301; 703296, 4546296; 703299, 4546289; 703301, 4546278; 
703304, 4546268; 703309, 4546257; 703315, 4546251; 703328, 4546247; 
703335, 4546246; 703378, 4546188; 703432, 4546121; 703472, 4546076; 
703512, 4546055; 703512, 4546053; 703516, 4546046; 703521, 4546041; 
703529, 4546037; 703536, 4546031; 703543, 4546027; 703554, 4546019; 
703563, 4546014; 703573, 4546013; 703589, 4546020; 703586, 4546022; 
703579, 4546029; 703570, 4546037; 703561, 4546046; 703554, 4546056; 
703551, 4546063; 703549, 4546071; 703549, 4546082; 703551, 4546095; 
703556, 4546104; 703566, 4546115; 703573, 4546122; 703581, 4546128; 
703592, 4546135; 703597, 4546139; 703607, 4546152; 703625, 4546150; 
703633, 4546150; 703641, 4546152; 703649, 4546155; 703655, 4546159; 
703660, 4546163; 703664, 4546167; 703669, 4546181; 703669, 4546184; 
703669, 4546198; 703668, 4546212; 703667, 4546223; 703666, 4546234; 
703666, 4546241; 703664, 4546249; 703652, 4546257; 703641, 4546261; 
703630, 4546262; 703618, 4546265; 703605, 4546268; 703590, 4546271; 
703578, 4546273; 703570, 4546274; 703560, 4546276; 703552, 4546276; 
703543, 4546273; 703540, 4546269; 703536, 4546262; 703535, 4546253; 
703533, 4546247; 703527, 4546241; 703519, 4546238; 703511, 4546238; 
703503, 4546240; 703495, 4546242; 703494, 4546246; 703490, 4546257; 
703488, 4546269; 703485, 4546281; 703482, 4546287; 703478, 4546292; 
703473, 4546298; 703466, 4546302; 703456, 4546301; 703449, 4546297; 
703440, 4546289; 703432, 4546286; 703420, 4546290; 703414, 4546298; 
703408, 4546304; 703399, 4546307; 703388, 4546308; 703378, 4546311; 
703369, 4546317; 703364, 4546323; 703349, 4546342; 703343, 4546353; 
703340, 4546361; 703338, 4546370; 703335, 4546382; 703331, 4546387; 
703326, 4546391; 703321, 4546400; 703318, 4546412; 703311, 4546432; 
703306, 4546441; 703302, 4546448; 703289, 4546457; 703281, 4546461; 
703270, 4546464; 703261, 4546465; 703254, 4546468; 703250, 4546470; 
703249, 4546472; 703247, 4546477; 703247, 4546516; 703248, 4546515; 
703248, 4546588; 703499, 4546594; 703498, 4546596; 704053, 4546612; 
704057, 4546612; 704067, 4546612; 704079, 4546612; 704089, 4546612; 
704101, 4546612; 704117, 4546612; 704136, 4546613; 704154, 4546614; 
704172, 4546614; 704193, 4546613; 704214, 4546613; 704234, 4546612; 
704253, 4546610; 704274, 4546610; 704293, 4546612; 704309, 4546615; 
704320, 4546616; 704326, 4546615; 704339, 4546609; 704339, 4546609; 
704342, 4546605; 704344, 4546602; 704347, 4546598; 704352, 4546594; 
704359, 4546590; 704369, 4546587; 704379, 4546585; 704390, 4546585; 
704400, 4546589; 704410, 4546597; 704419, 4546604; 704429, 4546609; 
704444, 4546613; 704457, 4546617; 704471, 4546620; 704487, 4546619; 
704502, 4546616; 704512, 4546612; 704517, 4546607; 704517, 4546599; 
704514, 4546591; 704514, 4546583; 704517, 4546577; 704525, 4546572; 
704529, 4546571; 704537, 4546571; 704548, 4546575; 704558, 4546580; 
704568, 4546587; 704575, 4546595; 704582, 4546605; 704589, 4546614; 
704601, 4546622; 704615, 4546624; 704627, 4546624; 704641, 4546620; 
704652, 4546617; 704669, 4546615; 704682, 4546617; 704693, 4546620; 
704713, 4546626; 704724, 4546634; 704731, 4546637; 704739, 4546639; 
704746, 4546640; 704751, 4546639; 704757, 4546637; 704758, 4546635; 
704760, 4546632.
    (x) Tract 4j. Land bounded by the following Universal Transverse 
Mercator (UTM) Zone 14N, North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83) 
coordinates (E, N): 705755, 4546121; 705768, 4546082; 705807, 4546037; 
705849, 4546006; 705848, 4546004; 705850, 4545994; 705853, 4545987; 
705858, 4545977; 705869, 4545962; 705876, 4545955; 705881, 4545951; 
705887, 4545947; 705894, 4545943; 705898, 4545941; 705904, 4545943; 
705910, 4545950; 705914, 4545956; 705917, 4545962; 705919, 4545967; 
705920, 4545973; 705919, 4545978; 705936, 4545973; 705936, 4545969; 
705938, 4545959; 705937, 4545949; 705931, 4545938; 705924, 4545930; 
705916, 4545926; 705909,

[[Page 852]]

4545924; 705853, 4545938; 705792, 4545978; 705750, 4546016; 705730, 
4545996; 705727, 4545924; 705731, 4545836; 705747, 4545803; 705750, 
4545780; 705743, 4545776; 705735, 4545769; 705731, 4545755; 705729, 
4545741; 705725, 4545732; 705719, 4545724; 705711, 4545721; 705703, 
4545720; 705698, 4545723; 705695, 4545732; 705694, 4545744; 705695, 
4545755; 705694, 4545768; 705695, 4545779; 705695, 4545787; 705694, 
4545794; 705693, 4545800; 705691, 4545803; 705682, 4545808; 705671, 
4545811; 705661, 4545810; 705647, 4545809; 705640, 4545807; 705634, 
4545806; 705628, 4545807; 705624, 4545809; 705620, 4545810; 705611, 
4545809; 705606, 4545803; 705599, 4545812; 705595, 4545818; 705590, 
4545827; 705584, 4545838; 705581, 4545846; 705580, 4545861; 705582, 
4545870; 705584, 4545878; 705589, 4545889; 705594, 4545899; 705597, 
4545907; 705596, 4545917; 705593, 4545933; 705594, 4545942; 705598, 
4545948; 705600, 4545957; 705597, 4545966; 705593, 4545975; 705588, 
4545983; 705582, 4545993; 705579, 4546002; 705576, 4546015; 705572, 
4546025; 705568, 4546039; 705566, 4546053; 705565, 4546064; 705569, 
4546077; 705573, 4546089; 705581, 4546104; 705588, 4546119; 705590, 
4546131; 705592, 4546144; 705589, 4546153; 705586, 4546162; 705580, 
4546169; 705573, 4546178; 705567, 4546185; 705563, 4546194; 705557, 
4546204; 705549, 4546216; 705521, 4546246; 705509, 4546259; 705499, 
4546270; 705490, 4546282; 705483, 4546297; 705480, 4546312; 705480, 
4546327; 705482, 4546341; 705485, 4546358; 705488, 4546374; 705489, 
4546388; 705489, 4546404; 705485, 4546415; 705478, 4546424; 705470, 
4546431; 705464, 4546434; 705448, 4546439; 705437, 4546445; 705424, 
4546452; 705410, 4546460; 705401, 4546465; 705387, 4546473; 705372, 
4546483; 705359, 4546493; 705347, 4546502; 705334, 4546511; 705321, 
4546520; 705306, 4546529; 705297, 4546535; 705285, 4546543; 705273, 
4546552; 705263, 4546564; 705253, 4546573; 705244, 4546577; 705234, 
4546579; 705222, 4546576; 705214, 4546573; 705208, 4546566; 705204, 
4546557; 705202, 4546545; 705199, 4546525; 705195, 4546514; 705193, 
4546509; 705190, 4546502; 705186, 4546493; 705181, 4546483; 705173, 
4546474; 705166, 4546467; 705154, 4546455; 705172, 4546454; 705172, 
4546453; 705202, 4546453; 705226, 4546467; 705225, 4546467; 705229, 
4546472; 705235, 4546483; 705240, 4546499; 705240, 4546509; 705238, 
4546517; 705236, 4546523; 705234, 4546529; 705235, 4546535; 705237, 
4546538; 705245, 4546539; 705252, 4546538; 705261, 4546534; 705266, 
4546526; 705269, 4546515; 705272, 4546501; 705274, 4546492; 705279, 
4546483; 705288, 4546476; 705299, 4546472; 705309, 4546471; 705320, 
4546469; 705331, 4546466; 705345, 4546457; 705354, 4546449; 705367, 
4546443; 705381, 4546439; 705399, 4546434; 705412, 4546431; 705425, 
4546427; 705438, 4546423; 705446, 4546417; 705452, 4546408; 705456, 
4546395; 705458, 4546380; 705458, 4546362; 705455, 4546349; 705452, 
4546336; 705449, 4546325; 705449, 4546315; 705450, 4546306; 705453, 
4546300; 705458, 4546293; 705465, 4546281; 705469, 4546269; 705473, 
4546258; 705478, 4546251; 705490, 4546242; 705499, 4546234; 705509, 
4546221; 705517, 4546207; 705523, 4546195; 705529, 4546185; 705533, 
4546180; 705541, 4546177; 705548, 4546171; 705555, 4546162; 705558, 
4546150; 705557, 4546137; 705555, 4546120; 705551, 4546107; 705547, 
4546093; 705542, 4546081; 705538, 4546071; 705531, 4546059; 705527, 
4546051; 705524, 4546040; 705525, 4546027; 705531, 4546011; 705540, 
4546001; 705550, 4545993; 705558, 4545987; 705564, 4545981; 705569, 
4545975; 705571, 4545968; 705569, 4545955; 705563, 4545942; 705554, 
4545926; 705547, 4545913; 705539, 4545903; 705533, 4545891; 705530, 
4545877; 705529, 4545861; 705531, 4545847; 705533, 4545834; 705534, 
4545821; 705533, 4545811; 705529, 4545804; 705521, 4545798; 705512, 
4545796; 705506, 4545796; 705501, 4545799; 705496, 4545801; 705487, 
4545799; 705481, 4545794; 705472, 4545788; 705463, 4545786; 705455, 
4545788; 705448, 4545790; 705435, 4545794; 705422, 4545787; 705416, 
4545782; 705407, 4545775; 705396, 4545769; 705383, 4545764; 705372, 
4545759; 705358, 4545756; 705345, 4545754; 705333, 4545750; 705317, 
4545740; 705317, 4545740; 705312, 4545745; 705309, 4545748; 705303, 
4545753; 705296, 4545757; 705288, 4545761; 705282, 4545764; 705275, 
4545766; 705269, 4545766; 705256, 4545770; 705245, 4545766; 705242, 
4545764; 705238, 4545762; 705233, 4545760; 705230, 4545759; 705219, 
4545760; 705219, 4545755; 705219, 4545751; 705217, 4545746; 705215, 
4545741; 705212, 4545736; 705208, 4545734; 705205, 4545731; 705202, 
4545728; 705200, 4545724; 705199, 4545720; 705200, 4545714; 705201, 
4545710; 705202, 4545706; 705205, 4545702; 705210, 4545700; 705216, 
4545697; 705222, 4545695; 705230, 4545694; 705239, 4545692; 705247, 
4545690; 705253, 4545687; 705258, 4545682; 705263, 4545673; 705265, 
4545666; 705266, 4545659; 705265, 4545652; 705263, 4545643; 705261, 
4545637; 705260, 4545629; 705260, 4545624; 705261, 4545617; 705264, 
4545614; 705267, 4545611; 705272, 4545608; 705278, 4545602; 705283, 
4545596; 705286, 4545590; 705287, 4545584; 705286, 4545576; 705285, 
4545568; 705283, 4545562; 705281, 4545558; 705279, 4545552; 705279, 
4545546; 705279, 4545541; 705280, 4545536; 705284, 4545527; 705288, 
4545520; 705291, 4545515; 705303, 4545500; 705300, 4545488; 705300, 
4545484; 705313, 4545482; 705322, 4545480; 705329, 4545478; 705337, 
4545475; 705345, 4545472; 705350, 4545467; 705354, 4545460; 705355, 
4545452; 705354, 4545444; 705353, 4545438; 705356, 4545431; 705359, 
4545426; 705362, 4545417; 705362, 4545406; 705361, 4545396; 705356, 
4545386; 705353, 4545380; 705350, 4545375; 705346, 4545372; 705343, 
4545370; 705340, 4545368; 705336, 4545380; 705332, 4545383; 705328, 
4545385; 705321, 4545389; 705316, 4545394; 705312, 4545401; 705310, 
4545408; 705309, 4545416; 705309, 4545424; 705308, 4545432; 705309, 
4545438; 705303, 4545448; 705294, 4545438; 705288, 4545429; 705282, 
4545416; 705278, 4545403; 705275, 4545392; 705274, 4545380; 705275, 
4545368; 705278, 4545360; 705282, 4545351; 705289, 4545344; 705294, 
4545337; 705298, 4545329; 705299, 4545320; 705297, 4545306; 705293, 
4545297; 705287, 4545285; 705282, 4545272; 705282, 4545264; 705284, 
4545255; 705290, 4545243; 705293, 4545240; 705298, 4545236; 705302, 
4545234; 705307, 4545231; 705308, 4545230; 705311, 4545228; 705316, 
4545211; 705325, 4545208; 705327, 4545206; 705330, 4545200; 705332, 
4545193; 705334, 4545184; 705337, 4545176; 705340, 4545170; 705344, 
4545157; 705344, 4545143; 705343, 4545129; 705342, 4545116; 705341, 
4545104; 705339, 4545095; 705338, 4545087; 705340, 4545076; 705342, 
4545069; 705345, 4545063; 705349, 4545055; 705352, 4545043; 705352, 
4545035; 705351, 4545030; 705351, 4545026; 705353, 4545021; 705357, 
4545015; 705360, 4545011; 705360, 4545004; 705359, 4545001; 705356, 
4544999; 705350, 4544999; 705344, 4544999; 705339, 4544999; 705335, 
4544999; 705331, 4544999; 705329,

[[Page 853]]

4544999; 705328, 4545000; 705327, 4545000; 705324, 4545001; 705312, 
4545002; 705307, 4545002; 705301, 4545002; 705293, 4545001; 705287, 
4545003; 705280, 4545007; 705277, 4545011; 705274, 4545023; 705274, 
4545032; 705275, 4545038; 705277, 4545046; 705278, 4545055; 705278, 
4545065; 705274, 4545080; 705268, 4545094; 705253, 4545121; 705247, 
4545133; 705243, 4545145; 705240, 4545161; 705240, 4545175; 705242, 
4545189; 705247, 4545201; 705254, 4545215; 705257, 4545226; 705257, 
4545241; 705256, 4545257; 705251, 4545269; 705246, 4545276; 705242, 
4545282; 705235, 4545288; 705231, 4545297; 705231, 4545305; 705233, 
4545317; 705231, 4545328; 705227, 4545341; 705227, 4545353; 705229, 
4545364; 705234, 4545376; 705240, 4545384; 705246, 4545392; 705255, 
4545402; 705262, 4545410; 705265, 4545420; 705267, 4545432; 705264, 
4545445; 705264, 4545455; 705264, 4545468; 705266, 4545477; 705267, 
4545484; 705267, 4545494; 705267, 4545505; 705266, 4545516; 705265, 
4545532; 705262, 4545549; 705262, 4545557; 705259, 4545565; 705254, 
4545574; 705249, 4545579; 705243, 4545585; 705233, 4545593; 705221, 
4545601; 705200, 4545622; 705193, 4545629; 705186, 4545637; 705182, 
4545648; 705179, 4545659; 705175, 4545666; 705169, 4545672; 705158, 
4545677; 705151, 4545684; 705143, 4545695; 705135, 4545707; 705126, 
4545717; 705118, 4545724; 705111, 4545730; 705081, 4545761; 705070, 
4545769; 705059, 4545773; 705050, 4545773; 705044, 4545772; 705038, 
4545770; 705030, 4545770; 705022, 4545773; 705018, 4545777; 705012, 
4545783; 705009, 4545791; 705006, 4545799; 705006, 4545800; 705070, 
4545821; 705120, 4545864; 705197, 4545924; 705274, 4545961; 705287, 
4546009; 705283, 4546013; 705282, 4546036; 705279, 4546084; 705259, 
4546080; 705236, 4546061; 705231, 4546053; 705211, 4546057; 705218, 
4546078; 705154, 4546095; 705128, 4546061; 705111, 4546061; 705069, 
4546047; 705058, 4546039; 705049, 4546044; 705000, 4546042; 704985, 
4546014; 704993, 4545981; 704992, 4545980; 704969, 4545959; 704964, 
4545971; 704957, 4545980; 704954, 4545985; 704944, 4545992; 704933, 
4545987; 704929, 4545987; 704928, 4545988; 704920, 4545981; 704916, 
4545979; 704912, 4545981; 704912, 4545980; 704912, 4545974; 704910, 
4545970; 704905, 4545966; 704894, 4545962; 704885, 4545960; 704876, 
4545959; 704864, 4545958; 704855, 4545958; 704850, 4545960; 704847, 
4545962; 704839, 4545968; 704817, 4545962; 704809, 4545963; 704804, 
4545965; 704800, 4545968; 704799, 4545971; 704798, 4545973; 704793, 
4546267; 704794, 4546293; 704819, 4546264; 704834, 4546236; 704841, 
4546194; 704837, 4546146; 704832, 4546088; 704842, 4546035; 704860, 
4545996; 704867, 4545996; 704909, 4546008; 704912, 4546045; 704888, 
4546067; 704890, 4546140; 704923, 4546189; 704954, 4546221; 704990, 
4546250; 705072, 4546236; 705123, 4546238; 705122, 4546264; 705116, 
4546331; 705091, 4546330; 705027, 4546348; 704971, 4546375; 704916, 
4546383; 704854, 4546393; 704795, 4546415; 704795, 4546427; 704796, 
4546457; 704813, 4546455; 704845, 4546454; 704897, 4546450; 704949, 
4546444; 704988, 4546425; 705013, 4546412; 705045, 4546390; 705064, 
4546394; 705078, 4546408; 705098, 4546446; 705114, 4546476; 705097, 
4546497; 705064, 4546491; 705009, 4546488; 704971, 4546507; 704942, 
4546531; 704908, 4546562; 704887, 4546591; 704879, 4546589; 704878, 
4546563; 704883, 4546535; 704867, 4546513; 704830, 4546498; 704798, 
4546499; 704799, 4546516; 704799, 4546545; 704839, 4546550; 704843, 
4546573; 704841, 4546603; 704845, 4546641; 704902, 4546642; 704953, 
4546599; 704989, 4546567; 705022, 4546552; 705052, 4546550; 705086, 
4546558; 705110, 4546572; 705147, 4546574; 705175, 4546571; 705182, 
4546583; 705208, 4546589; 705203, 4546608; 705184, 4546629; 705175, 
4546649; 705192, 4546649; 705226, 4546651; 705242, 4546650; 705256, 
4546648; 705268, 4546646; 705338, 4546547; 705428, 4546489; 705500, 
4546443; 705527, 4546362; 705530, 4546352; 705523, 4546336; 705525, 
4546304; 705557, 4546273; 705566, 4546248; 705600, 4546185; 705621, 
4546156; 705612, 4546102; 705605, 4546050; 705637, 4545949; 705659, 
4545895; 705689, 4545912; 705694, 4545992; 705697, 4546111; 705698, 
4546111; 705712, 4546158; 705681, 4546218; 705630, 4546292; 705619, 
4546366; 705604, 4546421; 705540, 4546481; 705491, 4546526; 705413, 
4546573; 705382, 4546602; 705365, 4546641; 705377, 4546643; 705385, 
4546647; 705391, 4546650; 705398, 4546654; 705404, 4546656; 705411, 
4546656; 705417, 4546653; 705420, 4546647; 705419, 4546639; 705417, 
4546628; 705418, 4546620; 705424, 4546607; 705437, 4546592; 705452, 
4546582; 705491, 4546565; 705503, 4546560; 705513, 4546557; 705526, 
4546553; 705538, 4546550; 705546, 4546544; 705552, 4546535; 705559, 
4546522; 705568, 4546510; 705579, 4546498; 705588, 4546487; 705598, 
4546480; 705611, 4546471; 705622, 4546461; 705631, 4546449; 705638, 
4546436; 705643, 4546425; 705645, 4546422; 705650, 4546408; 705654, 
4546395; 705658, 4546381; 705660, 4546369; 705660, 4546359; 705664, 
4546347; 705667, 4546342; 705675, 4546331; 705679, 4546323; 705683, 
4546314; 705683, 4546292; 705685, 4546280; 705687, 4546271; 705694, 
4546259; 705714, 4546246; 705721, 4546237; 705725, 4546229; 705729, 
4546218; 705731, 4546206; 705736, 4546195; 705745, 4546183; 705749, 
4546175; 705755, 4546121.
    (xi) Tract 4k. Land bounded by the following Universal Transverse 
Mercator (UTM) Zone 14N, North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83) 
coordinates (E, N): 705162, 4546811; 705173, 4546744; 705106, 4546730; 
705075, 4546704; 705137, 4546704; 705207, 4546698; 705306, 4546696; 
705306, 4546696; 705308, 4546688; 705311, 4546678; 705000, 4546667; 
704931, 4546687; 704873, 4546735; 704855, 4546781; 704812, 4546813; 
704812, 4546814; 704812, 4546820; 704811, 4546826; 704808, 4546830; 
704802, 4546831; 704793, 4546827; 704791, 4546825; 704750, 4546834; 
704750, 4546838; 704748, 4546849; 704747, 4546861; 704748, 4546874; 
704752, 4546882; 704762, 4546890; 704773, 4546896; 704782, 4546898; 
704788, 4546902; 704796, 4546906; 704803, 4546913; 704807, 4546923; 
704807, 4546936; 704807, 4546946; 704870, 4546886; 704920, 4546847; 
704958, 4546774; 705006, 4546748; 705048, 4546766; 705076, 4546799; 
705084, 4546840; 705084, 4546893; 705062, 4546927; 705046, 4546957; 
705056, 4546960; 705070, 4546959; 705080, 4546953; 705087, 4546947; 
705095, 4546942; 705103, 4546941; 705112, 4546940; 705122, 4546937; 
705132, 4546930; 705140, 4546923; 705149, 4546917; 705156, 4546913; 
705163, 4546904; 705167, 4546894; 705164, 4546888; 705161, 4546883; 
705159, 4546875; 705161, 4546864; 705165, 4546856; 705168, 4546854; 
705162, 4546811.
    (xii) Tract 41. Land bounded by the following Universal Transverse 
Mercator (UTM) Zone 14N, North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83) 
coordinates (E, N): 02925, 4547900; 702933, 4547900; 702939, 4547902; 
702948, 4547887;

[[Page 854]]

702968, 4547865; 703001, 4547844; 703038, 4547835; 703043, 4547832; 
703049, 4547829; 703054, 4547824; 703066, 4547809; 703087, 4547807; 
703094, 4547806; 703100, 4547805; 703102, 4547805; 703103, 4547598; 
703106, 4547564; 703105, 4547558; 703104, 4547555; 703099, 4547554; 
703093, 4547555; 703086, 4547558; 703078, 4547562; 703069, 4547567; 
703061, 4547572; 703045, 4547581; 703030, 4547586; 703016, 4547588; 
703001, 4547587; 702990, 4547582; 702980, 4547578; 702953, 4547563; 
702940, 4547560; 702927, 4547563; 702923, 4547568; 702922, 4547572; 
702924, 4547584; 702926, 4547593; 702928, 4547599; 702935, 4547608; 
702954, 4547624; 702961, 4547647; 702928, 4547653; 702897, 4547665; 
702859, 4547666; 702857, 4547669; 702851, 4547678; 702847, 4547690; 
702845, 4547700; 702846, 4547713; 702849, 4547727; 702849, 4547727; 
702874, 4547742; 702907, 4547765; 702913, 4547822; 702912, 4547846; 
702882, 4547872; 702874, 4547884; 702876, 4547891; 702880, 4547899; 
702884, 4547906; 702893, 4547910; 702901, 4547911; 702911, 4547909; 
702917, 4547907; 702921, 4547904; 702925, 4547900.
    (xiii) Tract 4m. Land bounded by the following Universal Transverse 
Mercator (UTM) Zone 14N, North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83) 
coordinates (E, N): 703489, 4548057; 703478, 4548055; 703470, 4548054; 
703464, 4548053; 703456, 4548057; 703453, 4548053; 703450, 4548052; 
703444, 4548048; 703440, 4548044; 703432, 4548039; 703423, 4548034; 
703411, 4548027; 703401, 4548021; 703388, 4548016; 703383, 4548016; 
703381, 4548020; 703369, 4548005; 703365, 4547997; 703360, 4547989; 
703355, 4547980; 703352, 4547973; 703353, 4547966; 703355, 4547961; 
703357, 4547956; 703358, 4547949; 703335, 4547941; 703324, 4547935; 
703316, 4547924; 703311, 4547910; 703309, 4547893; 703309, 4547877; 
703312, 4547860; 703316, 4547842; 703320, 4547824; 703322, 4547808; 
703319, 4547790; 703314, 4547773; 703308, 4547760; 703307, 4547744; 
703308, 4547727; 703305, 4547714; 703302, 4547696; 703299, 4547677; 
703299, 4547661; 703303, 4547648; 703311, 4547637; 703324, 4547630; 
703338, 4547627; 703351, 4547623; 703360, 4547615; 703371, 4547599; 
703375, 4547590; 703384, 4547577; 703388, 4547570; 703390, 4547553; 
703393, 4547528; 703396, 4547508; 703395, 4547491; 703387, 4547473; 
703376, 4547460; 703366, 4547450; 703358, 4547431; 703357, 4547415; 
703355, 4547402; 703350, 4547393; 703339, 4547384; 703333, 4547374; 
703330, 4547358; 703325, 4547344; 703315, 4547334; 703305, 4547326; 
703293, 4547315; 703284, 4547306; 703258, 4547283; 703246, 4547274; 
703231, 4547262; 703219, 4547253; 703207, 4547244; 703200, 4547234; 
703199, 4547223; 703205, 4547211; 703219, 4547203; 703233, 4547197; 
703240, 4547189; 703241, 4547173; 703237, 4547159; 703229, 4547148; 
703214, 4547137; 703202, 4547123; 703197, 4547114; 703195, 4547103; 
703198, 4547089; 703208, 4547073; 703221, 4547055; 703229, 4547044; 
703236, 4547034; 703241, 4547026; 703247, 4547019; 703254, 4547005; 
703256, 4547008; 703260, 4547012; 703263, 4547015; 703268, 4547023; 
703273, 4547036; 703276, 4547050; 703276, 4547064; 703272, 4547074; 
703267, 4547084; 703265, 4547099; 703267, 4547113; 703269, 4547126; 
703275, 4547135; 703283, 4547145; 703292, 4547154; 703300, 4547162; 
703327, 4547122; 703369, 4547100; 703416, 4547101; 703435, 4547128; 
703465, 4547184; 703526, 4547199; 703620, 4547221; 703684, 4547237; 
703726, 4547259; 703768, 4547339; 703811, 4547361; 703765, 4547387; 
703726, 4547409; 703698, 4547449; 703699, 4547518; 703682, 4547530; 
703674, 4547567; 703674, 4547612; 703659, 4547670; 703638, 4547662; 
703611, 4547629; 703573, 4547594; 703542, 4547552; 703500, 4547509; 
703469, 4547465; 703466, 4547441; 703447, 4547421; 703420, 4547372; 
703381, 4547360; 703381, 4547363; 703378, 4547375; 703376, 4547393; 
703376, 4547406; 703382, 4547419; 703390, 4547430; 703399, 4547444; 
703405, 4547461; 703412, 4547479; 703417, 4547499; 703423, 4547516; 
703431, 4547532; 703433, 4547542; 703462, 4547562; 703520, 4547619; 
703543, 4547688; 703578, 4547749; 703593, 4547795; 703592, 4547837; 
703585, 4547867; 703569, 4547901; 703579, 4547960; 703616, 4547995; 
703610, 4548075; 703610, 4548075; 703615, 4548091; 703619, 4548104; 
703626, 4548112; 703633, 4548121; 703638, 4548128; 703638, 4548136; 
703636, 4548142; 703633, 4548146; 703625, 4548153; 703629, 4548167; 
703631, 4548173; 703632, 4548179; 703633, 4548187; 703633, 4548192; 
703631, 4548198; 703629, 4548204; 703628, 4548208; 703627, 4548223; 
703643, 4548220; 703653, 4548216; 703659, 4548212; 703663, 4548203; 
703664, 4548189; 703664, 4548177; 703668, 4548164; 703669, 4548163; 
703657, 4548152; 703656, 4548102; 703651, 4548021; 703654, 4547960; 
703679, 4547937; 703713, 4547896; 703741, 4547895; 703748, 4547897; 
703744, 4547885; 703737, 4547873; 703730, 4547860; 703723, 4547844; 
703715, 4547831; 703706, 4547821; 703700, 4547810; 703695, 4547788; 
703697, 4547780; 703703, 4547772; 703704, 4547765; 703702, 4547753; 
703696, 4547739; 703691, 4547727; 703691, 4547716; 703693, 4547701; 
703699, 4547689; 703705, 4547679; 703708, 4547671; 703708, 4547657; 
703702, 4547642; 703701, 4547628; 703705, 4547619; 703709, 4547612; 
703706, 4547599; 703702, 4547589; 703701, 4547580; 703707, 4547570; 
703716, 4547564; 703724, 4547561; 703732, 4547556; 703735, 4547549; 
703733, 4547539; 703717, 4547527; 703731, 4547526; 703734, 4547525; 
703736, 4547522; 703739, 4547517; 703740, 4547512; 703740, 4547503; 
703740, 4547492; 703740, 4547486; 703743, 4547478; 703746, 4547476; 
703753, 4547476; 703759, 4547482; 703761, 4547490; 703761, 4547498; 
703766, 4547509; 703776, 4547513; 703786, 4547514; 703799, 4547515; 
703808, 4547514; 703818, 4547513; 703823, 4547513; 703829, 4547511; 
703833, 4547508; 703836, 4547506; 703837, 4547501; 703837, 4547485; 
703862, 4547492; 703871, 4547492; 703884, 4547494; 703890, 4547495; 
703900, 4547496; 703909, 4547494; 703915, 4547491; 703922, 4547483; 
703923, 4547473; 703920, 4547464; 703906, 4547454; 703894, 4547448; 
703883, 4547442; 703874, 4547434; 703868, 4547427; 703865, 4547416; 
703866, 4547405; 703869, 4547394; 703874, 4547381; 703883, 4547373; 
703895, 4547371; 703910, 4547371; 703925, 4547374; 703938, 4547378; 
703950, 4547382; 703961, 4547387; 703971, 4547391; 703976, 4547393; 
703985, 4547396; 703993, 4547397; 704001, 4547396; 704009, 4547393; 
704015, 4547387; 704017, 4547380; 704017, 4547367; 704015, 4547356; 
704010, 4547342; 704002, 4547323; 703996, 4547313; 703987, 4547304; 
703980, 4547298; 703972, 4547291; 703965, 4547281; 703962, 4547274; 
703962, 4547268; 703962, 4547265; 703968, 4547258; 703979, 4547255; 
703991, 4547256; 704023, 4547256; 704036, 4547255; 704049, 4547253; 
704060, 4547249; 704070, 4547246; 704075, 4547242; 704082, 4547231; 
704082, 4547218; 704080, 4547205; 704080, 4547196; 704085, 4547184; 
704089, 4547174; 704091, 4547160; 704089, 4547141; 704084, 4547125; 
704079, 4547109;

[[Page 855]]

704080, 4547094; 704084, 4547084; 704087, 4547079; 704089, 4547069; 
704089,4547064; 704090, 4547057; 704090, 4547056; 704099, 4547054; 
704100, 4547054; 704106, 4547050; 704111, 4547044; 704114, 4547039; 
704117, 4547033; 704121, 4547025; 704124, 4547021; 704130, 4547015; 
704131, 4547014; 704135, 4547009; 704137, 4547005; 704138, 4547001; 
704138, 4546999; 704136, 4546992; 704154, 4546981; 704178, 4546974; 
704202, 4546969; 704224, 4546963; 704245, 4546959; 704268, 4546957; 
704290, 4546955; 704306, 4546956; 704320, 4546958; 704332, 4546961; 
704345, 4546963; 704355, 4546962; 704367, 4546954; 704377, 4546941; 
704409, 4546916; 704430, 4546912; 704446, 4546908; 704466, 4546904; 
704477, 4546901; 704491, 4546892; 704493, 4546886; 704500, 4546877; 
704507, 4546870; 704518, 4546866; 704534, 4546863; 704567, 4546797; 
704638, 4546765; 704729, 4546782; 704729, 4546746; 704727, 4546732; 
704727, 4546724; 704728, 4546719; 704728, 4546712; 704727, 4546705; 
704727, 4546692; 704727, 4546685; 704728, 4546679; 704729, 4546674; 
704729, 4546670; 704728, 4546669; 704725, 4546668; 704723, 4546668; 
704717, 4546669; 704703, 4546671; 704701, 4546675; 704698, 4546681; 
704696, 4546686; 704694, 4546689; 704690, 4546691; 704684, 4546693; 
704678, 4546694; 704659, 4546696; 704654, 4546696; 704653, 4546696; 
704641, 4546695; 704631, 4546694; 704623, 4546694; 704606, 4546696; 
704576, 4546698; 704521, 4546701; 704500, 4546702; 704480, 4546702; 
704455, 4546701; 704434, 4546699; 704410, 4546698; 704351, 4546691; 
704333, 4546689; 704315, 4546690; 704297, 4546694; 704283, 4546692; 
704265, 4546693; 704243, 4546693; 704219, 4546693; 704201, 4546691; 
704155, 4546688; 704139, 4546686; 704124, 4546685; 704108, 4546684; 
704090, 4546685; 704073, 4546685; 704056, 4546686; 704044, 4546686; 
704028, 4546689; 704010, 4546693; 703997, 4546699; 703987, 4546705; 
703979, 4546716; 703973, 4546727; 703966, 4546741; 703955, 4546761; 
703957, 4546764; 703962, 4546769; 703969, 4546774; 703972, 4546777; 
703973, 4546783; 703971, 4546804; 704011, 4546822; 704024, 4546829; 
704030, 4546843; 704030, 4546843; 704029, 4546851; 704024, 4546857; 
704019, 4546860; 704010, 4546863; 704000, 4546868; 703983, 4546878; 
703976, 4546885; 703971, 4546893; 703966, 4546903; 703963, 4546915; 
703962, 4546924; 703958, 4546935; 703955, 4546938; 703947, 4546945; 
703939, 4546949; 703928, 4546951; 703917, 4546953; 703905, 4546957; 
703900, 4546964; 703893, 4546985; 703889, 4546995; 703884, 4547001; 
703874, 4547007; 703864, 4547013; 703856, 4547023; 703858, 4547032; 
703867, 4547042; 703879, 4547048; 703887, 4547054; 703894, 4547063; 
703894, 4547074; 703888, 4547080; 703883, 4547084; 703880, 4547089; 
703879, 4547100; 703882, 4547110; 703887, 4547121; 703892, 4547131; 
703892, 4547136; 703892, 4547144; 703890, 4547149; 703886, 4547153; 
703878, 4547156; 703872, 4547160; 703866, 4547167; 703861, 4547177; 
703857, 4547180; 703849, 4547180; 703840, 4547178; 703826, 4547174; 
703814, 4547173; 703799, 4547175; 703792, 4547177; 703792, 4547177; 
703776, 4547185; 703762, 4547194; 703744, 4547185; 703744, 4547185; 
703741, 4547183; 703736, 4547182; 703734, 4547181; 703734, 4547181; 
703727, 4547179; 703715, 4547180; 703705, 4547184; 703698, 4547187; 
703692, 4547192; 703685, 4547195; 703670, 4547196; 703661, 4547194; 
703653, 4547191; 703642, 4547189; 703626, 4547187; 703612, 4547185; 
703594, 4547183; 703576, 4547183; 703555, 4547183; 703535, 4547182; 
703520, 4547181; 703505, 4547179; 703491, 4547176; 703479, 4547171; 
703468, 4547166; 703463, 4547159; 703463, 4547155; 703464, 4547151; 
703468, 4547149; 703474, 4547148; 703481, 4547148; 703490, 4547148; 
703503, 4547143; 703497, 4547130; 703488, 4547127; 703478, 4547119; 
703472, 4547112; 703466, 4547102; 703459, 4547089; 703451, 4547074; 
703441, 4547062; 703426, 4547047; 703414, 4547037; 703395, 4547025; 
703375, 4547013; 703348, 4546992; 703344, 4546988; 703331, 4546984; 
703316, 4546983; 703304, 4546983; 703293, 4546981; 703285, 4546980; 
703275, 4546981; 703258, 4546985; 703253, 4546972; 703252, 4546965; 
703251, 4546953; 703253, 4546946; 703259, 4546937; 703266, 4546934; 
703274, 4546931; 703287, 4546929; 703294, 4546925; 703303, 4546919; 
703314, 4546914; 703327, 4546911; 703340, 4546911; 703355, 4546914; 
703367, 4546918; 703378, 4546923; 703388, 4546931; 703391, 4546935; 
703393, 4546940; 703392, 4546945; 703389, 4546950; 703387, 4546954; 
703384, 4546958; 703382, 4546966; 703384, 4546972; 703392, 4546979; 
703407, 4546984; 703423, 4546986; 703436, 4546987; 703449, 4546989; 
703458, 4546992; 703465, 4546997; 703473, 4547001; 703477, 4547005; 
703478, 4547012; 703478, 4547023; 703477, 4547029; 703477, 4547036; 
703478, 4547044; 703482, 4547049; 703491, 4547053; 703500, 4547058; 
703506, 4547063; 703516, 4547076; 703520, 4547087; 703523, 4547096; 
703527, 4547101; 703537, 4547109; 703545, 4547113; 703553, 4547116; 
703572, 4547122; 703581, 4547124; 703587, 4547124; 703591, 4547122; 
703602, 4547112; 703612, 4547100; 703621, 4547089; 703628, 4547086; 
703642, 4547085; 703654, 4547088; 703670, 4547093; 703684, 4547096; 
703695, 4547100; 703708, 4547106; 703720, 4547110; 703728, 4547113; 
703733, 4547114; 703741, 4547115; 703748, 4547116; 703756, 4547115; 
703763, 4547115; 703769, 4547113; 703772, 4547110; 703775, 4547108; 
703776, 4547104; 703775, 4547099; 703774, 4547091; 703772, 4547086; 
703771, 4547083; 703768, 4547080; 703775, 4547071; 703776, 4547069; 
703776, 4547067; 703777, 4547062; 703776, 4547059; 703773, 4547053; 
703770, 4547049; 703763, 4547045; 703752, 4547038; 703744, 4547033; 
703738, 4547028; 703737, 4547021; 703736, 4547015; 703737, 4547006; 
703737, 4547000; 703733, 4546992; 703726, 4546983; 703737, 4546973; 
703745, 4546969; 703756, 4546962; 703764, 4546953; 703771, 4546944; 
703777, 4546938; 703785, 4546934; 703797, 4546933; 703808, 4546932; 
703820, 4546928; 703826, 4546927; 703833, 4546923; 703836, 4546921; 
703839, 4546914; 703840, 4546906; 703838, 4546896; 703835, 4546884; 
703831, 4546871; 703830, 4546863; 703831, 4546854; 703832, 4546847; 
703836, 4546841; 703841, 4546834; 703848, 4546827; 703872, 4546809; 
703881, 4546806; 703895, 4546799; 703903, 4546795; 703910, 4546790; 
703920, 4546785; 703925, 4546780; 703930, 4546773; 703932, 4546765; 
703932, 4546756; 703931, 4546746; 703928, 4546736; 703927, 4546725; 
703930, 4546712; 703935, 4546703; 703942, 4546698; 703950, 4546694; 
703957, 4546691; 703966, 4546688; 703973, 4546684; 703977, 4546679; 
703980, 4546672; 703982, 4546667; 703983, 4546661; 703985, 4546649; 
703333, 4546631; 703154, 4546626; 703154, 4546629; 703118, 4546624; 
703118, 4546619; 702982, 4546615; 702982, 4546615; 702891, 4546611; 
702891, 4546614; 702891, 4546616; 702891, 4546618; 702892, 4546623; 
702895, 4546631; 702898, 4546633; 702904, 4546636; 702909, 4546637; 
702928, 4546639; 702927, 4546640; 702928, 4546644; 702933, 4546652; 
702940, 4546658; 702946, 4546661;

[[Page 856]]

702952, 4546663; 702968, 4546672; 702965, 4546681; 702965, 4546687; 
702966, 4546696; 702968, 4546709; 702969, 4546720; 702975, 4546727; 
702986, 4546726; 702994, 4546725; 703003, 4546730; 703009, 4546737; 
703010, 4546745; 703009, 4546754; 703002, 4546775; 703001, 4546788; 
703003, 4546796; 703008, 4546805; 703016, 4546812; 703023, 4546817; 
703030, 4546819; 703056, 4546824; 703055, 4546829; 703059, 4546836; 
703063, 4546840; 703067, 4546844; 703070, 4546848; 703070, 4546851; 
703066, 4546856; 703059, 4546856; 703051, 4546855; 703047, 4546857; 
703044, 4546860; 703044, 4546865; 703048, 4546871; 703051, 4546875; 
703053, 4546883; 703053, 4546893; 703053, 4546898; 703046, 4546905; 
703038, 4546909; 703031, 4546915; 703025, 4546920; 703016, 4546922; 
703007, 4546925; 702999, 4546928; 702991, 4546930; 702983, 4546929; 
702978, 4546927; 702967, 4546923; 702965, 4546920; 702895, 4546927; 
702837, 4546945; 702809, 4546984; 702755, 4547063; 702713, 4547086; 
702717, 4547093; 702716, 4547097; 702710, 4547101; 702703, 4547103; 
702694, 4547105; 702686, 4547107; 702672, 4547111; 702659, 4547112; 
702646, 4547111; 702639, 4547110; 702627, 4547108; 702612, 4547105; 
702599, 4547102; 702582, 4547095; 702566, 4547090; 702550, 4547087; 
702531, 4547083; 702520, 4547083; 702512, 4547088; 702509, 4547096; 
702507, 4547107; 702507, 4547116; 702510, 4547126; 702514, 4547134; 
702519, 4547140; 702527, 4547149; 702530, 4547153; 702545, 4547151; 
702596, 4547157; 702658, 4547156; 702702, 4547168; 702705, 4547205; 
702698, 4547258; 702694, 4547315; 702706, 4547366; 702707, 4547420; 
702710, 4547419; 702713, 4547417; 702718, 4547412; 702724, 4547406; 
702733, 4547400; 702734, 4547398; 702746, 4547388; 702754, 4547383; 
702777, 4547374; 702784, 4547372; 702791, 4547372; 702765, 4547319; 
702780, 4547256; 702823, 4547170; 702855, 4547133; 702867, 4547149; 
702890, 4547198; 702899, 4547201; 702907, 4547238; 702924, 4547290; 
702935, 4547300; 702949, 4547315; 702962, 4547328; 702972, 4547337; 
702983, 4547343; 702985, 4547342; 702995, 4547342; 703004, 4547344; 
703014, 4547349; 703025, 4547357; 703034, 4547367; 703043, 4547378; 
703053, 4547391; 703062, 4547405; 703072, 4547415; 703080, 4547422; 
703103, 4547430; 703103, 4547429; 703134, 4547443; 703137, 4547446; 
703144, 4547449; 703154, 4547451; 703161, 4547449; 703168, 4547447; 
703176, 4547442; 703184, 4547437; 703193, 4547436; 703205, 4547438; 
703219, 4547439; 703237, 4547438; 703255, 4547436; 703271, 4547435; 
703282, 4547435; 703291, 4547439; 703298, 4547448; 703300, 4547461; 
703299, 4547465; 703296, 4547472; 703293, 4547478; 703289, 4547488; 
703288, 4547501; 703290, 4547509; 703297, 4547519; 703303, 4547531; 
703306, 4547547; 703307, 4547551; 703295, 4547616; 703248, 4547589; 
703172, 4547523; 703144, 4547518; 703139, 4547521; 703137, 4547520; 
703134, 4547523; 703134, 4547526; 703133, 4547542; 703128, 4547550; 
703128, 4547555; 703128, 4547559; 703128, 4547564; 703129, 4547568; 
703130, 4547571; 703133, 4547579; 703133, 4547594; 703133, 4547596; 
703132, 4547603; 703133, 4547603; 703133, 4547604; 703135, 4547622; 
703133, 4547621; 703133, 4547629; 703133, 4547649; 703134, 4547649; 
703132, 4547757; 703131, 4547758; 703130, 4547810; 703131, 4547815; 
703175, 4547811; 703230, 4547836; 703244, 4547854; 703248, 4547852; 
703289, 4547922; 703289, 4547924; 703310, 4547963; 703339, 4548041; 
703363, 4548105; 703377, 4548166; 703397, 4548216; 703414, 4548217; 
703438, 4548218; 703470, 4548219; 703532, 4548221; 703589, 4548225; 
703593, 4548211; 703594, 4548204; 703590, 4548190; 703585, 4548175; 
703579, 4548162; 703574, 4548148; 703570, 4548135; 703565, 4548122; 
703560, 4548115; 703553, 4548107; 703546, 4548097; 703539, 4548087; 
703530, 4548079; 703523, 4548072; 703512, 4548066; 703504, 4548061; 
703496, 4548058; 703489, 4548057; 703746, 4546901; 703746, 4546899; 
703746, 4546900; 703746, 4546901.
    (xiv) Tract 4n. Land bounded by the following Universal Transverse 
Mercator (UTM) Zone 14N, North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83) 
coordinates (E, N): 703213, 4548983; 703212, 4548980; 703214, 4548981; 
703216, 4548980; 703224, 4548972; 703227, 4548972; 703247, 4548891; 
703261, 4548823; 703258, 4548757; 703244, 4548695; 703279, 4548634; 
703314, 4548625; 703333, 4548677; 703347, 4548724; 703374, 4548847; 
703375, 4548847; 703379, 4548849; 703382, 4548846; 703387, 4548837; 
703389, 4548824; 703388, 4548810; 703388, 4548793; 703394, 4548778; 
703398, 4548770; 703404, 4548759; 703406, 4548742; 703405, 4548728; 
703403, 4548717; 703402, 4548703; 703408, 4548686; 703410, 4548670; 
703410, 4548669; 703383, 4548606; 703387, 4548541; 703416, 4548480; 
703482, 4548378; 703456, 4548298; 703458, 4548249; 703407, 4548248; 
703379, 4548312; 703344, 4548357; 703290, 4548395; 703205, 4548437; 
703135, 4548453; 703132, 4548456; 703126, 4548466; 703122, 4548472; 
703120, 4548476; 703118, 4548481; 703117, 4548485; 703116, 4548490; 
703116, 4548494; 703117, 4548499; 703119, 4548502; 703127, 4548503; 
703137, 4548501; 703147, 4548500; 703157, 4548497; 703165, 4548496; 
703171, 4548497; 703173, 4548501; 703179, 4548508; 703174, 4548519; 
703184, 4548518; 703236, 4548529; 703279, 4548537; 703254, 4548586; 
703225, 4548663; 703217, 4548736; 703208, 4548835; 703200, 4548891; 
703182, 4548942; 703181, 4548946; 703180, 4548961; 703176, 4548977; 
703173, 4548986; 703168, 4548996; 703164, 4549006; 703161, 4549012; 
703159, 4549017; 703158, 4549021; 703157, 4549026; 703159, 4549030; 
703165, 4549034; 703171, 4549034; 703179, 4549030; 703191, 4549020; 
703200, 4549009; 703206, 4549000; 703210, 4548992; 703213, 4548983.
    (xv) Note: Map of Unit 4, Jack Sinn - Rock Creek (Map 4), follows:

[[Page 857]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR06AP10.007

 Valley Elderberry Longhorn Beetle (Desmocerus californicus dimorphus) 
                     California. Sacramento County.

    (1) Sacramento Zone. An area in the city of Sacramento enclosed on 
the north by the Route 160 Freeway, on the west and southwest by the 
Western Pacific railroad tracks, and on the east by Commerce Circle and 
its extension southward to the railroad tracks.
    Note: Map follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.148
    
    (2) American River Parkway Zone. An area of the American River 
Parkway on the south bank of the American River, bounded on the north by 
latitude 30[deg]37[min]30[sec] N, on the west and southwest by Elmanto 
Drive from its junction with Ambassador Drive to its extension

[[Page 858]]

to latitute 38[deg]37[min]30[sec] N, and on the south and east by 
Ambassador Drive and its extension north to latitude 
38[deg]37[min]30[sec] N. Goethe Park, and that portion of the American 
River Parkway northeast of Goethe Park, west of the Jedediah Smith 
Memorial Bicycle Trail, and north to a line extended eastward from Palm 
Drive.
    Note: Map follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.149
    
         Bay Checkerspot Butterfly (Euphydryas editha bayensis)

    (1) Critical habitat units are depicted for San Mateo and Santa 
Clara Counties, California, on the maps below.
    (2) The primary constituent elements of critical habitat for the Bay 
checkerspot butterfly are the habitat components that provide:
    (i) The presence of annual or perennial grasslands with little to no 
overstory that provide north-south and east-west slopes with a tilt of 
more than 7 degrees for larval host plant survival during periods of 
atypical weather (for example, drought). Common grassland species 
include wild oats (Avena fatua), soft chess (Bromus hordeaceus), 
California oatgrass (Danthonia californica), purple needlegrass 
(Nassella pulchra), and Idaho fescue (Festuca idahoensis); less abundant 
in these grasslands are annual and perennial forbs such as filaree 
(Erodium botrys), true clovers (Trifolium sp.), dwarf plantain (Plantago 
erecta), and turkey mullein (Croton setigerus). These species, with the 
exception of dwarf plantain, are not required by the Bay checkerspot 
butterfly, but merely are provided here as an example of species 
commonly found in California grasslands.
    (ii) The presence of the primary larval host plant, dwarf plantain 
(Plantago erecta), and at least one of the secondary host plants, purple 
owl's-clover (Castilleja densiflora) or exserted paintbrush (Castilleja 
exserta), are required for reproduction, feeding, and larval 
development.
    (iii) The presence of adult nectar sources for feeding. Common 
nectar sources include desertparsley (Lomatium spp.), California 
goldfields (Lasthenia californica), tidy-tips (Layia platyglossa), sea 
muilla (Muilla maritima), scytheleaf onion (Allium falcifolium), false 
babystars (Linanthus androsaceus), and intermediate fiddleneck 
(Amsinckia intermedia).
    (iv) Soils derived from serpentinite ultramafic rock (Montara, 
Climara, Henneke, Hentine, and Obispo soil series) or similar soils 
(Inks, Candlestick, Los Gatos, Fagan, and Barnabe soil series) that 
provide areas with fewer aggressive, nonnative plant species for larval 
host plant and adult nectar plant survival and reproduction.
    (v) The presence of stable holes and cracks in the soil, and surface 
rock outcrops that provide shelter for the larval stage of the Bay 
checkerspot butterfly during summer diapause.
    (3) Critical habitat does not include manmade structures (such as 
buildings, aqueducts, runways, roads, and other paved areas) and the 
land on which they are located existing on the effective date of this 
rule and not containing one or more of the primary constituent elements.
    (4) Critical habitat map units. Data layers defining map units were 
created on a base of USGS 7.5[min] quadrangles using USDA National 
Agricultural Imagery Program (NAIP) county-wide MrSID compressed mosaics 
of 1 meter resolution and natural color aerial photography from summer 
2005. Critical habitat units were then mapped using Universal Transverse 
Mercator (UTM) zone 10, North American Datum (NAD) 1983 coordinates.
    (5) Note: Index map for Bay checkerspot butterfly critical habitat 
units follows:

[[Page 859]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR26AU08.000

    (6) Unit 1: San Bruno Mountain, San Mateo County, California. From 
USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangle San Francisco South.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM zone 10, NAD 1983 coordinates 
(E,N): 52853, 4170062; 52856, 4170038; 52862, 4170043; 52866, 4170045; 
52889, 4170061; 52915, 4170074; 52940, 4170084; 52970, 4170091; 52991, 
4170102; 53010, 4170112; 53036, 4170134; 53057, 4170130; 53070, 4170151; 
53089, 4170171; 53112, 4170170; 53135, 4170154; 53153, 4170109; 53184, 
4170104; 53203, 4170081; 53207, 4170041; 53201, 4169958; 53214, 4169958; 
53241, 4169938; 53257, 4169970; 53281, 4169974; 53303, 4169965; 53323, 
4169971; 53344, 4169964; 53355, 4169943; 53374, 4169943; 53402, 4169930; 
53404, 4169906; 53428, 4169900; 53458, 4169913; 53489, 4169909; 53527, 
4169898; 53563, 4169900; 53592, 4169902; 53627, 4169892; 53656, 4169877; 
53671, 4169859; 53713, 4169856; 53710, 4169804; 53665, 4169711; 53618, 
4169606; 53604, 4169575; 53559, 4169488; 53521, 4169481; 53492, 4169479; 
53478, 4169457; 53474, 4169413; 53454, 4169388; 53434, 4169364; 53387, 
4169340; 53357, 4169322; 53336, 4169300; 53317, 4169269; 53301,

[[Page 860]]

4169264; 53287, 4169242; 53260, 4169178; 53235, 4169105; 53164, 4169029; 
53100, 4169010; 53101, 4168943; 53069, 4168920; 53013, 4168954; 52936, 
4168954; 52882, 4169005; 52824, 4169051; 52752, 4169071; 52718, 4169074; 
52650, 4169066; 52628, 4169020; 52610, 4168977; 52552, 4168965; 52580, 
4169045; 52440, 4169117; 52362, 4169110; 52352, 4169041; 52235, 4169066; 
52242, 4169257; 52198, 4169347; 52168, 4169354; 52159, 4169382; 52152, 
4169426; 52142, 4169428; 52127, 4169422; 52107, 4169432; 52094, 4169445; 
52088, 4169459; 52083, 4169491; 52068, 4169488; 52054, 4169493; 52049, 
4169483; 52049, 4169465; 52046, 4169432; 52038, 4169413; 52024, 4169400; 
52010, 4169390; 51996, 4169388; 51993, 4169373; 51990, 4169352; 51989, 
4169338; 51977, 4169310; 51954, 4169295; 51930, 4169292; 51912, 4169296; 
51896, 4169310; 51876, 4169332; 51849, 4169369; 51827, 4169382; 51815, 
4169391; 51792, 4169390; 51759, 4169390; 51747, 4169402; 51752, 4169424; 
51760, 4169437; 51769, 4169458; 51771, 4169481; 51797, 4169559; 51721, 
4169595; 51695, 4169469; 51667, 4169464; 51647, 4169469; 51623, 4169501; 
51589, 4169527; 51592, 4169674; 51570, 4169677; 51550, 4169674; 51508, 
4169668; 51477, 4169671; 51435, 4169674; 51423, 4169719; 51419, 4169736; 
51408, 4169731; 51394, 4169713; 51379, 4169697; 51354, 4169691; 51341, 
4169690; 51337, 4169681; 51315, 4169681; 51303, 4169689; 51279, 4169713; 
51229, 4169810; 51184, 4169770; 51171, 4169745; 51155, 4169731; 51135, 
4169723; 51129, 4169719; 51129, 4169710; 51129, 4169690; 51127, 4169669; 
51118, 4169651; 51104, 4169629; 51086, 4169609; 51061, 4169598; 51035, 
4169591; 50999, 4169589; 50967, 4169591; 50935, 4169599; 50913, 4169616; 
50896, 4169638; 50882, 4169668; 50844, 4169623; 50831, 4169611; 50810, 
4169588; 50792, 4169588; 50777, 4169590; 50760, 4169600; 50748, 4169602; 
50738, 4169589; 50731, 4169574; 50731, 4169561; 50736, 4169542; 50740, 
4169517; 50741, 4169495; 50736, 4169475; 50729, 4169463; 50723, 4169447; 
50722, 4169430; 50718, 4169415; 50710, 4169399; 50701, 4169385; 50690, 
4169374; 50679, 4169365; 50674, 4169349; 50664, 4169330; 50655, 4169312; 
50635, 4169299; 50623, 4169292; 50613, 4169284; 50613, 4169268; 50597, 
4169255; 50583, 4169239; 50580, 4169215; 50583, 4169191; 50613, 4169153; 
50665, 4169090; 50650, 4169068; 50617, 4169048; 50572, 4169043; 50542, 
4169042; 50519, 4169048; 50498, 4169052; 50483, 4169061; 50461, 4169073; 
50444, 4169085; 50387, 4169124; 50362, 4169151; 50346, 4169178; 50322, 
4169174; 50297, 4169175; 50279, 4169181; 50235, 4169183; 50203, 4169194; 
50169, 4169217; 50139, 4169238; 50122, 4169250; 50104, 4169267; 50081, 
4169290; 50073, 4169317; 50068, 4169345; 50069, 4169377; 50070, 4169388; 
50068, 4169402; 50068, 4169418; 50076, 4169438; 50087, 4169455; 50087, 
4169464; 50068, 4169486; 50054, 4169509; 50044, 4169534; 50035, 4169557; 
50033, 4169584; 50034, 4169608; 50040, 4169631; 50045, 4169650; 50050, 
4169664; 50055, 4169673; 50059, 4169686; 50068, 4169712; 50078, 4169734; 
50090, 4169776; 50096, 4169811; 50117, 4169844; 50136, 4169877; 50152, 
4169904; 50180, 4169920; 50235, 4169925; 50279, 4169932; 50323, 4169940; 
50364, 4169954; 50399, 4169970; 50412, 4169998; 50435, 4170034; 50460, 
4170069; 50490, 4170103; 50485, 4170138; 50482, 4170165; 50479, 4170188; 
50491, 4170214; 50483, 4170257; 50495, 4170295; 50515, 4170330; 50547, 
4170370; 50580, 4170407; 50613, 4170479; 50624, 4170446; 50640, 4170421; 
50667, 4170395; 50706, 4170376; 50730, 4170351; 50756, 4170336; 50784, 
4170314; 50799, 4170279; 50794, 4170250; 50767, 4170227; 50774, 4170205; 
50811, 4170182; 50851, 4170185; 50881, 4170201; 50892, 4170233; 50944, 
4170243; 50957, 4170277; 50980, 4170307; 51017, 4170327; 51050, 4170349; 
51063, 4170366; 51069, 4170404; 51069, 4170462; 51093, 4170507; 51112, 
4170535; 51128, 4170569; 51159, 4170601; 51180, 4170643; 51195, 4170685; 
51203, 4170750; 51268, 4170754; 51274, 4170805; 51322, 4170818; 51364, 
4170820; 51385, 4170786; 51354, 4170744; 51345, 4170699; 51303, 4170619; 
51206, 4170481; 51188, 4170457; 51133, 4170443; 51104, 4170432; 51101, 
4170397; 51113, 4170364; 51119, 4170341; 51150, 4170331; 51167, 4170314; 
51187, 4170309; 51214, 4170298; 51227, 4170315; 51243, 4170321; 51262, 
4170291; 51287, 4170284; 51316, 4170276; 51343, 4170291; 51382, 4170291; 
51427, 4170277; 51455, 4170354; 51495, 4170371; 51506, 4170328; 51536, 
4170284; 51569, 4170288; 51589, 4170279; 51614, 4170278; 51628, 4170264; 
51622, 4170249; 51626, 4170230; 51629, 4170215; 51643, 4170211; 51657, 
4170201; 51673, 4170196; 51689, 4170185; 51711, 4170180; 51736, 4170180; 
51767, 4170176; 51793, 4170180; 51823, 4170182; 51845, 4170150; 51843, 
4170122; 51871, 4170112; 51874, 4170144; 51879, 4170178; 51893, 4170205; 
51914, 4170246; 51916, 4170287; 51943, 4170335; 51944, 4170395; 51956, 
4170442; 51967, 4170500; 51964, 4170535; 51947, 4170559; 51929, 4170584; 
51937, 4170647; 51943, 4170683; 51944, 4170710; 51919, 4170764; 51916, 
4170789; 51925, 4170815; 51944, 4170850; 51955, 4170879; 51974, 4170905; 
51980, 4170939; 51981, 4170982; 51997, 4170985; 52017, 4170989; 52040, 
4170986; 52056, 4170972; 52076, 4170953; 52091, 4170957; 52113, 4170977; 
52150, 4170992; 52173, 4170975; 52186, 4170953; 52150, 4170924; 52147, 
4170872; 52166, 4170834; 52169, 4170799; 52160, 4170686; 52125, 4170673; 
52125, 4170651; 52160, 4170651; 52157, 4170619; 52131, 4170600; 52141, 
4170564; 52173, 4170564; 52176, 4170503; 52128, 4170295; 52125, 4170263; 
52134, 4170222; 52153, 4170202; 52176, 4170190; 52214, 4170190; 52243, 
4170206; 52266, 4170196; 52266, 4170129; 52236, 4170086; 52202, 4170051; 
52145, 4169994; 52165, 4169960; 52221, 4169933; 52269, 4169930; 52319, 
4169895; 52385, 4169894; 52425, 4169868; 52461, 4169881; 52449, 4170010; 
52462, 4170073; 52488, 4170158; 52518, 4170166; 52539, 4170168; 52560, 
4170160; 52575, 4170162; 52596, 4170173; 52616, 4170174; 52651, 4170154; 
52683, 4170159; 52723, 4170154; 52754, 4170155; 52782, 4170155; 52805, 
4170147; 52831, 4170134; 52847, 4170094; returning to 52853, 4170062.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit 1 for Bay checkerspot butterfly follows:

[[Page 861]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR26AU08.001

    (7) Unit 2: Pulgas Ridge, San Mateo County, California. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangle San Mateo.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM zone 10, NAD 1983 coordinates 
(E,N): 558502, 4151442; 558422, 4151451; 558339, 4151484; 558223, 
4151555; 558094, 4151656; 557957, 4151788; 557745, 4152013; 557545, 
4152228; 557398, 4152392; 557274, 4152523; 557191, 4152632; 557123, 
4152751; 557076, 4152838; 557061, 4152902; 557012, 4153060; 557027, 
4153077; 557027, 4153130; 556994, 4153145; 556961, 4153171; 556939, 
4153182; 556936, 4153216; 556913, 4153220; 556880, 4153242; 556868, 
4153273; 556867, 4153329; 557060, 4153350; 557277, 4153095; 557358, 
4153009; 557407, 4152900; 557494, 4152681; 557576, 4152631; 557851, 
4152470; 558104, 4152134; 558210, 4152004; 558320, 4151850; 558268, 
4151803; 558302, 4151758; 558363, 4151800; 558474, 4151666; 558625, 
4151470; 558602, 4151463; 558557, 4151448; returning to 558502, 4151442.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit 2 for Bay checkerspot butterfly follows:

[[Page 862]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR26AU08.002

    (8) Unit 3: Edgewood Park, San Mateo County, California. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangle Woodside.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM zone 10, NAD 1983 coordinates 
(E,N): 564162, 4146806; 564197, 4146796; 564234, 4146748; 564270, 
4146731; 564196, 4146657; 564182, 4146642; 564169, 4146630; 564154, 
4146615; 564142, 4146585; 564128, 4146601; 564108, 4146585; 564097, 
4146565; 564092, 4146540; 564078, 4146514; 564061, 4146457; 564032, 
4146525; 564003, 4146549; 563949, 4146575; 563903, 4146582; 563868, 
4146576; 563834, 4146542; 563809, 4146492; 563808, 4146448; 563842, 
4146394; 563811, 4146384; 563774, 4146364; 563747, 4146377; 563726, 
4146394; 563702, 4146416; 563668, 4146413; 563684, 4146384; 563656, 
4146377; 563626, 4146409; 563555, 4146423; 563533, 4146403; 563533, 
4146374; 563520, 4146338; 563543, 4146316; 563596, 4146356; 563604, 
4146338; 563576, 4146297; 563520, 4146284; 563450, 4146312; 563396, 
4146314; 563360, 4146293; 563338, 4146263; 563340, 4146229; 563365, 
4146198; 563424, 4146176; 563464, 4146140; 563488, 4146094; 563459, 
4146043; 563420, 4146003; 563361, 4145965; 563305, 4145945; 563215, 
4145902; 563106, 4145980; 563077,

[[Page 863]]

4145966; 563050, 4145976; 563014, 4145948; 562923, 4146053; 562820, 
4146153; 562674, 4146184; 562550, 4146190; 562503, 4146146; 562432, 
4146134; 562367, 4146141; 562337, 4146177; 562290, 4146269; 562106, 
4146315; 562126, 4146380; 562087, 4146395; 562148, 4146523; 562121, 
4146554; 562162, 4146602; 562260, 4146697; 562284, 4146723; 562369, 
4146818; 562418, 4146870; 562467, 4146918; 562548, 4147005; 562667, 
4147115; 562724, 4147186; 562744, 4147200; 562771, 4147206; 562796, 
4147214; 562816, 4147212; 562849, 4147216; 562862, 4147203; 562874, 
4147191; 562858, 4147160; 562876, 4147148; 562907, 4147149; 562915, 
4147187; 562936, 4147221; 562955, 4147207; 562963, 4147174; 563001, 
4147137; 563034, 4147121; 563052, 4147122; 563063, 4147135; 563063, 
4147160; 563070, 4147174; 563098, 4147180; 563141, 4147173; 563179, 
4147179; 563199, 4147187; 563196, 4147227; 563164, 4147243; 563156, 
4147274; 563140, 4147290; 563124, 4147308; 563103, 4147329; 563087, 
4147356; 563093, 4147379; 563113, 4147405; 563138, 4147424; 563196, 
4147403; 563228, 4147396; 563247, 4147392; 563256, 4147354; 563275, 
4147334; 563304, 4147313; 563304, 4147357; 563312, 4147395; 563324, 
4147437; 563329, 4147458; 563336, 4147478; 563334, 4147508; 563354, 
4147530; 563371, 4147543; 563411, 4147539; 563440, 4147526; 563465, 
4147513; 563468, 4147488; 563457, 4147462; 563446, 4147441; 563436, 
4147420; 563429, 4147405; 563422, 4147390; 563415, 4147377; 563414, 
4147360; 563406, 4147327; 563408, 4147272; 563443, 4147244; 563457, 
4147229; 563480, 4147222; 563502, 4147229; 563517, 4147251; 563534, 
4147276; 563553, 4147283; 563569, 4147282; 563595, 4147274; 563623, 
4147264; 563646, 4147239; 563645, 4147181; 563608, 4147135; 563604, 
4147096; 563609, 4147060; 563647, 4147048; 563675, 4147047; 563668, 
4147013; 563671, 4146982; 563673, 4146964; 563675, 4146954; 563669, 
4146934; 563697, 4146903; 563739, 4146896; 563788, 4146903; 563825, 
4146934; 563853, 4146979; 563862, 4146993; 563882, 4147004; 563902, 
4147007; 563915, 4147002; 563912, 4146981; 563900, 4146963; 563883, 
4146944; 563881, 4146913; 563889, 4146885; 563888, 4146855; 563858, 
4146857; 563817, 4146861; 563749, 4146833; 563727, 4146798; 563744, 
4146751; 563776, 4146699; 563799, 4146661; 563863, 4146689; 563971, 
4146735; 563979, 4146753; 563997, 4146758; 564017, 4146756; 564030, 
4146769; 564048, 4146778; 564080, 4146775; 564099, 4146784; 564131, 
4146803; returning to 564162, 4146806.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit 3 for Bay checkerspot butterfly follows:

[[Page 864]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR26AU08.003

    (9) Unit 4: Jasper Ridge, San Mateo County, California. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangle Palo Alto.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM zone 10, NAD 1983 coordinates 
(E,N): 569513, 4139881; 569524, 4139862; 569550, 4139849; 569569, 
4139829; 569580, 4139812; 569578, 4139791; 569578, 4139780; 569605, 
4139771; 569631, 4139770; 569696, 4139789; 569703, 4139764; 569676, 
4139743; 569686, 4139716; 569736, 4139668; 569782, 4139670; 569815, 
4139659; 569839, 4139671; 569869, 4139687; 569893, 4139716; 569915, 
4139714; 569954, 4139692; 569993, 4139680; 570014, 4139658; 570027, 
4139642; 570046, 4139627; 569983, 4139608; 568859, 4139177; 568865, 
4139205; 568889, 4139237; 568921, 4139265; 568951, 4139280; 568962, 
4139308; 568947, 4139319; 568908, 4139319; 568882, 4139319; 568882, 
4139327; 568885, 4139340; 568885, 4139353; 568876, 4139355; 568869, 
4139342; 568848, 4139319; 568831, 4139278; 568816, 4139261; 568797, 
4139250; 568775, 4139252; 568758, 4139261; 568747, 4139261; 568736, 
4139274; 568745, 4139299; 568749, 4139323; 568728, 4139344; 568702, 
4139342; 568674, 4139342; 568666, 4139342; 568664, 4139362; 568676, 
4139387; 568698, 4139407; 568743,

[[Page 865]]

4139411; 568771, 4139411; 568805, 4139411; 568816, 4139441; 568846, 
4139490; 568852, 4139520; 568852, 4139527; 568844, 4139531; 568833, 
4139507; 568788, 4139495; 568771, 4139495; 568749, 4139505; 568741, 
4139527; 568730, 4139548; 568724, 4139548; 568713, 4139531; 568694, 
4139518; 568685, 4139503; 568674, 4139501; 568657, 4139501; 568642, 
4139495; 568627, 4139484; 568603, 4139473; 568597, 4139499; 568603, 
4139512; 568520, 4139578; 568505, 4139565; 568475, 4139565; 568470, 
4139574; 568479, 4139595; 568485, 4139621; 568481, 4139625; 568462, 
4139617; 568425, 4139604; 568400, 4139604; 568389, 4139623; 568389, 
4139641; 568391, 4139668; 568404, 4139688; 568410, 4139705; 568410, 
4139722; 568412, 4139741; 568417, 4139746; 568408, 4139752; 568389, 
4139737; 568361, 4139718; 568325, 4139694; 568314, 4139694; 568307, 
4139703; 568322, 4139737; 568335, 4139765; 568348, 4139791; 568335, 
4139793; 568315, 4139789; 568305, 4139799; 568296, 4139814; 568270, 
4139808; 568246, 4139783; 568225, 4139748; 568210, 4139748; 568210, 
4139778; 568221, 4139803; 568247, 4139836; 568261, 4139857; 568252, 
4139870; 568210, 4139863; 568165, 4139858; 568142, 4139865; 568145, 
4139890; 568159, 4139919; 568152, 4139934; 568108, 4139937; 568099, 
4139966; 568083, 4139989; 568070, 4140011; 568066, 4140038; 568090, 
4140032; 568131, 4139998; 568168, 4139984; 568203, 4139975; 568250, 
4139976; 568279, 4139979; 568289, 4139967; 568294, 4139945; 568303, 
4139922; 568324, 4139914; 568345, 4139906; 568371, 4139896; 568407, 
4139913; 568461, 4139913; 568495, 4139923; 568526, 4139951; 568571, 
4140000; 568574, 4140034; 568543, 4140051; 568497, 4140049; 568467, 
4140066; 568430, 4140076; 568397, 4140063; 568353, 4140055; 568300, 
4140059; 568250, 4140072; 568225, 4140087; 568205, 4140107; 568200, 
4140141; 568207, 4140177; 568200, 4140183; 568163, 4140157; 568082, 
4140161; 568023, 4140180; 568005, 4140193; 567998, 4140211; 568015, 
4140225; 568027, 4140241; 568028, 4140259; 568006, 4140269; 567984, 
4140271; 567967, 4140280; 567962, 4140301; 567948, 4140320; 567930, 
4140339; 567915, 4140373; 567904, 4140392; 567938, 4140398; 567980, 
4140405; 568008, 4140418; 568001, 4140442; 567988, 4140457; 568031, 
4140467; 568098, 4140470; 568123, 4140484; 568166, 4140471; 568183, 
4140472; 568180, 4140494; 568172, 4140517; 568147, 4140543; 568153, 
4140554; 568184, 4140561; 568209, 4140577; 568249, 4140579; 568285, 
4140585; 568318, 4140597; 568356, 4140608; 568383, 4140600; 568423, 
4140577; 568471, 4140580; 568488, 4140590; 568483, 4140612; 568507, 
4140625; 568551, 4140623; 568572, 4140632; 568606, 4140653; 568658, 
4140676; 568681, 4140691; 568705, 4140693; 568723, 4140687; 568741, 
4140684; 568762, 4140673; 568807, 4140653; 568830, 4140634; 568862, 
4140607; 568873, 4140591; 568894, 4140584; 568891, 4140566; 568881, 
4140556; 568856, 4140536; 568838, 4140520; 568834, 4140499; 568812, 
4140474; 568803, 4140445; 568791, 4140422; 568786, 4140395; 568739, 
4140382; 568733, 4140366; 568719, 4140353; 568682, 4140355; 568648, 
4140350; 568651, 4140331; 568668, 4140312; 568672, 4140286; 568653, 
4140278; 568668, 4140256; 568713, 4140235; 568736, 4140273; 568769, 
4140284; 568805, 4140303; 568827, 4140297; 568848, 4140312; 568872, 
4140321; 568918, 4140335; 568964, 4140327; 569000, 4140248; 569024, 
4140226; 569058, 4140256; 569097, 4140267; 569129, 4140244; 569166, 
4140211; 569186, 4140185; 569202, 4140165; 569217, 4140136; 569219, 
4140119; 569228, 4140106; 569240, 4140094; 569260, 4140088; 569282, 
4140073; 569286, 4140045; 569284, 4140017; 569286, 4139986; 569279, 
4139961; 569254, 4139955; 569242, 4139943; 569217, 4139920; 569211, 
4139900; 569246, 4139893; 569275, 4139877; 569305, 4139877; 569342, 
4139883; 569367, 4139919; 569404, 4139945; 569434, 4139949; 569455, 
4139945; 569485, 4139917; returning to 569513, 4139881.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit 4 for Bay checkerspot butterfly follows:

[[Page 866]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR26AU08.004

    (10) Unit 5: Metcalf, Santa Clara County, California. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangles San Jose East, Lick Observatory, Santa Teresa 
Hills, and Morgan Hill.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM zone 10, NAD 1983 coordinates 
(E,N): 611242, 4121203; 611273, 4121300; 611382, 4121353; 611488, 
4121320; 611607, 4121360; 611707, 4121423; 611776, 4121486; 611856, 
4121482; 611945, 4121496; 612084, 4121502; 612190, 4121555; 612315, 
4121543; 612448, 4121585; 612577, 4121572; 612974, 4121532; 613302, 
4121410; 613507, 4121310; 613672, 4121337; 613907, 4121337; 614056, 
4121410; 614393, 4121110; 614418, 4121079; 614479, 4121095; 614513, 
4121108; 614547, 4121103; 614579, 4121103; 614616, 4121102; 614628, 
4121071; 614610, 4121032; 614633, 4121024; 614691, 4121025; 614737, 
4121019; 614760, 4120988; 614750, 4120961; 614713, 4120939; 614711, 
4120903; 614703, 4120876; 614718, 4120863; 614731, 4120832; 614743, 
4120810; 614774, 4120852; 614784, 4120819; 614904, 4120878; 614919, 
4120849; 614913, 4120812; 614919, 4120775; 614897, 4120730; 614874, 
4120715; 614886, 4120686; 614891, 4120659; 614921, 4120671; 614969, 
4120678; 614999, 4120664; 614999, 4120625; 614974,

[[Page 867]]

4120593; 614980, 4120547; 614950, 4120517; 614942, 4120488; 614970, 
4120470; 614986, 4120424; 614996, 4120339; 615037, 4120410; 615163, 
4120270; 615782, 4119656; 615873, 4119555; 616548, 4118936; 616751, 
4118743; 617140, 4118453; 617774, 4118066; 617873, 4118037; 617986, 
4118057; 618040, 4118015; 617983, 4117993; 617934, 4117940; 617896, 
4117916; 617930, 4117901; 617984, 4117896; 618000, 4117874; 618032, 
4117863; 618054, 4117849; 618052, 4117820; 618027, 4117810; 618025, 
4117766; 618067, 4117760; 618067, 4117728; 618144, 4117713; 618222, 
4117720; 618262, 4117696; 618278, 4117655; 618256, 4117633; 618279, 
4117591; 618286, 4117527; 618323, 4117503; 618317, 4117455; 618359, 
4117439; 618413, 4117435; 618427, 4117461; 618457, 4117471; 618489, 
4117476; 618489, 4117501; 618516, 4117516; 618545, 4117506; 618559, 
4117469; 618589, 4117466; 618618, 4117430; 618642, 4117442; 618642, 
4117477; 618684, 4117503; 618711, 4117527; 618730, 4117550; 618760, 
4117564; 618797, 4117553; 618818, 4117545; 618836, 4117511; 618852, 
4117500; 618877, 4117494; 618874, 4117457; 618894, 4117445; 618932, 
4117427; 618932, 4117442; 618957, 4117445; 618976, 4117432; 618976, 
4117393; 619062, 4117364; 619092, 4117373; 619113, 4117369; 619111, 
4117323; 619145, 4117283; 619062, 4117188; 619058, 4117150; 619037, 
4117123; 618984, 4117044; 619147, 4117114; 619236, 4117123; 619294, 
4117077; 619329, 4117080; 619357, 4117092; 619387, 4117074; 619392, 
4117037; 619382, 4117011; 619414, 4117004; 619446, 4116993; 619441, 
4116938; 619469, 4116920; 619483, 4116876; 619460, 4116840; 619496, 
4116812; 619525, 4116780; 619536, 4116746; 619553, 4116743; 619592, 
4116766; 619630, 4116739; 619626, 4116701; 619641, 4116687; 619677, 
4116701; 619706, 4116681; 619753, 4116690; 619769, 4116667; 619745, 
4116648; 619789, 4116592; 619775, 4116566; 619685, 4116547; 619768, 
4116513; 619764, 4116489; 619720, 4116399; 619758, 4116390; 619725, 
4116298; 619792, 4116295; 619827, 4116268; 619843, 4116231; 619832, 
4116189; 619956, 4116200; 620026, 4116196; 620027, 4116146; 620037, 
4116090; 619981, 4115976; 620018, 4115910; 619981, 4115866; 619891, 
4115850; 619903, 4115813; 619978, 4115796; 619996, 4115766; 620072, 
4115793; 620111, 4115763; 620096, 4115712; 620116, 4115680; 620199, 
4115750; 620314, 4115703; 620320, 4115653; 620356, 4115633; 620401, 
4115659; 620444, 4115506; 620503, 4115495; 620571, 4115549; 620617, 
4115454; 620788, 4115324; 620903, 4115266; 620995, 4115260; 621058, 
4115374; 621097, 4115435; 621107, 4115413; 621122, 4115390; 621149, 
4115374; 621156, 4115344; 621200, 4115254; 621608, 4115039; 621668, 
4115004; 621715, 4114977; 621744, 4114932; 621789, 4114879; 621788, 
4114836; 621788, 4114810; 621768, 4114773; 621773, 4114740; 621772, 
4114662; 621773, 4114638; 621766, 4114618; 621782, 4114597; 621842, 
4114600; 621857, 4114586; 621875, 4114583; 621881, 4114552; 621827, 
4114518; 621800, 4114474; 621727, 4114441; 621038, 4114280; 620937, 
4114292; 620831, 4114261; 620046, 4114525; 619795, 4114578; 619736, 
4114633; 619738, 4114702; 619674, 4114732; 619453, 4114356; 619351, 
4114262; 619197, 4114240; 619041, 4114293; 618895, 4114410; 618599, 
4114424; 618361, 4114506; 618185, 4114530; 617740, 4115026; 617095, 
4115754; 616662, 4116332; 616403, 4116568; 616244, 4116697; 616203, 
4116810; 616126, 4117005; 615933, 4117032; 615789, 4117099; 615722, 
4117186; 615933, 4117280; 616097, 4117217; 616167, 4117292; 616030, 
4117460; 615914, 4117446; 615683, 4117614; 615229, 4117907; 615099, 
4117854; 615457, 4117510; 615390, 4117438; 615003, 4117751; 614469, 
4118133; 613965, 4118481; 613890, 4118524; 613954, 4118666; 613790, 
4118831; 613636, 4118894; 613636, 4119149; 613557, 4119283; 613403, 
4119531; 613254, 4119651; 613077, 4119606; 612893, 4119620; 612832, 
4119665; 612853, 4119708; 612847, 4119729; 612784, 4119705; 612770, 
4119740; 612715, 4119760; 612640, 4119824; 612618, 4119872; 612583, 
4119977; 612062, 4120400; 611707, 4120758; 611686, 4120748; 611631, 
4120824; 611294, 4121127; returning to 611242, 4121203.
    (ii) Note: Unit 5 for Bay checkerspot butterfly is depicted on the 
map in paragraph (10)(ii) of this entry.

[[Page 868]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR26AU08.005

    (11) Unit 6: Tulare Hill, Santa Clara County, California. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangles San Jose East, Lick Observatory, Santa Teresa 
Hills, and Morgan Hill.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM zone 10, NAD 1983 coordinates 
(E,N): 610971, 4120478; 611134, 4120435; 611200, 4120245; 611116, 
4120132; 611181, 4119977; 611212, 4119824; 611280, 4119743; 611293, 
4119653; 611241, 4119512; 610967, 4119335; 610786, 4119391; 610392, 
4119622; 610302, 4119674; 610057, 4119813; 610117, 4119846; 609929, 
4120074; 609799, 4120229; 609915, 4120374; 609819, 4120430; 610113, 
4120749; 610310, 4120833; 610459, 4120769; 610531, 4120847; 610797, 
4120659; 610776, 4120464; 610843, 4120449; returning to 610971, 4120478.
    (ii) Note: Unit 6 for Bay checkerspot butterfly is depicted on the 
map in paragraph (10)(ii) of this entry.
    (12) Unit 7: Santa Teresa Hills, Santa Clara County, California. 
From USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles San Jose East, Lick Observatory, 
Santa Teresa Hills, and Morgan Hill.

[[Page 869]]

    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM zone 10, NAD 1983 coordinates 
(E,N): 608447, 4119332; 608474, 4119309; 608576, 4119335; 608615, 
4119330; 608689, 4119306; 608706, 4119356; 608749, 4119377; 608758, 
4119360; 608746, 4119302; 608760, 4119230; 608722, 4119159; 608656, 
4119124; 608669, 4119080; 608762, 4119101; 608846, 4119140; 608892, 
4119222; 609000, 4119082; 609117, 4119040; 609190, 4119077; 609244, 
4119107; 609509, 4119359; 609534, 4119358; 609548, 4119366; 609549, 
4119393; 609568, 4119444; 609582, 4119466; 609606, 4119520; 609628, 
4119547; 609656, 4119568; 610016, 4119783; 610228, 4119650; 610177, 
4119543; 610143, 4119434; 610086, 4119368; 610019, 4119278; 609929, 
4119219; 609928, 4119116; 609956, 4119070; 610001, 4119067; 610048, 
4119044; 610138, 4119037; 610165, 4119006; 610240, 4118997; 610306, 
4118956; 610325, 4118923; 610343, 4118915; 610381, 4118905; 610405, 
4118877; 610414, 4118822; 610436, 4118812; 610464, 4118833; 610521, 
4118824; 610564, 4118822; 610592, 4118815; 610612, 4118795; 610617, 
4118776; 610617, 4118756; 610624, 4118735; 610650, 4118729; 610669, 
4118717; 610700, 4118710; 610723, 4118718; 610757, 4118723; 610773, 
4118706; 610780, 4118658; 610790, 4118646; 610787, 4118598; 610775, 
4118570; 610773, 4118536; 610771, 4118519; 610782, 4118517; 610822, 
4118530; 610842, 4118528; 610864, 4118520; 610880, 4118508; 610899, 
4118501; 610915, 4118487; 610914, 4118461; 610906, 4118446; 610889, 
4118430; 610886, 4118417; 610902, 4118393; 610900, 4118367; 610896, 
4118340; 610912, 4118330; 610934, 4118310; 610940, 4118282; 610932, 
4118260; 610935, 4118251; 610949, 4118231; 610955, 4118207; 610957, 
4118181; 610964, 4118176; 610991, 4118168; 610989, 4118152; 610992, 
4118113; 611000, 4118109; 611019, 4118109; 611041, 4118121; 611066, 
4118127; 611096, 4118122; 611114, 4118125; 611160, 4118145; 611185, 
4118147; 611220, 4118143; 611254, 4118124; 611259, 4118093; 611250, 
4118046; 611250, 4118012; 611247, 4117972; 611255, 4117966; 611276, 
4117974; 611292, 4117975; 611331, 4117963; 611374, 4117922; 611421, 
4117919; 611446, 4117915; 611462, 4117908; 611475, 4117891; 611511, 
4117839; 611533, 4117814; 611554, 4117805; 611567, 4117772; 611556, 
4117741; 611560, 4117712; 611562, 4117677; 611517, 4117611; 611572, 
4117536; 611578, 4117500; 611570, 4117478; 611547, 4117451; 611503, 
4117429; 611458, 4117422; 611405, 4117439; 611323, 4117480; 611291, 
4117518; 611268, 4117566; 611230, 4117618; 611169, 4117625; 611100, 
4117637; 611072, 4117668; 611021, 4117766; 610962, 4117743; 610985, 
4117678; 611007, 4117611; 610957, 4117563; 610836, 4117565; 610800, 
4117537; 610773, 4117534; 610752, 4117518; 610733, 4117438; 610716, 
4117404; 610610, 4117272; 610572, 4117243; 610501, 4117238; 610412, 
4117262; 610370, 4117294; 610350, 4117341; 610281, 4117354; 610220, 
4117381; 610179, 4117413; 610146, 4117441; 610127, 4117492; 610058, 
4117531; 609819, 4117309; 609692, 4117372; 609593, 4117353; 609526, 
4117409; 609460, 4117386; 609405, 4117409; 609091, 4117456; 608872, 
4117364; 608840, 4117297; 608733, 4117262; 608502, 4117237; 608524, 
4117204; 608603, 4117138; 608723, 4117081; 608830, 4117067; 608934, 
4117066; 609071, 4117093; 609181, 4117210; 609225, 4117208; 609240, 
4117159; 609163, 4117083; 609228, 4117009; 609303, 4116981; 609325, 
4117003; 609303, 4117052; 609302, 4117087; 609324, 4117084; 609349, 
4117043; 609401, 4117059; 609409, 4117162; 609430, 4117203; 609458, 
4117190; 609471, 4117150; 609435, 4117016; 609506, 4116986; 609350, 
4116852; 609333, 4116880; 609256, 4116873; 609228, 4116889; 609205, 
4116873; 609163, 4116848; 609131, 4116849; 609102, 4116863; 609061, 
4116836; 609011, 4116841; 608843, 4116838; 608804, 4116864; 608758, 
4116878; 608714, 4116867; 608672, 4116827; 608625, 4116899; 608542, 
4116933; 608489, 4117019; 608426, 4117079; 608382, 4117115; 608343, 
4117134; 608305, 4117136; 608259, 4117127; 608216, 4117129; 608210, 
4117170; 608197, 4117192; 608138, 4117197; 608062, 4117234; 608020, 
4117241; 607997, 4117227; 607959, 4117228; 607963, 4117262; 607941, 
4117301; 607896, 4117334; 607909, 4117377; 608067, 4117348; 608170, 
4117343; 608289, 4117332; 608298, 4117392; 608239, 4117418; 608166, 
4117436; 608066, 4117450; 608012, 4117453; 607942, 4117507; 607907, 
4117572; 607938, 4117605; 607924, 4117642; 607848, 4117626; 607678, 
4117759; 607397, 4117766; 607129, 4117689; 606990, 4117599; 606767, 
4117931; 606643, 4118119; 606701, 4118302; 606742, 4118358; 606828, 
4118289; 606858, 4118323; 606693, 4118461; 606644, 4118391; 606609, 
4118328; 606542, 4118254; 606425, 4118183; 606179, 4118078; 605438, 
4118128; 605263, 4118203; 605074, 4118293; 604975, 4118365; 605178, 
4118600; 604548, 4118947; 604625, 4119145; 604788, 4119569; 604936, 
4119955; 604817, 4119974; 604817, 4120089; 604555, 4120119; 604414, 
4120139; 604283, 4120149; 604549, 4120858; 604561, 4120889; 604564, 
4120912; 604561, 4120952; 604572, 4120972; 604606, 4120977; 604622, 
4120963; 604624, 4120946; 604628, 4120920; 604645, 4120904; 604680, 
4120899; 604729, 4120910; 604729, 4120867; 604787, 4120831; 604810, 
4120814; 604844, 4120783; 604890, 4120765; 604924, 4120799; 604948, 
4120835; 604970, 4120831; 604986, 4120786; 605003, 4120742; 605064, 
4120714; 605093, 4120722; 605132, 4120760; 605163, 4120770; 605185, 
4120744; 605219, 4120689; 605272, 4120656; 605329, 4120668; 605395, 
4120706; 605405, 4120671; 605424, 4120642; 605452, 4120646; 605473, 
4120657; 605509, 4120656; 605548, 4120664; 605588, 4120656; 605614, 
4120682; 605643, 4120689; 605647, 4120649; 605679, 4120645; 605711, 
4120633; 605746, 4120610; 605728, 4120571; 605712, 4120545; 605685, 
4120526; 605653, 4120525; 605613, 4120522; 605608, 4120506; 605619, 
4120496; 605645, 4120487; 605709, 4120480; 605729, 4120443; 605749, 
4120426; 605775, 4120431; 605792, 4120456; 605809, 4120473; 605836, 
4120498; 605864, 4120508; 605879, 4120512; 605904, 4120506; 605928, 
4120490; 605945, 4120465; 605949, 4120449; 605945, 4120432; 605953, 
4120401; 605971, 4120390; 606001, 4120399; 606040, 4120411; 606076, 
4120422; 606105, 4120433; 606133, 4120448; 606158, 4120474; 606200, 
4120494; 606241, 4120516; 606272, 4120540; 606310, 4120548; 606353, 
4120567; 606378, 4120587; 606394, 4120604; 606407, 4120596; 606422, 
4120586; 606474, 4120580; 606521, 4120577; 606553, 4120566; 606589, 
4120544; 606625, 4120524; 606653, 4120496; 606653, 4120520; 606626, 
4120579; 606625, 4120607; 606650, 4120613; 606703, 4120612; 606736, 
4120611; 606751, 4120586; 606748, 4120556; 606762, 4120552; 606804, 
4120566; 606861, 4120594; 606917, 4120615; 606968, 4120624; 607030, 
4120627; 607084, 4120614; 607139, 4120594; 607197, 4120614; 607194, 
4120598; 607195, 4120569; 607195, 4120549; 607188, 4120521; 607174, 
4120507; 607179, 4120472; 607191, 4120455; 607214, 4120443; 607247, 
4120427; 607277, 4120408; 607280, 4120373; 607298, 4120340; 607305, 
4120307; 607332,

[[Page 870]]

4120290; 607364, 4120276; 607395, 4120272; 607414, 4120266; 607434, 
4120261; 607453, 4120267; 607461, 4120254; 607462, 4120237; 607458, 
4120220; 607449, 4120201; 607437, 4120184; 607421, 4120162; 607397, 
4120136; 607370, 4120088; 607327, 4120023; 607297, 4119983; 607182, 
4119926; 607113, 4119874; 607064, 4119832; 607020, 4119802; 606938, 
4119784; 606848, 4119768; 606800, 4119732; 606822, 4119719; 606891, 
4119713; 606982, 4119681; 607021, 4119632; 607033, 4119550; 607049, 
4119507; 607064, 4119439; 607068, 4119404; 607099, 4119389; 607118, 
4119342; 607152, 4119323; 607181, 4119286; 607199, 4119244; 607188, 
4119204; 607145, 4119123; 607167, 4119087; 607256, 4119070; 607355, 
4119123; 607619, 4119104; 607673, 4119099; 607702, 4119117; 607733, 
4119120; 607774, 4119125; 607775, 4119165; 607814, 4119200; 607861, 
4119222; 607909, 4119212; 607985, 4119188; 608024, 4119217; 607998, 
4119236; 608004, 4119270; 608048, 4119275; 608100, 4119228; 608157, 
4119228; 608207, 4119263; 608269, 4119268; 608314, 4119280; 608363, 
4119287; 608409, 4119297; 608425, 4119321; returning to 608447, 4119332.
    (ii) Note: Unit 7 for Bay checkerspot butterfly is depicted on the 
map in paragraph (10)(ii) of this entry.
    (13) Unit 8: Calero Reservoir, Santa Clara County, California. From 
USGS 1:24,000 scale quadrangles San Jose East, Lick Observatory, Santa 
Teresa Hills, and Morgan Hill.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM zone 10, NAD 1983 coordinates 
(E,N): 605493, 4116867; 605661, 4116896; 605718, 4116853; 605799, 
4116844; 605856, 4116923; 605938, 4116906; 606045, 4116752; 606122, 
4116520; 606156, 4116383; 606165, 4116288; 606051, 4116182; 606069, 
4116127; 606132, 4116039; 606177, 4116025; 606230, 4116083; 606269, 
4115997; 606336, 4116015; 606337, 4115938; 606300, 4115931; 606262, 
4115861; 606326, 4115838; 606387, 4115849; 606433, 4115829; 606519, 
4115734; 606574, 4115740; 606867, 4115901; 606937, 4115907; 606994, 
4115890; 607043, 4115856; 607081, 4115818; 607068, 4115755; 607090, 
4115693; 607144, 4115664; 607241, 4115643; 607290, 4115588; 607342, 
4115554; 607159, 4115391; 607119, 4115368; 607073, 4115389; 607047, 
4115495; 606903, 4115584; 606837, 4115586; 606861, 4115560; 606919, 
4115549; 606944, 4115530; 606950, 4115482; 606978, 4115469; 606996, 
4115393; 606975, 4115370; 606902, 4115402; 606901, 4115371; 606921, 
4115339; 606904, 4115306; 606880, 4115337; 606861, 4115296; 606876, 
4115251; 606935, 4115241; 606958, 4115263; 606986, 4115195; 607026, 
4115199; 607027, 4115255; 607060, 4115266; 607082, 4115207; 607089, 
4115149; 607179, 4115149; 607266, 4115115; 607415, 4115156; 607464, 
4115136; 607555, 4115164; 607716, 4115136; 607712, 4115003; 607657, 
4114850; 607604, 4114753; 607518, 4114686; 607611, 4114702; 607791, 
4114919; 607826, 4114984; 607808, 4115366; 607972, 4115293; 608186, 
4115186; 608470, 4115055; 608850, 4114830; 608992, 4114854; 609129, 
4114812; 609117, 4115020; 608880, 4115233; 608512, 4115397; 608059, 
4115492; 608029, 4115644; 607959, 4115592; 607880, 4115595; 607966, 
4115726; 608052, 4115817; 608155, 4115878; 608258, 4115908; 608358, 
4115910; 608437, 4115938; 608556, 4115906; 608545, 4115971; 608608, 
4115990; 608682, 4115957; 608750, 4115901; 608776, 4115906; 608815, 
4115934; 608892, 4115927; 608946, 4115873; 608948, 4115826; 608906, 
4115731; 608967, 4115710; 609032, 4115647; 609481, 4115100; 609477, 
4115025; 609577, 4114951; 609821, 4114856; 609866, 4114711; 609880, 
4114582; 610030, 4114486; 610081, 4114398; 610120, 4114330; 610159, 
4114322; 610155, 4114287; 610124, 4114240; 610287, 4114038; 610327, 
4113965; 610319, 4113865; 610257, 4113742; 610202, 4113705; 610079, 
4113729; 609993, 4113754; 609891, 4113813; 609798, 4113845; 609735, 
4113885; 609737, 4113963; 609663, 4114035; 609563, 4114088; 609524, 
4114248; 609455, 4114356; 609212, 4114403; 609004, 4114676; 608945, 
4114439; 608774, 4114422; 608635, 4114302; 608547, 4114164; 608453, 
4113729; 608135, 4113470; 608079, 4113433; 608043, 4113356; 608038, 
4113230; 608012, 4113254; 607980, 4113238; 607947, 4113270; 607907, 
4113243; 607855, 4113282; 607814, 4113362; 607802, 4113545; 607694, 
4113606; 607526, 4113700; 607691, 4113754; 607691, 4114069; 607465, 
4114176; 607326, 4114660; 606930, 4114755; 606709, 4114597; 606401, 
4114641; 606250, 4114805; 605916, 4114924; 605715, 4115195; 605293, 
4115604; 605224, 4115604; 605180, 4115755; 605224, 4115869; 605035, 
4116101; 605042, 4116215; 605067, 4116309; 605123, 4116366; 605229, 
4116454; 605338, 4116598; 605387, 4116705; returning to 605493, 4116867.
    (ii) Note: Unit 8 for Bay checkerspot butterfly is depicted on the 
map in paragraph (10)(ii) of this entry.
    (14) Unit 9: Kalana Hills, Santa Clara County, California. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangles San Jose East, Lick Observatory, Santa Teresa 
Hills, and Morgan Hill.
    (i) Subunit 9A: Land bounded by the following UTM zone 10, NAD 1983 
coordinates (E,N): 612463, 4115364; 612548, 4115283; 612611, 4115228; 
612581, 4115190; 612560, 4115157; 612725, 4114962; 612697, 4114924; 
612640, 4114916; 612512, 4114806; 612469, 4114770; 612456, 4114706; 
612331, 4114635; 612276, 4114621; 612159, 4114668; 612036, 4114796; 
611975, 4114842; 611928, 4114901; 611857, 4114927; 611811, 4114924; 
611806, 4115198; 611735, 4115382; 611703, 4115487; 611772, 4115526; 
611741, 4115600; 611742, returning to 4115605; 612028, 4115820; 
returning to 612463, 4115364.
    (ii) Subunit 9B: Land bounded by the following UTM zone 10, NAD 1983 
coordinates (E,N): 613292, 4114458; 613477, 4114328; 613645, 4114236; 
613859, 4114112; 613800, 4114081; 613704, 4114080; 613628, 4114115; 
613571, 4114099; 613525, 4114035; 613464, 4114059; 613430, 4114072; 
613389, 4114098; 613269, 4114176; 613135, 4114270; 613043, 4114292; 
612952, 4114245; 612882, 4114296; 612769, 4114341; 612771, 4114386; 
612807, 4114455; 612779, 4114504; 612761, 4114557; 612827, 4114609; 
612910, 4114621; 613020, 4114550; 613029, 4114509; 612967, 4114492; 
612953, 4114422; 612990, 4114368; 613090, 4114360; 613112, 4114463; 
613178, 4114499; returning to 613292, 4114458;
    (iii) Note: Unit 9 for Bay checkerspot butterfly is depicted on the 
map in paragraph (10)(ii) of this entry.
    (15) Unit 10: Hale, Santa Clara County, California. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangles San Jose East, Lick Observatory, Santa Teresa 
Hills, and Morgan Hill.
    (i) Unit 10: Land bounded by the following UTM zone 10, NAD 1983 
coordinates (E,N): 617448, 4111989; 617422, 4111978; 617343, 4111978;

[[Page 871]]

617295, 4111947; 617252, 4111862; 617269, 4111828; 617405, 4111774; 
617445, 4111797; 617501, 4111797; 617512, 4111746; 617589, 4111729; 
617733, 4111766; 618083, 4111853; 618116, 4111766; 618023, 4111705; 
617936, 4111647; 617899, 4111684; 617764, 4111596; 617933, 4111368; 
617964, 4111303; 617953, 4111188; 617891, 4111138; 617937, 4111083; 
617919, 4111040; 617865, 4111014; 617798, 4111069; 617586, 4110876; 
617618, 4110838; 617504, 4110738; 617459, 4110704; 617380, 4110673; 
617197, 4110835; 617009, 4111119; 616981, 4111133; 616936, 4111110; 
616925, 4111147; 616908, 4111187; 616885, 4111204; 616843, 4111232; 
616817, 4111274; 616809, 4111303; 616781, 4111297; 616758, 4111257; 
616724, 4111221; 616713, 4111159; 616744, 4111088; 616724, 4111060; 
616730, 4111037; 616789, 4110983; 616702, 4110933; 616668, 4110952; 
616620, 4110952; 616611, 4110901; 616436, 4111062; 616394, 4111037; 
616410, 4110989; 616472, 4110988; 616532, 4110930; 616523, 4110872; 
616555, 4110831; 616077, 4110537; 616073, 4110327; 615914, 4110402; 
615846, 4110431; 615912, 4110524; 615761, 4110576; 615745, 4110646; 
615715, 4110728; 615645, 4110790; 615684, 4110906; 615779, 4110867; 
615779, 4110825; 615918, 4110725; 616038, 4110856; 615936, 4110930; 
615947, 4111077; 615894, 4111105; 615830, 4111216; 615902, 4111306; 
615866, 4111429; 615933, 4111449; 616044, 4111449; 616147, 4111428; 
616225, 4111410; 616275, 4111430; 616313, 4111483; 616368, 4111489; 
616399, 4111520; 616394, 4111579; 616380, 4111625; 616430, 4111650; 
616484, 4111622; 616498, 4111585; 616555, 4111562; 616671, 4111591; 
616659, 4111653; 616685, 4111715; 616741, 4111780; 616846, 4111829; 
616677, 4112120; 616760, 4112261; 616792, 4112343; 617011, 4112356; 
617160, 4112394; 617286, 4112306; 617433, 4112045; returning to 617448, 
4111989 .
    (ii) Note: Unit 10 for Bay checkerspot butterfly is depicted on the 
map in paragraph (10)(ii) of this entry.
    (16) Unit 11: Bear Ranch, Santa Clara County, California. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangle Gilroy.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM zone 10, NAD 1983 coordinates 
(E,N): 628304, 4108774; 628402, 4108819; 628507, 4108797; 628590, 
4108729; 628635, 4108675; 628659, 4108564; 628747, 4108397; 628931, 
4108012; 629104, 4107674; 629171, 4107133; 629022, 4107043; 628875, 
4107022; 628732, 4107075; 628575, 4107128; 628449, 4107072; 628322, 
4107074; 628234, 4107094; 628173, 4107173; 628166, 4107286; 628210, 
4107426; 628327, 4107650; 628375, 4107703; 628458, 4107736; 628368, 
4107898; 628263, 4108172; 628208, 4108414; returning to 628304, 4108774.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit 11 for Bay checkerspot butterfly follows:

[[Page 872]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR26AU08.006

    (17) Unit 12: San Martin, Santa Clara County, California. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangles Mt. Madonna and Gilroy.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM zone 10, NAD 1983 coordinates 
(E,N): 622150, 4104262; 622178, 4104216; 622192, 4104170; 622217, 
4104195; 622241, 4104226; 622274, 4104226; 622296, 4104208; 622309, 
4104171; 622302, 4104120; 622340, 4104110; 622347, 4104088; 622336, 
4104047; 622334, 4103984; 622320, 4103948; 622317, 4103898; 622330, 
4103845; 622404, 4103809; 622421, 4103769; 622421, 4103689; 622441, 
4103649; 622487, 4103631; 622538, 4103599; 622557, 4103529; 622591, 
4103461; 622575, 4103406; 622538, 4103358; 622441, 4103346; 622399, 
4103363; 622352, 4103322; 622274, 4103300; 622206, 4103304; 622098, 
4103341; 622020, 4103370; 621920, 4103382; 621843, 4103390; 621812, 
4103362; 621779, 4103365; 621739, 4103372; 621700, 4103404; 621682, 
4103449; 621705, 4103496; 621667, 4103560; 621569, 4103489; 621509, 
4103489; 621463, 4103477; 621464, 4103459; 621411, 4103467; 621348, 
4103472; 621288, 4103477; 621223, 4103476; 621183, 4103476; 621127, 
4103476; 621079, 4103490; 621030, 4103508; 620988, 4103525; 620973, 
4103571; 620996, 4103623; 621025,

[[Page 873]]

4103666; 621055, 4103695; 621076, 4103707; 621079, 4103733; 621087, 
4103764; 621112, 4103805; 621046, 4103796; 621009, 4103805; 620979, 
4103791; 620922, 4103774; 620887, 4103775; 620871, 4103811; 620845, 
4103873; 620806, 4103922; 620751, 4103944; 620702, 4103984; 620679, 
4103961; 620627, 4103961; 620593, 4103979; 620591, 4104020; 620568, 
4104053; 620542, 4104032; 620509, 4104030; 620482, 4104039; 620450, 
4104073; 620393, 4104116; 620330, 4104174; 620283, 4104200; 620255, 
4104240; 620230, 4104262; 620197, 4104288; 620191, 4104325; 620193, 
4104362; 620203, 4104399; 620176, 4104412; 620126, 4104472; 620132, 
4104499; 620211, 4104578; 620245, 4104578; 620329, 4104574; 620440, 
4104541; 620510, 4104492; 620543, 4104480; 620529, 4104405; 620612, 
4104386; 620646, 4104431; 620657, 4104489; 620672, 4104509; 620728, 
4104541; 620794, 4104556; 620852, 4104539; 620909, 4104525; 620931, 
4104568; 620942, 4104598; 620946, 4104627; 620968, 4104627; 620988, 
4104586; 621013, 4104556; 621034, 4104566; 621046, 4104621; 621098, 
4104634; 621083, 4104537; 621176, 4104528; 621262, 4104540; 621334, 
4104549; 621398, 4104575; 621488, 4104622; 621559, 4104617; 621598, 
4104563; 621688, 4104533; 621739, 4104536; 621811, 4104464; 621836, 
4104417; 621908, 4104391; 621951, 4104417; 622007, 4104440; 622132, 
4104423; 622160, 4104403; 622153, 4104371; 622118, 4104356; 622033, 
4104350; 622004, 4104340; 621974, 4104326; 621951, 4104304; 621969, 
4104286; 621996, 4104293; 622032, 4104294; 622060, 4104274; 622115, 
4104272; returning to 622150, 4104262.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit 12 for Bay checkerspot butterfly follows:

[[Page 874]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR26AU08.007

    (18) Unit 13: Kirby, Santa Clara County, California. From USGS 
1:24,000 scale quadrangles San Jose East, Lick Observatory, Santa Teresa 
Hills, and Morgan Hill.
    (i) Land bounded by the following UTM zone 10, NAD 1983 coordinates 
(E,N): 614073, 4122412; 613927, 4122313; 613818, 4122194; 613722, 
4121982; 613609, 4121926; 613463, 4121895; 613322, 4121923; 613199, 
4122005; 613063, 4121982; 612938, 4122012; 612845, 4121942; 612809, 
4121823; 612723, 4121727; 612574, 4121711; 612435, 4121734; 612295, 
4121716; 612154, 4121723; 612079, 4121699; 612017, 4121720; 611996, 
4121655; 611902, 4121653; 611790, 4121695; 611662, 4121642; 611579, 
4121554; 611512, 4121447; 611422, 4121445; 611365, 4121419; 611310, 
4121420; 611247, 4121377; 610975, 4121590; 610770, 4121774; 610611, 
4121899; 610472, 4122085; 610310, 4122006; 610106, 4122145; 610077, 
4122227; 610126, 4122316; 610217, 4122395; 610179, 4122447; 610133, 
4122430; 610089, 4122512; 610125, 4122559; 610156, 4122607; 610157, 
4122653; 610128, 4122660; 610058, 4122641; 610016, 4122607; 609977, 
4122674; 610091, 4122763; 610187, 4122847; 610220, 4122921; 610249, 
4122977; 610374, 4123102; 610254, 4123181; 610015,

[[Page 875]]

4123335; 609613, 4123583; 609641, 4123630; 609399, 4123790; 609324, 
4123843; 609182, 4124041; 608934, 4123924; 608736, 4124027; 608538, 
4124145; 608423, 4124256; 608167, 4124471; 608065, 4124633; 608059, 
4124666; 607803, 4124871; 607677, 4124973; 607615, 4125109; 607637, 
4125224; 607756, 4125351; 607593, 4125474; 607351, 4125490; 607272, 
4125663; 607018, 4125820; 606980, 4125845; 606948, 4125876; 606896, 
4125972; 606890, 4125996; 606845, 4125998; 606796, 4126045; 606753, 
4126055; 606663, 4126127; 606595, 4126178; 606463, 4126353; 606314, 
4126287; 606282, 4126331; 606153, 4126428; 605939, 4126505; 605841, 
4126533; 605785, 4126693; 605832, 4126844; 605701, 4126851; 605621, 
4127118; 605715, 4127161; 605847, 4127159; 605992, 4127130; 606076, 
4127058; 606215, 4127099; 606422, 4127010; 606465, 4126897; 606699, 
4126796; 606886, 4126695; 607019, 4126736; 607190, 4126796; 607356, 
4126935; 607437, 4127065; 607306, 4127251; 607149, 4127421; 607062, 
4127440; 606910, 4127537; 606714, 4127727; 606521, 4127943; 606345, 
4128015; 606227, 4128006; 606179, 4127924; 606131, 4127779; 606097, 
4127827; 606067, 4127868; 605982, 4127883; 605953, 4128027; 605857, 
4127996; 605761, 4128001; 605703, 4128063; 605662, 4128160; 605702, 
4128211; 605770, 4128251; 605842, 4128289; 605912, 4128287; 605946, 
4128220; 605992, 4128138; 606059, 4128152; 606148, 4128174; 606210, 
4128152; 606324, 4128056; 606410, 4128049; 606321, 4128171; 606343, 
4128210; 606614, 4128290; 606611, 4128519; 606706, 4128535; 606802, 
4128525; 607015, 4128424; 607079, 4128412; 607069, 4128316; 607125, 
4128227; 607190, 4128215; 607202, 4128263; 607252, 4128252; 606865, 
4127849; 607067, 4127789; 607267, 4127710; 607475, 4127729; 607713, 
4127722; 607817, 4127626; 607733, 4127426; 607803, 4127314; 607825, 
4127248; 607762, 4127173; 607740, 4127113; 607808, 4127063; 607894, 
4127046; 608043, 4127019; 608116, 4126921; 608123, 4126707; 608000, 
4126634; 607880, 4126543; 607769, 4126507; 607654, 4126497; 607668, 
4126413; 607779, 4126408; 607805, 4126324; 608058, 4126129; 608255, 
4125992; 608610, 4125722; 608893, 4125417; 609482, 4125417; 609838, 
4125398; 610196, 4125396; 610302, 4125557; 610370, 4125506; 610487, 
4125492; 610584, 4125439; 610692, 4125442; 610769, 4125405; 610827, 
4125316; 610877, 4125249; 610937, 4125251; 610947, 4125345; 610759, 
4125562; 610815, 4125701; 610858, 4125797; 610945, 4125841; 611101, 
4125858; 611199, 4125833; 611308, 4125853; 611356, 4125884; 611424, 
4125805; 611461, 4125744; 611542, 4125723; 611602, 4125671; 611673, 
4125610; 611808, 4125456; 611970, 4125331; 612147, 4125249; 612322, 
4125103; 612539, 4124931; 612515, 4124823; 612590, 4124756; 612648, 
4124664; 612753, 4124575; 612773, 4124506; 612879, 4124335; 612972, 
4124219; 613073, 4124178; 613129, 4124085; 613251, 4123917; 613206, 
4123339; 613193, 4122893; 613280, 4122832; 613351, 4122715; 613426, 
4122657; 613489, 4122657; 613563, 4122662; 613669, 4122607; 613741, 
4122596; 614073, 4122412.
    (ii) Note: Unit 13 for Bay checkerspot butterfly is depicted on the 
map in paragraph (10)(ii) of this entry.

          Fender's Blue butterfly (Icaricia icarioides fenderi)

    (1) Critical habitat units are depicted for Benton, Lane, Polk, and 
Yamhill Counties, Oregon, on the maps below.
    (2) The primary constituent elements of critical habitat for 
Fender's blue butterfly are the habitat components that provide:
    (i) Early seral upland prairie, wet prairie, or oak savanna habitat 
with a mosaic of low-growing grasses and forbs, an absence of dense 
canopy vegetation, and undisturbed subsoils;
    (ii) Larval host-plants Lupinus sulphureus ssp. kincaidii, L. 
arbustus, or L. albicaulis;
    (iii) Adult nectar sources, such as: Allium acuminatum (tapertip 
onion), Allium amplectens (narrowleaf onion), Calochortus tolmiei 
(Tolmie's mariposa lilly), Camassia quamash (small camas), Cryptantha 
intermedia (clearwater cryptantha), Eriophyllum lanatum (wooly 
sunflower), Geranium oreganum (Oregon geranium), Iris tenax (toughleaf 
iris), Linum angustifolium (pale flax), Linum perenne (blue flax), 
Sidalcea campestris (Meadow checkermallow), Sidalcea virgata (rose 
checker-mallow), Vicia cracca (bird vetch), V. sativa (common vetch), 
and V. hirsute (tiny vetch);
    (iv) Stepping-stone habitat consisting of undeveloped open areas 
with the physical characteristics appropriate for supporting the short-
stature prairie oak savanna plant community (well-drained soils), within 
1.2 miles (2 km) of natal lupine patches.
    (3) Critical habitat does not include man-made structures (such as 
buildings, aqueducts, airports, roads, and other paved areas, and the 
land on which such structures are located) existing on the effective 
date of this rule and not containing one or more of the primary 
constituent elements.
    (4) Critical Habitat Map Units. Data layers defining map units were 
created using USGS 24,000 scale Digital Ortho Quads captured in 2000. 
Critical habitat units were then mapped using Universal Transverse 
Mercator (UTM) zone 10, North American Datum (NAD) 1983 coordinates.
    (5) Note: Map 1 (Index map for Fender's blue butterfly) follows:

[[Page 876]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31OC06.001

    (6) Unit 1 for Fender's blue butterfly (FBB-1), Yamhill County, 
Oregon.
    (i) Unit 1A (FBB-1A): 477069, 5022493; 477070, 5022487; 477067, 
5022487; 477065, 5022493; 477063, 5022498; 477063, 5022510; 477046, 
5022526; 477039, 5022566; 477039, 5022576; 477038, 5022585; 477039, 
5022591; 477039, 5022824; 477055, 5022862; 477073, 5022873; 477056, 
5022893; 477056, 5022901; 477057, 5022907; 477061, 5022907; 477060, 
5022896; 477081, 5022888; 477101, 5022884; 477099, 5022848; 477110, 
5022829; 477111, 5022528; 477098, 5022513; 477069, 5022504; 477067, 
5022498; 477069, 5022493.
    (ii) Unit 1B (FBB-1B): 477876, 5021643; 477881, 5021641; 477902, 
5021642; 477941, 5021640; 477957, 5021634; 477983, 5021620; 478008, 
5021592; 478031, 5021554; 478078, 5021484; 478068, 5021464; 478035, 
5021445; 477996, 5021442; 477983, 5021440; 477989, 5021435; 477986, 
5021427; 477979, 5021419; 477968, 5021420; 477956, 5021427; 477931, 
5021437; 477898, 5021440; 477878, 5021434; 477854, 5021427; 477857,

[[Page 877]]

5021435; 477855, 5021439; 477846, 5021438; 477836, 5021433; 477812, 
5021449; 477790, 5021465; 477773, 5021478; 477759, 5021499; 477745, 
5021504; 477743, 5021519; 477744, 5021519; 477737, 5021537; 477732, 
5021541; 477731, 5021541; 477731, 5021541; 477731, 5021541; 477731, 
5021541; 477730, 5021541; 477730, 5021541; 477729, 5021541; 477727, 
5021541; 477727, 5021541; 477727, 5021541; 477727, 5021541; 477727, 
5021541; 477726, 5021542; 477726, 5021542; 477726, 5021542; 477726, 
5021542; 477726, 5021542; 477726, 5021542; 477726, 5021542; 477726, 
5021542; 477726, 5021542; 477726, 5021542; 477725, 5021543; 477724, 
5021543; 477724, 5021543; 477724, 5021543; 477724, 5021543; 477723, 
5021543; 477723, 5021543; 477723, 5021543; 477722, 5021543; 477722, 
5021544; 477721, 5021544; 477720, 5021543; 477720, 5021543; 477720, 
5021543; 477720, 5021543; 477720, 5021543; 477719, 5021543; 477719, 
5021543; 477719, 5021543; 477719, 5021543; 477719, 5021543; 477719, 
5021543; 477719, 5021543; 477719, 5021543; 477719, 5021543; 477719, 
5021543; 477719, 5021543; 477719, 5021543; 477719, 5021543; 477719, 
5021543; 477719, 5021543; 477719, 5021543; 477718, 5021543; 477718, 
5021543; 477718, 5021543; 477718, 5021544; 477718, 5021544; 477718, 
5021544; 477718, 5021544; 477718, 5021544; 477718, 5021544; 477718, 
5021544; 477718, 5021544; 477718, 5021544; 477718, 5021544; 477718, 
5021544; 477718, 5021544; 477718, 5021544; 477718, 5021544; 477718, 
5021544; 477718, 5021544; 477718, 5021545; 477718, 5021545; 477718, 
5021545; 477718, 5021545; 477718, 5021545; 477718, 5021545; 477719, 
5021545; 477719, 5021545; 477719, 5021545; 477719, 5021545; 477719, 
5021545; 477719, 5021545; 477719, 5021545; 477719, 5021545; 477720, 
5021545; 477720, 5021545; 477720, 5021545; 477721, 5021546; 477721, 
5021546; 477721, 5021546; 477721, 5021546; 477721, 5021546; 477721, 
5021546; 477721, 5021546; 477722, 5021546; 477722, 5021546; 477722, 
5021546; 477722, 5021546; 477722, 5021546; 477723, 5021545; 477723, 
5021545; 477723, 5021545; 477723, 5021545; 477723, 5021545; 477724, 
5021545; 477725, 5021544; 477725, 5021544; 477725, 5021544; 477725, 
5021544; 477726, 5021544; 477726, 5021544; 477726, 5021544; 477726, 
5021544; 477726, 5021544; 477726, 5021544; 477727, 5021543; 477728, 
5021543; 477729, 5021543; 477715, 5021554; 477698, 5021582; 477695, 
5021586; 477695, 5021589; 477690, 5021600; 477691, 5021601; 477707, 
5021609; 477719, 5021607; 477739, 5021612; 477777, 5021616; 477823, 
5021631; 477839, 5021635; 477849, 5021641; 477867, 5021641; 477876, 
5021643.
    (iii) Note: Map 2 (Unit 1 for Fender's blue butterfly (FBB-1)) 
follows:

[[Page 878]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31OC06.002

    (7) Unit 2 for Fender's blue butterfly (FBB-2), Yamhill County, 
Oregon.
    (i) Unit 2 (FBB-2): 470959, 5003231; 470965, 5003226; 470972, 
5003226; 470984, 5003224; 470992, 5003223; 471004, 5003220; 471012, 
5003218; 471016, 5003215; 471018, 5003209; 471014, 5003202; 471011, 
5003200; 471006, 5003198; 470998, 5003191; 470991, 5003187; 470988, 
5003186; 470981, 5003180; 470977, 5003176; 470973, 5003168; 470970, 
5003165; 470968, 5003159; 470968, 5003151; 470968, 5003132; 470968, 
5003123; 470967, 5003109; 470965, 5003099; 470962, 5003090; 470961, 
5003075; 470965, 5003070; 470966, 5003065; 470967, 5003055; 470965, 
5003048; 470969, 5003041; 470974, 5003036; 470979, 5003036; 470984, 
5003035; 470986, 5003035; 470990, 5003032; 470995, 5003027; 470998, 
5003022; 470998, 5003015; 470998, 5003010; 470994, 5003007; 470988, 
5003006; 470977, 5003006; 470973, 5003006; 470963, 5003004; 470957, 
5003001; 470949, 5002996; 470947, 5002994; 470945, 5002987; 470944, 
5002981; 470946, 5002976; 470949,

[[Page 879]]

5002967; 470958, 5002964; 470965, 5002964; 470973, 5002962; 470981, 
5002958; 470988, 5002955; 470994, 5002951; 470999, 5002946; 471004, 
5002937; 471005, 5002932; 471010, 5002924; 471012, 5002918; 471010, 
5002913; 471011, 5002902; 471003, 5002893; 470992, 5002886; 470982, 
5002892; 470966, 5002893; 470956, 5002901; 470945, 5002909; 470932, 
5002914; 470925, 5002911; 470914, 5002904; 470905, 5002901; 470893, 
5002900; 470876, 5002901; 470868, 5002895; 470867, 5002887; 470879, 
5002867; 470888, 5002866; 470935, 5002861; 470970, 5002859; 470988, 
5002861; 470991, 5002853; 470998, 5002837; 471002, 5002828; 471012, 
5002821; 471016, 5002816; 471015, 5002796; 471017, 5002785; 471017, 
5002776; 471016, 5002766; 471015, 5002751; 471014, 5002740; 471012, 
5002737; 471008, 5002734; 470998, 5002731; 470988, 5002734; 470981, 
5002737; 470975, 5002739; 470967, 5002744; 470959, 5002745; 470951, 
5002747; 470943, 5002747; 470929, 5002745; 470924, 5002744; 470917, 
5002740; 470908, 5002741; 470894, 5002743; 470884, 5002741; 470878, 
5002739; 470871, 5002737; 470865, 5002735; 470861, 5002735; 470853, 
5002735; 470843, 5002736; 470834, 5002737; 470826, 5002742; 470819, 
5002745; 470814, 5002751; 470811, 5002758; 470811, 5002764; 470809, 
5002774; 470805, 5002784; 470801, 5002791; 470797, 5002795; 470787, 
5002802; 470780, 5002802; 470772, 5002802; 470760, 5002805; 470752, 
5002811; 470750, 5002818; 470747, 5002830; 470746, 5002840; 470744, 
5002861; 470743, 5002874; 470740, 5002886; 470738, 5002896; 470735, 
5002904; 470731, 5002910; 470729, 5002911; 470716, 5002892; 470717, 
5002872; 470704, 5002848; 470692, 5002827; 470696, 5002824; 470691, 
5002816; 470690, 5002804; 470692, 5002800; 470703, 5002799; 470698, 
5002794; 470700, 5002783; 470695, 5002776; 470691, 5002769; 470690, 
5002762; 470695, 5002753; 470682, 5002753; 470682, 5002723; 470692, 
5002723; 470689, 5002717; 470691, 5002709; 470694, 5002702; 470684, 
5002700; 470675, 5002699; 470665, 5002704; 470657, 5002701; 470651, 
5002704; 470645, 5002701; 470640, 5002694; 470623, 5002696; 470617, 
5002697; 470608, 5002697; 470604, 5002707; 470589, 5002716; 470582, 
5002715; 470580, 5002725; 470564, 5002726; 470563, 5002707; 470555, 
5002695; 470553, 5002676; 470548, 5002670; 470553, 5002660; 470562, 
5002655; 470562, 5002646; 470557, 5002635; 470564, 5002625; 470557, 
5002608; 470514, 5002689; 470514, 5002732; 470561, 5002844; 470604, 
5002950; 470685, 5003149; 470688, 5003164; 470693, 5003185; 470725, 
5003387; 470725, 5003399; 470728, 5003400; 470728, 5003406; 470733, 
5003407; 470738, 5003441; 470741, 5003444; 470749, 5003447; 470755, 
5003446; 470764, 5003444; 470769, 5003441; 470775, 5003430; 470778, 
5003422; 470780, 5003416; 470782, 5003411; 470787, 5003400; 470790, 
5003393; 470794, 5003387; 470797, 5003383; 470810, 5003372; 470817, 
5003367; 470829, 5003362; 470836, 5003356; 470841, 5003352; 470852, 
5003349; 470856, 5003345; 470858, 5003343; 470869, 5003337; 470878, 
5003335; 470891, 5003328; 470895, 5003325; 470901, 5003320; 470914, 
5003313; 470925, 5003301; 470930, 5003295; 470937, 5003286; 470945, 
5003282; 470948, 5003277; 470948, 5003271; 470948, 5003260; 470951, 
5003247; 470955, 5003235; 470959, 5003231.
    (ii) Note: Map 3 (Unit 2 for Fender's blue butterfly (FBB-2)) 
follows:

[[Page 880]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31OC06.003

    (8) Unit 3 for Fender's blue butterfly (FBB-3), Polk County, Oregon.
    (i) Unit 3 (FBB-3): 466744, 4985295; 466788, 4985264; 466788, 
4985266; 466788, 4985267; 466788, 4985268; 466789, 4985269; 466789, 
4985270; 466790, 4985271; 466791, 4985272; 466792, 4985273; 466793, 
4985273; 466795, 4985273; 466796, 4985274; 466797, 4985273; 466798, 
4985273; 466800, 4985272; 466800, 4985272; 466801, 4985271; 466802, 
4985270; 466802, 4985269; 466803, 4985267; 466803, 4985266; 466803, 
4985265; 466802, 4985264; 466805, 4985263; 466814, 4985246; 466828, 
4985234; 466834, 4985222; 466841, 4985196; 466839, 4985170; 466828, 
4985145; 466814, 4985129; 466805, 4985129; 466783, 4985143; 466767, 
4985178; 466742, 4985216; 466725, 4985214; 466725, 4985212; 466721, 
4985211; 466718, 4985210; 466715, 4985211; 466711, 4985212; 466707, 
4985213; 466700, 4985220; 466694, 4985237; 466694, 4985239; 466694, 
4985241; 466696, 4985243; 466710, 4985258; 466681,

[[Page 881]]

4985295; 466683, 4985320; 466691, 4985320; 466712, 4985309; 466744, 
4985295.
    (ii) Note: Map 4 (Unit 3 for Fender's blue butterfly (FBB-3)) 
follows:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31OC06.004

    (9) Unit 4 for Fender's blue butterfly (FBB-4), Polk County, Oregon.
    (i) Unit 4A (FBB-4A): 480420, 4981038; 480415, 4980660; 480465, 
4980658; 480509, 4980632; 480539, 4980585; 480559, 4980485; 480655, 
4980012; 480670, 4980021; 480700, 4980045; 480721, 4980066; 480736, 
4980087; 480757, 4980126; 480772, 4980165; 480790, 4980221; 480805, 
4980257; 480811, 4980275; 480850, 4980311; 480865, 4980329; 480892, 
4980347; 480943, 4980338; 480973, 4980332; 480997, 4980317; 481021, 
4980302; 481036, 4980287; 481093, 4980302; 481105, 4980299; 481150, 
4980293; 481188, 4980278; 481215,

[[Page 882]]

4980266; 481218, 4980239; 481272, 4980218; 481290, 4980218; 481335, 
4980218; 481371, 4980215; 481401, 4980212; 481446, 4980212; 481473, 
4980221; 481482, 4980236; 481506, 4980254; 481542, 4980257; 481584, 
4980257; 481617, 4980251; 481719, 4980272; 481776, 4980281; 481926, 
4980287; 482124, 4980275; 482147, 4980262; 482161, 4980236; 482177, 
4980217; 482190, 4980197; 482191, 4980181; 482193, 4980161; 482184, 
4980150; 482154, 4980150; 482109, 4980135; 482067, 4980117; 482058, 
4980075; 482052, 4980027; 481998, 4980024; 481977, 4980018; 481959, 
4980003; 481938, 4980003; 481920, 4980009; 481899, 4980015; 481875, 
4980003; 481866, 4979937; 481473, 4979934; 481476, 4979898; 481476, 
4979835; 481482, 4979793; 481470, 4979754; 481464, 4979730; 481455, 
4979703; 481434, 4979682; 481413, 4979649; 481380, 4979628; 481338, 
4979625; 481293, 4979619; 481248, 4979613; 481233, 4979601; 481215, 
4979577; 481194, 4979562; 481150, 4979505; 481120, 4979448; 481099, 
4979418; 481069, 4979382; 481039, 4979352; 481018, 4979334; 480985, 
4979322; 480928, 4979319; 480868, 4979313; 480835, 4979310; 480805, 
4979313; 480781, 4979304; 480739, 4979268; 480703, 4979235; 480679, 
4979211; 480667, 4979229; 480664, 4979265; 480664, 4979320; 480631, 
4979301; 480562, 4979290; 480500, 4979319; 480430, 4979365; 480364, 
4979418; 480295, 4979482; 480192, 4979594; 480162, 4979636; 480146, 
4979629; 480153, 4979478; 480132, 4979469; 480081, 4979470; 480069, 
4979463; 480014, 4979470; 479987, 4979491; 479974, 4979497; 479955, 
4979499; 479950, 4979491; 479949, 4979474; 479980, 4979422; 479985, 
4979353; 479986, 4979247; 479955, 4979176; 479892, 4979121; 479789, 
4979108; 479733, 4979057; 479709, 4979033; 479669, 4978987; 479621, 
4978771; 479610, 4978730; 479588, 4978684; 479536, 4978649; 479490, 
4978639; 479442, 4978604; 479317, 4978553; 479262, 4978567; 479166, 
4978639; 479121, 4978705; 479115, 4978766; 479123, 4978846; 479124, 
4978910; 479125, 4978980; 479136, 4979163; 479138, 4979243; 479160, 
4979487; 479170, 4979514; 479211, 4979570; 479216, 4979575; 479226, 
4979608; 479267, 4979631; 479289, 4979636; 479317, 4979621; 479337, 
4979585; 479357, 4979503; 479386, 4979425; 479394, 4979339; 479420, 
4979229; 479431, 4979203; 479437, 4979189; 479463, 4979159; 479505, 
4979144; 479515, 4979151; 479558, 4979182; 479590, 4979220; 479615, 
4979263; 479634, 4979344; 479637, 4979377; 479627, 4979430; 479599, 
4979493; 479567, 4979539; 479517, 4979565; 479479, 4979591; 479448, 
4979641; 479427, 4979687; 479442, 4979726; 479483, 4979721; 479523, 
4979726; 479636, 4979673; 479674, 4979658; 479689, 4979658; 479704, 
4979652; 479706, 4979658; 479702, 4979671; 479704, 4979680; 479709, 
4979687; 479718, 4979687; 479726, 4979685; 479732, 4979688; 479725, 
4979696; 479712, 4979698; 479700, 4979702; 479694, 4979712; 479677, 
4979727; 479671, 4979737; 479657, 4979744; 479647, 4979749; 479641, 
4979754; 479640, 4979762; 479629, 4979768; 479616, 4979772; 479610, 
4979778; 479603, 4979787; 479591, 4979790; 479582, 4979793; 479572, 
4979797; 479564, 4979803; 479556, 4979804; 479545, 4979812; 479530, 
4979818; 479523, 4979826; 479513, 4979823; 479506, 4979832; 479500, 
4979842; 479497, 4979852; 479487, 4979861; 479471, 4979865; 479459, 
4979860; 479446, 4979857; 479431, 4979857; 479415, 4979864; 479402, 
4979872; 479393, 4979882; 479357, 4979902; 479332, 4979906; 479304, 
4979923; 479280, 4979933; 479251, 4979937; 479208, 4979982; 479184, 
4980014; 479170, 4980039; 479157, 4980082; 479148, 4980099; 479149, 
4980126; 479158, 4980154; 479155, 4980237; 479150, 4980299; 479129, 
4980320; 479108, 4980347; 479100, 4980373; 479105, 4980406; 479115, 
4980442; 479118, 4980493; 479105, 4980533; 479106, 4980564; 479115, 
4980602; 479110, 4980644; 479110, 4980683; 479110, 4980720; 479124, 
4980755; 479131, 4980796; 479136, 4980835; 479149, 4980865; 479167, 
4980878; 479187, 4980883; 479210, 4980892; 479224, 4980903; 479235, 
4980911; 479248, 4980909; 479266, 4980896; 479279, 4980880; 479288, 
4980866; 479294, 4980851; 479290, 4980840; 479292, 4980832; 479303, 
4980821; 479314, 4980812; 479321, 4980800; 479342, 4980795; 479356, 
4980790; 479364, 4980792; 479374, 4980790; 479382, 4980780; 479392, 
4980770; 479402, 4980759; 479407, 4980742; 479414, 4980719; 479422, 
4980693; 479430, 4980679; 479449, 4980659; 479473, 4980619; 479509, 
4980619; 479536, 4980613; 479568, 4980594; 479588, 4980578; 479596, 
4980556; 479604, 4980531; 479607, 4980512; 479609, 4980497; 479619, 
4980487; 479636, 4980487; 479648, 4980486; 479659, 4980480; 479671, 
4980469; 479704, 4980398; 479706, 4980386; 479702, 4980362; 479704, 
4980343; 479711, 4980330; 479727, 4980313; 479740, 4980301; 479758, 
4980294; 479785, 4980295; 479836, 4980302; 479893, 4980332; 479923, 
4980343; 479952, 4980354; 479966, 4980359; 479982, 4980358; 479990, 
4980366; 479994, 4980387; 479992, 4980413; 479983, 4980435; 479974, 
4980464; 479942, 4980502; 479908, 4980532; 479883, 4980552; 479854, 
4980578; 479835, 4980590; 479820, 4980608; 479808, 4980638; 479818, 
4980663; 479831, 4980688; 479856, 4980704; 479881, 4980702; 479905, 
4980696; 479927, 4980689; 479954, 4980688; 479989, 4980698; 480013, 
4980714; 480029, 4980729; 480046, 4980739; 480067, 4980747; 480091, 
4980753; 480117, 4980754; 480138, 4980754; 480156, 4980749; 480173, 
4980738; 480181, 4980739; 480188, 4980746; 480170, 4980766; 480158, 
4980778; 480158, 4980793; 480158, 4980810; 480160, 4980824; 480168, 
4980835; 480169, 4980847; 480173, 4980863; 480179, 4980878; 480197, 
4980892; 480221, 4980911; 480245, 4980928; 480273, 4980947; 480296, 
4980966; 480330, 4980984; 480356, 4981000; 480386, 4981021; 480405, 
4981037; 480420, 4981038.
    (ii) Unit 4B (FBB-4B): 480860, 4983078; 480881, 4983054; 480869, 
4983018; 480854, 4983006; 480830, 4982992; 480818, 4982974; 480821, 
4982950; 480821, 4982944; 480821, 4982923; 480836, 4982905; 480845, 
4982908; 480860, 4982911; 480872, 4982923; 480884, 4982938; 480896, 
4982953; 480902, 4982965; 480917, 4982974; 480962, 4982956; 480968, 
4982950; 480977, 4982947; 480977, 4982932; 480974, 4982905; 480992, 
4982911; 481046, 4982920; 481070, 4982926; 481106, 4982932; 481157, 
4982941; 481178, 4982941; 481184, 4982944; 481196, 4982950; 481205, 
4982950; 481220, 4982950; 481229, 4982950; 481244, 4982956; 481253, 
4982953; 481280, 4982962; 481337, 4982953; 481364, 4982932; 481364, 
4982914; 481361, 4982848; 481361, 4982812; 481367, 4982770; 481355, 
4982716; 481361, 4982623; 481358, 4982518; 481340, 4982314; 481349, 
4982287; 481346, 4982218; 481343, 4982125; 481337, 4982089; 481343, 
4982062; 481337, 4982050; 481328, 4982047; 481334, 4982023; 481337, 
4982002; 481328, 4981984; 481331, 4981969; 481337, 4981954; 481349, 
4981930; 481352, 4981888; 481355, 4981867; 481355, 4981828; 481346, 
4981742; 481349, 4981724; 481343, 4981703; 481075, 4981699; 481048, 
4981722; 481059, 4982492; 480646, 4982496; 480545, 4982422; 480553,

[[Page 883]]

4982004; 480564, 4981927; 480530, 4981858; 480456, 4981838; 480352, 
4981823; 480247, 4981830; 480158, 4981846; 480089, 4981861; 480050, 
4981850; 480023, 4981761; 480011, 4981656; 479988, 4981567; 479977, 
4981509; 479984, 4981417; 480010, 4981359; 480004, 4981154; 479663, 
4981161; 479609, 4981154; 479582, 4981030; 479532, 4980899; 479526, 
4980905; 479499, 4980920; 479487, 4980926; 479472, 4980935; 479435, 
4980999; 479436, 4981283; 479442, 4981328; 479442, 4981367; 479454, 
4981382; 479475, 4981394; 479505, 4981415; 479535, 4981445; 479562, 
4981499; 479574, 4981517; 479583, 4981556; 479589, 4981601; 479607, 
4981622; 479619, 4981628; 479634, 4981631; 479649, 4981628; 479667, 
4981619; 479688, 4981616; 479697, 4981604; 479697, 4981631; 479691, 
4981661; 479694, 4981691; 479688, 4981712; 479652, 4981763; 479628, 
4981787; 479631, 4981825; 479634, 4982011; 479625, 4982026; 479601, 
4982038; 479598, 4982050; 479613, 4982050; 479652, 4982053; 479682, 
4982047; 479739, 4982056; 479736, 4982344; 479748, 4982644; 479751, 
4982674; 479751, 4982713; 479748, 4982746; 479754, 4982764; 479913, 
4982761; 479931, 4982758; 479949, 4982758; 479964, 4982746; 479979, 
4982740; 479988, 4982722; 480006, 4982689; 480015, 4982689; 480033, 
4982692; 480072, 4982704; 480108, 4982710; 480129, 4982719; 480141, 
4982722; 480159, 4982728; 480168, 4982728; 480179, 4982728; 480188, 
4982716; 480197, 4982719; 480209, 4982737; 480218, 4982743; 480242, 
4982746; 480254, 4982758; 480269, 4982770; 480287, 4982773; 480299, 
4982773; 480314, 4982767; 480323, 4982758; 480320, 4982740; 480317, 
4982722; 480329, 4982704; 480341, 4982698; 480350, 4982707; 480365, 
4982710; 480698, 4982806; 480695, 4982821; 480692, 4982836; 480689, 
4982860; 480692, 4982887; 480689, 4982908; 480686, 4982929; 480683, 
4982950; 480686, 4982986; 480695, 4983006; 480704, 4983036; 480716, 
4983054; 480731, 4983060; 480752, 4983063; 480770, 4983072; 480806, 
4983063; 480815, 4983063; 480830, 4983069; 480842, 4983078; 480860, 
4983078.
    (iii) Note: Map 5 (Unit 4 for Fender's blue butterfly (FBB-4)) 
follows:

[[Page 884]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31OC06.005

    (10) Unit 5 for Fender's blue butterfly (FBB-5), Polk County, 
Oregon.
    (i) Unit 5 (FBB-5): 474272, 4973321; 474269, 4973168; 474273, 
4973168; 474274, 4973107; 474153, 4973107; 474153, 4973026; 474053, 
4973026; 474051, 4973029; 474049, 4973032; 474047, 4973034; 474042, 
4973034; 474039, 4973035; 474038, 4973084; 474044, 4973086; 474045, 
4973092; 474045, 4973097; 474045, 4973104; 474045, 4973109; 474046, 
4973116; 474047, 4973121; 474046, 4973128; 474047, 4973134; 474047, 
4973139; 474046, 4973146; 474047, 4973152; 474048, 4973154; 474047, 
4973158; 474048, 4973164; 474049, 4973164; 474052, 4973165; 474054, 
4973165; 474061, 4973165; 474067, 4973165; 474074, 4973165; 474079, 
4973166; 474083, 4973168; 474098, 4973263; 474107, 4973322; 474272, 
4973321.
    (ii) Note: Map 6 (Unit 5 for Fender's blue butterfly (FBB-5)) 
follows:

[[Page 885]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31OC06.006

    (11) Unit 6 for Fender's blue butterfly (FBB-6), Polk County, 
Oregon.
    (i) Unit 6A (FBB-6A): 475279, 4966872; 475243, 4966871; 475222, 
4966886; 475213, 4966910; 475218, 4966935; 475240, 4966947; 475327, 
4966950; 475355, 4966941; 475361, 4966915; 475341, 4966880; 475311, 
4966874; 475279, 4966872.
    (ii) Unit 6B (FBB-6B): 476378, 4965968; 476384, 4965952; 476405, 
4965950; 476419, 4965937; 476444, 4965919; 476463, 4965906; 476473, 
4965897; 476487, 4965882; 476493, 4965872; 476506, 4965856; 476509, 
4965842; 476521, 4965821; 476538, 4965819; 476542, 4965808; 476540, 
4965796; 476532, 4965791; 476525, 4965780; 476519, 4965777; 476512, 
4965770; 476507, 4965760; 476499, 4965757; 476493, 4965753; 476484, 
4965744; 476477, 4965750; 476466, 4965743; 476463, 4965733; 476448, 
4965733; 476435, 4965730; 476427, 4965729; 476423, 4965722; 476413, 
4965718; 476411, 4965713; 476384, 4965707; 476355, 4965699; 476346, 
4965699; 476339, 4965702; 476299, 4965693; 476290,

[[Page 886]]

4965699; 476285, 4965694; 476259, 4965694; 476247, 4965701; 476238, 
4965709; 476222, 4965716; 476209, 4965725; 476202, 4965722; 476202, 
4965709; 476186, 4965715; 476186, 4965722; 476188, 4965840; 476262, 
4965902; 476327, 4965906; 476329, 4965931; 476331, 4965951; 476344, 
4965964; 476364, 4965964; 476376, 4965961; 476378, 4965968.
    (iii) Note: Map 7 (Unit 6 for Fender's blue butterfly (FBB-6)) 
follows:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31OC06.007

    (12) Units 7, 8, and 9 for Fender's blue butterfly (FBB-7, FBB-8, 
and FBB-9), Benton County, Oregon.
    (i) Unit 7 (FBB-7): 472041, 4940614; 472041, 4940616; 472040, 
4940619; 472041, 4940623; 472043, 4940628; 472043, 4940632; 472043, 
4940636; 472043,

[[Page 887]]

4940639; 472045, 4940641; 472047, 4940642; 472048, 4940642; 472051, 
4940646; 472051, 4940651; 472051, 4940655; 472051, 4940658; 472051, 
4940660; 472050, 4940665; 472053, 4940667; 472057, 4940668; 472060, 
4940670; 472063, 4940668; 472066, 4940668; 472070, 4940667; 472070, 
4940663; 472073, 4940660; 472078, 4940658; 472080, 4940661; 472083, 
4940662; 472087, 4940663; 472090, 4940662; 472092, 4940663; 472095, 
4940664; 472100, 4940664; 472104, 4940663; 472106, 4940661; 472107, 
4940659; 472109, 4940656; 472113, 4940654; 472115, 4940653; 472115, 
4940650; 472117, 4940648; 472120, 4940647; 472121, 4940645; 472121, 
4940641; 472122, 4940640; 472123, 4940636; 472124, 4940633; 472121, 
4940632; 472116, 4940631; 472114, 4940629; 472112, 4940626; 472110, 
4940622; 472110, 4940618; 472109, 4940613; 472108, 4940609; 472104, 
4940605; 472102, 4940599; 472103, 4940594; 472104, 4940590; 472105, 
4940586; 472105, 4940586; 472104, 4940582; 472100, 4940579; 472093, 
4940558; 472089, 4940535; 472102, 4940527; 472103, 4940510; 472115, 
4940498; 472124, 4940503; 472127, 4940510; 472139, 4940515; 472141, 
4940507; 472138, 4940499; 472146, 4940494; 472164, 4940503; 472202, 
4940512; 472206, 4940531; 472188, 4940534; 472187, 4940543; 472200, 
4940547; 472206, 4940555; 472202, 4940572; 472218, 4940570; 472251, 
4940569; 472260, 4940564; 472276, 4940554; 472282, 4940544; 472285, 
4940531; 472293, 4940519; 472286, 4940510; 472283, 4940499; 472297, 
4940500; 472300, 4940495; 472311, 4940488; 472311, 4940478; 472320, 
4940474; 472338, 4940465; 472348, 4940472; 472357, 4940472; 472362, 
4940461; 472368, 4940442; 472375, 4940417; 472375, 4940401; 472375, 
4940393; 472376, 4940386; 472381, 4940384; 472384, 4940372; 472392, 
4940365; 472407, 4940365; 472417, 4940360; 472431, 4940353; 472442, 
4940342; 472442, 4940330; 472448, 4940313; 472451, 4940311; 472434, 
4940281; 472417, 4940275; 472391, 4940279; 472389, 4940288; 472373, 
4940293; 472366, 4940287; 472355, 4940295; 472355, 4940315; 472332, 
4940334; 472332, 4940335; 472330, 4940336; 472301, 4940344; 472299, 
4940360; 472299, 4940361; 472311, 4940365; 472327, 4940351; 472329, 
4940349; 472342, 4940348; 472343, 4940367; 472356, 4940366; 472367, 
4940381; 472367, 4940397; 472363, 4940405; 472338, 4940405; 472319, 
4940428; 472305, 4940430; 472296, 4940445; 472281, 4940449; 472273, 
4940443; 472273, 4940443; 472251, 4940425; 472164, 4940437; 472163, 
4940436; 472159, 4940437; 472152, 4940450; 472136, 4940452; 472113, 
4940447; 472102, 4940421; 472101, 4940419; 472071, 4940414; 472042, 
4940422; 472034, 4940405; 472014, 4940407; 472014, 4940392; 472010, 
4940384; 471999, 4940374; 471994, 4940367; 471993, 4940345; 471971, 
4940342; 471946, 4940345; 471939, 4940342; 471939, 4940329; 471938, 
4940303; 471930, 4940288; 471928, 4940269; 471917, 4940269; 471905, 
4940275; 471902, 4940293; 471910, 4940305; 471919, 4940326; 471922, 
4940338; 471932, 4940351; 471948, 4940354; 471966, 4940360; 471970, 
4940368; 471976, 4940385; 471993, 4940398; 472001, 4940410; 472018, 
4940418; 472024, 4940429; 472024, 4940445; 472026, 4940447; 472041, 
4940454; 472049, 4940482; 472069, 4940490; 472078, 4940515; 472072, 
4940521; 472074, 4940530; 472082, 4940534; 472085, 4940542; 472082, 
4940565; 472080, 4940574; 472072, 4940583; 472072, 4940587; 472072, 
4940587; 472072, 4940590; 472071, 4940592; 472071, 4940595; 472072, 
4940596; 472073, 4940596; 472074, 4940597; 472079, 4940597; 472079, 
4940602; 472077, 4940609; 472072, 4940612; 472070, 4940612; 472067, 
4940612; 472065, 4940611; 472061, 4940613; 472056, 4940616; 472048, 
4940615; 472046, 4940613; 472045, 4940612; 472045, 4940611; 472043, 
4940611; 472041, 4940614; 472041, 4940614.
    (ii) Unit 8 (FBB-8): 466807, 4938996; 466822, 4938987; 466857, 
4938963; 466860, 4938942; 466813, 4938811; 466811, 4938793; 466828, 
4938769; 466941, 4938694; 466944, 4938670; 467002, 4938673; 467028, 
4938645; 467029, 4938608; 467021, 4938582; 466984, 4938561; 466908, 
4938577; 466832, 4938387; 466805, 4938237; 466934, 4938170; 466973, 
4938111; 466957, 4937968; 467029, 4937886; 467194, 4937886; 467195, 
4937857; 467365, 4937876; 467379, 4937926; 467611, 4937920; 467606, 
4938003; 467523, 4938171; 467492, 4938190; 467460, 4938377; 467542, 
4938516; 467858, 4938596; 467858, 4938879; 467912, 4938876; 467912, 
4939023; 467936, 4939032; 468294, 4939023; 468330, 4939008; 468384, 
4939008; 468414, 4938891; 468339, 4938736; 468339, 4938638; 468297, 
4938551; 468324, 4938509; 468427, 4938482; 468488, 4938484; 468601, 
4938464; 468666, 4938425; 468749, 4938490; 468859, 4938476; 468989, 
4938412; 469013, 4938386; 468981, 4938369; 468949, 4938351; 468934, 
4938305; 468966, 4938282; 469004, 4938261; 469027, 4938227; 469137, 
4938256; 469181, 4938244; 469192, 4938198; 469186, 4938151; 469169, 
4938119; 469120, 4938105; 469076, 4938079; 469056, 4938041; 469013, 
4938018; 468978, 4937948; 469007, 4937940; 469100, 4937954; 469143, 
4937931; 469204, 4937919; 469276, 4937905; 469320, 4937899; 469314, 
4937864; 469256, 4937859; 469230, 4937821; 469184, 4937806; 469143, 
4937789; 469088, 4937737; 469053, 4937685; 469027, 4937656; 469050, 
4937604; 469036, 4937589; 468981, 4937569; 468946, 4937583; 468923, 
4937635; 468874, 4937633; 468853, 4937615; 468833, 4937636; 468842, 
4937659; 468819, 4937699; 468833, 4937720; 468876, 4937722; 468903, 
4937746; 468899, 4937788; 468871, 4937818; 468856, 4937864; 468824, 
4937879; 468816, 4937847; 468752, 4937824; 468723, 4937792; 468642, 
4937746; 468338, 4937844; 468259, 4937905; 468216, 4937917; 468204, 
4937864; 468112, 4937768; 468118, 4937725; 468124, 4937663; 468155, 
4937619; 468175, 4937569; 468182, 4937545; 468127, 4937546; 468085, 
4937549; 468046, 4937531; 468031, 4937507; 468007, 4937539; 467971, 
4937573; 467970, 4937597; 467920, 4937618; 467892, 4937661; 467875, 
4937662; 467845, 4937645; 467840, 4937641; 467841, 4937621; 467850, 
4937503; 467896, 4937426; 467889, 4937381; 467879, 4937358; 467844, 
4937352; 467717, 4937354; 467525, 4937362; 467217, 4937372; 467186, 
4937381; 467066, 4937388; 467055, 4937377; 467009, 4937373; 466961, 
4937380; 466915, 4937382; 466860, 4937392; 466783, 4937400; 466746, 
4937390; 466750, 4937358; 466727, 4937335; 466713, 4937308; 466667, 
4937298; 466654, 4937262; 466659, 4937211; 466686, 4937130; 466701, 
4937088; 466710, 4937034; 466703, 4937031; 466705, 4937011; 466705, 
4936978; 466695, 4936938; 466754, 4936891; 466792, 4936884; 466800, 
4936874; 466824, 4936872; 466851, 4936874; 466877, 4936883; 466901, 
4936894; 466913, 4936893; 466920, 4936885; 466932, 4936902; 466948, 
4936901; 466959, 4936896; 466985, 4936886; 467030, 4936878; 467052, 
4936866; 467075, 4936863; 467076, 4936853; 467057, 4936837; 467040, 
4936823; 467030, 4936810; 466999, 4936794; 466960, 4936800; 466949, 
4936803; 466904, 4936794; 466896, 4936793; 466884, 4936799; 466874, 
4936790; 466865, 4936778; 466862,

[[Page 888]]

4936758; 466843, 4936740; 466824, 4936734; 466791, 4936729; 466776, 
4936713; 466768, 4936726; 466742, 4936713; 466720, 4936698; 466693, 
4936682; 466671, 4936695; 466657, 4936702; 466649, 4936691; 466638, 
4936676; 466620, 4936676; 466610, 4936671; 466603, 4936645; 466602, 
4936633; 466595, 4936605; 466596, 4936586; 466601, 4936577; 466605, 
4936563; 466605, 4936539; 466601, 4936531; 466592, 4936524; 466585, 
4936518; 466579, 4936517; 466575, 4936510; 466568, 4936509; 466566, 
4936519; 466551, 4936516; 466546, 4936511; 466540, 4936478; 466543, 
4936463; 466541, 4936425; 466536, 4936391; 466542, 4936383; 466572, 
4936388; 466607, 4936392; 466634, 4936386; 466664, 4936367; 466683, 
4936337; 466699, 4936302; 466689, 4936260; 466670, 4936252; 466609, 
4936227; 466559, 4936227; 466532, 4936265; 466529, 4936290; 466509, 
4936310; 466495, 4936359; 466486, 4936405; 466488, 4936536; 466457, 
4936587; 466219, 4936726; 466211, 4936799; 466299, 4937032; 466287, 
4937049; 466323, 4937128; 466333, 4937175; 466358, 4937197; 466399, 
4937195; 466435, 4937164; 466474, 4937164; 466507, 4937181; 466535, 
4937200; 466526, 4937239; 466535, 4937294; 466551, 4937316; 466551, 
4937355; 466565, 4937408; 466585, 4937561; 466593, 4937636; 466591, 
4937692; 466591, 4937693; 466593, 4937783; 466553, 4937832; 466482, 
4937903; 466442, 4938088; 466427, 4938109; 466418, 4938183; 466379, 
4938225; 466347, 4938249; 466370, 4938285; 466376, 4938324; 466382, 
4938360; 466394, 4938393; 466415, 4938408; 466400, 4938467; 466513, 
4938413; 466551, 4938272; 466720, 4938295; 466738, 4938502; 466423, 
4938625; 466421, 4938685; 466400, 4938751; 466388, 4938802; 466367, 
4938832; 466356, 4938868; 466359, 4938882; 466370, 4938900; 466400, 
4938885; 466412, 4938891; 466427, 4938909; 466451, 4938906; 466463, 
4938891; 466487, 4938891; 466514, 4938897; 466538, 4938918; 466526, 
4938945; 466520, 4938981; 466529, 4939011; 466550, 4939035; 466586, 
4939026; 466597, 4938996; 466603, 4938990; 466657, 4939044; 466660, 
4939127; 466699, 4939163; 466753, 4939178; 466771, 4939169; 466789, 
4939157; 466801, 4939038; 466807, 4938996.
    (iii) Unit 9 (FBB-9): 472296, 4933737; 472312, 4933733; 472316, 
4933734; 472317, 4933734; 472317, 4933733; 472317, 4933732; 472317, 
4933732; 472315, 4933731; 472319, 4933730; 472325, 4933708; 472324, 
4933707; 472325, 4933685; 472276, 4933663; 472265, 4933662; 472199, 
4933648; 472192, 4933641; 472149, 4933621; 472144, 4933615; 472143, 
4933611; 472140, 4933608; 472139, 4933604; 472140, 4933601; 472139, 
4933599; 472138, 4933594; 472140, 4933589; 472140, 4933584; 472142, 
4933581; 472148, 4933580; 472145, 4933576; 472145, 4933572; 472150, 
4933570; 472159, 4933573; 472165, 4933575; 472169, 4933578; 472176, 
4933582; 472182, 4933584; 472189, 4933585; 472194, 4933582; 472198, 
4933579; 472201, 4933574; 472201, 4933571; 472201, 4933566; 472199, 
4933561; 472194, 4933558; 472189, 4933556; 472188, 4933552; 472185, 
4933550; 472184, 4933546; 472179, 4933544; 472176, 4933540; 472174, 
4933534; 472169, 4933534; 472163, 4933533; 472158, 4933532; 472154, 
4933529; 472151, 4933526; 472147, 4933525; 472146, 4933518; 472144, 
4933513; 472142, 4933509; 472146, 4933505; 472147, 4933500; 472144, 
4933496; 472144, 4933489; 472147, 4933487; 472148, 4933475; 472148, 
4933469; 472149, 4933462; 472150, 4933455; 472151, 4933448; 472146, 
4933447; 472146, 4933445; 472150, 4933441; 472156, 4933440; 472156, 
4933436; 472151, 4933437; 472147, 4933433; 472148, 4933428; 472149, 
4933421; 472146, 4933422; 472145, 4933413; 472145, 4933406; 472144, 
4933395; 472147, 4933390; 472147, 4933383; 472147, 4933378; 472150, 
4933375; 472151, 4933370; 472146, 4933370; 472146, 4933363; 472147, 
4933342; 472148, 4933340; 472149, 4933336; 472149, 4933331; 472151, 
4933321; 472151, 4933314; 472152, 4933306; 472156, 4933289; 472157, 
4933267; 472158, 4933251; 472159, 4933239; 472159, 4933225; 472160, 
4933213; 472161, 4933206; 472162, 4933195; 472163, 4933186; 472158, 
4933167; 472147, 4933161; 472144, 4933165; 472139, 4933170; 472131, 
4933175; 472127, 4933169; 472123, 4933166; 472122, 4933162; 472115, 
4933158; 472111, 4933152; 472108, 4933145; 472106, 4933139; 472104, 
4933137; 472104, 4933130; 472109, 4933128; 472112, 4933123; 472117, 
4933124; 472121, 4933124; 472122, 4933119; 472123, 4933115; 472122, 
4933112; 472118, 4933111; 472112, 4933108; 472109, 4933103; 472102, 
4933103; 472096, 4933104; 472091, 4933106; 472085, 4933106; 472079, 
4933107; 472074, 4933104; 472073, 4933097; 472069, 4933090; 472069, 
4933086; 472067, 4933081; 472068, 4933072; 472064, 4933070; 472059, 
4933071; 472053, 4933070; 472052, 4933065; 472047, 4933062; 472041, 
4933063; 472039, 4933067; 472037, 4933071; 472032, 4933071; 472030, 
4933071; 472027, 4933073; 472024, 4933074; 472020, 4933073; 472016, 
4933073; 472010, 4933074; 472005, 4933090; 472003, 4933094; 472003, 
4933101; 472007, 4933106; 472009, 4933111; 472007, 4933116; 472004, 
4933116; 472004, 4933120; 472002, 4933125; 472001, 4933128; 472002, 
4933134; 472004, 4933137; 472002, 4933140; 472002, 4933143; 472007, 
4933146; 472009, 4933153; 472010, 4933160; 472011, 4933165; 472013, 
4933170; 472016, 4933176; 472018, 4933179; 472015, 4933183; 472015, 
4933186; 472019, 4933186; 472021, 4933190; 472020, 4933195; 472016, 
4933198; 472011, 4933215; 472003, 4933221; 471996, 4933227; 471990, 
4933231; 471989, 4933240; 471983, 4933257; 471982, 4933268; 471977, 
4933277; 471976, 4933282; 471972, 4933282; 471968, 4933281; 471962, 
4933280; 471962, 4933280; 471962, 4933280; 471961, 4933278; 471960, 
4933276; 471958, 4933273; 471957, 4933271; 471957, 4933271; 471956, 
4933271; 471956, 4933268; 471956, 4933266; 471955, 4933263; 471955, 
4933260; 471955, 4933257; 471954, 4933257; 471953, 4933258; 471950, 
4933257; 471947, 4933257; 471944, 4933256; 471942, 4933255; 471939, 
4933253; 471936, 4933251; 471934, 4933251; 471929, 4933247; 471929, 
4933247; 471929, 4933247; 471929, 4933245; 471928, 4933244; 471927, 
4933242; 471925, 4933240; 471924, 4933239; 471922, 4933237; 471921, 
4933237; 471919, 4933236; 471917, 4933236; 471915, 4933235; 471913, 
4933236; 471911, 4933235; 471909, 4933235; 471908, 4933234; 471906, 
4933234; 471904, 4933233; 471904, 4933233; 471904, 4933233; 471903, 
4933233; 471902, 4933232; 471899, 4933230; 471897, 4933228; 471895, 
4933227; 471894, 4933227; 471893, 4933224; 471892, 4933222; 471888, 
4933220; 471884, 4933218; 471882, 4933217; 471876, 4933214; 471873, 
4933212; 471870, 4933211; 471868, 4933209; 471865, 4933208; 471862, 
4933207; 471859, 4933205; 471859, 4933205; 471859, 4933205; 471859, 
4933203; 471854, 4933190; 471854, 4933190; 471853, 4933188; 471851, 
4933183; 471851, 4933183; 471850, 4933182; 471850, 4933173; 471850, 
4933171; 471850, 4933170; 471850, 4933166; 471850, 4933164; 471850, 
4933162; 471850, 4933161; 471850, 4933159; 471848, 4933159; 471847, 
4933158; 471846, 4933158; 471845, 4933158; 471846,

[[Page 889]]

4933162; 471844, 4933163; 471842, 4933165; 471840, 4933167; 471839, 
4933168; 471837, 4933170; 471835, 4933172; 471832, 4933174; 471830, 
4933176; 471828, 4933178; 471826, 4933181; 471824, 4933181; 471822, 
4933181; 471820, 4933182; 471818, 4933183; 471816, 4933183; 471815, 
4933184; 471814, 4933185; 471813, 4933186; 471812, 4933187; 471811, 
4933188; 471812, 4933189; 471813, 4933189; 471814, 4933190; 471815, 
4933191; 471816, 4933191; 471818, 4933192; 471819, 4933193; 471820, 
4933194; 471821, 4933194; 471822, 4933195; 471820, 4933197; 471819, 
4933198; 471817, 4933199; 471815, 4933201; 471814, 4933202; 471812, 
4933202; 471811, 4933203; 471810, 4933203; 471808, 4933203; 471807, 
4933203; 471805, 4933203; 471804, 4933203; 471802, 4933204; 471801, 
4933204; 471799, 4933204; 471798, 4933204; 471796, 4933204; 471795, 
4933205; 471793, 4933205; 471792, 4933206; 471791, 4933207; 471790, 
4933208; 471790, 4933209; 471789, 4933210; 471788, 4933211; 471787, 
4933212; 471786, 4933212; 471785, 4933213; 471783, 4933214; 471782, 
4933214; 471782, 4933215; 471781, 4933215; 471781, 4933215; 471780, 
4933216; 471780, 4933217; 471777, 4933218; 471778, 4933219; 471778, 
4933220; 471779, 4933221; 471779, 4933222; 471779, 4933223; 471779, 
4933225; 471779, 4933226; 471779, 4933227; 471779, 4933229; 471779, 
4933230; 471780, 4933231; 471781, 4933232; 471783, 4933233; 471784, 
4933235; 471785, 4933236; 471785, 4933236; 471786, 4933237; 471786, 
4933237; 471779, 4933246; 471778, 4933249; 471776, 4933251; 471775, 
4933254; 471774, 4933256; 471773, 4933257; 471772, 4933261; 471771, 
4933264; 471769, 4933267; 471768, 4933271; 471767, 4933274; 471767, 
4933277; 471766, 4933280; 471765, 4933283; 471766, 4933284; 471763, 
4933287; 471761, 4933290; 471759, 4933294; 471757, 4933297; 471755, 
4933301; 471754, 4933303; 471754, 4933306; 471753, 4933308; 471752, 
4933311; 471752, 4933314; 471751, 4933316; 471750, 4933319; 471750, 
4933322; 471749, 4933325; 471748, 4933328; 471747, 4933331; 471746, 
4933334; 471745, 4933338; 471744, 4933341; 471743, 4933344; 471742, 
4933348; 471741, 4933352; 471740, 4933355; 471739, 4933359; 471738, 
4933363; 471738, 4933365; 471737, 4933368; 471737, 4933370; 471736, 
4933373; 471736, 4933375; 471736, 4933377; 471735, 4933378; 471735, 
4933380; 471734, 4933381; 471734, 4933383; 471733, 4933384; 471732, 
4933386; 471732, 4933387; 471731, 4933388; 471730, 4933390; 471730, 
4933391; 471729, 4933392; 471728, 4933394; 471728, 4933395; 471727, 
4933397; 471727, 4933398; 471727, 4933400; 471727, 4933401; 471726, 
4933403; 471726, 4933404; 471727, 4933406; 471727, 4933408; 471728, 
4933410; 471728, 4933413; 471729, 4933415; 471729, 4933416; 471729, 
4933418; 471730, 4933419; 471730, 4933421; 471730, 4933423; 471730, 
4933424; 471730, 4933426; 471730, 4933427; 471730, 4933429; 471730, 
4933431; 471730, 4933432; 471729, 4933434; 471729, 4933435; 471728, 
4933437; 471727, 4933438; 471727, 4933440; 471727, 4933441; 471726, 
4933443; 471726, 4933444; 471725, 4933446; 471726, 4933448; 471726, 
4933449; 471726, 4933451; 471726, 4933453; 471726, 4933455; 471727, 
4933456; 471727, 4933458; 471727, 4933459; 471728, 4933461; 471728, 
4933463; 471728, 4933464; 471729, 4933465; 471729, 4933467; 471730, 
4933468; 471730, 4933470; 471731, 4933471; 471731, 4933473; 471732, 
4933474; 471733, 4933476; 471733, 4933477; 471734, 4933478; 471734, 
4933480; 471734, 4933481; 471735, 4933482; 471735, 4933483; 471735, 
4933485; 471736, 4933486; 471736, 4933488; 471737, 4933489; 471737, 
4933491; 471738, 4933492; 471739, 4933494; 471740, 4933495; 471741, 
4933496; 471741, 4933497; 471742, 4933498; 471743, 4933500; 471743, 
4933501; 471743, 4933503; 471744, 4933505; 471744, 4933506; 471745, 
4933508; 471746, 4933510; 471747, 4933511; 471748, 4933513; 471749, 
4933515; 471749, 4933515; 471750, 4933517; 471751, 4933518; 471751, 
4933519; 471752, 4933521; 471753, 4933523; 471754, 4933524; 471755, 
4933525; 471756, 4933527; 471756, 4933528; 471757, 4933529; 471758, 
4933531; 471760, 4933532; 471761, 4933534; 471762, 4933535; 471763, 
4933537; 471764, 4933538; 471765, 4933539; 471766, 4933540; 471768, 
4933542; 471769, 4933543; 471769, 4933544; 471770, 4933545; 471771, 
4933547; 471772, 4933548; 471772, 4933548; 471771, 4933547; 471770, 
4933547; 471770, 4933547; 471767, 4933544; 471766, 4933544; 471766, 
4933545; 471765, 4933545; 471765, 4933546; 471764, 4933547; 471763, 
4933548; 471758, 4933550; 471759, 4933551; 471759, 4933551; 471759, 
4933551; 471759, 4933551; 471761, 4933552; 471763, 4933553; 471765, 
4933554; 471766, 4933555; 471768, 4933556; 471769, 4933558; 471770, 
4933560; 471771, 4933562; 471772, 4933564; 471773, 4933565; 471772, 
4933566; 471769, 4933590; 471769, 4933600; 471772, 4933604; 471777, 
4933607; 471778, 4933609; 471783, 4933613; 471808, 4933596; 471808, 
4933596; 471809, 4933595; 471809, 4933595; 471811, 4933597; 471814, 
4933598; 471816, 4933600; 471818, 4933601; 471820, 4933602; 471822, 
4933604; 471823, 4933604; 471824, 4933605; 471825, 4933606; 471826, 
4933607; 471827, 4933607; 471828, 4933607; 471842, 4933603; 471840, 
4933603; 471840, 4933603; 471840, 4933603; 471839, 4933602; 471839, 
4933602; 471839, 4933602; 471838, 4933601; 471837, 4933600; 471836, 
4933600; 471839, 4933601; 471841, 4933602; 471843, 4933603; 471846, 
4933605; 471848, 4933606; 471850, 4933607; 471853, 4933608; 471855, 
4933609; 471857, 4933610; 471859, 4933611; 471860, 4933611; 471861, 
4933611; 471863, 4933612; 471865, 4933613; 471867, 4933614; 471868, 
4933614; 471870, 4933615; 471871, 4933615; 471873, 4933616; 471874, 
4933617; 471874, 4933617; 471874, 4933617; 472080, 4933675; 472196, 
4933705; 472296, 4933737.
    (iv) Note: Map 8 (Units 7, 8, and 9 for Fender's blue butterfly 
(FBB-7, FBB-8, and FBB-9)) follows:

[[Page 890]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31OC06.008

    (13) Units 10, 11, and 12 for Fender's blue butterfly (FBB-10, FBB-
11, and FBB-12) in Lane County, Oregon.
    (i) Unit 10A (FBB-10A): 479362, 4883342; 479389, 4883340; 479413, 
4883340; 479442, 4883333; 479454, 4883325; 479444, 4883317; 479419, 
4883305; 479409, 4883299; 479403, 4883279; 479397, 4883259; 479385, 
4883239; 479377, 4883216; 479371, 4883204; 479373, 4883192; 479373, 
4883176; 479375, 4883162; 479371, 4883148; 479361, 4883128; 479357, 
4883120; 479353, 4883108; 479365, 4883104; 479365, 4883104; 479366, 
4883104; 479370, 4883102; 479372, 4883091; 479372, 4883083; 479371, 
4883075; 479369, 4883061; 479365, 4883041; 479361, 4883025; 479345, 
4883003; 479332, 4883007; 479332, 4883007; 479331, 4883007; 479333, 
4882993; 479321, 4882977; 479305, 4882968; 479282, 4882968; 479266, 
4882969; 479246, 4882973; 479246, 4882973; 479246, 4882973; 479226, 
4882972; 479219, 4882977; 479213, 4882991; 479211, 4883005;

[[Page 891]]

479211, 4883005; 479210, 4883009; 479204, 4883015; 479186, 4883017; 
479165, 4883013; 479149, 4883013; 479135, 4883013; 479123, 4883007; 
479093, 4883009; 479059, 4883003; 479026, 4883001; 479013, 4882998; 
479012, 4882998; 479010, 4882997; 479004, 4882995; 479006, 4882987; 
479013, 4882982; 479013, 4882980; 479010, 4882970; 478998, 4882966; 
478962, 4882964; 478931, 4882967; 478927, 4882977; 478927, 4882977; 
478926, 4882977; 478913, 4882973; 478897, 4882962; 478857, 4882952; 
478838, 4882954; 478832, 4882961; 478821, 4882979; 478819, 4882982; 
478819, 4882982; 478819, 4882982; 478819, 4882982; 478807, 4882981; 
478794, 4882977; 478778, 4882977; 478764, 4882966; 478764, 4882966; 
478764, 4882965; 478770, 4882954; 478792, 4882950; 478817, 4882940; 
478831, 4882918; 478841, 4882904; 478851, 4882900; 478863, 4882900; 
478881, 4882900; 478891, 4882876; 478891, 4882862; 478899, 4882844; 
478901, 4882831; 478893, 4882823; 478881, 4882815; 478879, 4882813; 
478873, 4882801; 478861, 4882797; 478853, 4882795; 478849, 4882783; 
478847, 4882775; 478837, 4882765; 478813, 4882761; 478794, 4882759; 
478774, 4882759; 478758, 4882759; 478744, 4882757; 478734, 4882759; 
478720, 4882759; 478700, 4882761; 478682, 4882765; 478665, 4882765; 
478641, 4882765; 478627, 4882775; 478609, 4882779; 478597, 4882793; 
478587, 4882801; 478577, 4882815; 478561, 4882825; 478555, 4882839; 
478551, 4882846; 478540, 4882852; 478530, 4882858; 478528, 4882866; 
478538, 4882876; 478543, 4882886; 478545, 4882894; 478551, 4882904; 
478563, 4882916; 478569, 4882922; 478577, 4882928; 478589, 4882936; 
478605, 4882946; 478617, 4882956; 478623, 4882964; 478623, 4882970; 
478624, 4882970; 478623, 4882973; 478627, 4882983; 478627, 4882984; 
478627, 4882983; 478619, 4882997; 478595, 4883005; 478573, 4883007; 
478555, 4883007; 478534, 4883009; 478508, 4883005; 478508, 4883005; 
478507, 4883005; 478480, 4882999; 478454, 4882997; 478442, 4882989; 
478429, 4882989; 478419, 4882997; 478419, 4882997; 478418, 4882997; 
478411, 4882989; 478403, 4882979; 478397, 4882964; 478386, 4882946; 
478382, 4882940; 478366, 4882933; 478352, 4882939; 478349, 4882940; 
478341, 4882948; 478333, 4882956; 478333, 4882956; 478333, 4882956; 
478331, 4882954; 478317, 4882944; 478296, 4882954; 478298, 4882969; 
478304, 4882985; 478322, 4883013; 478329, 4883031; 478335, 4883047; 
478339, 4883067; 478349, 4883088; 478361, 4883104; 478367, 4883118; 
478379, 4883126; 478392, 4883133; 478403, 4883134; 478406, 4883134; 
478415, 4883127; 478417, 4883117; 478417, 4883114; 478417, 4883114; 
478417, 4883114; 478420, 4883108; 478422, 4883098; 478423, 4883095; 
478428, 4883084; 478435, 4883079; 478441, 4883074; 478458, 4883069; 
478458, 4883069; 478459, 4883069; 478484, 4883066; 478496, 4883065; 
478510, 4883065; 478524, 4883065; 478536, 4883063; 478559, 4883057; 
478559, 4883057; 478561, 4883057; 478583, 4883055; 478597, 4883053; 
478619, 4883045; 478645, 4883029; 478659, 4883027; 478674, 4883027; 
478676, 4883027; 478694, 4883032; 478694, 4883032; 478697, 4883033; 
478707, 4883039; 478724, 4883031; 478728, 4883021; 478730, 4883011; 
478746, 4883005; 478746, 4883005; 478746, 4883005; 478766, 4883009; 
478772, 4883015; 478790, 4883005; 478790, 4883005; 478790, 4883005; 
478810, 4883015; 478816, 4883037; 478816, 4883053; 478814, 4883069; 
478806, 4883096; 478815, 4883107; 478859, 4883108; 478880, 4883106; 
478901, 4883104; 478921, 4883108; 479004, 4883110; 479010, 4883103; 
479010, 4883102; 479010, 4883102; 479212, 4883102; 479212, 4883104; 
479213, 4883103; 479211, 4883128; 479213, 4883156; 479211, 4883190; 
479211, 4883217; 479215, 4883247; 479211, 4883265; 479209, 4883283; 
479217, 4883313; 479219, 4883337; 479239, 4883339; 479278, 4883339; 
479320, 4883342; 479362, 4883342.
    (ii) Unit 10B (FBB-10B): 480173, 4882467; 480173, 4882393; 480173, 
4882308; 480170, 4882236; 480168, 4882173; 480168, 4882165; 480169, 
4882164; 480176, 4882152; 480191, 4882150; 480226, 4882147; 480247, 
4882138; 480243, 4882127; 480236, 4882109; 480232, 4882089; 480224, 
4882064; 480207, 4882058; 480209, 4882042; 480209, 4882024; 480185, 
4882016; 480170, 4882007; 480169, 4881966; 480191, 4881931; 480206, 
4881898; 480213, 4881847; 480219, 4881787; 480246, 4881569; 480248, 
4881544; 480247, 4881536; 480247, 4881524; 480239, 4881512; 480240, 
4881489; 480243, 4881474; 480247, 4881442; 480243, 4881433; 480239, 
4881415; 480224, 4881399; 480215, 4881399; 480210, 4881384; 480221, 
4881370; 480230, 4881360; 480254, 4881347; 480271, 4881331; 480283, 
4881333; 480297, 4881333; 480325, 4881335; 480338, 4881336; 480361, 
4881332; 480375, 4881331; 480386, 4881325; 480394, 4881312; 480398, 
4881279; 480398, 4881082; 480400, 4881032; 480399, 4881003; 480394, 
4880995; 480394, 4880984; 480394, 4880984; 480360, 4880954; 480360, 
4880954; 480350, 4880954; 480332, 4880958; 480316, 4880964; 480294, 
4880970; 480284, 4880970; 480274, 4880966; 480261, 4880960; 480239, 
4880962; 480213, 4880960; 480201, 4880950; 480179, 4880950; 480159, 
4880950; 480130, 4880950; 480094, 4880944; 480080, 4880952; 480058, 
4880954; 480052, 4880938; 480052, 4880920; 480044, 4880914; 480024, 
4880912; 480026, 4880895; 480020, 4880883; 479997, 4880879; 479975, 
4880873; 479961, 4880863; 479935, 4880849; 479917, 4880847; 479903, 
4880841; 479883, 4880837; 479874, 4880825; 479874, 4880813; 479866, 
4880803; 479848, 4880797; 479844, 4880779; 479848, 4880756; 479870, 
4880738; 479868, 4880724; 479856, 4880702; 479872, 4880690; 479870, 
4880674; 479856, 4880668; 479862, 4880650; 479876, 4880631; 479891, 
4880621; 479901, 4880615; 479909, 4880597; 479919, 4880577; 479923, 
4880559; 479927, 4880535; 479925, 4880523; 479939, 4880500; 479941, 
4880484; 479939, 4880468; 479945, 4880456; 479947, 4880442; 479943, 
4880426; 479949, 4880410; 479965, 4880400; 479975, 4880396; 479981, 
4880373; 479987, 4880361; 479999, 4880357; 479999, 4880343; 480005, 
4880319; 480005, 4880305; 480016, 4880283; 480034, 4880263; 480048, 
4880265; 480054, 4880273; 480068, 4880265; 480088, 4880271; 480098, 
4880291; 480094, 4880305; 480100, 4880315; 480118, 4880321; 480118, 
4880339; 480124, 4880359; 480134, 4880388; 480141, 4880400; 480149, 
4880412; 480163, 4880418; 480173, 4880428; 480177, 4880432; 480189, 
4880432; 480221, 4880422; 480245, 4880424; 480261, 4880422; 480280, 
4880422; 480322, 4880426; 480344, 4880432; 480378, 4880438; 480391, 
4880442; 480417, 4880444; 480411, 4880428; 480405, 4880398; 480401, 
4880371; 480401, 4880353; 480389, 4880333; 480384, 4880311; 480374, 
4880265; 480366, 4880238; 480364, 4880208; 480362, 4880184; 480358, 
4880156; 480354, 4880113; 480336, 4880109; 480300, 4880109; 480259, 
4880113; 480179, 4880115; 480116, 4880115; 480076, 4880115; 480044, 
4880117; 480044, 4880142; 480044, 4880166; 480042, 4880194; 480034, 
4880192; 480020, 4880196; 480010, 4880198; 479997, 4880190; 480001, 
4880168; 480001, 4880154; 479983, 4880156;

[[Page 892]]

479969, 4880158; 479957, 4880142; 479971, 4880133; 479983, 4880117; 
479977, 4880109; 479989, 4880085; 479993, 4880067; 479987, 4879964; 
479602, 4879960; 479606, 4879744; 479592, 4879738; 479586, 4879724; 
479584, 4879525; 479544, 4879525; 479500, 4879523; 479304, 4879519; 
479272, 4879527; 479243, 4879535; 479235, 4879557; 479245, 4879589; 
479256, 4879623; 479268, 4879654; 479288, 4879680; 479298, 4879694; 
479298, 4879732; 479278, 4879744; 479233, 4879746; 479215, 4879750; 
479195, 4879753; 479193, 4879761; 479195, 4879779; 479201, 4879811; 
479199, 4879831; 479199, 4879859; 479217, 4879861; 479245, 4879835; 
479270, 4879829; 479300, 4879867; 479308, 4879902; 479298, 4879930; 
479284, 4879974; 479290, 4880025; 479300, 4880065; 479320, 4880095; 
479328, 4880119; 479350, 4880134; 479360, 4880148; 479370, 4880180; 
479377, 4880210; 479385, 4880252; 479385, 4880303; 479383, 4880341; 
479395, 4880367; 479397, 4880392; 479403, 4880406; 479415, 4880432; 
479415, 4880450; 479411, 4880468; 479423, 4880474; 479439, 4880484; 
479447, 4880494; 479459, 4880498; 479477, 4880496; 479495, 4880502; 
479493, 4880519; 479485, 4880541; 479491, 4880551; 479500, 4880557; 
479518, 4880571; 479520, 4880567; 479526, 4880551; 479542, 4880527; 
479552, 4880537; 479576, 4880547; 479582, 4880539; 479600, 4880527; 
479620, 4880517; 479637, 4880517; 479665, 4880529; 479683, 4880543; 
479665, 4880587; 479635, 4880623; 479588, 4880672; 479540, 4880744; 
479524, 4880785; 479516, 4880801; 479510, 4880811; 479506, 4880829; 
479518, 4880831; 479546, 4880825; 479584, 4880813; 479610, 4880803; 
479639, 4880807; 479679, 4880823; 479713, 4880857; 479721, 4880879; 
479739, 4880910; 479753, 4880942; 479766, 4880956; 479782, 4880970; 
479800, 4880986; 479822, 4881000; 479840, 4881025; 479880, 4881069; 
479899, 4881093; 479915, 4881115; 479935, 4881133; 479951, 4881137; 
479979, 4881139; 480012, 4881133; 480048, 4881150; 480062, 4881170; 
480110, 4881234; 480108, 4881248; 480098, 4881272; 480084, 4881289; 
480058, 4881325; 480040, 4881351; 480020, 4881375; 479987, 4881406; 
479983, 4881410; 479953, 4881450; 479941, 4881484; 479937, 4881518; 
479937, 4881551; 479947, 4881567; 479953, 4881589; 479963, 4881607; 
479981, 4881623; 480012, 4881647; 480042, 4881666; 480052, 4881666; 
480082, 4881662; 480102, 4881658; 480134, 4881664; 480155, 4881678; 
480161, 4881700; 480163, 4881722; 480163, 4881748; 480159, 4881776; 
480159, 4881793; 480149, 4881807; 480145, 4881817; 480135, 4881825; 
480122, 4881829; 480110, 4881825; 480068, 4881829; 480046, 4881825; 
480028, 4881825; 479989, 4881845; 479965, 4881863; 479941, 4881889; 
479923, 4881924; 479921, 4881954; 479921, 4881978; 479929, 4882000; 
479947, 4882020; 479959, 4882028; 479981, 4882043; 479995, 4882057; 
480014, 4882067; 480003, 4882089; 479997, 4882111; 479997, 4882135; 
479993, 4882155; 479981, 4882180; 479980, 4882187; 479981, 4882188; 
479978, 4882213; 479980, 4882240; 479978, 4882272; 479976, 4882288; 
479968, 4882318; 479954, 4882344; 479944, 4882371; 479942, 4882401; 
479946, 4882431; 479954, 4882449; 479962, 4882455; 479980, 4882461; 
479990, 4882465; 479999, 4882463; 480017, 4882459; 480037, 4882473; 
480047, 4882494; 480063, 4882502; 480077, 4882508; 480109, 4882512; 
480134, 4882518; 480158, 4882532; 480171, 4882532; 480171, 4882524; 
480172, 4882501; 480173, 4882467.
    (iii) Unit 10C (FBB-10C): 481378, 4880648; 481378, 4880649; 481379, 
4880651; 481380, 4880651; 481386, 4880656; 481391, 4880657; 481396, 
4880658; 481398, 4880658; 481400, 4880657; 481401, 4880674; 481426, 
4880675; 481437, 4880674; 481437, 4880675; 481438, 4880675; 481438, 
4880675; 481438, 4880675; 481443, 4880679; 481448, 4880686; 481454, 
4880692; 481461, 4880697; 481466, 4880702; 481473, 4880709; 481478, 
4880715; 481481, 4880724; 481484, 4880732; 481485, 4880737; 481486, 
4880744; 481487, 4880751; 481488, 4880756; 481488, 4880762; 481488, 
4880768; 481485, 4880774; 481482, 4880779; 481480, 4880786; 481478, 
4880790; 481477, 4880795; 481475, 4880803; 481474, 4880808; 481473, 
4880813; 481473, 4880820; 481467, 4880823; 481460, 4880829; 481455, 
4880836; 481454, 4880844; 481455, 4880854; 481460, 4880864; 481464, 
4880872; 481468, 4880877; 481472, 4880882; 481476, 4880886; 481481, 
4880892; 481489, 4880897; 481495, 4880902; 481502, 4880908; 481511, 
4880912; 481515, 4880917; 481521, 4880920; 481529, 4880923; 481535, 
4880925; 481542, 4880927; 481545, 4880928; 481567, 4880927; 481580, 
4880925; 481590, 4880922; 481597, 4880918; 481602, 4880914; 481602, 
4880914; 481602, 4880913; 481609, 4880913; 481612, 4880913; 481615, 
4880820; 481611, 4880820; 481611, 4880816; 481612, 4880815; 481616, 
4880815; 481616, 4880806; 481617, 4880802; 481620, 4880797; 481622, 
4880794; 481622, 4880793; 481623, 4880790; 481623, 4880789; 481624, 
4880788; 481624, 4880786; 481816, 4880785; 481814, 4880923; 481900, 
4880926; 481912, 4880916; 481942, 4880882; 481988, 4880820; 481991, 
4880727; 481800, 4880618; 481741, 4880607; 481669, 4880604; 481667, 
4880569; 481686, 4880525; 481718, 4880494; 481780, 4880511; 481849, 
4880560; 481913, 4880614; 481964, 4880648; 482025, 4880685; 482062, 
4880698; 482079, 4880687; 482089, 4880665; 482099, 4880579; 482082, 
4880547; 481998, 4880506; 481925, 4880469; 481809, 4880408; 481760, 
4880370; 481645, 4880354; 481620, 4880380; 481618, 4880513; 481600, 
4880528; 481599, 4880529; 481598, 4880529; 481594, 4880529; 481589, 
4880526; 481587, 4880525; 481577, 4880525; 481572, 4880525; 481568, 
4880525; 481563, 4880525; 481559, 4880525; 481557, 4880525; 481553, 
4880523; 481551, 4880523; 481541, 4880523; 481540, 4880523; 481540, 
4880523; 481532, 4880524; 481525, 4880523; 481509, 4880519; 481496, 
4880519; 481494, 4880520; 481483, 4880523; 481470, 4880525; 481470, 
4880525; 481470, 4880525; 481469, 4880525; 481454, 4880526; 481448, 
4880527; 481431, 4880531; 481409, 4880530; 481409, 4880530; 481405, 
4880530; 481420, 4880517; 481445, 4880474; 481453, 4880443; 481451, 
4880421; 481452, 4880420; 481444, 4880418; 481428, 4880427; 481400, 
4880494; 481379, 4880554; 481368, 4880626; 481373, 4880640; 481374, 
4880634; 481375, 4880644; 481377, 4880648; 481378, 4880648.
    (iv) Unit 10D (FBB-10D): 482330, 4880170; 482330, 4880242; 482338, 
4880299; 482384, 4880330; 482415, 4880349; 482472, 4880382; 482531, 
4880408; 482566, 4880419; 482601, 4880426; 482638, 4880434; 482700, 
4880436; 482751, 4880435; 482832, 4880421; 482837, 4880436; 482842, 
4880441; 482846, 4880456; 482865, 4880463; 482890, 4880456; 482946, 
4880435; 482951, 4880427; 482973, 4880408; 483000, 4880395; 483014, 
4880387; 483040, 4880372; 483075, 4880346; 483131, 4880295; 483137, 
4880272; 483125, 4880251; 483125, 4880250; 483083, 4880204; 483082, 
4880205; 483069, 4880202; 483048, 4880205; 483015, 4880205; 482992, 
4880209; 482984, 4880207; 482955, 4880210; 482933, 4880217; 482866, 
4880211; 482836, 4880163;

[[Page 893]]

482839, 4880141; 482828, 4880125; 482816, 4880120; 482804, 4880120; 
482788, 4880127; 482759, 4880130; 482736, 4880121; 482713, 4880119; 
482649, 4880141; 482601, 4880164; 482567, 4880154; 482546, 4880160; 
482532, 4880142; 482511, 4880124; 482489, 4880130; 482457, 4880119; 
482423, 4880123; 482330, 4880170.
    (v) Unit 10E (FBB-10E): 483301, 4880015; 483334, 4880057; 483333, 
4880306; 483332, 4880510; 483360, 4880508; 483386, 4880503; 483421, 
4880492; 483444, 4880480; 483486, 4880443; 483541, 4880386; 483561, 
4880361; 483631, 4880258; 483671, 4880200; 483683, 4880171; 483736, 
4880004; 483767, 4879924; 483848, 4879754; 483860, 4879739; 483868, 
4879724; 483868, 4879708; 483853, 4879707; 483824, 4879707; 483765, 
4879712; 483763, 4879718; 483751, 4879724; 483751, 4879729; 483748, 
4879746; 483706, 4879749; 483693, 4879751; 483681, 4879754; 483652, 
4879767; 483614, 4879787; 483545, 4879797; 483306, 4879918; 483301, 
4880015.
    (vi) Unit 11A (FBB-11A): 482634, 4879216; 482560, 4879196; 482528, 
4879254; 482470, 4879358; 482492, 4879432; 482573, 4879516; 482592, 
4879600; 482486, 4879609; 482475, 4879701; 482527, 4879700; 482613, 
4879696; 482655, 4879694; 482634, 4879216.
    (vii) Unit 11B (FBB-11B): 482130, 4878873; 482101, 4878734; 481898, 
4878780; 481827, 4878721; 481792, 4878680; 481750, 4878676; 481734, 
4878689; 481740, 4878776; 481743, 4878847; 481771, 4878922; 481791, 
4878918; 481901, 4878886; 482130, 4878873.
    (viii) Unit 11C (FBB-11C): 482637, 4878489; 482654, 4878466; 482492, 
4878476; 482492, 4878521; 482544, 4878709; 482595, 4878851; 482687, 
4878901; 482911, 4878899; 482883, 4878825; 482792, 4878741; 482744, 
4878644; 482654, 4878599; 482625, 4878583; 482637, 4878489.
    (ix) Unit 11D (FBB-11D): 483917, 4879166; 483911, 4879133; 483895, 
4879125; 483841, 4879126; 483792, 4879136; 483800, 4879102; 483835, 
4879061; 483920, 4879021; 483949, 4879004; 483975, 4878976; 483992, 
4878953; 484027, 4878883; 484048, 4878870; 484059, 4878815; 484017, 
4878833; 483914, 4878874; 483812, 4878917; 483725, 4878961; 483698, 
4878999; 483674, 4879071; 483668, 4879377; 483703, 4879390; 483754, 
4879404; 483789, 4879412; 483849, 4879401; 483906, 4879358; 483920, 
4879301; 483923, 4879247; 483917, 4879166.
    (x) Unit 11E (FBB-11E): 484274, 4879053; 484439, 4878986; 484226, 
4878988; 484195, 4878996; 484183, 4879004; 484183, 4879189; 484193, 
4879197; 484201, 4879199; 484220, 4879148; 484239, 4879099; 484253, 
4879070; 484274, 4879053.
    (xi) Unit 11F (FBB-11F): 484856, 4878596; 484906, 4878565; 484909, 
4878412; 485192, 4878416; 485247, 4878417; 485269, 4878317; 485038, 
4878264; 484819, 4878269; 484774, 4878240; 484777, 4878237; 484743, 
4878234; 484735, 4878256; 484736, 4878340; 484731, 4878360; 484711, 
4878440; 484690, 4878493; 484646, 4878531; 484613, 4878561; 484639, 
4878590; 484639, 4878590; 484856, 4878596.
    (xii) Unit 11G (FBB-11G): 484890, 4877956; 484890, 4877986; 484893, 
4878018; 484903, 4878058; 484911, 4878082; 484908, 4878084; 484943, 
4878095; 484981, 4878028; 484993, 4877966; 484998, 4877917; 485005, 
4877890; 485003, 4877867; 484981, 4877858; 484981, 4877861; 484960, 
4877869; 484936, 4877878; 484916, 4877898; 484897, 4877925; 484890, 
4877956.
    (xiii) Unit 11H (FBB-11H): 485260, 4877580; 485260, 4877580; 485263, 
4878059; 485381, 4878067; 485486, 4878059; 485530, 4878059; 485578, 
4878058; 485595, 4878021; 485594, 4877901; 485597, 4877851; 485598, 
4877813; 485589, 4877780; 485587, 4877759; 485587, 4877759; 485586, 
4877757; 485592, 4877706; 485592, 4877705; 485589, 4877570; 485589, 
4877512; 485616, 4877499; 485716, 4877494; 485714, 4877466; 485719, 
4877374; 485716, 4877332; 485700, 4877320; 485605, 4877329; 485547, 
4877340; 485479, 4877364; 485432, 4877390; 485340, 4877458; 485304, 
4877484; 485260, 4877580.
    (xiv) Unit 11I (FBB-11I): 486042, 4877818; 486064, 4877815; 486085, 
4877816; 486097, 4877812; 486099, 4877812; 486110, 4877794; 486111, 
4877786; 486113, 4877755; 486112, 4877751; 486111, 4877741; 486112, 
4877740; 486112, 4877736; 486112, 4877735; 486110, 4877734; 486110, 
4877734; 486107, 4877713; 486106, 4877708; 486106, 4877708; 486106, 
4877708; 486067, 4877628; 486041, 4877605; 486036, 4877586; 486033, 
4877528; 486241, 4877142; 486263, 4877100; 486261, 4876700; 486057, 
4876700; 485991, 4876758; 485978, 4876930; 485986, 4877216; 485986, 
4877222; 485981, 4877497; 485981, 4877647; 485977, 4877652; 485975, 
4877692; 485976, 4877692; 485976, 4877703; 485977, 4877703; 485976, 
4877703; 485977, 4877712; 485983, 4877780; 485984, 4877781; 485987, 
4877791; 485988, 4877795; 485996, 4877809; 485999, 4877814; 486024, 
4877817; 486038, 4877818; 486042, 4877818.
    (xv) Unit 12A (FBB-12A): 486197, 4875513; 486200, 4875474; 486201, 
4875316; 486185, 4874677; 486042, 4874749; 486046, 4875014; 485875, 
4875023; 485874, 4875012; 485698, 4875023; 485695, 4875035; 485450, 
4875035; 485608, 4875144; 485702, 4875208; 485712, 4875178; 485862, 
4875211; 485889, 4875218; 485910, 4875396; 485986, 4875456; 486062, 
4875471; 486072, 4875472; 486086, 4875473; 486088, 4875478; 486096, 
4875476; 486143, 4875502; 486141, 4875516; 486141, 4875526; 486138, 
4875537; 486132, 4875540; 486115, 4875576; 486116, 4875585; 486113, 
4875587; 486113, 4875591; 486100, 4875599; 486094, 4875607; 486092, 
4875611; 486092, 4875616; 486105, 4875626; 486123, 4875643; 486143, 
4875649; 486156, 4875646; 486159, 4875643; 486163, 4875634; 486164, 
4875624; 486166, 4875609; 486169, 4875599; 486174, 4875586; 486190, 
4875560; 486193, 4875549; 486195, 4875534; 486197, 4875513.
    (xvi) Unit 12B (FBB-12B): 486793, 4876121; 486790, 4876107; 486783, 
4876064; 486783, 4876051; 486790, 4876034; 486805, 4876021; 486842, 
4875993; 486855, 4875977; 486860, 4875962; 486869, 4875946; 486883, 
4875908; 486893, 4875878; 486895, 4875857; 486896, 4875826; 486892, 
4875791; 486893, 4875754; 486886, 4875756; 486738, 4875751; 486734, 
4875744; 486731, 4875711; 486725, 4875665; 486720, 4875629; 486693, 
4875573; 486629, 4875348; 486549, 4875312; 486469, 4875220; 486477, 
4875168; 486553, 4875136; 486603, 4875021; 486608, 4875021; 486616, 
4875020; 486601, 4874935; 486577, 4874945; 486546, 4874949; 486542, 
4874941; 486522, 4874907; 486507, 4874882; 486482, 4874888; 486482, 
4874900; 486481, 4874944; 486439, 4874947; 486424, 4874957; 486426, 
4874980; 486427, 4875000; 486409, 4875006; 486398, 4875018; 486401, 
4875024; 486416, 4875027; 486422, 4875028; 486417, 4875033; 486405, 
4875292; 486421, 4875508; 486517, 4875652; 486614, 4875792; 486640, 
4875821; 486742, 4875825; 486742, 4875951; 486725, 4875983;

[[Page 894]]

486714, 4875983; 486709, 4875984; 486702, 4875993; 486694, 4876021; 
486685, 4876033; 486684, 4876035; 486680, 4876031; 486676, 4876028; 
486672, 4876025; 486660, 4876020; 486657, 4876018; 486652, 4876018; 
486639, 4876025; 486629, 4876029; 486620, 4876034; 486614, 4876044; 
486613, 4876052; 486610, 4876058; 486605, 4876068; 486594, 4876067; 
486589, 4876066; 486585, 4876068; 486581, 4876078; 486576, 4876086; 
486568, 4876093; 486565, 4876102; 486563, 4876110; 486565, 4876115; 
486573, 4876118; 486577, 4876118; 486583, 4876115; 486588, 4876113; 
486592, 4876119; 486590, 4876128; 486585, 4876137; 486580, 4876144; 
486579, 4876147; 486795, 4876145; 486793, 4876121.
    (xvii) Note: Map 9 (Units 10, 11, and 12 for Fender's blue butterfly 
(FBB-10, FBB-11, and FBB-12)) follows:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31OC06.009


[[Page 895]]


    (14) Unit 13 for Fender's blue butterfly, Lane County, Oregon.
    (i) Unit 13 (FBB-13) exterior unit perimeter: 500237, 4885879; 
500247, 4885878; 500251, 4885881; 500259, 4885886; 500266, 4885881; 
500274, 4885878; 500281, 4885875; 500294, 4885870; 500305, 4885867; 
500309, 4885860; 500312, 4885856; 500326, 4885855; 500374, 4885871; 
500388, 4885861; 500407, 4885873; 500445, 4885876; 500494, 4885861; 
500516, 4885835; 500529, 4885775; 500516, 4885744; 500461, 4885670; 
500397, 4885621; 500340, 4885608; 500322, 4885619; 500317, 4885610; 
500306, 4885597; 500302, 4885585; 500297, 4885572; 500297, 4885553; 
500301, 4885537; 500309, 4885525; 500306, 4885510; 500301, 4885500; 
500291, 4885484; 500282, 4885466; 500266, 4885451; 500242, 4885409; 
500227, 4885390; 500207, 4885373; 500198, 4885360; 500187, 4885333; 
500176, 4885307; 500174, 4885290; 500176, 4885279; 500179, 4885270; 
500184, 4885259; 500181, 4885253; 500171, 4885244; 500164, 4885234; 
500162, 4885226; 500162, 4885217; 500163, 4885206; 500168, 4885202; 
500171, 4885197; 500161, 4885192; 500160, 4885180; 500160, 4885169; 
500164, 4885163; 500178, 4885155; 500184, 4885150; 500190, 4885148; 
500193, 4885151; 500199, 4885162; 500206, 4885173; 500217, 4885177; 
500212, 4885166; 500206, 4885154; 500201, 4885146; 500209, 4885142; 
500215, 4885144; 500229, 4885144; 500239, 4885146; 500251, 4885152; 
500259, 4885155; 500279, 4885163; 500292, 4885172; 500302, 4885178; 
500314, 4885187; 500324, 4885196; 500329, 4885199; 500344, 4885203; 
500352, 4885207; 500361, 4885212; 500371, 4885215; 500400, 4885229; 
500421, 4885235; 500427, 4885243; 500433, 4885255; 500437, 4885268; 
500442, 4885275; 500444, 4885282; 500438, 4885286; 500423, 4885294; 
500426, 4885302; 500437, 4885307; 500442, 4885305; 500454, 4885296; 
500462, 4885297; 500459, 4885311; 500452, 4885318; 500449, 4885334; 
500453, 4885342; 500462, 4885352; 500467, 4885363; 500477, 4885365; 
500477, 4885376; 500485, 4885383; 500494, 4885390; 500505, 4885393; 
500521, 4885400; 500529, 4885408; 500534, 4885416; 500542, 4885422; 
500554, 4885423; 500562, 4885416; 500568, 4885412; 500579, 4885407; 
500592, 4885409; 500597, 4885417; 500596, 4885428; 500602, 4885436; 
500609, 4885439; 500622, 4885444; 500634, 4885443; 500654, 4885440; 
500673, 4885439; 500687, 4885436; 500694, 4885427; 500687, 4885407; 
500670, 4885388; 500647, 4885390; 500636, 4885394; 500621, 4885391; 
500602, 4885373; 500581, 4885365; 500549, 4885361; 500531, 4885360; 
500527, 4885349; 500530, 4885339; 500519, 4885340; 500508, 4885335; 
500504, 4885327; 500497, 4885330; 500491, 4885326; 500494, 4885317; 
500489, 4885309; 500489, 4885296; 500502, 4885288; 500514, 4885289; 
500537, 4885295; 500546, 4885294; 500558, 4885292; 500561, 4885282; 
500554, 4885275; 500544, 4885277; 500529, 4885277; 500519, 4885272; 
500513, 4885265; 500501, 4885271; 500485, 4885274; 500476, 4885264; 
500468, 4885243; 500460, 4885232; 500457, 4885210; 500452, 4885199; 
500457, 4885188; 500479, 4885175; 500486, 4885169; 500499, 4885169; 
500506, 4885155; 500517, 4885152; 500513, 4885142; 500508, 4885129; 
500512, 4885117; 500511, 4885095; 500505, 4885083; 500514, 4885068; 
500512, 4885060; 500511, 4885048; 500513, 4885042; 500520, 4885030; 
500524, 4885026; 500541, 4885018; 500541, 4885011; 500552, 4884997; 
500547, 4884989; 500532, 4884994; 500523, 4884995; 500515, 4884995; 
500507, 4884986; 500501, 4884974; 500500, 4884957; 500498, 4884940; 
500500, 4884924; 500506, 4884903; 500512, 4884889; 500526, 4884882; 
500538, 4884872; 500560, 4884867; 500558, 4884857; 500550, 4884838; 
500557, 4884822; 500554, 4884812; 500539, 4884807; 500527, 4884801; 
500520, 4884812; 500523, 4884822; 500519, 4884834; 500500, 4884839; 
500486, 4884843; 500475, 4884849; 500469, 4884862; 500464, 4884870; 
500455, 4884876; 500448, 4884874; 500444, 4884867; 500439, 4884851; 
500437, 4884837; 500426, 4884837; 500418, 4884832; 500414, 4884825; 
500401, 4884830; 500396, 4884836; 500386, 4884831; 500373, 4884819; 
500362, 4884802; 500348, 4884785; 500337, 4884770; 500322, 4884744; 
500312, 4884716; 500301, 4884704; 500292, 4884694; 500281, 4884687; 
500267, 4884682; 500256, 4884673; 500244, 4884669; 500234, 4884672; 
500222, 4884666; 500211, 4884655; 500201, 4884648; 500174, 4884630; 
500154, 4884624; 500132, 4884606; 500134, 4884582; 500125, 4884539; 
500130, 4884538; 500154, 4884536; 500166, 4884531; 500176, 4884521; 
500182, 4884512; 500190, 4884506; 500198, 4884505; 500211, 4884508; 
500219, 4884511; 500230, 4884513; 500238, 4884513; 500251, 4884513; 
500256, 4884517; 500254, 4884528; 500261, 4884531; 500269, 4884528; 
500279, 4884523; 500279, 4884506; 500281, 4884491; 500288, 4884489; 
500287, 4884479; 500286, 4884472; 500276, 4884463; 500267, 4884455; 
500258, 4884449; 500252, 4884457; 500236, 4884460; 500231, 4884449; 
500220, 4884448; 500212, 4884454; 500193, 4884456; 500186, 4884460; 
500187, 4884468; 500181, 4884474; 500149, 4884471; 500133, 4884476; 
500124, 4884444; 500114, 4884406; 500109, 4884374; 500111, 4884347; 
500121, 4884318; 500138, 4884294; 500164, 4884282; 500193, 4884273; 
500201, 4884250; 500211, 4884236; 500229, 4884215; 500235, 4884217; 
500245, 4884212; 500254, 4884199; 500251, 4884182; 500238, 4884164; 
500224, 4884159; 500204, 4884154; 500174, 4884141; 500156, 4884137; 
500145, 4884134; 500141, 4884126; 500130, 4884121; 500118, 4884114; 
500115, 4884106; 500104, 4884084; 500095, 4884081; 500086, 4884071; 
500050, 4884053; 499990, 4884044; 499956, 4884048; 499951, 4884036; 
499966, 4884029; 499976, 4884029; 500008, 4884021; 500053, 4884012; 
500169, 4883965; 500217, 4883954; 500256, 4883937; 500287, 4883928; 
500276, 4883890; 500259, 4883868; 500219, 4883809; 500181, 4883777; 
500171, 4883756; 500131, 4883708; 500125, 4883695; 500115, 4883689; 
500063, 4883635; 500046, 4883627; 499885, 4883627; 499836, 4883667; 
499804, 4883725; 499753, 4883765; 499771, 4883806; 499781, 4883829; 
499786, 4883841; 499802, 4883859; 499837, 4883920; 499839, 4883934; 
499868, 4883969; 499893, 4883998; 499921, 4884044; 499926, 4884058; 
499908, 4884095; 499908, 4884114; 499907, 4884131; 499920, 4884154; 
499926, 4884179; 499903, 4884192; 499878, 4884208; 499869, 4884224; 
499867, 4884234; 499868, 4884250; 499875, 4884256; 499886, 4884279; 
499896, 4884302; 499888, 4884318; 499844, 4884340; 499833, 4884325; 
499826, 4884336; 499804, 4884347; 499803, 4884346; 499796, 4884334; 
499799, 4884325; 499795, 4884317; 499787, 4884313; 499781, 4884298; 
499783, 4884288; 499786, 4884282; 499792, 4884272; 499796, 4884254; 
499796, 4884242; 499791, 4884232; 499779, 4884235; 499762, 4884241; 
499749, 4884250; 499746, 4884260; 499746, 4884275; 499753, 4884282; 
499756, 4884295; 499754, 4884304; 499747, 4884317; 499750, 4884327; 
499755, 4884326; 499766, 4884329; 499774, 4884335; 499781, 4884335; 
499784, 4884346; 499788, 4884351; 499793, 4884356; 499743,

[[Page 896]]

4884415; 499723, 4884425; 499678, 4884501; 499702, 4884553; 499778, 
4884603; 499794, 4884603; 499798, 4884609; 499815, 4884619; 499828, 
4884630; 499840, 4884642; 499849, 4884652; 499868, 4884659; 499884, 
4884670; 499903, 4884680; 499911, 4884685; 499923, 4884692; 499942, 
4884707; 499951, 4884718; 499961, 4884726; 499969, 4884733; 499974, 
4884745; 499979, 4884757; 499982, 4884774; 499978, 4884786; 499969, 
4884789; 499953, 4884792; 499949, 4884805; 499953, 4884820; 499954, 
4884835; 499957, 4884858; 499958, 4884880; 499965, 4884899; 499968, 
4884907; 499974, 4884922; 499980, 4884936; 499987, 4884951; 499991, 
4884964; 499996, 4884979; 500002, 4884995; 500008, 4885009; 500013, 
4885025; 500020, 4885040; 500027, 4885063; 500032, 4885073; 500048, 
4885105; 500059, 4885120; 500069, 4885128; 500084, 4885136; 500096, 
4885144; 500100, 4885153; 500107, 4885166; 500108, 4885178; 500111, 
4885195; 500122, 4885206; 500125, 4885217; 500130, 4885229; 500136, 
4885234; 500145, 4885238; 500154, 4885244; 500157, 4885255; 500155, 
4885263; 500152, 4885272; 500153, 4885285; 500157, 4885300; 500161, 
4885324; 500171, 4885342; 500179, 4885357; 500185, 4885371; 500192, 
4885383; 500206, 4885392; 500216, 4885409; 500230, 4885428; 500244, 
4885450; 500259, 4885474; 500271, 4885484; 500282, 4885506; 500284, 
4885519; 500280, 4885528; 500277, 4885551; 500274, 4885558; 500267, 
4885564; 500260, 4885567; 500256, 4885574; 500251, 4885582; 500247, 
4885589; 500247, 4885596; 500253, 4885598; 500258, 4885606; 500256, 
4885616; 500254, 4885623; 500247, 4885628; 500239, 4885635; 500247, 
4885640; 500250, 4885646; 500250, 4885653; 500254, 4885660; 500262, 
4885664; 500273, 4885675; 500279, 4885683; 500277, 4885686; 500271, 
4885694; 500267, 4885696; 500264, 4885706; 500260, 4885708; 500259, 
4885716; 500261, 4885720; 500266, 4885721; 500275, 4885723; 500287, 
4885728; 500298, 4885805; 500311, 4885825; 500303, 4885830; 500299, 
4885833; 500292, 4885833; 500288, 4885831; 500284, 4885830; 500276, 
4885833; 500271, 4885833; 500264, 4885830; 500259, 4885828; 500253, 
4885827; 500247, 4885825; 500242, 4885820; 500239, 4885820; 500234, 
4885816; 500229, 4885818; 500223, 4885814; 500220, 4885815; 500215, 
4885819; 500211, 4885825; 500205, 4885821; 500200, 4885819; 500192, 
4885818; 500185, 4885825; 500181, 4885830; 500171, 4885836; 500166, 
4885843; 500164, 4885849; 500174, 4885853; 500177, 4885857; 500183, 
4885861; 500187, 4885867; 500191, 4885870; 500199, 4885870; 500205, 
4885874; 500205, 4885881; 500214, 4885879; 500219, 4885882; 500226, 
4885882; 500232, 4885887; 500237, 4885879.
    (ii) Unit 13 (FBB-13) interior unit perimeter 500014, 4884757; 
500024, 4884754; 500039, 4884757; 500047, 4884762; 500047, 4884748; 
500048, 4884731; 500033, 4884719; 500019, 4884709; 500009, 4884696; 
499994, 4884686; 499975, 4884679; 499963, 4884672; 499939, 4884665; 
499927, 4884656; 499908, 4884648; 499899, 4884644; 499883, 4884641; 
499869, 4884634; 499896, 4884633; 499920, 4884633; 499959, 4884630; 
500010, 4884633; 500077, 4884643; 500098, 4884643; 500132, 4884671; 
500152, 4884680; 500169, 4884677; 500211, 4884696; 500232, 4884707; 
500254, 4884720; 500271, 4884714; 500280, 4884715; 500316, 4884780; 
500328, 4884808; 500349, 4884827; 500374, 4884844; 500382, 4884855; 
500387, 4884875; 500373, 4884873; 500367, 4884862; 500367, 4884883; 
500374, 4884899; 500389, 4884907; 500401, 4884915; 500393, 4884922; 
500399, 4884934; 500404, 4884947; 500414, 4884955; 500421, 4884967; 
500414, 4884984; 500407, 4884992; 500412, 4885011; 500406, 4885026; 
500392, 4885038; 500386, 4885045; 500381, 4885060; 500391, 4885076; 
500386, 4885085; 500372, 4885080; 500364, 4885083; 500362, 4885099; 
500372, 4885114; 500377, 4885133; 500385, 4885158; 500391, 4885166; 
500404, 4885165; 500424, 4885161; 500427, 4885174; 500422, 4885182; 
500387, 4885191; 500364, 4885192; 500348, 4885190; 500333, 4885182; 
500317, 4885172; 500297, 4885161; 500275, 4885150; 500261, 4885142; 
500246, 4885127; 500242, 4885106; 500246, 4885090; 500260, 4885076; 
500272, 4885079; 500283, 4885078; 500283, 4885068; 500272, 4885060; 
500268, 4885047; 500277, 4885039; 500286, 4885038; 500275, 4885024; 
500260, 4885012; 500260, 4885001; 500265, 4884987; 500264, 4884970; 
500252, 4884959; 500242, 4884954; 500226, 4884951; 500208, 4884958; 
500198, 4884965; 500191, 4884981; 500194, 4884996; 500202, 4885011; 
500212, 4885020; 500209, 4885034; 500193, 4885043; 500186, 4885049; 
500179, 4885057; 500161, 4885069; 500154, 4885086; 500166, 4885113; 
500182, 4885123; 500171, 4885137; 500162, 4885147; 500149, 4885157; 
500137, 4885168; 500128, 4885163; 500119, 4885147; 500121, 4885136; 
500101, 4885127; 500085, 4885118; 500077, 4885110; 500070, 4885099; 
500062, 4885087; 500055, 4885072; 500041, 4885045; 500034, 4885017; 
500029, 4884996; 500025, 4884978; 500016, 4884959; 500011, 4884937; 
500011, 4884921; 500004, 4884891; 500006, 4884875; 500006, 4884860; 
500014, 4884840; 500020, 4884823; 500025, 4884806; 500021, 4884789; 
500024, 4884780; 500014, 4884772; 500014, 4884757.
    (iii) Note: Map 10 (Unit 13 for Fender's blue butterfly (FBB-13)) 
follows:

[[Page 897]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR31OC06.010


[[Page 898]]



         Oregon Silverspot Butterfly (Speyeria zerene hippolyta)

    Oregon. Lane County T. 16 S., R. 12 W. Those portions of section 15 
and of the south half of section 10 which are west of a line parallel 
to, and 1500 feet west of, the eastern section boundaries of sections 10 
and 15.
    Note: Map follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.150
    
    Constituent biological elements essential to the continued existence 
of the Oregon silverspot butterfly within the Critical Habitat include 
the larval foodplant (Viola adunca), grasses and forbs in which the 
larvae find shelter, the composite plants from which the adults obtain 
nectar, and the spruce woods in which the adults find shelter.

  Palos Verdes Blue Butterfly (Glaucopsyche lygdamus palosverdesensis)

    California. Los Angeles County.
    1. Agua Amarga Canyon Zone. Palos Verdes Estates. A square area of 
land 0.4x0.4 kilometers located at the southeast corner of the 
southernmost corporate boundary of Palos Verdes Estates.
    2. Frank Hesse Park Zone. Rancho Palos Verdes. An area enclosed by 
Hawthorne Boulevard, Locklenna Lane, and Verde Drive.
    Note: Map follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.151
    
    3. Palos Verdes Drive Zone. Rancho Palos Verdes. The Switchback area 
of Palos Verdes Drive East, bounded by a line connecting the two eastern 
curves, a line parallel to and 0.3 kilometers southwest of this line, 
and the upper and lower portions of Palos Verdes Drive East.
    Note: Map follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.152
    
Within these Critical Habitat areas, the known biological constituent 
elements essential to the conservation of this species are colonies of 
the larval foodplant, Astragalus trichopodus leucopsis.

          Quino Checkerspot Butterfly (Euphydryas editha quino)

    (1) Critical habitat units are depicted for Riverside and San Diego 
Counties, California, on the maps below.

[[Page 899]]

    (2) The primary constituent elements of critical habitat for the 
Quino checkerspot butterfly are:
    (i) Open areas within scrublands at least 21.5 square feet (ft2) (2 
square meters (m)) in size that:
    (A) Contain no woody canopy cover; and
    (B) Contain one or more of the host plants Plantago erecta, Plantago 
patagonica, Antirrhinum coulterianum, or Collinsia concolor used for 
Quino checkerspot butterfly growth, reproduction, and feeding; or
    (C) Contain one or more of the host plants Cordylanthus rigidus or 
Castilleja exserta that are within 328 ft (100 m) of the host plants 
listed in paragraph (2)(i)(B) above; or
    (D) Contain flowering plants with a corolla tube less than or equal 
to 0.43 in (11 mm) used for Quino checkerspot butterfly feeding;
    (ii) Open scrubland areas and vegetation within 656 ft (200 m) of 
the open canopy areas (described in paragraph (2)(i) of this entry) used 
for movement and basking; and
    (iii) Hilltops or ridges within scrublands, containing an open, 
woody-canopy area at least 21.5 ft\2\ (2 m\2\) in size used for Quino 
checkerspot butterfly mating (hilltopping behavior) and are contiguous 
with (but not otherwise included in) open areas and natural vegetation 
described in paragraphs (2)(i) and (ii) above.
    (3) Critical habitat does not include manmade structures (such as 
buildings, aqueducts, airports, roads, and other paved areas) and the 
land on which they are located existing within the legal boundaries on 
the effective date of this rule.
    (4) Critical habitat map units. Data layers defining map units were 
created on a base of USGS 1:24,000 maps, and critical habitat units were 
then mapped using Universal Transverse Mercator (UTM) coordinates.
    (5) Note: Index map of critical habitat units for the Quino 
checkerspot butterfly follows:

[[Page 900]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17JN09.002

    (6) Unit 2: Skinner/Johnson, Riverside County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 quadrangles Murrieta, Bachelor Mountain, 
Winchester, Sage, and Hemet. Land bounded by the following Universal 
Transverse Mercator (UTM) North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83) 
coordinates (E, N): 499480, 3720871; 498641, 3720857; 498511, 3720856; 
498353, 3720855; 498593, 3720996; 498642, 3721009; 499082, 3721122; 
499479, 3721141; 499529, 3721143; 499731, 3721103; 499738, 3721101; 
499829, 3720955; 499918, 3720879; thence

[[Page 901]]

returning to 499480, 3720871. Continue to 497696, 3720235; 497728, 
3720291; 497832, 3720397; 498082, 3720651; 498640, 3720657; 498640, 
3720445; 498639, 3720257; 498639, 3720257; 498059, 3720244; 497833, 
3720239; 497778, 3720238; thence returning to 497696, 3720235. Continue 
to 494486, 3720445; 494486, 3720445; 494496, 3720550; 494671, 3720558; 
494796, 3720564; 495236, 3720522; 495415, 3720453; 495475, 3720430; 
495475, 3720430; 495474, 3720194; 495474, 3720033; 495470, 3719192; 
496227, 3719210; 496269, 3719211; 496291, 3719212; 496669, 3719221; 
497068, 3719231; 497401, 3719235; 497436, 3719236; 497456, 3719236; 
497636, 3719238; 497727, 3719239; 497838, 3719241; 498238, 3719245; 
498463, 3719247; 498638, 3719249; 498647, 3719249; 498648, 3719249; 
498654, 3719249; 498722, 3719250; 499106, 3719253; 499141, 3719254; 
499290, 3719254; 499723, 3719253; 499723, 3719253; 499641, 3719206; 
499612, 3719190; 499612, 3719190; 499544, 3719046; 499543, 3719044; 
499543, 3719044; 499540, 3719034; 499529, 3719035; 499526, 3719035; 
499524, 3719035; 499523, 3719035; 499523, 3719036; 499080, 3719076; 
499079, 3719074; 499065, 3719034; 499065, 3719034; 499063, 3719029; 
499059, 3719017; 498910, 3719042; 498899, 3719044; 498888, 3719047; 
498877, 3719051; 498866, 3719054; 498856, 3719059; 498845, 3719064; 
498743, 3719119; 498736, 3719121; 498733, 3719122; 498725, 3719123; 
498722, 3719123; 498718, 3719123; 498715, 3719122; 498708, 3719120; 
498704, 3719118; 498701, 3719116; 498698, 3719114; 498695, 3719112; 
498679, 3719100; 498672, 3719094; 498672, 3719094; 498641, 3719071; 
498638, 3719069; 498638, 3718868; 498638, 3718796; 498638, 3718794; 
498683, 3718804; 498683, 3718805; 498692, 3718806; 498692, 3718806; 
498694, 3718801; 498695, 3718797; 498697, 3718793; 498700, 3718789; 
498702, 3718786; 498705, 3718783; 498708, 3718780; 498711, 3718777; 
498715, 3718775; 498718, 3718773; 498730, 3718768; 498737, 3718764; 
498744, 3718759; 498750, 3718753; 498756, 3718747; 498761, 3718741; 
498766, 3718734; 498770, 3718726; 498773, 3718719; 498776, 3718711; 
498778, 3718703; 498780, 3718690; 498781, 3718687; 498782, 3718683; 
498784, 3718679; 498786, 3718676; 498788, 3718673; 498793, 3718667; 
498796, 3718664; 498802, 3718660; 498806, 3718658; 498809, 3718656; 
498817, 3718654; 498821, 3718654; 498831, 3718653; 498838, 3718652; 
498844, 3718651; 498850, 3718648; 498856, 3718646; 498862, 3718642; 
498868, 3718639; 498873, 3718634; 498877, 3718630; 498882, 3718625; 
498885, 3718619; 498889, 3718614; 498891, 3718608; 498894, 3718602; 
498895, 3718595; 498896, 3718589; 498897, 3718582; 498897, 3718571; 
498896, 3718569; 498893, 3718491; 498893, 3718487; 498892, 3718483; 
498891, 3718479; 498890, 3718476; 498888, 3718472; 498887, 3718469; 
498884, 3718466; 498882, 3718463; 498876, 3718457; 498873, 3718454; 
498871, 3718451; 498869, 3718448; 498866, 3718440; 498865, 3718436; 
498864, 3718433; 498864, 3718432; 498863, 3718429; 498863, 3718425; 
498864, 3718421; 498864, 3718417; 498866, 3718409; 498868, 3718405; 
498871, 3718401; 498873, 3718397; 498897, 3718360; 498899, 3718357; 
498902, 3718354; 498905, 3718351; 498908, 3718348; 498911, 3718346; 
498915, 3718344; 498919, 3718342; 498923, 3718341; 498931, 3718338; 
498935, 3718337; 498939, 3718335; 498942, 3718333; 498949, 3718327; 
498952, 3718324; 498954, 3718321; 498954, 3718321; 498962, 3718311; 
498969, 3718301; 498978, 3718292; 498986, 3718283; 498996, 3718275; 
499005, 3718267; 499014, 3718261; 499009, 3718254; 498845, 3718012; 
498846, 3718004; 498847, 3717997; 498849, 3717990; 498852, 3717983; 
498856, 3717977; 498860, 3717970; 498864, 3717965; 498864, 3717964; 
498869, 3717959; 498874, 3717954; 498879, 3717949; 498882, 3717945; 
498882, 3717945; 498886, 3717940; 498888, 3717935; 498891, 3717929; 
498893, 3717923; 498894, 3717917; 498895, 3717912; 498895, 3717906; 
498895, 3717900; 498894, 3717894; 498893, 3717888; 498891, 3717882; 
498889, 3717877; 498886, 3717871; 498881, 3717863; 498875, 3717854; 
498839, 3717794; 498842, 3717633; 498659, 3717635; 498659, 3717635; 
498656, 3717528; 498651, 3717303; 498651, 3717303; 498669, 3717308; 
499021, 3717392; 499247, 3717391; 499345, 3717390; 499345, 3717390; 
499349, 3717434; 499349, 3717434; 499349, 3717434; 499349, 3717434; 
499349, 3717435; 499349, 3717435; 499349, 3717435; 499349, 3717435; 
499349, 3717435; 499349, 3717435; 499349, 3717435; 499349, 3717436; 
499349, 3717436; 499349, 3717436; 499349, 3717436; 499349, 3717436; 
499349, 3717436; 499349, 3717437; 499349, 3717437; 499349, 3717437; 
499349, 3717437; 499349, 3717437; 499349, 3717437; 499349, 3717437; 
499349, 3717438; 499349, 3717438; 499349, 3717438; 499349, 3717438; 
499349, 3717438; 499349, 3717438; 499349, 3717439; 499349, 3717439; 
499349, 3717439; 499349, 3717439; 499349, 3717439; 499349, 3717439; 
499349, 3717439; 499349, 3717440; 499349, 3717440; 499349, 3717440; 
499349, 3717440; 499349, 3717440; 499349, 3717440; 499349, 3717441; 
499349, 3717441; 499349, 3717441; 499349, 3717441; 499349, 3717441; 
499349, 3717441; 499349, 3717441; 499349, 3717442; 499349, 3717442; 
499349, 3717442; 499349, 3717442; 499349, 3717442; 499349, 3717442; 
499349, 3717442; 499349, 3717443; 499349, 3717443; 499349, 3717443; 
499349, 3717443; 499349, 3717443; 499349, 3717443; 499349, 3717444; 
499349, 3717444; 499349, 3717444; 499350, 3717444; 499350, 3717444; 
499350, 3717444; 499350, 3717444; 499350, 3717444; 499350, 3717445; 
499350, 3717445; 499350, 3717445; 499350, 3717445; 499350, 3717445; 
499350, 3717445; 499350, 3717445; 499350, 3717446; 499350, 3717446; 
499350, 3717446; 499350, 3717446; 499350, 3717446; 499350, 3717446; 
499350, 3717446; 499350, 3717447; 499350, 3717447; 499350, 3717447; 
499350, 3717447; 499350, 3717447; 499350, 3717447; 499350, 3717447; 
499350, 3717448; 499350, 3717448; 499350, 3717448; 499350, 3717448; 
499350, 3717448; 499350, 3717448; 499350, 3717448; 499350, 3717449; 
499350, 3717449; 499350, 3717449; 499350, 3717449; 499350, 3717449; 
499350, 3717449; 499350, 3717449; 499350, 3717450; 499350, 3717450; 
499350, 3717450; 499350, 3717450; 499350, 3717450; 499350, 3717450; 
499350, 3717451; 499350, 3717451; 499350, 3717451; 499350, 3717451; 
499350, 3717451; 499350, 3717451; 499350, 3717451; 499350, 3717452; 
499350, 3717452; 499350, 3717452; 499350, 3717452; 499350, 3717452; 
499350, 3717452; 499350, 3717452; 499350, 3717453; 499350, 3717453; 
499350, 3717453; 499350, 3717453; 499350, 3717453; 499350, 3717453; 
499350, 3717453; 499349, 3717454; 499349, 3717454; 499349, 3717454; 
499349, 3717454; 499349, 3717454; 499349, 3717454; 499349, 3717455; 
499349, 3717455; 499349, 3717455; 499349, 3717455; 499349, 3717455; 
499349, 3717455; 499349, 3717455; 499349, 3717455; 499349, 3717456; 
499349, 3717456; 499349, 3717456; 499349, 3717456; 499349, 3717456; 
499349, 3717456; 499349, 3717456; 499349, 3717457; 499349, 3717457; 
499349,

[[Page 902]]

3717457; 499349, 3717457; 499349, 3717457; 499349, 3717457; 499349, 
3717457; 499349, 3717458; 499349, 3717458; 499349, 3717458; 499346, 
3717514; 499346, 3717514; 499346, 3717514; 499346, 3717514; 499346, 
3717515; 499346, 3717515; 499346, 3717515; 499346, 3717515; 499346, 
3717515; 499346, 3717515; 499346, 3717515; 499346, 3717516; 499346, 
3717516; 499346, 3717516; 499346, 3717516; 499346, 3717516; 499346, 
3717516; 499346, 3717516; 499346, 3717517; 499346, 3717517; 499346, 
3717517; 499346, 3717517; 499346, 3717517; 499346, 3717517; 499346, 
3717518; 499346, 3717518; 499346, 3717518; 499346, 3717518; 499346, 
3717518; 499346, 3717518; 499346, 3717518; 499346, 3717519; 499346, 
3717519; 499346, 3717519; 499346, 3717519; 499345, 3717519; 499345, 
3717519; 499345, 3717520; 499345, 3717520; 499345, 3717520; 499345, 
3717520; 499345, 3717520; 499345, 3717520; 499345, 3717520; 499345, 
3717521; 499345, 3717521; 499345, 3717521; 499345, 3717521; 499345, 
3717521; 499345, 3717521; 499345, 3717521; 499345, 3717522; 499345, 
3717522; 499345, 3717522; 499345, 3717522; 499345, 3717522; 499345, 
3717522; 499345, 3717523; 499345, 3717523; 499345, 3717523; 499345, 
3717523; 499345, 3717523; 499345, 3717523; 499345, 3717523; 499345, 
3717524; 499345, 3717524; 499345, 3717524; 499345, 3717524; 499345, 
3717524; 499345, 3717524; 499344, 3717524; 499344, 3717525; 499344, 
3717525; 499344, 3717525; 499344, 3717525; 499344, 3717525; 499344, 
3717525; 499344, 3717525; 499344, 3717525; 499344, 3717526; 499344, 
3717526; 499344, 3717526; 499344, 3717526; 499344, 3717526; 499344, 
3717526; 499344, 3717527; 499344, 3717527; 499344, 3717527; 499344, 
3717527; 499344, 3717527; 499344, 3717527; 499344, 3717527; 499344, 
3717528; 499344, 3717528; 499344, 3717528; 499344, 3717528; 499344, 
3717528; 499343, 3717528; 499343, 3717528; 499343, 3717529; 499343, 
3717529; 499343, 3717529; 499343, 3717529; 499343, 3717529; 499343, 
3717529; 499343, 3717529; 499343, 3717529; 499343, 3717530; 499343, 
3717530; 499343, 3717530; 499343, 3717530; 499343, 3717530; 499343, 
3717530; 499343, 3717530; 499343, 3717531; 499343, 3717531; 499343, 
3717531; 499343, 3717531; 499342, 3717531; 499342, 3717531; 499342, 
3717531; 499342, 3717531; 499342, 3717532; 499342, 3717532; 499342, 
3717532; 499342, 3717532; 499342, 3717532; 499342, 3717532; 499342, 
3717532; 499342, 3717533; 499342, 3717533; 499342, 3717533; 499342, 
3717533; 499342, 3717533; 499342, 3717533; 499342, 3717533; 499342, 
3717534; 499341, 3717534; 499341, 3717534; 499341, 3717534; 499341, 
3717534; 499341, 3717534; 499341, 3717534; 499341, 3717534; 499341, 
3717535; 499341, 3717535; 499341, 3717535; 499341, 3717535; 499341, 
3717535; 499341, 3717535; 499341, 3717535; 499341, 3717535; 499341, 
3717536; 499341, 3717536; 499341, 3717536; 499341, 3717536; 499340, 
3717536; 499340, 3717536; 499340, 3717536; 499340, 3717536; 499340, 
3717537; 499340, 3717537; 499340, 3717537; 499340, 3717537; 499340, 
3717537; 499340, 3717537; 499340, 3717537; 499340, 3717538; 499340, 
3717538; 499340, 3717538; 499340, 3717538; 499339, 3717538; 499339, 
3717538; 499339, 3717538; 499339, 3717539; 499339, 3717539; 499339, 
3717539; 499339, 3717539; 499339, 3717539; 499339, 3717539; 499339, 
3717539; 499339, 3717539; 499339, 3717540; 499339, 3717540; 499339, 
3717540; 499338, 3717540; 499338, 3717540; 499338, 3717540; 499338, 
3717540; 499338, 3717541; 499338, 3717541; 499338, 3717541; 499338, 
3717541; 499338, 3717541; 499338, 3717541; 499338, 3717541; 499338, 
3717541; 499338, 3717542; 499337, 3717542; 499337, 3717542; 499337, 
3717542; 499337, 3717542; 499337, 3717542; 499337, 3717542; 499337, 
3717543; 499337, 3717543; 499337, 3717543; 499337, 3717543; 499337, 
3717543; 499337, 3717543; 499336, 3717543; 499336, 3717543; 499336, 
3717544; 499336, 3717544; 499336, 3717544; 499336, 3717544; 499336, 
3717544; 499336, 3717544; 499336, 3717544; 499336, 3717544; 499336, 
3717545; 499336, 3717545; 499335, 3717545; 499335, 3717545; 499335, 
3717545; 499335, 3717545; 499335, 3717545; 499335, 3717545; 499335, 
3717546; 499335, 3717546; 499335, 3717546; 499335, 3717546; 499335, 
3717546; 499335, 3717546; 499334, 3717546; 499334, 3717546; 499334, 
3717547; 499334, 3717547; 499334, 3717547; 499334, 3717547; 499334, 
3717547; 499334, 3717547; 499334, 3717547; 499334, 3717547; 499333, 
3717548; 499333, 3717548; 499333, 3717548; 499333, 3717548; 499333, 
3717548; 499333, 3717548; 499333, 3717548; 499333, 3717548; 499333, 
3717548; 499333, 3717549; 499333, 3717549; 499332, 3717549; 499332, 
3717549; 499332, 3717549; 499332, 3717549; 499332, 3717549; 499332, 
3717549; 499331, 3717550; 499265, 3717629; 499269, 3717629; 499269, 
3717629; 499277, 3717716; 499284, 3717792; 499284, 3717792; 499282, 
3717803; 499282, 3717803; 499285, 3717803; 499290, 3717804; 499296, 
3717806; 499302, 3717809; 499308, 3717812; 499313, 3717815; 499318, 
3717819; 499323, 3717824; 499375, 3717877; 499551, 3718054; 499553, 
3718057; 499557, 3718060; 499560, 3718062; 499563, 3718063; 499567, 
3718065; 499571, 3718066; 499575, 3718067; 499579, 3718067; 499582, 
3718068; 499586, 3718067; 499590, 3718067; 499594, 3718066; 499598, 
3718065; 499602, 3718063; 499605, 3718061; 499612, 3718056; 499613, 
3718056; 499605, 3718049; 499605, 3718049; 499589, 3718033; 499588, 
3718026; 499588, 3718019; 499588, 3718013; 499588, 3718006; 499589, 
3718000; 499591, 3717994; 499593, 3717984; 499596, 3717974; 499600, 
3717964; 499604, 3717955; 499610, 3717946; 499612, 3717943; 499614, 
3717940; 499614, 3717940; 499623, 3717926; 499622, 3717911; 499621, 
3717907; 499622, 3717899; 499623, 3717895; 499624, 3717894; 499621, 
3717877; 499606, 3717770; 499585, 3717626; 499585, 3717626; 499615, 
3717626; 499683, 3717626; 499901, 3717624; 499903, 3717590; 499912, 
3717430; 499919, 3717323; 499919, 3717322; 499972, 3717322; 500032, 
3717321; 500350, 3717271; 500421, 3717259; 500421, 3717152; 500445, 
3717103; 500445, 3717103; 500363, 3717091; 500216, 3717069; 500178, 
3717063; 500188, 3716806; 500188, 3716805; 500188, 3716805; 500188, 
3716805; 500188, 3716805; 500188, 3716805; 500188, 3716804; 500188, 
3716804; 500188, 3716804; 500188, 3716804; 500188, 3716804; 500187, 
3716804; 500187, 3716804; 500187, 3716803; 500187, 3716803; 500187, 
3716803; 500187, 3716803; 500187, 3716803; 500187, 3716803; 500187, 
3716803; 500187, 3716802; 500187, 3716802; 500187, 3716802; 500187, 
3716802; 500187, 3716802; 500187, 3716802; 500187, 3716802; 500187, 
3716802; 500186, 3716801; 500186, 3716801; 500186, 3716801; 500186, 
3716801; 500186, 3716801; 500186, 3716801; 500186, 3716801; 500186, 
3716800; 500186, 3716800; 500186, 3716800; 500186, 3716800; 500186, 
3716800; 500186, 3716800; 500186, 3716800; 500186, 3716799; 500186, 
3716799; 500186, 3716799; 500186, 3716799; 500185, 3716799; 500185, 
3716799; 500185, 3716799; 500185, 3716799; 500185, 3716798; 500185, 
3716798; 500185, 3716798; 500185,

[[Page 903]]

3716798; 500185, 3716798; 500185, 3716798; 500185, 3716798; 500185, 
3716797; 500185, 3716797; 500185, 3716797; 500185, 3716797; 500185, 
3716797; 500185, 3716797; 500185, 3716797; 500185, 3716796; 500185, 
3716796; 500185, 3716796; 500184, 3716796; 500184, 3716796; 500184, 
3716796; 500184, 3716796; 500184, 3716795; 500184, 3716795; 500184, 
3716795; 500184, 3716795; 500184, 3716795; 500184, 3716795; 500184, 
3716795; 500184, 3716794; 500184, 3716794; 500184, 3716794; 500184, 
3716794; 500184, 3716794; 500184, 3716794; 500184, 3716794; 500184, 
3716793; 500184, 3716793; 500184, 3716793; 500184, 3716793; 500184, 
3716793; 500183, 3716793; 500183, 3716793; 500183, 3716792; 500183, 
3716792; 500183, 3716792; 500183, 3716792; 500183, 3716792; 500183, 
3716792; 500183, 3716792; 500183, 3716791; 500183, 3716791; 500183, 
3716791; 500183, 3716791; 500183, 3716791; 500183, 3716791; 500183, 
3716791; 500183, 3716790; 500183, 3716790; 500183, 3716790; 500183, 
3716790; 500183, 3716790; 500183, 3716790; 500183, 3716789; 500183, 
3716789; 500183, 3716789; 500182, 3716789; 500182, 3716789; 500182, 
3716789; 500182, 3716789; 500182, 3716788; 500182, 3716788; 500182, 
3716788; 500182, 3716788; 500182, 3716788; 500182, 3716788; 500182, 
3716788; 500182, 3716788; 500182, 3716787; 500182, 3716787; 500182, 
3716787; 500182, 3716787; 500182, 3716787; 500182, 3716787; 500182, 
3716787; 500182, 3716786; 500182, 3716786; 500182, 3716786; 500182, 
3716786; 500182, 3716786; 500182, 3716786; 500182, 3716786; 500182, 
3716785; 500182, 3716785; 500182, 3716785; 500182, 3716785; 500182, 
3716785; 500182, 3716785; 500181, 3716785; 500181, 3716784; 500181, 
3716784; 500181, 3716784; 500181, 3716784; 500181, 3716784; 500181, 
3716784; 500181, 3716784; 500181, 3716783; 500181, 3716783; 500181, 
3716783; 500181, 3716783; 500181, 3716783; 500181, 3716783; 500181, 
3716782; 500181, 3716782; 500181, 3716782; 500181, 3716782; 500181, 
3716782; 500181, 3716782; 500181, 3716782; 500181, 3716781; 500181, 
3716781; 500181, 3716781; 500181, 3716781; 500181, 3716781; 500181, 
3716781; 500181, 3716781; 500181, 3716781; 500181, 3716780; 500181, 
3716780; 500181, 3716780; 500181, 3716780; 500181, 3716780; 500181, 
3716780; 500181, 3716779; 500181, 3716779; 500181, 3716779; 500181, 
3716779; 500181, 3716779; 500180, 3716779; 500180, 3716779; 500180, 
3716778; 500180, 3716778; 500180, 3716778; 500180, 3716778; 500180, 
3716778; 500180, 3716778; 500180, 3716778; 500180, 3716778; 500180, 
3716777; 500180, 3716777; 500180, 3716777; 500180, 3716777; 500180, 
3716777; 500180, 3716777; 500180, 3716776; 500180, 3716776; 500180, 
3716776; 500180, 3716776; 500180, 3716776; 500180, 3716776; 500180, 
3716776; 500180, 3716776; 500180, 3716775; 500180, 3716775; 500180, 
3716775; 500180, 3716775; 500180, 3716775; 500180, 3716775; 500180, 
3716774; 500180, 3716774; 500180, 3716774; 500180, 3716774; 500180, 
3716774; 500180, 3716774; 500180, 3716774; 500180, 3716773; 500180, 
3716773; 500180, 3716773; 500180, 3716773; 500180, 3716773; 500180, 
3716773; 500180, 3716773; 500180, 3716773; 500180, 3716772; 500180, 
3716772; 500180, 3716772; 500180, 3716772; 500180, 3716772; 500180, 
3716772; 500180, 3716771; 500180, 3716771; 500180, 3716771; 500180, 
3716771; 500180, 3716771; 500180, 3716771; 500180, 3716771; 500180, 
3716770; 500180, 3716770; 500180, 3716770; 500180, 3716770; 500180, 
3716770; 500180, 3716770; 500180, 3716769; 500180, 3716769; 500180, 
3716769; 500180, 3716769; 500180, 3716769; 500180, 3716769; 500180, 
3716768; 500180, 3716768; 500180, 3716768; 500180, 3716768; 500180, 
3716768; 500180, 3716768; 500180, 3716768; 500180, 3716767; 500180, 
3716767; 500180, 3716767; 500180, 3716767; 500180, 3716767; 500180, 
3716767; 500180, 3716767; 500180, 3716766; 500180, 3716766; 500180, 
3716766; 500180, 3716766; 500180, 3716766; 500180, 3716766; 500180, 
3716765; 500180, 3716765; 500180, 3716765; 500180, 3716765; 500180, 
3716765; 500180, 3716453; 500180, 3716396; 500181, 3716131; 500010, 
3716115; 499920, 3716070; 499820, 3716020; 499809, 3716013; 499809, 
3716013; 499804, 3716010; 499676, 3716013; 499676, 3716013; 499675, 
3715929; 499675, 3715929; 499669, 3715926; 499560, 3715877; 499560, 
3716013; 499560, 3716013; 499417, 3716012; 499415, 3716012; 499415, 
3715832; 499252, 3715812; 499195, 3715717; 499166, 3715670; 499158, 
3715600; 499158, 3715600; 499147, 3715508; 499034, 3715357; 499025, 
3715330; 499025, 3715330; 498939, 3715072; 498844, 3715034; 498768, 
3715025; 498637, 3714966; 498637, 3714966; 498621, 3714959; 498590, 
3714804; 498564, 3714680; 498549, 3714412; 498565, 3714290; 498549, 
3714218; 498549, 3714073; 498468, 3714072; 498460, 3714072; 498284, 
3714069; 498285, 3714010; 498285, 3714005; 498119, 3714003; 498005, 
3714001; 497973, 3714001; 497909, 3714000; 497865, 3713999; 497817, 
3713999; 497762, 3713998; 497762, 3713998; 497611, 3714040; 497536, 
3714122; 497328, 3714352; 497167, 3714371; 497116, 3714377; 497116, 
3714379; 497116, 3714385; 497115, 3714483; 497118, 3714774; 497118, 
3714797; 497118, 3714799; 497114, 3714799; 497109, 3714799; 495457, 
3714793; 494866, 3714791; 494879, 3714858; 494858, 3714858; 494815, 
3714786; 494012, 3714783; 493832, 3714783; 493832, 3714783; 493831, 
3714783; 492831, 3714782; 492830, 3714782; 492635, 3714782; 492640, 
3714780; 492640, 3714780; 492548, 3714782; 492548, 3714782; 492548, 
3714782; 492530, 3714782; 492516, 3714782; 492406, 3714782; 492327, 
3714782; 492302, 3714782; 492300, 3714782; 492300, 3714921; 492300, 
3714921; 492328, 3714940; 492356, 3714959; 492687, 3715186; 492904, 
3715335; 493417, 3715698; 493428, 3715706; 493435, 3715699; 493475, 
3715656; 493525, 3715654; 493632, 3715652; 493636, 3715657; 493747, 
3715813; 493814, 3715822; 493824, 3715823; 493971, 3715842; 494048, 
3715838; 494148, 3715832; 494196, 3715830; 494280, 3715807; 494400, 
3715775; 494439, 3715774; 494489, 3715772; 494574, 3715770; 494648, 
3715751; 494705, 3715736; 494797, 3715672; 494849, 3715635; 494888, 
3715590; 494926, 3715546; 495057, 3715609; 495261, 3715609; 495324, 
3715562; 495350, 3715588; 495396, 3715635; 495445, 3715692; 495465, 
3715715; 495473, 3715724; 495513, 3715731; 495617, 3715749; 495720, 
3715760; 495740, 3715762; 495901, 3715758; 495942, 3715754; 495999, 
3715749; 496083, 3715728; 496245, 3715719; 496295, 3715753; 496295, 
3715753; 496389, 3715711; 496401, 3715711; 496473, 3715708; 496482, 
3715708; 496516, 3715707; 496572, 3715731; 496630, 3715758; 496723, 
3715865; 496828, 3715931; 496851, 3715946; 496901, 3715996; 497000, 
3716094; 497018, 3716113; 497075, 3716169; 497087, 3716217; 497138, 
3716403; 497179, 3716557; 497164, 3716735; 497079, 3716780; 496941, 
3716855; 496702, 3717093; 496840, 3717214; 496911, 3717221; 496923, 
3717212; 496973, 3717159; 496989, 3717131; 497050, 3717075; 497075, 
3717034; 497077, 3716950; 497077, 3716930; 497098, 3716915; 497184, 
3716884; 497316, 3716877; 497377,

[[Page 904]]

3716851; 497413, 3716861; 497426, 3716905; 497385, 3716966; 497359, 
3716994; 497230, 3717067; 497197, 3717111; 497182, 3717179; 497182, 
3717281; 497151, 3717314; 497129, 3717352; 497131, 3717380; 497139, 
3717394; 497140, 3717394; 497196, 3717418; 497258, 3717442; 497268, 
3717443; 497284, 3717456; 497322, 3717527; 497350, 3717552; 497380, 
3717606; 497380, 3717611; 497380, 3717611; 497380, 3717644; 497230, 
3717728; 497213, 3717720; 497207, 3717714; 497177, 3717720; 497124, 
3717711; 497074, 3717682; 497067, 3717693; 497060, 3717703; 496479, 
3717674; 496121, 3717689; 496063, 3717606; 495943, 3717435; 495885, 
3717410; 495808, 3717461; 495722, 3717442; 495693, 3717365; 495626, 
3717331; 495492, 3717331; 495452, 3717314; 495452, 3717314; 495449, 
3717312; 495352, 3717269; 495117, 3717216; 495046, 3717218; 494959, 
3717221; 494805, 3717221; 494694, 3717187; 494522, 3717154; 494358, 
3717139; 494243, 3717144; 494123, 3717183; 494070, 3717178; 493993, 
3717149; 493878, 3717197; 493869, 3717202; 493840, 3717218; 493734, 
3717279; 493633, 3717346; 493652, 3717379; 493604, 3717408; 493571, 
3717375; 493446, 3717447; 493364, 3717557; 493246, 3717610; 493072, 
3717688; 493044, 3717692; 492709, 3717744; 492583, 3717876; 492569, 
3718009; 492737, 3718239; 492694, 3718421; 492681, 3718477; 492625, 
3718567; 492597, 3718686; 492618, 3718685; 492618, 3718685; 492622, 
3718670; 492647, 3718567; 492647, 3718564; 492648, 3718561; 492649, 
3718557; 492650, 3718554; 492651, 3718551; 492652, 3718550; 492653, 
3718548; 492654, 3718547; 492655, 3718545; 492657, 3718543; 492659, 
3718541; 492660, 3718540; 492662, 3718538; 492669, 3718531; 492680, 
3718519; 492684, 3718516; 492687, 3718513; 492689, 3718510; 492693, 
3718505; 492698, 3718498; 492699, 3718498; 492703, 3718490; 492705, 
3718485; 492707, 3718481; 492709, 3718472; 492711, 3718462; 492711, 
3718462; 492756, 3718473; 492756, 3718473; 492767, 3718421; 492802, 
3718251; 492803, 3718244; 492806, 3718228; 492806, 3718215; 492804, 
3718205; 492802, 3718197; 492801, 3718193; 492799, 3718187; 492797, 
3718181; 492792, 3718170; 492785, 3718159; 492778, 3718149; 492778, 
3718149; 492768, 3718137; 492762, 3718129; 492671, 3718014; 492938, 
3718015; 493045, 3718015; 493543, 3718017; 493845, 3718018; 493849, 
3717608; 493849, 3717608; 494138, 3717605; 494643, 3717601; 495049, 
3717603; 495453, 3717605; 495453, 3717607; 495455, 3717771; 495461, 
3718399; 494976, 3718407; 494783, 3718411; 494656, 3718413; 494628, 
3718414; 494621, 3718414; 494602, 3718414; 494417, 3718417; 494345, 
3718419; 494296, 3718419; 494217, 3718421; 494103, 3718423; 493928, 
3718426; 493840, 3718428; 493840, 3718428; 493848, 3718672; 493858, 
3719011; 493861, 3719091; 493864, 3719200; 493864, 3719210; 493864, 
3719210; 493864, 3719210; 493864, 3719210; 493979, 3719209; 494214, 
3719206; 494526, 3719203; 494667, 3719201; 494667, 3719201; 494667, 
3719210; 494668, 3719409; 494668, 3719617; 494669, 3719801; 494670, 
3720032; 494671, 3720447; 494671, 3720447; thence returning to 494486, 
3720445. Excluding land bounded by 499546, 3716748; 499545, 3716748; 
499545, 3716748; 499545, 3716748; 499545, 3716748; 499545, 3716748; 
499545, 3716748; 499545, 3716748; 499544, 3716748; 499544, 3716748; 
499544, 3716748; 499544, 3716748; 499544, 3716748; 499544, 3716748; 
499543, 3716748; 499543, 3716748; 499543, 3716748; 499543, 3716748; 
499543, 3716748; 499543, 3716748; 499543, 3716748; 499542, 3716748; 
499542, 3716748; 499542, 3716748; 499542, 3716748; 499542, 3716748; 
499542, 3716748; 499542, 3716748; 499541, 3716748; 499541, 3716748; 
499541, 3716748; 499541, 3716748; 499541, 3716748; 499541, 3716748; 
499540, 3716748; 499540, 3716748; 499540, 3716748; 499540, 3716748; 
499540, 3716748; 499540, 3716748; 499540, 3716748; 499539, 3716748; 
499539, 3716748; 499539, 3716748; 499539, 3716749; 499539, 3716749; 
499539, 3716749; 499538, 3716749; 499538, 3716749; 499538, 3716749; 
499538, 3716749; 499538, 3716749; 499538, 3716749; 499538, 3716749; 
499537, 3716749; 499537, 3716749; 499537, 3716749; 499537, 3716749; 
499537, 3716749; 499537, 3716749; 499537, 3716749; 499536, 3716749; 
499536, 3716749; 499536, 3716749; 499536, 3716749; 499536, 3716749; 
499536, 3716749; 499535, 3716749; 499535, 3716749; 499535, 3716749; 
499535, 3716749; 499535, 3716749; 499535, 3716749; 499535, 3716749; 
499534, 3716749; 499534, 3716749; 499534, 3716750; 499534, 3716750; 
499534, 3716750; 499534, 3716750; 499534, 3716750; 499533, 3716750; 
499533, 3716750; 499533, 3716750; 499533, 3716750; 499533, 3716750; 
499533, 3716750; 499533, 3716750; 499532, 3716750; 499532, 3716750; 
499532, 3716750; 499532, 3716750; 499532, 3716750; 499532, 3716750; 
499532, 3716750; 499531, 3716750; 499531, 3716750; 499531, 3716750; 
499531, 3716750; 499531, 3716751; 499531, 3716751; 499531, 3716751; 
499530, 3716751; 499530, 3716751; 499530, 3716751; 499530, 3716751; 
499530, 3716751; 499530, 3716751; 499530, 3716751; 499529, 3716751; 
499529, 3716751; 499529, 3716751; 499529, 3716751; 499529, 3716751; 
499529, 3716751; 499529, 3716751; 499528, 3716751; 499528, 3716751; 
499528, 3716752; 499528, 3716752; 499528, 3716752; 499528, 3716752; 
499528, 3716752; 499527, 3716752; 499527, 3716752; 499527, 3716752; 
499527, 3716752; 499527, 3716752; 499527, 3716752; 499527, 3716752; 
499526, 3716752; 499526, 3716752; 499526, 3716752; 499526, 3716752; 
499526, 3716753; 499526, 3716753; 499526, 3716753; 499525, 3716753; 
499525, 3716753; 499525, 3716753; 499525, 3716753; 499525, 3716753; 
499525, 3716753; 499525, 3716753; 499525, 3716753; 499524, 3716753; 
499524, 3716753; 499524, 3716753; 499524, 3716754; 499524, 3716754; 
499524, 3716754; 499524, 3716754; 499523, 3716754; 499523, 3716754; 
499523, 3716754; 499523, 3716754; 499523, 3716754; 499523, 3716754; 
499523, 3716754; 499523, 3716754; 499522, 3716754; 499522, 3716755; 
499522, 3716755; 499522, 3716755; 499522, 3716755; 499522, 3716755; 
499522, 3716755; 499521, 3716755; 499521, 3716755; 499521, 3716755; 
499521, 3716755; 499521, 3716755; 499521, 3716755; 499521, 3716755; 
499521, 3716756; 499520, 3716756; 499520, 3716756; 499520, 3716756; 
499520, 3716756; 499520, 3716756; 499520, 3716756; 499520, 3716756; 
499520, 3716756; 499519, 3716756; 499519, 3716756; 499519, 3716757; 
499519, 3716757; 499519, 3716757; 499519, 3716757; 499519, 3716757; 
499519, 3716757; 499518, 3716757; 499518, 3716757; 499518, 3716757; 
499518, 3716757; 499518, 3716757; 499518, 3716758; 499518, 3716758; 
499518, 3716758; 499518, 3716758; 499517, 3716758; 499517, 3716758; 
499517, 3716758; 499517, 3716758; 499517, 3716758; 499517, 3716758; 
499517, 3716758; 499517, 3716759; 499516, 3716759; 499516, 3716759; 
499516, 3716759; 499516, 3716759; 499516, 3716759; 499516, 3716759; 
499516, 3716759; 499516, 3716759; 499516, 3716759; 499515, 3716760; 
499515, 3716760; 499515, 3716760; 499515, 3716760; 499515, 3716760; 
499515, 3716760;

[[Page 905]]

499515, 3716760; 499515, 3716760; 499514, 3716760; 499514, 3716760; 
499514, 3716761; 499514, 3716761; 499514, 3716761; 499514, 3716761; 
499514, 3716761; 499514, 3716761; 499514, 3716761; 499514, 3716761; 
499513, 3716761; 499513, 3716762; 499513, 3716762; 499513, 3716762; 
499513, 3716762; 499513, 3716762; 499513, 3716762; 499513, 3716762; 
499513, 3716762; 499512, 3716762; 499512, 3716763; 499512, 3716763; 
499512, 3716763; 499512, 3716763; 499512, 3716763; 499512, 3716763; 
499512, 3716763; 499512, 3716763; 499512, 3716763; 499511, 3716764; 
499511, 3716764; 499511, 3716764; 499511, 3716764; 499511, 3716764; 
499511, 3716764; 499511, 3716764; 499511, 3716764; 499511, 3716764; 
499511, 3716765; 499511, 3716765; 499510, 3716765; 499508, 3716768; 
499493, 3716786; 499493, 3716786; 499492, 3716787; 499492, 3716787; 
499492, 3716787; 499492, 3716787; 499492, 3716787; 499492, 3716787; 
499492, 3716787; 499492, 3716787; 499492, 3716788; 499492, 3716788; 
499491, 3716788; 499491, 3716788; 499491, 3716788; 499491, 3716788; 
499491, 3716788; 499491, 3716788; 499491, 3716788; 499491, 3716789; 
499491, 3716789; 499491, 3716789; 499491, 3716789; 499490, 3716789; 
499490, 3716789; 499490, 3716789; 499490, 3716789; 499490, 3716790; 
499490, 3716790; 499490, 3716790; 499490, 3716790; 499490, 3716790; 
499490, 3716790; 499490, 3716790; 499489, 3716790; 499489, 3716791; 
499489, 3716791; 499489, 3716791; 499489, 3716791; 499489, 3716791; 
499489, 3716791; 499489, 3716791; 499489, 3716791; 499489, 3716792; 
499489, 3716792; 499489, 3716792; 499489, 3716792; 499488, 3716792; 
499488, 3716792; 499488, 3716792; 499488, 3716792; 499488, 3716792; 
499488, 3716792; 499488, 3716793; 499488, 3716793; 499488, 3716793; 
499488, 3716793; 499488, 3716793; 499488, 3716793; 499487, 3716793; 
499487, 3716793; 499487, 3716794; 499487, 3716794; 499487, 3716794; 
499487, 3716794; 499487, 3716794; 499487, 3716794; 499487, 3716794; 
499487, 3716794; 499487, 3716795; 499487, 3716795; 499486, 3716795; 
499486, 3716795; 499486, 3716795; 499486, 3716795; 499486, 3716795; 
499486, 3716795; 499486, 3716796; 499486, 3716796; 499486, 3716796; 
499486, 3716796; 499486, 3716796; 499486, 3716796; 499486, 3716796; 
499485, 3716797; 499485, 3716797; 499485, 3716797; 499485, 3716797; 
499485, 3716797; 499485, 3716797; 499485, 3716797; 499485, 3716797; 
499485, 3716798; 499485, 3716798; 499485, 3716798; 499485, 3716798; 
499485, 3716798; 499484, 3716798; 499484, 3716798; 499484, 3716799; 
499484, 3716799; 499484, 3716799; 499484, 3716799; 499484, 3716799; 
499484, 3716799; 499484, 3716799; 499484, 3716799; 499484, 3716800; 
499484, 3716800; 499484, 3716800; 499484, 3716800; 499483, 3716800; 
499483, 3716800; 499483, 3716800; 499483, 3716801; 499483, 3716801; 
499483, 3716801; 499483, 3716801; 499483, 3716801; 499483, 3716801; 
499483, 3716801; 499483, 3716801; 499483, 3716802; 499483, 3716802; 
499483, 3716802; 499482, 3716802; 499482, 3716802; 499482, 3716802; 
499482, 3716802; 499482, 3716803; 499482, 3716803; 499477, 3716812; 
499477, 3716813; 499453, 3716862; 499453, 3716862; 499453, 3716862; 
499444, 3716871; 499353, 3716944; 499347, 3716948; 499248, 3717028; 
499067, 3716918; 498635, 3716657; 498635, 3716657; 498634, 3716602; 
498629, 3716418; 498795, 3716421; 499116, 3716425; 499299, 3716427; 
499334, 3716428; 499415, 3716429; 499415, 3716429; 499806, 3716412; 
499810, 3716412; 499814, 3716412; 499816, 3716856; 499816, 3716856; 
499809, 3716855; 499684, 3716831; 499675, 3716825; 499659, 3716812; 
499602, 3716769; 499564, 3716752; 499564, 3716752; 499564, 3716752; 
499564, 3716752; 499564, 3716752; 499564, 3716752; 499564, 3716752; 
499563, 3716752; 499563, 3716751; 499563, 3716751; 499563, 3716751; 
499563, 3716751; 499563, 3716751; 499563, 3716751; 499562, 3716751; 
499562, 3716751; 499562, 3716751; 499562, 3716751; 499562, 3716751; 
499562, 3716751; 499562, 3716751; 499561, 3716751; 499561, 3716751; 
499561, 3716751; 499561, 3716751; 499561, 3716751; 499561, 3716751; 
499561, 3716750; 499560, 3716750; 499560, 3716750; 499560, 3716750; 
499560, 3716750; 499560, 3716750; 499560, 3716750; 499560, 3716750; 
499559, 3716750; 499559, 3716750; 499559, 3716750; 499559, 3716750; 
499559, 3716750; 499559, 3716750; 499559, 3716750; 499558, 3716750; 
499558, 3716750; 499558, 3716750; 499558, 3716750; 499558, 3716750; 
499558, 3716750; 499558, 3716750; 499557, 3716749; 499557, 3716749; 
499557, 3716749; 499557, 3716749; 499557, 3716749; 499557, 3716749; 
499556, 3716749; 499556, 3716749; 499556, 3716749; 499556, 3716749; 
499556, 3716749; 499556, 3716749; 499556, 3716749; 499555, 3716749; 
499555, 3716749; 499555, 3716749; 499555, 3716749; 499555, 3716749; 
499555, 3716749; 499555, 3716749; 499554, 3716749; 499554, 3716749; 
499554, 3716749; 499554, 3716749; 499554, 3716749; 499554, 3716749; 
499554, 3716749; 499553, 3716749; 499553, 3716749; 499553, 3716749; 
499553, 3716749; 499553, 3716749; 499553, 3716749; 499552, 3716748; 
499552, 3716748; 499552, 3716748; 499552, 3716748; 499552, 3716748; 
499552, 3716748; 499552, 3716748; 499551, 3716748; 499551, 3716748; 
499551, 3716748; 499551, 3716748; 499551, 3716748; 499551, 3716748; 
499550, 3716748; 499550, 3716748; 499550, 3716748; 499550, 3716748; 
499550, 3716748; 499550, 3716748; 499550, 3716748; 499549, 3716748; 
499549, 3716748; 499549, 3716748; 499549, 3716748; 499549, 3716748; 
499549, 3716748; 499549, 3716748; 499548, 3716748; 499548, 3716748; 
499548, 3716748; 499548, 3716748; 499548, 3716748; 499548, 3716748; 
499547, 3716748; 499547, 3716748; 499547, 3716748; 499547, 3716748; 
499547, 3716748; 499547, 3716748; 499547, 3716748; thence returning to 
499546, 3716748. Continuing to include as Critical Habitat lands bounded 
by 500357, 3718083; 500349, 3718085; 500340, 3718087; 500331, 3718087; 
500321, 3718087; 500315, 3718086; 500311, 3718086; 500302, 3718083; 
500296, 3718082; 500293, 3718081; 500288, 3718079; 500288, 3718079; 
500274, 3718074; 500274, 3718074; 500273, 3718074; 500273, 3718074; 
500273, 3718074; 500273, 3718074; 500273, 3718074; 500273, 3718074; 
500273, 3718074; 500272, 3718074; 500272, 3718074; 500272, 3718074; 
500272, 3718074; 500272, 3718074; 500272, 3718074; 500271, 3718074; 
500271, 3718073; 500271, 3718073; 500271, 3718073; 500271, 3718073; 
500271, 3718073; 500271, 3718073; 500270, 3718073; 500270, 3718073; 
500270, 3718073; 500270, 3718073; 500270, 3718073; 500270, 3718073; 
500270, 3718073; 500269, 3718073; 500269, 3718073; 500269, 3718073; 
500269, 3718073; 500269, 3718073; 500269, 3718073; 500268, 3718073; 
500268, 3718073; 500268, 3718073; 500268, 3718073; 500268, 3718073; 
500268, 3718073; 500268, 3718073; 500267, 3718073; 500267, 3718073; 
500267, 3718073; 500267, 3718073; 500267, 3718073; 500267, 3718073; 
500267, 3718073; 500266, 3718073; 500266, 3718073; 500266, 3718073; 
500266, 3718073; 500251, 3718072; 500250, 3718072; 500250, 3718072;

[[Page 906]]

500250, 3718072; 500250, 3718072; 500250, 3718072; 500250, 3718072; 
500250, 3718072; 500249, 3718072; 500249, 3718072; 500249, 3718072; 
500249, 3718072; 500249, 3718072; 500249, 3718072; 500249, 3718072; 
500248, 3718072; 500248, 3718072; 500248, 3718071; 500248, 3718071; 
500248, 3718071; 500248, 3718071; 500247, 3718071; 500247, 3718071; 
500247, 3718071; 500247, 3718071; 500247, 3718071; 500247, 3718071; 
500247, 3718071; 500246, 3718071; 500246, 3718071; 500246, 3718071; 
500246, 3718071; 500246, 3718071; 500246, 3718071; 500246, 3718071; 
500245, 3718071; 500245, 3718071; 500245, 3718070; 500245, 3718070; 
500245, 3718070; 500245, 3718070; 500245, 3718070; 500245, 3718070; 
500244, 3718070; 500244, 3718070; 500244, 3718070; 500244, 3718070; 
500244, 3718070; 500244, 3718070; 500244, 3718070; 500243, 3718070; 
500243, 3718069; 500243, 3718069; 500243, 3718069; 500243, 3718069; 
500243, 3718069; 500243, 3718069; 500243, 3718069; 500242, 3718069; 
500242, 3718069; 500242, 3718069; 500242, 3718069; 500242, 3718068; 
500242, 3718068; 500242, 3718068; 500242, 3718068; 500242, 3718068; 
500241, 3718068; 500241, 3718068; 500241, 3718068; 500241, 3718068; 
500241, 3718068; 500241, 3718067; 500241, 3718067; 500241, 3718067; 
500241, 3718067; 500240, 3718067; 500240, 3718067; 500240, 3718067; 
500240, 3718067; 500240, 3718066; 500240, 3718066; 500240, 3718066; 
500240, 3718066; 500240, 3718066; 500240, 3718066; 500240, 3718066; 
500239, 3718066; 500239, 3718066; 500239, 3718065; 500239, 3718065; 
500239, 3718065; 500239, 3718065; 500239, 3718065; 500239, 3718065; 
500239, 3718065; 500239, 3718064; 500239, 3718064; 500239, 3718064; 
500238, 3718064; 500238, 3718064; 500238, 3718064; 500238, 3718064; 
500238, 3718064; 500238, 3718063; 500238, 3718063; 500238, 3718063; 
500238, 3718063; 500238, 3718063; 500238, 3718063; 500238, 3718063; 
500238, 3718062; 500238, 3718062; 500238, 3718062; 500238, 3718062; 
500238, 3718062; 500237, 3718062; 500237, 3718062; 500237, 3718061; 
500237, 3718061; 500237, 3718061; 500237, 3718061; 500237, 3718061; 
500237, 3718061; 500237, 3718061; 500237, 3718060; 500232, 3718060; 
500227, 3718060; 500226, 3718060; 500224, 3718060; 500222, 3718060; 
500222, 3718060; 500222, 3718050; 500222, 3718050; 500222, 3718050; 
500222, 3718050; 500221, 3718050; 500221, 3718050; 500221, 3718050; 
500221, 3718050; 500221, 3718050; 500221, 3718050; 500221, 3718050; 
500220, 3718050; 500220, 3718050; 500220, 3718050; 500220, 3718050; 
500220, 3718050; 500220, 3718050; 500219, 3718050; 500219, 3718050; 
500219, 3718050; 500219, 3718050; 500219, 3718050; 500219, 3718050; 
500219, 3718050; 500218, 3718050; 500218, 3718050; 500218, 3718050; 
500218, 3718050; 500218, 3718050; 500218, 3718050; 500217, 3718050; 
500217, 3718050; 500217, 3718050; 500217, 3718050; 500217, 3718050; 
500217, 3718050; 500217, 3718050; 500216, 3718050; 500216, 3718050; 
500216, 3718050; 500216, 3718050; 500216, 3718050; 500216, 3718050; 
500216, 3718050; 500215, 3718050; 500215, 3718050; 500215, 3718050; 
500215, 3718050; 500215, 3718050; 500215, 3718050; 500214, 3718050; 
500214, 3718050; 500214, 3718050; 500214, 3718050; 500214, 3718050; 
500214, 3718050; 500214, 3718050; 500213, 3718050; 500213, 3718050; 
500213, 3718050; 500213, 3718050; 500213, 3718050; 500213, 3718050; 
500212, 3718050; 500212, 3718050; 500212, 3718050; 500212, 3718050; 
500212, 3718050; 500212, 3718050; 500212, 3718050; 500211, 3718050; 
500211, 3718050; 500211, 3718050; 500211, 3718050; 500211, 3718050; 
500211, 3718050; 500210, 3718050; 500210, 3718050; 500210, 3718050; 
500210, 3718050; 500210, 3718050; 500210, 3718050; 500210, 3718050; 
500209, 3718050; 500209, 3718050; 500209, 3718049; 500209, 3718049; 
500209, 3718049; 500209, 3718049; 500209, 3718049; 500208, 3718049; 
500208, 3718049; 500208, 3718049; 500208, 3718049; 500208, 3718049; 
500208, 3718049; 500207, 3718049; 500207, 3718049; 500207, 3718049; 
500207, 3718049; 500207, 3718049; 500207, 3718049; 500207, 3718049; 
500206, 3718049; 500206, 3718049; 500206, 3718049; 500206, 3718049; 
500206, 3718049; 500206, 3718049; 500206, 3718049; 500205, 3718049; 
500205, 3718049; 500205, 3718049; 500205, 3718049; 500205, 3718049; 
500205, 3718049; 500204, 3718049; 500204, 3718049; 500204, 3718049; 
500204, 3718049; 500204, 3718049; 500204, 3718049; 500204, 3718049; 
500203, 3718049; 500203, 3718049; 500203, 3718049; 500203, 3718049; 
500203, 3718049; 500203, 3718049; 500202, 3718049; 500202, 3718049; 
500202, 3718048; 500202, 3718048; 500202, 3718048; 500202, 3718048; 
500202, 3718048; 500201, 3718048; 500201, 3718048; 500201, 3718048; 
500201, 3718048; 500201, 3718048; 500201, 3718048; 500201, 3718048; 
500200, 3718048; 500200, 3718048; 500200, 3718048; 500200, 3718048; 
500200, 3718048; 500200, 3718048; 500199, 3718048; 500199, 3718048; 
500199, 3718048; 500199, 3718048; 500199, 3718048; 500199, 3718048; 
500199, 3718048; 500198, 3718048; 500198, 3718048; 500198, 3718048; 
500198, 3718048; 500198, 3718048; 500198, 3718048; 500198, 3718048; 
500197, 3718048; 500197, 3718048; 500197, 3718047; 500197, 3718047; 
500197, 3718047; 500197, 3718047; 500197, 3718047; 500196, 3718047; 
500196, 3718047; 500196, 3718047; 500196, 3718047; 500196, 3718047; 
500196, 3718047; 500195, 3718047; 500195, 3718047; 500195, 3718047; 
500195, 3718047; 500195, 3718047; 500195, 3718047; 500195, 3718047; 
500194, 3718047; 500194, 3718047; 500194, 3718047; 500194, 3718047; 
500194, 3718047; 500194, 3718047; 500194, 3718047; 500193, 3718047; 
500193, 3718047; 500193, 3718047; 500193, 3718047; 500193, 3718046; 
500193, 3718046; 500193, 3718046; 500192, 3718046; 500192, 3718046; 
500192, 3718046; 500192, 3718046; 500192, 3718046; 500192, 3718046; 
500191, 3718046; 500191, 3718046; 500191, 3718046; 500191, 3718046; 
500191, 3718046; 500191, 3718046; 500191, 3718046; 500190, 3718046; 
500190, 3718046; 500190, 3718046; 500190, 3718046; 500190, 3718046; 
500190, 3718046; 500190, 3718046; 500189, 3718045; 500189, 3718045; 
500189, 3718045; 500189, 3718045; 500189, 3718045; 500189, 3718045; 
500189, 3718045; 500188, 3718045; 500188, 3718045; 500188, 3718045; 
500188, 3718045; 500188, 3718045; 500188, 3718045; 500188, 3718045; 
500187, 3718045; 500187, 3718045; 500187, 3718045; 500187, 3718045; 
500187, 3718045; 500187, 3718044; 500187, 3718044; 500186, 3718044; 
500186, 3718044; 500186, 3718044; 500186, 3718044; 500186, 3718044; 
500186, 3718044; 500186, 3718044; 500185, 3718044; 500185, 3718044; 
500185, 3718044; 500185, 3718044; 500185, 3718044; 500185, 3718044; 
500185, 3718044; 500184, 3718044; 500184, 3718044; 500184, 3718043; 
500184, 3718043; 500184, 3718043; 500184, 3718043; 500184, 3718043; 
500183, 3718043; 500183, 3718043; 500183, 3718043; 500183, 3718043; 
500183, 3718043; 500183, 3718043; 500183, 3718043; 500182, 3718043; 
500182, 3718043; 500182, 3718045; 500180, 3718050; 500178, 3718056; 
500178, 3718062; 500177, 3718067;

[[Page 907]]

500178, 3718073; 500178, 3718079; 500179, 3718084; 500181, 3718090; 
500185, 3718099; 500186, 3718102; 500187, 3718105; 500187, 3718109; 
500188, 3718115; 500187, 3718119; 500186, 3718125; 500185, 3718129; 
500182, 3718135; 500136, 3718206; 500132, 3718212; 500127, 3718218; 
500121, 3718223; 500115, 3718228; 500109, 3718232; 500102, 3718236; 
500096, 3718239; 500088, 3718242; 500085, 3718242; 500087, 3718268; 
500087, 3718276; 500086, 3718284; 500084, 3718292; 500081, 3718299; 
500078, 3718310; 500074, 3718322; 500071, 3718333; 500070, 3718345; 
500068, 3718357; 500068, 3718369; 500068, 3718381; 500069, 3718398; 
500069, 3718404; 500069, 3718409; 500068, 3718415; 500067, 3718421; 
500065, 3718426; 500062, 3718431; 500033, 3718490; 500031, 3718495; 
500029, 3718500; 500026, 3718504; 500023, 3718508; 500020, 3718512; 
500016, 3718516; 500006, 3718524; 500003, 3718526; 499999, 3718530; 
499995, 3718535; 499992, 3718540; 499989, 3718545; 499987, 3718551; 
499985, 3718557; 499983, 3718563; 499982, 3718568; 499980, 3718578; 
499977, 3718587; 499973, 3718596; 499967, 3718607; 499961, 3718619; 
499955, 3718631; 499954, 3718631; 499952, 3718637; 499949, 3718644; 
499947, 3718651; 499946, 3718658; 499931, 3718759; 499931, 3718765; 
499931, 3718771; 499932, 3718776; 499933, 3718782; 499934, 3718788; 
499937, 3718795; 499940, 3718800; 499941, 3718803; 499942, 3718804; 
499946, 3718813; 499949, 3718821; 499951, 3718829; 499953, 3718837; 
499954, 3718845; 499954, 3718853; 499953, 3718862; 499952, 3718870; 
499936, 3718933; 499926, 3718951; 499944, 3718947; 499944, 3718947; 
499960, 3718944; 500049, 3718925; 500207, 3718936; 500207, 3718934; 
500208, 3718913; 500210, 3718777; 500212, 3718650; 500213, 3718633; 
500213, 3718619; 500214, 3718536; 500366, 3718536; 500366, 3718536; 
500369, 3718517; 500378, 3718435; 500422, 3718059; 500422, 3718059; 
500403, 3718058; 500403, 3718058; 500400, 3718060; 500400, 3718060; 
500400, 3718061; 500393, 3718066; 500385, 3718072; 500376, 3718076; 
500368, 3718080; 500368, 3718080; 500360, 3718083; 500359, 3718083; 
thence returning to 500357, 3718083. Continue to 500187, 3717622; 
500000, 3717623; 499967, 3717713; 499917, 3717846; 499917, 3717857; 
499923, 3717858; 499927, 3717859; 499931, 3717860; 499938, 3717863; 
499942, 3717865; 499945, 3717868; 499948, 3717870; 499953, 3717876; 
499955, 3717880; 499957, 3717883; 499960, 3717891; 499962, 3717895; 
499964, 3717898; 499967, 3717901; 499969, 3717904; 499972, 3717907; 
499976, 3717910; 499979, 3717912; 499983, 3717914; 499986, 3717916; 
499990, 3717917; 499994, 3717918; 499998, 3717918; 500002, 3717919; 
500026, 3717919; 500026, 3717919; 500213, 3717924; 500224, 3717924; 
500224, 3717922; 500225, 3717921; 500225, 3717921; 500230, 3717622; 
500230, 3717622; thence returning to 500187, 3717622. Continue to 
491502, 3714828; 491542, 3714827; 491542, 3714827; 491506, 3714754; 
491500, 3714742; 491398, 3714534; 491396, 3714529; 491376, 3714490; 
491306, 3714347; 491302, 3714339; 491302, 3714339; 491303, 3714339; 
490908, 3713519; 490764, 3713221; 490740, 3713172; 490622, 3712839; 
490613, 3712849; 490573, 3712746; 490564, 3712723; 490542, 3712723; 
490550, 3712747; 490611, 3712919; 490620, 3712944; 490707, 3713186; 
490720, 3713214; 491262, 3714337; 491261, 3714337; 491267, 3714350; 
491267, 3714350; 491335, 3714489; 491336, 3714492; 491409, 3714641; 
491463, 3714749; 491500, 3714824; thence returning to 491502, 3714828. 
Continue to 493853, 3712379; 493853, 3712254; 493776, 3712306; 493776, 
3712403; 493853, 3712388; thence returning to 493853, 3712379.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit 2, Skinner/Johnson follows:

[[Page 908]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17JN09.003

    (7) Unit 3: Sage Unit, Riverside County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 quadrangle Sage. Land bounded by the 
following Universal Transverse Mercator (UTM) North American Datum of 
1983 (NAD83) coordinates (E, N): 505035, 3716405; 505035, 3716405; 
505175, 3716404; 505175, 3716404; 505245, 3716403; 505267, 3716403; 
505380, 3716402; 505427, 3716402; 505429, 3716017; 505429, 3715985; 
505432, 3715985; 505727, 3715975; 505831, 3715971; 505831, 3715971; 
505831, 3715774; 505831, 3715547; 505025, 3715591; 505025, 3715611;

[[Page 909]]

505026, 3715641; 505027, 3715789; 505027, 3715789; 505029, 3715890; 
505030, 3715988; 505032, 3716141; 505032, 3716189; 505032, 3716189; 
thence returning to 505035, 3716405.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit 3 (Sage Unit), Unit 4 (Wilson Valley Unit), 
and Unit 5 (Vail Lake/Oak Mountain Unit) follows:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17JN09.004


[[Page 910]]


    (8) Unit 4: Wilson Valley Unit, Riverside County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 quadrangles Cahuilla Mountain, Sage, and Vail 
Lake. Land bounded by the following Universal Transverse Mercator (UTM) 
North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83) coordinates (E, N): 510234, 
3707784; 510234, 3707785; 510234, 3707800; 510234, 3707808; 509911, 
3707810; 509378, 3707813; 509357, 3707813; 509356, 3707812; 509356, 
3707812; 509094, 3707816; 509094, 3707816; 509094, 3707816; 509092, 
3707833; 509092, 3707835; 509064, 3708174; 509061, 3708213; 509060, 
3708216; 509060, 3708217; 509311, 3708214; 509360, 3708214; 509412, 
3708213; 509447, 3708213; 509447, 3708213; 509535, 3708212; 509558, 
3708212; 509712, 3708211; 509854, 3708209; 509870, 3708209; 509870, 
3708209; 509870, 3708209; 509935, 3708209; 510386, 3708205; 510689, 
3708203; 511420, 3708197; 511480, 3708197; 511507, 3708197; 511507, 
3708197; 511507, 3708172; 511507, 3708066; 511507, 3708066; 511506, 
3707959; 511506, 3707934; 511505, 3707784; 511504, 3707636; 511504, 
3707594; 511503, 3707514; 511503, 3707503; 511503, 3707503; 511503, 
3707375; 511502, 3707375; 511087, 3707383; 510706, 3707390; 510706, 
3707390; 510706, 3707390; 510706, 3707424; 510704, 3707599; 510702, 
3707780; 510680, 3707780; 510595, 3707781; thence returning to 510234, 
3707784. Continue to 510706, 3707390; 510707, 3707301; 510715, 3706625; 
510715, 3706625; 510035, 3706610; 510035, 3706610; 510025, 3706704; 
510024, 3706709; 510024, 3706712; 510015, 3706798; 509994, 3707007; 
509994, 3707007; 509973, 3707206; 509973, 3707206; 509963, 3707305; 
509953, 3707404; 509953, 3707404; 510609, 3707392; 510678, 3707390; 
thence returning to 510706, 3707390.
    (ii) Note: Unit 4 (Wilson Valley) for the Quino checkerspot 
butterfly is depicted on the map in paragraph (7)(ii) of this entry.
    (8) Unit 5: Vail Lake/Oak Mountain Unit, Riverside County, 
California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 quadrangles Bachelor Mountain, Sage, 
Pechanga, and Vail Lake. Land bounded by the following Universal 
Transverse Mercator (UTM) North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83) 
coordinates (E, N): 501858, 3709596; 501858, 3709596; 502139, 3709646; 
502615, 3709631; 502626, 3709625; 502643, 3709615; 502643, 3709609; 
502642, 3709465; 502642, 3709465; 502641, 3709286; 502641, 3709256; 
502640, 3709087; 502640, 3709074; 502640, 3709046; 503036, 3709037; 
503036, 3709037; 503174, 3709034; 503340, 3709031; 503433, 3709028; 
503434, 3708993; 503434, 3708987; 503434, 3708987; 503434, 3708899; 
503435, 3708725; 503435, 3708713; 503435, 3708707; 503435, 3708707; 
503437, 3708213; 503437, 3708213; 503437, 3708213; 501828, 3708226; 
501828, 3708226; 501828, 3708226; 501829, 3708245; 501829, 3708258; 
501841, 3708792; 501844, 3708936; 501849, 3709192; 501853, 3709344; 
501853, 3709354; 501853, 3709364; thence returning to 501858, 3709596. 
Continue to 500229, 3708250; 500085, 3708249; 499766, 3708247; 499671, 
3708246; 499671, 3708246; 499668, 3708295; 499768, 3708331; 499694, 
3708419; 499652, 3708468; 499727, 3708495; 499768, 3708510; 499887, 
3708558; 499915, 3708657; 499987, 3708725; 500070, 3708773; 500134, 
3708820; 500154, 3708832; 500220, 3708869; 500220, 3708868; thence 
returning to 500229, 3708250. Continue to 501828, 3708226; 501830, 
3708001; 501831, 3707844; 501833, 3707599; 501834, 3707442; 501835, 
3707394; 501835, 3707318; 501835, 3707318; 501550, 3707363; 501429, 
3707383; 501022, 3707448; 500616, 3707513; 500397, 3707548; 500210, 
3707578; 500210, 3707578; 500210, 3707582; 500214, 3707723; 500226, 
3708156; 500229, 3708250; 500229, 3708250; 500229, 3708250; 500719, 
3708249; 501023, 3708249; 501441, 3708237; 501466, 3708236; 501737, 
3708229; 501801, 3708227; 501817, 3708226; thence returning to 501828, 
3708226. Continue to 507529, 3701874; 507531, 3701777; 507532, 3701729; 
507532, 3701729; 507513, 3701663; 507489, 3701583; 507470, 3701544; 
507352, 3701469; 507350, 3701469; 507350, 3701467; 507271, 3701434; 
507218, 3701448; 507155, 3701416; 507129, 3701371; 507113, 3701304; 
507071, 3701262; 506993, 3701239; 506916, 3701235; 506865, 3701235; 
506805, 3701244; 506703, 3701200; 506640, 3701170; 506568, 3701135; 
506494, 3701063; 506399, 3701047; 506264, 3701054; 506246, 3701061; 
506242, 3701061; 506242, 3701072; 505840, 3701071; 505840, 3701071; 
505840, 3701068; 505840, 3701068; 505833, 3701068; 505723, 3701058; 
505713, 3701052; 505415, 3701052; 505035, 3701052; 505013, 3701052; 
504656, 3701290; 504313, 3701648; 504171, 3701886; 503985, 3702199; 
503837, 3702780; 503528, 3702954; 503528, 3702954; 503494, 3702973; 
503477, 3702981; 503477, 3702981; 503417, 3703009; 503271, 3703077; 
503258, 3703095; 503250, 3703106; 503340, 3703114; 503415, 3703121; 
503866, 3703163; 503873, 3703164; 503946, 3703171; 503953, 3703172; 
505023, 3703271; 505023, 3703271; 505026, 3703040; 505026, 3703040; 
505029, 3702852; 505029, 3702852; 505030, 3702776; 505031, 3702723; 
505031, 3702702; 505039, 3702145; 505043, 3701881; 505043, 3701881; 
505266, 3701880; 505443, 3701879; 505443, 3701879; 505722, 3701878; 
505843, 3701877; 505848, 3701877; 506242, 3701875; 506242, 3701875; 
506242, 3702278; 506244, 3702278; 506643, 3702274; 506643, 3702106; 
506642, 3702087; 506642, 3701873; 506642, 3701873; 506657, 3701873; 
506684, 3701873; 507103, 3701873; 507282, 3701874; thence returning to 
507529, 3701874.
    (ii) Note: Unit 5 (Vail Lake/Oak Mountain) for the Quino checkerspot 
butterfly is depicted on the map in paragraph (7)(ii) of this entry.
    (10) Unit 6: Tule Peak Unit, Riverside County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 quadrangles Aguanga, Beauty Mountain, and 
Anza. Land bounded by the following Universal Transverse Mercator (UTM) 
North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83) coordinates (E, N): 527628, 
3703575; 527233, 3703541; 527233, 3703541; 527232, 3703658; 527230, 
3703925; 527230, 3703934; 527229, 3704074; 527228, 3704118; 527226, 
3704307; 526831, 3704287; 526824, 3704287; 526813, 3704286; 526813, 
3704286; 526811, 3704467; 526806, 3704812; 526803, 3705067; 527305, 
3705070; 527625, 3705073; 527626, 3704522; 527626, 3704231; 527627, 
3703961; 527627, 3703809; 527627, 3703725; 527627, 3703709; 527628, 
3703696; 527628, 3703575; thence returning to 527628, 3703575. Continue 
to 526311, 3703859; 526400, 3703866; 526403, 3703470; 526403, 3703470; 
526365, 3703467; 526040, 3703439; 525983, 3703434; 525980, 3703823; 
525980, 3703835; thence returning to 526311, 3703859. Continue to

[[Page 911]]

528328, 3703573; 528328, 3703573; 528310, 3703558; 528208, 3703471; 
528051, 3703364; 527873, 3703263; 527737, 3703197; 527631, 3703161; 
527630, 3703161; 527630, 3703161; 527628, 3703575; 527628, 3703575; 
528134, 3703574; 528153, 3703574; thence returning to 528328, 3703573. 
Continue to 526412, 3702730; 526363, 3702718; 525995, 3702627; 525987, 
3702626; 525605, 3702584; 525588, 3702582; 525588, 3702582; 525588, 
3702696; 525588, 3702696; 525854, 3702707; 525986, 3702713; 526140, 
3702719; 526368, 3702728; thence returning to 526412, 3702730.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit 6 (Tule Peak) and Unit 7 (Bautista) follows:

[[Page 912]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17JN09.005

    (8) Unit 7: Bautista Unit, Riverside County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 quadrangles Anza, Butterfly Peak, Blackburn 
Canyon, and Idyllwild. Land bounded by the following Universal 
Transverse Mercator (UTM) North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83) 
coordinates (E, N): 524940, 3714398; 524927, 3714405; 524915, 3714413; 
524912, 3714415; 524909, 3714416; 524891, 3714427; 524867, 3714442; 
524861, 3714445; 524843, 3714457; 524824, 3714470; 524819, 3714473; 
524796, 3714488; 524773, 3714505; 524750, 3714521; 524727,

[[Page 913]]

3714538; 524704, 3714555; 524702, 3714557; 524687, 3714568; 524679, 
3714573; 524654, 3714586; 524629, 3714600; 524617, 3714607; 524605, 
3714614; 524580, 3714629; 524556, 3714644; 524532, 3714659; 524513, 
3714671; 524509, 3714674; 524492, 3714686; 524485, 3714690; 524480, 
3714693; 524481, 3714769; 524482, 3715168; 524477, 3716096; 524477, 
3716098; 524477, 3716098; 524477, 3716100; 524471, 3716251; 524469, 
3716299; 524465, 3716399; 524461, 3716501; 524460, 3716518; 524266, 
3716521; 524066, 3716524; 524027, 3716524; 523864, 3716521; 523861, 
3716521; 523854, 3716740; 523656, 3716816; 523633, 3716826; 523462, 
3716890; 523431, 3716902; 523428, 3716906; 523360, 3717007; 523341, 
3717034; 523361, 3717047; 523540, 3717157; 523666, 3717226; 523707, 
3717229; 523748, 3717231; 523775, 3717233; 523867, 3717239; 523874, 
3717240; 523880, 3717246; 523937, 3717306; 523947, 3717323; 523947, 
3717323; 523970, 3717369; 523961, 3717692; 523961, 3717716; 523961, 
3717716; 523960, 3717730; 523983, 3717727; 524035, 3717723; 524048, 
3717721; 524066, 3717720; 524069, 3717725; 524206, 3717824; 524277, 
3717924; 524258, 3717981; 524258, 3718099; 524324, 3718142; 524348, 
3718208; 524249, 3718307; 524196, 3718411; 524225, 3718430; 524431, 
3718538; 524632, 3718643; 524731, 3718695; 524845, 3718714; 524902, 
3718643; 524906, 3718567; 524864, 3718525; 524797, 3718482; 524741, 
3718468; 524807, 3718373; 524873, 3718312; 524925, 3718302; 524982, 
3718350; 525058, 3718397; 525081, 3718405; 525131, 3718553; 525220, 
3718672; 525468, 3718851; 525745, 3719098; 525416, 3719350; 525111, 
3719584; 524566, 3719376; 524430, 3719396; 524239, 3719425; 523912, 
3719713; 523615, 3719822; 523367, 3719822; 523190, 3720727; 523182, 
3720746; 523189, 3720781; 523152, 3720828; 523144, 3720939; 523142, 
3720964; 522899, 3721091; 522836, 3721107; 522744, 3721130; 522579, 
3721130; 522394, 3721100; 522200, 3721091; 521967, 3721149; 521734, 
3721139; 521510, 3721159; 521365, 3721149; 521205, 3721194; 521190, 
3721198; 520928, 3721236; 520850, 3721100; 520626, 3721120; 520374, 
3721275; 520189, 3721304; 519995, 3721343; 519791, 3721460; 519582, 
3721532; 519574, 3721535; 519479, 3721553; 519098, 3721695; 518771, 
3721772; 518561, 3721822; 518505, 3721878; 518487, 3721892; 518467, 
3721909; 518364, 3721991; 518293, 3722048; 518329, 3722089; 518346, 
3722109; 518477, 3722260; 518335, 3722443; 518113, 3722392; 517968, 
3722358; 517956, 3722392; 517925, 3722480; 517918, 3722500; 517913, 
3722512; 517756, 3722952; 517601, 3723163; 517479, 3723317; 517374, 
3723450; 517333, 3723502; 517919, 3723509; 517950, 3723509; 518230, 
3723509; 518526, 3723509; 518809, 3723538; 519119, 3723580; 519345, 
3723580; 519570, 3723641; 519712, 3723679; 520150, 3723679; 520362, 
3723622; 520419, 3723354; 520334, 3723156; 520673, 3723086; 521194, 
3723178; 521273, 3723192; 521570, 3723192; 521824, 3723135; 521993, 
3722895; 522318, 3722881; 522445, 3722881; 522700, 3722796; 522826, 
3722686; 522926, 3722599; 522949, 3722552; 523039, 3722373; 523180, 
3722147; 523392, 3722118; 523674, 3722203; 523858, 3722132; 524070, 
3721836; 524211, 3721511; 524310, 3721158; 524427, 3721017; 524485, 
3720947; 524487, 3720945; 524515, 3720927; 524945, 3720678; 525609, 
3720409; 526076, 3720080; 526329, 3719901; 526492, 3719823; 526491, 
3719804; 526480, 3719413; 526509, 3719413; 526519, 3719413; 526520, 
3719365; 526884, 3719367; 526885, 3719348; 526890, 3719196; 526912, 
3718594; 526923, 3718593; 526923, 3718516; 527300, 3718525; 527316, 
3718184; 527316, 3718184; 527316, 3718184; 527343, 3718185; 527345, 
3718115; 527707, 3718119; 528111, 3718123; 528117, 3717769; 528144, 
3717769; 528505, 3717777; 528510, 3717777; 528913, 3717788; 528913, 
3717618; 528912, 3717449; 528914, 3717449; 528915, 3717385; 529317, 
3717395; 529323, 3717396; 529719, 3717401; 529719, 3717427; 529720, 
3717427; 529718, 3717640; 529717, 3717803; 529716, 3717803; 529716, 
3717836; 529714, 3718072; 529749, 3718072; 529839, 3718072; 530135, 
3718199; 530263, 3718411; 530503, 3718693; 530573, 3718891; 530644, 
3719188; 530921, 3719188; 530969, 3719188; 531294, 3718934; 531322, 
3718679; 531322, 3718439; 531251, 3718143; 531491, 3717888; 531627, 
3717821; 531717, 3717775; 532000, 3717790; 532155, 3717719; 532141, 
3717521; 531957, 3717366; 531816, 3717083; 532000, 3717055; 532212, 
3717069; 532593, 3717069; 532664, 3717394; 532732, 3717483; 532861, 
3717648; 533144, 3717451; 533341, 3717239; 533666, 3716999; 533920, 
3716759; 534274, 3716603; 534347, 3716608; 534683, 3716631; 534881, 
3716815; 535149, 3716928; 535516, 3716857; 535534, 3716835; 535542, 
3716823; 535700, 3716617; 535815, 3716473; 535971, 3716278; 535982, 
3716264; 536051, 3716216; 536103, 3716180; 536178, 3716127; 536251, 
3716077; 536265, 3716067; 536326, 3716031; 536404, 3715985; 536513, 
3715922; 536527, 3715914; 536604, 3715869; 536705, 3715667; 536725, 
3715627; 536731, 3715615; 536731, 3715614; 537028, 3715276; 537338, 
3715276; 537391, 3715260; 537443, 3715246; 537505, 3715228; 537525, 
3715222; 537635, 3715191; 537925, 3715191; 538016, 3715191; 538100, 
3715186; 538120, 3715185; 538203, 3715180; 538482, 3715163; 538580, 
3715082; 538722, 3714964; 538737, 3714952; 538892, 3714824; 539038, 
3714870; 539245, 3714937; 539434, 3714891; 539515, 3714872; 539528, 
3714869; 539717, 3714824; 539895, 3714781; 539895, 3714777; 539923, 
3714762; 539922, 3714300; 539919, 3713604; 539919, 3713579; 539917, 
3713220; 539923, 3712426; 539923, 3712307; 539524, 3712228; 539368, 
3712239; 539033, 3712239; 538609, 3712253; 538328, 3712372; 538242, 
3712409; 538327, 3712634; 538327, 3712635; 538369, 3712974; 538324, 
3713016; 538322, 3713018; 538214, 3713120; 538143, 3713185; 537939, 
3713208; 537928, 3713209; 537922, 3713209; 537890, 3713213; 537621, 
3713242; 537084, 3713242; 537024, 3713218; 537002, 3713210; 536999, 
3713209; 536973, 3713209; 536963, 3713209; 536732, 3713207; 536712, 
3713207; 536326, 3713211; 536104, 3713213; 536087, 3713214; 536086, 
3713214; 536072, 3713200; 536030, 3713158; 535993, 3713121; 535965, 
3713119; 535889, 3713112; 535844, 3713108; 535753, 3713089; 535577, 
3713167; 535565, 3713177; 535543, 3713196; 535461, 3713264; 535419, 
3713298; 535402, 3713313; 535343, 3713362; 535202, 3713459; 535132, 
3713508; 535090, 3713537; 534887, 3713657; 534804, 3713706; 534693, 
3713771; 534677, 3713790; 534649, 3713822; 534550, 3713934; 534375, 
3714083; 534261, 3714142; 534173, 3714187; 534056, 3714213; 533907, 
3714343; 533857, 3714382; 533725, 3714486; 533690, 3714520; 533523, 
3714681; 533348, 3714837; 533192, 3714909; 533165, 3714935; 533114, 
3714987; 533075, 3715344; 532860, 3715448; 532735, 3715539; 532672, 
3715585; 532528, 3715650; 532423, 3715698; 532386, 3715715; 532326, 
3715725; 532237, 3715740; 532230, 3715741; 532149, 3715797; 532106, 
3716045; 532030, 3716121; 532029, 3716122; 532010, 3716141; 531908, 
3716243; 531589, 3716251; 531547,

[[Page 914]]

3716135; 531543, 3716125; 531541, 3716120; 531525, 3716075; 531609, 
3715995; 531878, 3715737; 531878, 3715737; 531712, 3715735; 531577, 
3715733; 531511, 3715732; 531321, 3715730; 531309, 3715732; 531302, 
3715733; 531207, 3715747; 531107, 3715762; 531087, 3715765; 530947, 
3715786; 530698, 3715760; 530680, 3715758; 530607, 3715727; 530454, 
3715659; 530329, 3715726; 530289, 3715748; 530257, 3715765; 530080, 
3715751; 529885, 3715735; 529820, 3715730; 529736, 3715723; 529608, 
3715714; 529480, 3715720; 529473, 3715720; 529402, 3715723; 529304, 
3715728; 529281, 3715775; 529226, 3715884; 529078, 3715890; 529069, 
3715890; 529064, 3715891; 529065, 3715917; 529069, 3715977; 529070, 
3716008; 529049, 3716018; 528908, 3716092; 528869, 3716112; 528776, 
3716112; 528684, 3716112; 528446, 3716112; 528446, 3716120; 528433, 
3716352; 528421, 3716352; 528320, 3716352; 528303, 3716352; 528297, 
3716138; 528199, 3716131; 528199, 3716119; 528198, 3716105; 528193, 
3715962; 528093, 3715970; 527969, 3715979; 527770, 3715995; 527770, 
3716116; 527771, 3716519; 527771, 3716525; 527766, 3716525; 527558, 
3716535; 527558, 3716519; 527560, 3716315; 527560, 3716221; 527561, 
3716130; 527561, 3716125; 527155, 3716125; 527153, 3716125; 526959, 
3716125; 526853, 3716124; 526753, 3716124; 526621, 3716124; 526539, 
3716123; 526540, 3716116; 526549, 3715911; 526549, 3715911; 526648, 
3715908; 526751, 3715906; 526886, 3715902; 526932, 3715901; 526939, 
3715690; 526946, 3715476; 526760, 3715480; 526655, 3715482; 526551, 
3715483; 526550, 3715483; 526547, 3715571; 526543, 3715682; 526543, 
3715689; 526439, 3715689; 526343, 3715689; 526343, 3715678; 526342, 
3715569; 526341, 3715534; 526340, 3715474; 526237, 3715468; 526138, 
3715462; 526138, 3715449; 526138, 3715227; 526138, 3715029; 526138, 
3714927; 526138, 3714911; 526139, 3714828; 526139, 3714627; 526139, 
3714428; 526139, 3714417; 526136, 3714417; 526124, 3714417; 526125, 
3714112; 526121, 3714112; 526052, 3714115; 526036, 3714116; 526017, 
3714118; 525989, 3714122; 525972, 3714124; 525961, 3714125; 525933, 
3714129; 525929, 3714130; 525905, 3714133; 525878, 3714138; 525857, 
3714139; 525828, 3714140; 525800, 3714142; 525791, 3714142; 525772, 
3714144; 525744, 3714146; 525725, 3714148; 525716, 3714149; 525687, 
3714152; 525670, 3714154; 525659, 3714156; 525631, 3714160; 525603, 
3714164; 525576, 3714169; 525549, 3714174; 525548, 3714174; 525520, 
3714179; 525516, 3714180; 525492, 3714185; 525465, 3714192; 525437, 
3714198; 525410, 3714206; 525403, 3714207; 525383, 3714213; 525355, 
3714221; 525328, 3714229; 525301, 3714238; 525297, 3714239; 525287, 
3714243; 525286, 3714243; 525275, 3714247; 525248, 3714256; 525243, 
3714258; 525221, 3714266; 525195, 3714276; 525172, 3714286; 525169, 
3714287; 525143, 3714298; 525117, 3714309; 525091, 3714321; 525065, 
3714333; 525040, 3714345; 525035, 3714348; 525014, 3714358; 524989, 
3714371; 524964, 3714385; thence returning to 524940, 3714398. Excluding 
land bounded by 525336, 3717346; 525538, 3717338; 525526, 3717651; 
525245, 3717656; 525259, 3717478; 525275, 3717451; and excluding land 
bounded by 525483, 3717132; 525482, 3717132; 525478, 3717134; 525478, 
3717134; 525473, 3717137; 525473, 3717137; 525468, 3717139; 525468, 
3717139; 525463, 3717142; 525463, 3717142; 525459, 3717145; 525458, 
3717145; 525454, 3717148; 525454, 3717148; 525449, 3717151; 525449, 
3717151; 525445, 3717154; 525445, 3717154; 525440, 3717157; 525440, 
3717157; 525436, 3717160; 525436, 3717160; 525431, 3717164; 525431, 
3717164; 525427, 3717167; 525427, 3717167; 525423, 3717170; 525423, 
3717171; 525419, 3717174; 525418, 3717174; 525414, 3717178; 525414, 
3717178; 525410, 3717181; 525410, 3717181; 525406, 3717185; 525406, 
3717185; 525402, 3717189; 525402, 3717189; 525398, 3717193; 525398, 
3717193; 525395, 3717197; 525394, 3717197; 525391, 3717201; 525391, 
3717201; 525387, 3717205; 525387, 3717205; 525384, 3717209; 525383, 
3717209; 525380, 3717213; 525380, 3717213; 525377, 3717217; 525376, 
3717218; 525373, 3717222; 525373, 3717222; 525370, 3717226; 525370, 
3717226; 525367, 3717231; 525366, 3717231; 525363, 3717235; 525363, 
3717235; 525360, 3717240; 525360, 3717240; 525357, 3717244; 525357, 
3717244; 525354, 3717249; 525354, 3717249; 525351, 3717254; 525255, 
3717419; 525269, 3717240; 525299, 3716874; 525328, 3716873; 525366, 
3716908; 525367, 3716909; 525367, 3716909; 525368, 3716910; 525368, 
3716910; 525369, 3716911; 525369, 3716911; 525370, 3716911; 525370, 
3716912; 525371, 3716912; 525371, 3716913; 525372, 3716913; 525372, 
3716914; 525372, 3716914; 525373, 3716914; 525373, 3716915; 525374, 
3716915; 525374, 3716916; 525375, 3716916; 525375, 3716917; 525376, 
3716917; 525376, 3716917; 525377, 3716918; 525377, 3716918; 525378, 
3716919; 525378, 3716919; 525379, 3716919; 525379, 3716920; 525380, 
3716920; 525380, 3716921; 525381, 3716921; 525381, 3716921; 525382, 
3716922; 525382, 3716922; 525383, 3716923; 525383, 3716923; 525384, 
3716923; 525384, 3716924; 525385, 3716924; 525385, 3716925; 525386, 
3716925; 525386, 3716925; 525387, 3716926; 525387, 3716926; 525388, 
3716927; 525388, 3716927; 525389, 3716927; 525389, 3716928; 525390, 
3716928; 525390, 3716929; 525391, 3716929; 525392, 3716929; 525392, 
3716930; 525393, 3716930; 525393, 3716930; 525394, 3716931; 525394, 
3716931; 525395, 3716932; 525395, 3716932; 525396, 3716932; 525396, 
3716933; 525397, 3716933; 525397, 3716933; 525398, 3716934; 525398, 
3716934; 525399, 3716935; 525399, 3716935; 525400, 3716935; 525400, 
3716936; 525401, 3716936; 525402, 3716936; 525402, 3716937; 525403, 
3716937; 525403, 3716937; 525404, 3716938; 525404, 3716938; 525405, 
3716938; 525405, 3716939; 525406, 3716939; 525406, 3716939; 525407, 
3716940; 525408, 3716940; 525408, 3716940; 525409, 3716941; 525409, 
3716941; 525410, 3716941; 525410, 3716942; 525411, 3716942; 525411, 
3716942; 525412, 3716943; 525412, 3716943; 525413, 3716943; 525414, 
3716944; 525414, 3716944; 525415, 3716944; 525415, 3716945; 525416, 
3716945; 525416, 3716945; 525417, 3716946; 525418, 3716946; 525418, 
3716946; 525419, 3716947; 525419, 3716947; 525420, 3716947; 525420, 
3716948; 525421, 3716948; 525421, 3716948; 525422, 3716948; 525423, 
3716949; 525423, 3716949; 525424, 3716949; 525424, 3716950; 525425, 
3716950; 525425, 3716950; 525426, 3716950; 525427, 3716951; 525427, 
3716951; 525428, 3716951; 525428, 3716952; 525429, 3716952; 525430, 
3716952; 525430, 3716952; 525431, 3716953; 525431, 3716953; 525432, 
3716953; 525432, 3716954; 525433, 3716954; 525434, 3716954; 525434, 
3716954; 525435, 3716955; 525435, 3716955; 525436, 3716955; 525436, 
3716955; 525437, 3716956; 525438, 3716956; 525438, 3716956; 525439, 
3716957; 525439, 3716957; 525440, 3716957; 525441, 3716957; 525441, 
3716958; 525442, 3716958; 525442, 3716958; 525443, 3716958; 525444, 
3716959; 525444, 3716959; 525445, 3716959; 525445, 3716959; 525446,

[[Page 915]]

3716960; 525447, 3716960; 525447, 3716960; 525448, 3716960; 525448, 
3716960; 525449, 3716961; 525449, 3716961; 525450, 3716961; 525450, 
3716961; 525451, 3716961; 525451, 3716962; 525452, 3716962; 525452, 
3716962; 525453, 3716962; 525453, 3716962; 525454, 3716963; 525455, 
3716963; 525455, 3716963; 525456, 3716963; 525456, 3716963; 525457, 
3716964; 525457, 3716964; 525458, 3716964; 525458, 3716964; 525459, 
3716965; 525459, 3716965; 525460, 3716965; 525460, 3716965; 525461, 
3716965; 525461, 3716966; 525462, 3716966; 525462, 3716966; 525463, 
3716966; 525463, 3716967; 525464, 3716967; 525464, 3716967; 525465, 
3716967; 525466, 3716968; 525466, 3716968; 525467, 3716968; 525467, 
3716968; 525468, 3716969; 525468, 3716969; 525469, 3716969; 525469, 
3716969; 525470, 3716970; 525470, 3716970; 525471, 3716970; 525471, 
3716970; 525472, 3716971; 525472, 3716971; 525473, 3716971; 525473, 
3716971; 525474, 3716972; 525474, 3716972; 525475, 3716972; 525475, 
3716972; 525476, 3716973; 525476, 3716973; 525477, 3716973; 525477, 
3716974; 525478, 3716974; 525478, 3716974; 525479, 3716974; 525479, 
3716975; 525480, 3716975; 525480, 3716975; 525481, 3716976; 525481, 
3716976; 525482, 3716976; 525482, 3716976; 525483, 3716977; 525483, 
3716977; 525484, 3716977; 525484, 3716978; 525485, 3716978; 525485, 
3716978; 525486, 3716979; 525486, 3716979; 525487, 3716979; 525487, 
3716979; 525487, 3716980; 525488, 3716980; 525488, 3716980; 525489, 
3716981; 525489, 3716981; 525490, 3716981; 525490, 3716982; 525491, 
3716982; 525491, 3716982; 525492, 3716983; 525492, 3716983; 525493, 
3716983; 525493, 3716984; 525494, 3716984; 525494, 3716984; 525495, 
3716984; 525495, 3716985; 525496, 3716985; 525496, 3716985; 525496, 
3716986; 525497, 3716986; 525497, 3716986; 525498, 3716987; 525498, 
3716987; 525499, 3716987; 525499, 3716988; 525500, 3716988; 525500, 
3716989; 525501, 3716989; 525501, 3716989; 525502, 3716990; 525502, 
3716990; 525502, 3716990; 525503, 3716991; 525503, 3716991; 525504, 
3716991; 525504, 3716992; 525505, 3716992; 525505, 3716992; 525506, 
3716993; 525506, 3716993; 525506, 3716993; 525507, 3716994; 525507, 
3716994; 525508, 3716995; 525508, 3716995; 525509, 3716995; 525509, 
3716996; 525510, 3716996; 525510, 3716996; 525510, 3716997; 525511, 
3716997; 525511, 3716997; 525512, 3716998; 525512, 3716998; 525513, 
3716999; 525513, 3716999; 525513, 3716999; 525514, 3717000; 525514, 
3717000; 525515, 3717001; 525515, 3717001; 525516, 3717001; 525516, 
3717002; 525516, 3717002; 525517, 3717002; 525517, 3717003; 525518, 
3717003; 525518, 3717004; 525518, 3717004; 525519, 3717004; 525519, 
3717005; 525520, 3717005; 525520, 3717006; 525520, 3717006; 525521, 
3717006; 525521, 3717007; 525522, 3717007; 525522, 3717008; 525522, 
3717008; 525523, 3717008; 525523, 3717009; 525524, 3717009; 525524, 
3717010; 525524, 3717010; 525525, 3717011; 525525, 3717011; 525526, 
3717011; 525526, 3717012; 525526, 3717012; 525527, 3717013; 525527, 
3717013; 525528, 3717013; 525528, 3717014; 525528, 3717014; 525529, 
3717015; 525529, 3717015; 525530, 3717016; 525530, 3717016; 525530, 
3717016; 525531, 3717017; 525531, 3717017; 525531, 3717018; 525532, 
3717018; 525532, 3717019; 525533, 3717019; 525533, 3717019; 525533, 
3717020; 525534, 3717020; 525534, 3717021; 525534, 3717021; 525535, 
3717022; 525535, 3717022; 525535, 3717023; 525536, 3717023; 525536, 
3717023; 525536, 3717024; 525537, 3717024; 525537, 3717025; 525538, 
3717025; 525538, 3717026; 525538, 3717026; 525539, 3717027; 525539, 
3717027; 525539, 3717027; 525540, 3717028; 525540, 3717028; 525540, 
3717029; 525541, 3717029; 525541, 3717030; 525541, 3717030; 525542, 
3717031; 525542, 3717031; 525542, 3717032; 525543, 3717032; 525543, 
3717033; 525543, 3717033; 525544, 3717033; 525544, 3717034; 525544, 
3717034; 525545, 3717035; 525545, 3717035; 525545, 3717036; 525546, 
3717036; 525546, 3717037; 525546, 3717037; 525547, 3717038; 525547, 
3717038; 525547, 3717039; 525548, 3717039; 525548, 3717040; 525548, 
3717040; 525548, 3717041; 525549, 3717041; 525549, 3717042; 525549, 
3717042; 525550, 3717043; 525550, 3717043; 525550, 3717043; 525551, 
3717044; 525551, 3717044; 525551, 3717045; 525551, 3717045; 525552, 
3717046; 525552, 3717046; 525552, 3717047; 525553, 3717047; 525553, 
3717048; 525553, 3717048; 525553, 3717049; 525554, 3717049; 525554, 
3717050; 525554, 3717050; 525555, 3717051; 525555, 3717051; 525555, 
3717052; 525555, 3717052; 525556, 3717053; 525556, 3717053; 525556, 
3717054; 525557, 3717054; 525557, 3717055; 525557, 3717055; 525557, 
3717056; 525558, 3717056; 525558, 3717057; 525558, 3717057; 525558, 
3717058; 525559, 3717058; 525559, 3717059; 525559, 3717059; 525559, 
3717060; 525560, 3717060; 525560, 3717061; 525560, 3717061; 525560, 
3717062; 525561, 3717063; 525561, 3717063; 525561, 3717064; 525561, 
3717064; 525562, 3717065; 525562, 3717065; 525562, 3717066; 525562, 
3717066; 525563, 3717067; 525563, 3717067; 525563, 3717068; 525563, 
3717068; 525564, 3717069; 525564, 3717069; 525564, 3717070; 525564, 
3717070; 525564, 3717071; 525565, 3717071; 525565, 3717072; 525565, 
3717072; 525565, 3717073; 525565, 3717074; 525566, 3717074; 525566, 
3717075; 525566, 3717075; 525566, 3717076; 525567, 3717076; 525567, 
3717077; 525567, 3717077; 525567, 3717078; 525567, 3717078; 525568, 
3717079; 525568, 3717079; 525568, 3717080; 525568, 3717080; 525568, 
3717081; 525569, 3717082; 525569, 3717082; 525570, 3717091; 525560, 
3717105; 525560, 3717105; 525555, 3717106; 525555, 3717106; 525550, 
3717107; 525550, 3717107; 525544, 3717109; 525544, 3717109; 525539, 
3717110; 525539, 3717110; 525534, 3717111; 525534, 3717111; 525529, 
3717113; 525528, 3717113; 525523, 3717115; 525523, 3717115; 525518, 
3717117; 525518, 3717117; 525513, 3717118; 525513, 3717118; 525508, 
3717120; 525508, 3717120; 525503, 3717122; 525503, 3717123; 525498, 
3717125; 525497, 3717125; 525493, 3717127; 525492, 3717127; 525488, 
3717129; 525487, 3717129; and excluding land bounded by 525380, 3716871; 
525388, 3716870; 525389, 3716878; 525375, 3716878; 525372, 3716871; and 
excluding land bounded by 525434, 3716924; 525433, 3716924; 525433, 
3716924; 525432, 3716923; 525432, 3716923; 525431, 3716923; 525431, 
3716923; 525430, 3716922; 525430, 3716922; 525429, 3716922; 525429, 
3716921; 525428, 3716921; 525428, 3716921; 525427, 3716921; 525427, 
3716920; 525426, 3716920; 525426, 3716920; 525425, 3716919; 525425, 
3716919; 525424, 3716919; 525424, 3716918; 525423, 3716918; 525423, 
3716918; 525422, 3716918; 525422, 3716917; 525421, 3716917; 525421, 
3716917; 525420, 3716916; 525420, 3716916; 525419, 3716916; 525419, 
3716915; 525418, 3716915; 525418, 3716915; 525417, 3716915; 525417, 
3716914; 525416, 3716914; 525416, 3716914; 525415, 3716913; 525415, 
3716913; 525414, 3716913; 525414, 3716912; 525413, 3716912; 525413, 
3716912; 525412, 3716911; 525412, 3716911; 525412, 3716911; 525411,

[[Page 916]]

3716910; 525411, 3716910; 525410, 3716910; 525410, 3716909; 525409, 
3716909; 525409, 3716909; 525408, 3716908; 525408, 3716908; 525407, 
3716908; 525407, 3716907; 525406, 3716907; 525406, 3716907; 525405, 
3716906; 525405, 3716906; 525405, 3716906; 525404, 3716905; 525404, 
3716905; 525403, 3716905; 525403, 3716904; 525402, 3716904; 525402, 
3716904; 525402, 3716885; 525419, 3716876; 525435, 3716876; 525471, 
3716881; 525472, 3716881; 525473, 3716881; 525473, 3716881; 525474, 
3716881; 525474, 3716881; 525475, 3716881; 525476, 3716880; 525476, 
3716880; 525477, 3716880; 525477, 3716880; 525478, 3716879; 525478, 
3716879; 525479, 3716879; 525479, 3716879; 525480, 3716878; 525480, 
3716878; 525481, 3716877; 525481, 3716877; 525482, 3716877; 525482, 
3716876; 525483, 3716876; 525483, 3716875; 525483, 3716875; 525484, 
3716874; 525484, 3716874; 525485, 3716873; 525485, 3716873; 525485, 
3716872; 525486, 3716872; 525486, 3716871; 525486, 3716871; 525486, 
3716870; 525487, 3716870; 525487, 3716869; 525487, 3716868; 525487, 
3716868; 525487, 3716867; 525487, 3716867; 525715, 3716858; 526066, 
3716845; 526065, 3716845; 526061, 3716847; 526061, 3716847; 526057, 
3716849; 526057, 3716849; 526052, 3716850; 526052, 3716850; 526048, 
3716852; 526048, 3716852; 526044, 3716854; 526044, 3716854; 526039, 
3716856; 526039, 3716856; 526035, 3716858; 526035, 3716858; 526031, 
3716860; 526031, 3716860; 526027, 3716862; 526027, 3716863; 526023, 
3716865; 526022, 3716865; 526019, 3716867; 526018, 3716867; 526014, 
3716869; 526014, 3716870; 526010, 3716872; 526010, 3716872; 526007, 
3716875; 526006, 3716875; 526003, 3716877; 526002, 3716877; 525999, 
3716880; 525999, 3716880; 525995, 3716883; 525995, 3716883; 525991, 
3716885; 525991, 3716886; 525987, 3716888; 525987, 3716888; 525984, 
3716891; 525984, 3716891; 525980, 3716894; 525980, 3716894; 525977, 
3716897; 525976, 3716897; 525973, 3716901; 525973, 3716901; 525970, 
3716904; 525969, 3716904; 525966, 3716907; 525966, 3716907; 525963, 
3716910; 525963, 3716910; 525960, 3716914; 525959, 3716914; 525956, 
3716917; 525956, 3716917; 525953, 3716921; 525953, 3716921; 525950, 
3716924; 525950, 3716924; 525947, 3716928; 525947, 3716928; 525944, 
3716931; 525944, 3716932; 525941, 3716935; 525941, 3716935; 525938, 
3716939; 525938, 3716939; 525935, 3716943; 525935, 3716943; 525933, 
3716947; 525933, 3716947; 525930, 3716951; 525930, 3716951; 525927, 
3716954; 525927, 3716955; 525925, 3716958; 525925, 3716959; 525923, 
3716962; 525922, 3716963; 525920, 3716967; 525920, 3716967; 525918, 
3716971; 525918, 3716971; 525916, 3716975; 525916, 3716975; 525914, 
3716978; 525912, 3716981; 525909, 3716985; 525906, 3716989; 525902, 
3716992; 525899, 3716996; 525896, 3716999; 525892, 3717003; 525889, 
3717006; 525886, 3717010; 525882, 3717013; 525878, 3717016; 525875, 
3717019; 525871, 3717023; 525867, 3717026; 525863, 3717029; 525860, 
3717031; 525856, 3717034; 525852, 3717037; 525848, 3717040; 525844, 
3717042; 525840, 3717045; 525835, 3717047; 525831, 3717050; 525827, 
3717052; 525823, 3717055; 525818, 3717057; 525814, 3717059; 525810, 
3717061; 525805, 3717063; 525801, 3717065; 525796, 3717067; 525792, 
3717068; 525787, 3717070; 525783, 3717072; 525778, 3717073; 525773, 
3717074; 525769, 3717076; 525764, 3717077; 525759, 3717078; 525755, 
3717079; 525750, 3717080; 525745, 3717081; 525740, 3717082; 525736, 
3717083; 525731, 3717083; 525724, 3717084; 525612, 3717098; 525596, 
3717085; 525595, 3717076; 525595, 3717075; 525594, 3717074; 525594, 
3717073; 525594, 3717073; 525594, 3717072; 525593, 3717071; 525593, 
3717071; 525593, 3717070; 525593, 3717069; 525592, 3717069; 525592, 
3717068; 525592, 3717068; 525592, 3717067; 525592, 3717066; 525591, 
3717066; 525591, 3717065; 525591, 3717065; 525591, 3717064; 525590, 
3717063; 525590, 3717063; 525590, 3717062; 525590, 3717062; 525589, 
3717061; 525589, 3717060; 525589, 3717060; 525589, 3717059; 525588, 
3717059; 525588, 3717058; 525588, 3717057; 525588, 3717057; 525587, 
3717056; 525587, 3717056; 525587, 3717055; 525587, 3717055; 525586, 
3717054; 525586, 3717053; 525586, 3717053; 525585, 3717052; 525585, 
3717052; 525585, 3717051; 525585, 3717050; 525584, 3717050; 525584, 
3717049; 525584, 3717049; 525583, 3717048; 525583, 3717047; 525583, 
3717047; 525583, 3717046; 525582, 3717046; 525582, 3717045; 525582, 
3717045; 525581, 3717044; 525581, 3717043; 525581, 3717043; 525581, 
3717042; 525580, 3717042; 525580, 3717041; 525580, 3717041; 525579, 
3717040; 525579, 3717039; 525579, 3717039; 525578, 3717038; 525578, 
3717038; 525578, 3717037; 525577, 3717037; 525577, 3717036; 525577, 
3717036; 525576, 3717035; 525576, 3717034; 525576, 3717034; 525575, 
3717033; 525575, 3717033; 525575, 3717032; 525574, 3717032; 525574, 
3717031; 525574, 3717031; 525573, 3717030; 525573, 3717029; 525573, 
3717029; 525572, 3717028; 525572, 3717028; 525572, 3717027; 525571, 
3717027; 525571, 3717026; 525571, 3717026; 525570, 3717025; 525570, 
3717024; 525570, 3717024; 525569, 3717023; 525569, 3717023; 525569, 
3717022; 525568, 3717022; 525568, 3717021; 525567, 3717021; 525567, 
3717020; 525567, 3717020; 525566, 3717019; 525566, 3717019; 525566, 
3717018; 525565, 3717018; 525565, 3717017; 525564, 3717016; 525564, 
3717016; 525564, 3717015; 525563, 3717015; 525563, 3717014; 525563, 
3717014; 525562, 3717013; 525562, 3717013; 525561, 3717012; 525561, 
3717012; 525561, 3717011; 525560, 3717011; 525560, 3717010; 525559, 
3717010; 525559, 3717009; 525559, 3717009; 525558, 3717008; 525558, 
3717008; 525557, 3717007; 525557, 3717007; 525557, 3717006; 525556, 
3717006; 525556, 3717005; 525555, 3717005; 525555, 3717004; 525555, 
3717004; 525554, 3717003; 525554, 3717003; 525553, 3717002; 525553, 
3717002; 525553, 3717001; 525552, 3717001; 525552, 3717000; 525551, 
3717000; 525551, 3716999; 525550, 3716999; 525550, 3716998; 525550, 
3716998; 525549, 3716997; 525549, 3716997; 525548, 3716996; 525548, 
3716996; 525547, 3716995; 525547, 3716995; 525547, 3716994; 525546, 
3716994; 525546, 3716993; 525545, 3716993; 525545, 3716992; 525544, 
3716992; 525544, 3716992; 525543, 3716991; 525543, 3716991; 525542, 
3716990; 525542, 3716990; 525542, 3716989; 525541, 3716989; 525541, 
3716988; 525540, 3716988; 525540, 3716987; 525539, 3716987; 525539, 
3716986; 525538, 3716986; 525538, 3716986; 525537, 3716985; 525537, 
3716985; 525537, 3716984; 525536, 3716984; 525536, 3716983; 525535, 
3716983; 525535, 3716982; 525534, 3716982; 525534, 3716982; 525533, 
3716981; 525533, 3716981; 525532, 3716980; 525532, 3716980; 525531, 
3716979; 525531, 3716979; 525530, 3716979; 525530, 3716978; 525529, 
3716978; 525529, 3716977; 525528, 3716977; 525528, 3716976; 525527, 
3716976; 525527, 3716976; 525526, 3716975; 525526, 3716975; 525525, 
3716974; 525525, 3716974; 525524, 3716974; 525524, 3716973; 525523, 
3716973; 525523, 3716972; 525522, 3716972; 525522, 3716971; 525521, 
3716971; 525521, 3716971; 525520,

[[Page 917]]

3716970; 525520, 3716970; 525519, 3716969; 525519, 3716969; 525518, 
3716969; 525518, 3716968; 525517, 3716968; 525517, 3716967; 525516, 
3716967; 525516, 3716967; 525515, 3716966; 525515, 3716966; 525514, 
3716966; 525514, 3716965; 525513, 3716965; 525513, 3716964; 525512, 
3716964; 525512, 3716964; 525511, 3716963; 525510, 3716963; 525510, 
3716963; 525509, 3716962; 525509, 3716962; 525508, 3716961; 525508, 
3716961; 525507, 3716961; 525507, 3716960; 525506, 3716960; 525506, 
3716960; 525505, 3716959; 525505, 3716959; 525504, 3716959; 525504, 
3716958; 525503, 3716958; 525502, 3716957; 525502, 3716957; 525501, 
3716957; 525501, 3716956; 525500, 3716956; 525500, 3716956; 525499, 
3716955; 525499, 3716955; 525498, 3716955; 525498, 3716954; 525497, 
3716954; 525496, 3716954; 525496, 3716953; 525495, 3716953; 525495, 
3716953; 525494, 3716952; 525494, 3716952; 525493, 3716952; 525492, 
3716951; 525492, 3716951; 525491, 3716951; 525491, 3716950; 525490, 
3716950; 525490, 3716950; 525489, 3716950; 525489, 3716949; 525488, 
3716949; 525487, 3716949; 525487, 3716948; 525486, 3716948; 525486, 
3716948; 525485, 3716947; 525485, 3716947; 525484, 3716947; 525483, 
3716946; 525483, 3716946; 525482, 3716946; 525482, 3716946; 525481, 
3716945; 525480, 3716945; 525480, 3716945; 525479, 3716944; 525479, 
3716944; 525478, 3716944; 525478, 3716944; 525477, 3716943; 525476, 
3716943; 525476, 3716943; 525475, 3716943; 525475, 3716942; 525474, 
3716942; 525473, 3716942; 525473, 3716941; 525472, 3716941; 525472, 
3716941; 525471, 3716941; 525471, 3716940; 525470, 3716940; 525469, 
3716940; 525469, 3716940; 525468, 3716939; 525468, 3716939; 525467, 
3716939; 525466, 3716939; 525466, 3716938; 525465, 3716938; 525465, 
3716938; 525464, 3716938; 525463, 3716937; 525463, 3716937; 525462, 
3716937; 525462, 3716937; 525461, 3716936; 525460, 3716936; 525460, 
3716936; 525459, 3716936; 525458, 3716936; 525458, 3716935; 525457, 
3716935; 525457, 3716935; 525456, 3716935; 525456, 3716935; 525455, 
3716934; 525455, 3716934; 525454, 3716934; 525454, 3716934; 525453, 
3716934; 525453, 3716933; 525452, 3716933; 525452, 3716933; 525451, 
3716933; 525451, 3716932; 525450, 3716932; 525450, 3716932; 525449, 
3716932; 525449, 3716931; 525448, 3716931; 525448, 3716931; 525447, 
3716931; 525446, 3716931; 525446, 3716930; 525445, 3716930; 525445, 
3716930; 525444, 3716930; 525444, 3716929; 525443, 3716929; 525443, 
3716929; 525442, 3716929; 525442, 3716928; 525441, 3716928; 525441, 
3716928; 525440, 3716928; 525440, 3716927; 525439, 3716927; 525439, 
3716927; 525438, 3716927; 525438, 3716926; 525437, 3716926; 525437, 
3716926; 525436, 3716926; 525436, 3716925; 525435, 3716925; 525435, 
3716925; and excluding land bounded by 526091, 3716237; 526123, 3716234; 
526132, 3716233; 526136, 3716233; 526136, 3716292; 526136, 3716423; 
526136, 3716548; 526166, 3716550; 526362, 3716559; 526366, 3716559; 
526374, 3716741; 526380, 3716866; 526386, 3716992; 526278, 3716986; 
526183, 3717080; 526131, 3717037; 526131, 3717037; 526125, 3717031; 
526122, 3716959; 526119, 3716866; 526118, 3716843; 526104, 3716453; 
525716, 3716463; 525596, 3716466; 525300, 3716473; 525291, 3716474; 
525289, 3716474; 525223, 3716474; 525115, 3716474; 525115, 3716382; 
525115, 3716378; 525076, 3716378; 525084, 3716279; 524986, 3716282; 
524885, 3716286; 524875, 3716286; 524875, 3716101; 524875, 3716084; 
524875, 3716082; 525714, 3716048; 525704, 3716201; 525927, 3716254; and 
excluding land bounded by 525777, 3717434; 526121, 3717419; 526120, 
3717641; 525770, 3717647.
    (ii) Note: Unit 7 (Bautista) for the Quino checkerspot butterfly is 
depicted on the map in paragraph (10)(ii) of this entry.
    (8) Unit 8: Otay Unit, San Diego County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 quadrangles Jamul Mountains, Dulzura, Otay 
Mesa, Otay Mountain, and Tecate. Land bounded by the following Universal 
Transverse Mercator (UTM) North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83) 
coordinates (E, N): 505693, 3606447; 505703, 3606427; 505702, 3606427; 
505702, 3606426; 505693, 3606046; 505691, 3605963; 505687, 3605768; 
505677, 3605363; 505668, 3604969; 505635, 3604959; 505560, 3604935; 
505239, 3604836; 505150, 3604808; 505147, 3604807; 505125, 3604572; 
505124, 3604564; 504912, 3604574; 504650, 3604587; 504549, 3604707; 
504464, 3604807; 503596, 3604788; 503441, 3604784; 503423, 3604784; 
502983, 3604518; 502810, 3604205; 502732, 3604207; 502715, 3605000; 
502151, 3605003; 502141, 3605216; 502141, 3605222; 502335, 3605289; 
502913, 3605488; 502919, 3605481; 502922, 3605478; 503260, 3605591; 
503260, 3605593; 503257, 3605604; 503255, 3605606; 503274, 3605613; 
503537, 3605704; 503545, 3605706; 503856, 3605814; 503909, 3605832; 
503935, 3605840; 504176, 3605924; 504337, 3605979; 504546, 3606052; 
504617, 3606076; 504799, 3606141; 505139, 3606262; 505378, 3606338; 
505594, 3606413; 505692, 3606446; 505693, 3606447; thence returning to 
505693, 3606447. Continue to 506421, 3607499; 506490, 3607502; 506512, 
3607503; 506510, 3607549; 506510, 3607549; 506489, 3607885; 506564, 
3607917; 506564, 3607917; 506776, 3608010; 506859, 3608047; 506976, 
3608221; 507010, 3608271; 507025, 3608294; 507168, 3608518; 507452, 
3608739; 507453, 3608758; 507569, 3608830; 507852, 3608932; 507977, 
3608971; 508040, 3609097; 508040, 3609363; 508199, 3609449; 508324, 
3609517; 508518, 3609622; 508714, 3609755; 508740, 3609897; 508745, 
3609928; 508824, 3610006; 508996, 3610006; 509114, 3610061; 509177, 
3610137; 509190, 3610152; 509192, 3610155; 509333, 3610179; 509420, 
3610202; 509490, 3610163; 509537, 3610108; 509537, 3610202; 509553, 
3610351; 509725, 3610390; 509984, 3610508; 510011, 3610531; 510039, 
3610555; 510149, 3610563; 510305, 3610500; 510517, 3610469; 510666, 
3610508; 510713, 3610641; 510792, 3610822; 510828, 3610885; 510909, 
3611025; 510930, 3611061; 511066, 3611284; 511301, 3611402; 511497, 
3611417; 511497, 3611226; 511497, 3611221; 511676, 3611260; 511787, 
3611284; 512102, 3611553; 512218, 3611653; 512210, 3611672; 512171, 
3611755; 512265, 3612060; 512273, 3612311; 512352, 3612421; 512508, 
3612507; 512610, 3612531; 512691, 3612505; 512759, 3612484; 512785, 
3612488; 512844, 3612496; 512872, 3612501; 512916, 3612507; 513018, 
3612593; 513049, 3612664; 513144, 3612719; 513261, 3612742; 513266, 
3612803; 513267, 3612819; 513269, 3612844; 513295, 3612845; 513313, 
3612846; 513418, 3612851; 513457, 3612852; 513567, 3612758; 513567, 
3612664; 513567, 3612523; 513620, 3612383; 513653, 3612295; 513880, 
3612084; 513953, 3612024; 514096, 3611906; 514147, 3611864; 514249, 
3611966; 514177, 3611992; 514163, 3611998; 514139, 3612068; 513990, 
3612209; 513888, 3612217; 513786, 3612350; 513763, 3612499; 513810, 
3612617;

[[Page 918]]

513833, 3612627; 513935, 3612672; 514006, 3612774; 514147, 3612876; 
514148, 3612877; 514232, 3612971; 514280, 3613025; 514335, 3613158; 
514406, 3613236; 514471, 3613282; 514539, 3613330; 514546, 3613351; 
514552, 3613367; 514610, 3613526; 514798, 3613636; 514939, 3613730; 
515036, 3613762; 515127, 3613793; 515179, 3613793; 515192, 3613793; 
515292, 3613793; 515354, 3613848; 515235, 3613960; 515225, 3613970; 
515221, 3613973; 515228, 3613982; 515252, 3614011; 515292, 3614059; 
515297, 3614078; 515307, 3614110; 515322, 3614162; 515331, 3614193; 
515389, 3614212; 515410, 3614219; 515519, 3614255; 515707, 3614342; 
515935, 3614420; 516107, 3614428; 516264, 3614420; 516405, 3614420; 
516562, 3614420; 516686, 3614366; 516687, 3614365; 516716, 3614316; 
516746, 3614265; 516797, 3614177; 516837, 3614113; 516853, 3614086; 
516860, 3614075; 516861, 3614075; 516945, 3614047; 516977, 3614036; 
517103, 3614036; 517346, 3614028; 517487, 3613942; 517491, 3613951; 
517496, 3613962; 517496, 3613962; 517498, 3613967; 517565, 3614114; 
517565, 3614271; 517518, 3614451; 517377, 3614436; 517197, 3614451; 
517024, 3614404; 516899, 3614467; 516711, 3614530; 516687, 3614544; 
516475, 3614671; 516409, 3614712; 516391, 3614722; 516370, 3614735; 
516347, 3614749; 516309, 3614772; 516281, 3614789; 516256, 3614804; 
515982, 3614812; 515903, 3614828; 515793, 3614867; 515648, 3614946; 
515605, 3614969; 515480, 3615118; 515413, 3615147; 515370, 3615165; 
515369, 3615155; 515354, 3615024; 515322, 3614927; 515315, 3614906; 
515221, 3614843; 515237, 3614734; 515307, 3614593; 515323, 3614451; 
515252, 3614279; 515158, 3614224; 515043, 3614170; 515041, 3614169; 
515020, 3614135; 514994, 3614091; 514923, 3614005; 514839, 3613953; 
514781, 3613916; 514759, 3613903; 514737, 3613812; 514737, 3613811; 
514727, 3613769; 514637, 3613726; 514580, 3613699; 514563, 3613691; 
514536, 3613673; 514414, 3613589; 514312, 3613495; 514218, 3613370; 
514188, 3613266; 514177, 3613225; 514163, 3613174; 514100, 3613056; 
514022, 3613017; 513928, 3612938; 513818, 3612821; 513801, 3612835; 
513783, 3612852; 513747, 3612883; 513637, 3613025; 513583, 3613059; 
513490, 3613118; 513488, 3613119; 513421, 3613141; 513371, 3613158; 
513366, 3613135; 513347, 3613056; 513285, 3612993; 513120, 3613072; 
513034, 3612931; 512900, 3612907; 512806, 3612852; 512704, 3612695; 
512553, 3612659; 512540, 3612656; 512391, 3612570; 512226, 3612531; 
512140, 3612413; 512124, 3612295; 512148, 3612123; 512116, 3611958; 
512044, 3611864; 512038, 3611856; 512037, 3611856; 511981, 3611841; 
511930, 3611826; 511842, 3611802; 511764, 3611668; 511682, 3611550; 
511677, 3611543; 511513, 3611551; 511262, 3611512; 511121, 3611425; 
510870, 3611253; 510827, 3611065; 510827, 3611062; 510815, 3611010; 
510799, 3610997; 510643, 3610869; 510509, 3610845; 510376, 3610900; 
510334, 3610910; 510236, 3610934; 510180, 3610947; 510101, 3610938; 
509976, 3610924; 509929, 3610918; 509906, 3610916; 509608, 3610767; 
509563, 3610759; 509562, 3610759; 509294, 3610712; 508996, 3610712; 
508800, 3610775; 508773, 3610776; 508675, 3610783; 508637, 3610786; 
508581, 3610790; 508564, 3610802; 508385, 3610931; 508369, 3611080; 
508361, 3611159; 508354, 3611160; 508344, 3611162; 508226, 3611186; 
508126, 3611206; 508079, 3611300; 508094, 3611508; 508095, 3611512; 
507961, 3611676; 507679, 3611786; 507350, 3611778; 507136, 3611739; 
507067, 3611726; 507052, 3611723; 506926, 3611943; 506853, 3612078; 
506774, 3612225; 506770, 3612233; 506683, 3612319; 506527, 3612374; 
506370, 3612609; 506363, 3612643; 506357, 3612669; 506346, 3612719; 
506354, 3612797; 506383, 3612873; 506346, 3612867; 506269, 3612995; 
506217, 3613021; 506166, 3613008; 506094, 3613153; 506050, 3613240; 
506054, 3613375; 506054, 3613388; 506058, 3613539; 506063, 3613717; 
506075, 3613744; 506153, 3613914; 506176, 3613964; 506269, 3614165; 
506282, 3614194; 506326, 3614368; 506360, 3614505; 506427, 3614773; 
506437, 3614812; 506449, 3615804; 506449, 3615986; 506449, 3615998; 
506617, 3616036; 506765, 3616066; 507068, 3616127; 507175, 3616245; 
507215, 3616290; 507300, 3616384; 507442, 3616642; 507472, 3616667; 
507738, 3616887; 507686, 3617093; 507738, 3617389; 507825, 3617489; 
507918, 3617596; 507934, 3617618; 508086, 3617840; 508315, 3617902; 
508421, 3617931; 508726, 3617837; 508923, 3617776; 509132, 3617601; 
509478, 3617312; 509563, 3617128; 509748, 3616732; 509779, 3616310; 
509813, 3615856; 509392, 3615485; 509271, 3615379; 509234, 3615102; 
509184, 3614742; 509155, 3614529; 509236, 3614331; 509401, 3613929; 
509461, 3613782; 509571, 3613835; 509579, 3613838; 509813, 3613727; 
509982, 3613676; 510097, 3613641; 510615, 3613752; 510972, 3613542; 
511465, 3613197; 511580, 3613165; 511711, 3613129; 511838, 3613094; 
511884, 3613081; 511909, 3613074; 511954, 3613137; 512144, 3613407; 
512183, 3613549; 512214, 3613664; 512279, 3613900; 512345, 3613974; 
512575, 3614233; 512579, 3614376; 512588, 3614689; 512574, 3614758; 
512501, 3615146; 512378, 3615158; 512588, 3615441; 512711, 3615565; 
512945, 3615799; 513026, 3615830; 513204, 3615898; 513401, 3615676; 
513447, 3615669; 513512, 3615659; 513765, 3615620; 513871, 3615620; 
513890, 3615620; 513907, 3615634; 514157, 3615839; 514190, 3615994; 
514215, 3616189; 514286, 3616328; 514299, 3616355; 514300, 3616356; 
514188, 3616418; 514111, 3616472; 514046, 3616517; 513875, 3616716; 
513840, 3616758; 513526, 3617123; 513365, 3617321; 513236, 3617480; 
513229, 3617488; 513293, 3617543; 513417, 3617650; 513458, 3617686; 
513526, 3617695; 513786, 3617729; 513897, 3617788; 513928, 3617804; 
513945, 3617803; 514207, 3617798; 514893, 3617785; 514900, 3617785; 
515006, 3617796; 515058, 3617801; 515165, 3617812; 515236, 3617819; 
515478, 3617844; 515630, 3617859; 515611, 3618107; 515481, 3618107; 
515438, 3618107; 515482, 3618290; 515544, 3618554; 515611, 3618837; 
515605, 3618955; 515593, 3619214; 515528, 3619360; 515478, 3619473; 
515450, 3619536; 515478, 3619550; 515541, 3619583; 515679, 3619654; 
515772, 3619658; 515872, 3619662; 516094, 3619672; 516178, 3619572; 
516230, 3619510; 516354, 3619363; 516425, 3619358; 516661, 3619344; 
516663, 3619344; 517047, 3619350; 517124, 3619367; 517210, 3619385; 
517337, 3619412; 517334, 3619334; 517329, 3619217; 517319, 3618961; 
517571, 3618934; 517757, 3618937; 517982, 3618940; 518000, 3618925; 
518000, 3618875; 518012, 3618865; 518045, 3618837; 518090, 3618817; 
518100, 3618795; 518108, 3618778; 518121, 3618751; 518169, 3618720; 
518234, 3618738; 518243, 3618756; 518252, 3618771; 518306, 3618751; 
518445, 3618664; 518451, 3618660; 518458, 3618544; 518463, 3618469; 
518231, 3618151; 518231, 3618151; 518187, 3618129; 518103, 3617942; 
518229, 3617848; 518229, 3617766; 518232, 3617753; 518303, 3617445; 
518430, 3617371; 518451, 3617359; 518685, 3617100; 518661, 3616792; 
518661, 3616582; 518664, 3616578; 518833, 3616360; 519129, 3616225; 
519232, 3616173; 519425, 3616077;

[[Page 919]]

519610, 3616089; 519795, 3616184; 519850, 3616212; 520042, 3616311; 
520216, 3616298; 520237, 3616289; 520308, 3616194; 520313, 3616187; 
520364, 3616142; 520422, 3616027; 520537, 3615912; 520556, 3615822; 
520556, 3615804; 520556, 3615669; 520563, 3615490; 520581, 3615472; 
520646, 3615406; 520646, 3615406; 520665, 3615323; 520627, 3615272; 
520590, 3615249; 520544, 3615221; 520460, 3615112; 520358, 3615080; 
520269, 3614984; 520246, 3614963; 520166, 3614888; 520083, 3614735; 
519981, 3614619; 519891, 3614543; 519880, 3614539; 519821, 3614517; 
519674, 3614524; 519610, 3614485; 519622, 3614402; 519712, 3614319; 
519643, 3614219; 519642, 3614216; 519386, 3614216; 519386, 3614219; 
519405, 3614383; 519285, 3614385; 519148, 3614387; 519034, 3614389; 
519028, 3614285; 519027, 3614262; 519021, 3614159; 519122, 3614154; 
519149, 3614152; 519148, 3614093; 519143, 3613551; 519166, 3613553; 
519253, 3613560; 519349, 3613567; 519392, 3613570; 519447, 3613531; 
519501, 3613493; 519532, 3613370; 519539, 3613340; 519533, 3613270; 
519528, 3613264; 519469, 3613193; 519398, 3613116; 519290, 3613026; 
519304, 3613009; 519315, 3612994; 519374, 3612994; 519386, 3612994; 
519394, 3612990; 519437, 3612969; 519522, 3612849; 519533, 3612835; 
519622, 3612822; 519680, 3612854; 519744, 3612879; 519750, 3612869; 
519802, 3612777; 519816, 3612712; 519827, 3612662; 519895, 3612614; 
519921, 3612595; 519947, 3612552; 519962, 3612526; 519999, 3612465; 
520035, 3612405; 520085, 3612322; 520188, 3612073; 520193, 3612060; 
520233, 3611964; 520277, 3611901; 520294, 3611876; 520360, 3611781; 
520392, 3611736; 520405, 3611716; 520430, 3611680; 520455, 3611471; 
520559, 3611311; 520640, 3611187; 520686, 3611192; 520899, 3611212; 
521086, 3611255; 521219, 3611286; 521276, 3611358; 521332, 3611382; 
521379, 3611376; 521427, 3611360; 521473, 3611356; 521502, 3611354; 
521619, 3611301; 521669, 3611290; 521760, 3611257; 521773, 3611251; 
521827, 3611224; 521833, 3611173; 521869, 3611162; 521933, 3611109; 
521952, 3611059; 521950, 3611026; 521983, 3611026; 522008, 3610962; 
522002, 3610909; 521922, 3610915; 521925, 3610905; 521938, 3610856; 
521994, 3610865; 521992, 3610842; 521983, 3610767; 522005, 3610678; 
522066, 3610623; 522089, 3610542; 522086, 3610499; 522086, 3610489; 
522032, 3610498; 522005, 3610503; 522000, 3610498; 521983, 3610481; 
521938, 3610489; 521937, 3610478; 521933, 3610425; 521899, 3610436; 
521714, 3610428; 521710, 3610428; 521699, 3610219; 521713, 3610183; 
521728, 3610183; 521778, 3610181; 521801, 3610181; 521813, 3610180; 
521809, 3610177; 521766, 3610133; 521705, 3610125; 521676, 3610087; 
521632, 3610030; 521524, 3609777; 521505, 3609759; 521488, 3609744; 
521477, 3609719; 521469, 3609701; 521454, 3609669; 521452, 3609613; 
521463, 3609521; 521463, 3609396; 521457, 3609341; 521452, 3609293; 
521470, 3609254; 521474, 3609246; 521478, 3608968; 521480, 3608854; 
521447, 3608850; 521393, 3608843; 521393, 3608793; 521413, 3608717; 
521418, 3608695; 521454, 3608676; 521491, 3608590; 521499, 3608523; 
521500, 3608522; 521559, 3608438; 521566, 3608428; 521619, 3608395; 
521691, 3608348; 521752, 3608309; 521758, 3608306; 521759, 3608301; 
521769, 3608247; 521776, 3608196; 521777, 3608189; 521777, 3608181; 
521774, 3608092; 521758, 3608019; 521713, 3607983; 521660, 3607967; 
521566, 3607975; 521557, 3608025; 521613, 3608092; 521474, 3608122; 
521491, 3608067; 521418, 3607914; 521251, 3607978; 521229, 3607922; 
521146, 3607936; 521137, 3607903; 521087, 3607908; 521086, 3607904; 
521073, 3607852; 521123, 3607833; 521146, 3607823; 521193, 3607802; 
521257, 3607772; 521327, 3607752; 521368, 3607752; 521385, 3607722; 
521407, 3607702; 521482, 3607691; 521482, 3607585; 521515, 3607583; 
521533, 3607581; 521552, 3607580; 521557, 3607700; 521558, 3607701; 
521577, 3607789; 521584, 3607796; 521645, 3607867; 521652, 3607875; 
521678, 3607895; 521730, 3607936; 521730, 3607936; 521797, 3607928; 
521866, 3607944; 521911, 3607967; 521914, 3607966; 521944, 3607961; 
522005, 3607947; 522083, 3607925; 522125, 3607916; 522161, 3607903; 
522208, 3607900; 522269, 3607894; 522320, 3607894; 522322, 3607894; 
522406, 3607889; 522500, 3607908; 522561, 3607883; 522586, 3607862; 
522600, 3607850; 522659, 3607844; 522728, 3607844; 522756, 3607847; 
522762, 3607853; 522765, 3607857; 522790, 3607883; 522842, 3607894; 
522887, 3607880; 522910, 3607879; 523001, 3607872; 523011, 3607872; 
523020, 3607872; 523077, 3607872; 523082, 3607872; 523122, 3607900; 
523146, 3607916; 523184, 3607935; 523213, 3607936; 523482, 3607950; 
523517, 3607944; 523877, 3607876; 523877, 3607682; 523877, 3607679; 
523766, 3607383; 523766, 3607278; 523766, 3607136; 523824, 3606885; 
523852, 3606766; 523803, 3606520; 523921, 3606493; 524081, 3606456; 
524234, 3606421; 524481, 3606347; 524690, 3606220; 524765, 3606175; 
524765, 3606016; 524765, 3605928; 524683, 3605828; 524543, 3605657; 
524530, 3605361; 524650, 3605138; 524671, 3605101; 524777, 3604904; 
525282, 3604806; 525578, 3604806; 526035, 3604695; 526230, 3604670; 
526516, 3604633; 526910, 3604411; 527231, 3604029; 527255, 3603647; 
526225, 3603542; 524690, 3603385; 524297, 3603345; 523949, 3603310; 
523903, 3603328; 523826, 3603359; 523716, 3603410; 523605, 3603418; 
523436, 3603359; 523266, 3603322; 523106, 3603322; 523097, 3603322; 
522942, 3603314; 522817, 3603233; 522669, 3603241; 522603, 3603263; 
522456, 3603300; 522213, 3603336; 522043, 3603359; 521851, 3603329; 
521586, 3603373; 521484, 3603416; 521409, 3603447; 521345, 3603523; 
521328, 3603543; 521122, 3603565; 520975, 3603646; 520739, 3603720; 
520709, 3603808; 520677, 3603808; 520628, 3603808; 520540, 3603712; 
520400, 3603543; 520334, 3603432; 520334, 3603410; 520334, 3603300; 
520385, 3603115; 520385, 3603114; 520385, 3603113; 520464, 3603111; 
520464, 3603113; 520474, 3603233; 520584, 3603292; 520761, 3603381; 
520953, 3603432; 521100, 3603395; 521196, 3603336; 521321, 3603189; 
521439, 3603138; 521490, 3603117; 521606, 3603071; 521491, 3603059; 
520456, 3602953; 520365, 3602944; 520029, 3602910; 519965, 3602946; 
519875, 3602981; 519759, 3603027; 519509, 3603020; 519398, 3603049; 
519317, 3603182; 519221, 3603292; 519182, 3603349; 519155, 3603388; 
519140, 3603491; 519133, 3603587; 519079, 3603707; 519185, 3603751; 
519567, 3603838; 519740, 3604109; 519866, 3604132; 520085, 3604171; 
520274, 3604282; 520295, 3604294; 520295, 3604553; 520272, 3604567; 
520011, 3604726; 519849, 3604862; 519616, 3605059; 519843, 3605118; 
520085, 3605182; 520086, 3605197; 520140, 3605842; 520155, 3605855; 
520275, 3606158; 520282, 3606387; 520231, 3606578; 520105, 3606689; 
519958, 3606814; 519910, 3606867; 519828, 3606956; 519789, 3606998; 
519663, 3607212; 519612, 3607448; 519612, 3607683; 519634, 3607809; 
519744, 3608030; 519832, 3608198; 519847, 3608229; 519870, 3608347; 
519865, 3608495; 519862, 3608604; 519833, 3608645; 519796, 3608697; 
519783, 3608702; 519441, 3608846;

[[Page 920]]

519253, 3608924; 519089, 3608934; 519050, 3609038; 518903, 3609193; 
518903, 3609321; 518903, 3609331; 518920, 3609478; 518936, 3609609; 
518830, 3609666; 518749, 3609690; 518724, 3609690; 518664, 3609617; 
518651, 3609601; 518561, 3609584; 518504, 3609690; 518439, 3609764; 
518341, 3609837; 518264, 3609849; 518178, 3609861; 518047, 3609764; 
517933, 3609698; 517786, 3609723; 517705, 3609804; 517566, 3609861; 
517509, 3609919; 517436, 3609992; 517370, 3610049; 517352, 3610083; 
517305, 3610171; 517150, 3610277; 516946, 3610343; 516710, 3610326; 
516660, 3610326; 516555, 3610326; 516473, 3610351; 516482, 3610473; 
516473, 3610579; 516514, 3610734; 516596, 3610791; 516571, 3610864; 
516490, 3611028; 516433, 3611240; 516433, 3611313; 516367, 3611427; 
516270, 3611460; 516188, 3611460; 516074, 3611525; 515878, 3611533; 
515826, 3611533; 515770, 3611533; 515584, 3611582; 515263, 3611582; 
515167, 3611555; 515092, 3611611; 515087, 3611615; 514997, 3611634; 
514932, 3611647; 514810, 3611696; 514688, 3611753; 514590, 3611770; 
514508, 3611639; 514440, 3611602; 514418, 3611590; 514263, 3611566; 
514141, 3611419; 513970, 3611354; 513774, 3611174; 513766, 3611052; 
513766, 3610954; 513760, 3610898; 513660, 3610830; 513636, 3610721; 
513574, 3610447; 513417, 3610447; 513216, 3610447; 512859, 3610238; 
512575, 3609966; 512608, 3609861; 512723, 3609486; 512255, 3609486; 
512057, 3609424; 511687, 3609288; 511661, 3609247; 511515, 3609017; 
511515, 3608758; 511626, 3608413; 511665, 3608355; 511733, 3608254; 
511835, 3608104; 511659, 3607857; 511589, 3607759; 511239, 3607768; 
511108, 3607771; 510454, 3607845; 510023, 3608043; 509996, 3608030; 
509560, 3607827; 509708, 3607543; 509814, 3607452; 509979, 3607309; 
510004, 3607259; 510115, 3607038; 510312, 3606766; 510300, 3606629; 
510288, 3606483; 510522, 3606199; 510732, 3606027; 510584, 3605755; 
510670, 3605484; 510769, 3605213; 510892, 3605077; 510898, 3605077; 
510933, 3605028; 511000, 3604987; 511089, 3604934; 511191, 3604871; 
511191, 3604777; 511207, 3604746; 511325, 3604730; 511427, 3604691; 
511591, 3604542; 511623, 3604416; 511656, 3604360; 511595, 3604177; 
511690, 3604061; 511829, 3603893; 511989, 3603560; 512187, 3603474; 
512433, 3603412; 512483, 3603178; 512483, 3602808; 512544, 3602549; 
512882, 3602163; 511729, 3602052; 511703, 3602049; 511655, 3602045; 
510059, 3601876; 509854, 3601854; 509239, 3601789; 509184, 3601783; 
509184, 3601818; 509184, 3601962; 509153, 3602049; 509148, 3602120; 
509145, 3602158; 509145, 3602237; 509011, 3602455; 509012, 3602480; 
508989, 3602528; 508918, 3602676; 508894, 3602699; 508810, 3602802; 
508785, 3602833; 508696, 3602926; 508636, 3602989; 508447, 3603021; 
508392, 3603076; 508361, 3603107; 508306, 3603201; 508328, 3603322; 
508330, 3603334; 508377, 3603515; 508377, 3603544; 508377, 3603571; 
508377, 3603732; 508377, 3603742; 508397, 3603792; 508413, 3603831; 
508494, 3604032; 508491, 3604051; 508476, 3604148; 508471, 3604181; 
508314, 3604244; 508110, 3604424; 508043, 3604558; 508024, 3604597; 
508061, 3604667; 508087, 3604714; 508133, 3604841; 508162, 3604919; 
508173, 3604949; 508162, 3604969; 508118, 3605051; 508157, 3605263; 
508094, 3605379; 508071, 3605420; 508173, 3605530; 508165, 3605694; 
508165, 3605993; 508165, 3606000; 508146, 3606094; 508126, 3606196; 
508118, 3606197; 508024, 3606209; 507875, 3606227; 507577, 3606220; 
507415, 3606091; 507391, 3606108; 507277, 3606189; 507137, 3606288; 
507023, 3606407; 506982, 3606450; 506870, 3606566; 506836, 3606600; 
506834, 3606602; 506825, 3606607; 506777, 3606635; 506582, 3606751; 
506581, 3606753; 506641, 3606774; 506671, 3606784; 506619, 3606934; 
506589, 3607018; 506430, 3607474; thence returning to 506421, 3607499.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit 8 (Otay) follows:

[[Page 921]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17JN09.006

    (13) Unit 9: La Posta/Campo Unit, San Diego County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 quadrangles Cameron Corners, Live Oak 
Springs, Campo, Tierra Del Sol. Land bounded by the following Universal 
Transverse Mercator (UTM) North American Datum of 1983 (NAD83) 
coordinates (E, N): 555235, 3612703; 555266, 3612642; 555282, 3612538; 
555299, 3612347; 555299, 3612204; 555289, 3612185; 555286, 3612179; 
555258, 3612122; 555255, 3612116; 555250, 3612113; 555196, 3612065; 
555167, 3612040; 555141, 3612041; 554992, 3612051; 554790, 3612076; 
554773, 3612078; 554750, 3612088; 554644, 3612135; 554616, 3612172; 
555239,

[[Page 922]]

3612178; thence returning to 555235, 3612703. Continue to 556851, 
3611831; 556851, 3611792; 556854, 3611388; 556857, 3610862; 556857, 
3610859; 556859, 3610589; 556859, 3610438; 556861, 3609806; 556861, 
3609643; 556862, 3608972; 556862, 3608918; 556767, 3608971; 556662, 
3609029; 556154, 3609661; 556051, 3609942; 555876, 3610417; 555985, 
3610583; 556046, 3610677; 556107, 3610771; 556044, 3611140; 556015, 
3611311; 556008, 3611382; 555969, 3611769; 556037, 3611820; 556037, 
3611884; 556041, 3611885; 556101, 3611901; 556214, 3611905; 556239, 
3611937; 556313, 3611993; 556440, 3612043; 556442, 3612043; 556511, 
3612053; 556578, 3611968; 556613, 3611912; 556684, 3611841; 556758, 
3611806; 556815, 3611806; 556832, 3611806; thence returning to 556851, 
3611831. Continue to 559269, 3608184; 559129, 3608366; 558512, 3608706; 
557788, 3608752; 557674, 3608729; 557672, 3608729; 557672, 3608979; 
557672, 3608979; 557793, 3608980; 558433, 3608985; 559266, 3608992; 
559267, 3608896; 559267, 3608810; 559267, 3608809; 559268, 3608585; 
559268, 3608448; 559268, 3608441; thence returning to 559269, 3608184. 
Continue to 551183, 3617445; 551182, 3617374; 550771, 3617373; 550851, 
3617445; 551067, 3617445; thence returning to 551183, 3617445. Continue 
to 551992, 3617445; 552177, 3617445; 552670, 3617384; 552673, 3617382; 
552808, 3617319; 552870, 3617290; 552901, 3617276; 552934, 3617205; 
552977, 3617113; 553009, 3617045; 553009, 3617022; 553009, 3616930; 
553009, 3616705; 553009, 3616544; 553009, 3616397; 553101, 3616282; 
553194, 3616166; 553285, 3616149; 553340, 3616138; 553348, 3616137; 
553528, 3615859; 553528, 3615738; 553210, 3615735; 553209, 3616137; 
553101, 3616137; 552875, 3616135; 552874, 3616544; 552873, 3616927; 
552873, 3616929; 552873, 3616929; 552872, 3616985; 552810, 3616984; 
552398, 3616983; 552252, 3616983; 551991, 3616983; thence returning to 
551992, 3617445. Continue to 556827, 3615793; 556828, 3615737; 556830, 
3615408; 556831, 3614590; 556831, 3614555; 556816, 3614517; 556830, 
3614504; 556831, 3614197; 556833, 3613792; 556834, 3613792; 556835, 
3613521; 556835, 3613453; 556837, 3613299; 556840, 3612986; 556840, 
3612930; 556842, 3612930; 556843, 3612929; 556844, 3612929; 556844, 
3612927; 556844, 3612927; 556802, 3612921; 556740, 3612911; 556636, 
3612867; 556619, 3612703; 556553, 3612654; 556515, 3612626; 556479, 
3612608; 556444, 3612590; 556423, 3612580; 556416, 3612577; 556521, 
3612314; 556400, 3612275; 556307, 3612263; 556206, 3612250; 556186, 
3612248; 556121, 3612242; 556039, 3612202; 556022, 3612193; 556018, 
3612187; 555967, 3612111; 555748, 3612067; 555710, 3612089; 555707, 
3612183; 555704, 3612270; 555660, 3612423; 555647, 3612445; 555602, 
3612514; 555590, 3612533; 555584, 3612544; 555577, 3612572; 555545, 
3612703; 555507, 3612900; 555458, 3613294; 555375, 3613607; 555290, 
3613781; 555280, 3613802; 555260, 3614054; 555275, 3614501; 555306, 
3614948; 555310, 3614990; 555337, 3615287; 555386, 3615398; 555506, 
3615673; 555626, 3615927; 555679, 3616039; 555707, 3616099; 555753, 
3616197; 556016, 3616272; 556184, 3616320; 556215, 3616306; 556416, 
3616218; 556437, 3616209; 556570, 3616151; thence returning to 556827, 
3615793. Continue to 551599, 3614195; 551570, 3614263; 551570, 3614263; 
551526, 3614370; 551520, 3614383; 551521, 3614511; 551527, 3615370; 
551528, 3615536; 551160, 3615550; 551160, 3615696; 551159, 3616111; 
551186, 3616112; 551566, 3616122; 551567, 3615699; 551568, 3615371; 
551570, 3614568; 551600, 3614567; 551600, 3614481; 551600, 3614370; 
551599, 3614263; thence returning to 551599, 3614195. Continue to 
554425, 3615730; 554441, 3615730; 554522, 3615639; 554643, 3615503; 
554669, 3615392; 554705, 3615241; 554703, 3615200; 554693, 3614945; 
554663, 3614637; 554666, 3614487; 554669, 3614396; 554795, 3614111; 
554836, 3614027; 554844, 3614011; 554957, 3613779; 555058, 3613574; 
555093, 3613469; 555125, 3613372; 554837, 3613372; 554834, 3613779; 
554437, 3613777; 554435, 3613777; 554434, 3613580; 554432, 3613580; 
554433, 3613380; 554434, 3613175; 554435, 3613041; 554435, 3612974; 
554436, 3612795; 554436, 3612774; 554437, 3612565; 554439, 3612565; 
554440, 3612406; 554440, 3612406; 554408, 3612449; 554411, 3612565; 
554418, 3612773; 554419, 3612804; 554427, 3613038; 554432, 3613175; 
554433, 3613218; 554175, 3613196; 554175, 3613378; 554175, 3613578; 
554175, 3613771; 554102, 3613775; 554103, 3613775; 554432, 3613777; 
554433, 3613777; 554429, 3614501; 554429, 3614578; 554425, 3615390; 
554421, 3615720; 554425, 3615720; thence returning to 554425, 3615730. 
Continue to 551780, 3613764; 551611, 3614166; 552008, 3614166; 552272, 
3614167; 552418, 3614167; 552419, 3613766; 552275, 3613766; 552008, 
3613765; thence returning to 551780, 3613764. Continue to 553772, 
3613773; 553780, 3613744; 553775, 3613536; 553615, 3613536; 553617, 
3613402; 553617, 3613401; 553617, 3613344; 553549, 3613376; 553194, 
3613222; 552815, 3613352; 552815, 3613352; 552819, 3613767; 553417, 
3613772; 553612, 3613773; 553772, 3613774; thence returning to 553772, 
3613773.
    (ii) Note: Map of Unit 9 (La Posta/Campo) follows:

[[Page 923]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR17JN09.007

    (14) Unit 10: Jacumba Unit, San Diego County, California.
    (i) From USGS 1:24,000 quadrangles Jacumba, and Jacumba OE S. Land 
bounded by the following Universal Transverse Mercator (UTM) North 
American Datum of 1983 (NAD83) coordinates (E, N): 573863, 3613297; 
574023, 3613274; 574161, 3613286; 574253, 3613292; 574396, 3613303; 
574510, 3613303; 574638, 3613245; 574759, 3613218; 574955, 3613176; 
575272, 3612817; 575656, 3612485; 575643, 3612410; 575643, 3612410; 
575586, 3612080; 575458, 3612014; 575458, 3612014;

[[Page 924]]

575439, 3612004; 575439, 3612004; 575245, 3611903; 575131, 3611815; 
575017, 3611638; 575017, 3611608; 575017, 3611608; 575017, 3611404; 
574935, 3611182; 575207, 3610803; 575428, 3610462; 575453, 3610310; 
575637, 3610253; 575798, 3610029; 575798, 3610029; 575801, 3610025; 
575696, 3609704; 575637, 3609610; 575634, 3609606; 575431, 3609284; 
575322, 3609111; 575204, 3608925; 575204, 3608842; 575204, 3608780; 
575204, 3608757; 575204, 3608606; 575204, 3608573; 575204, 3608558; 
575172, 3608561; 574790, 3608586; 574711, 3608610; 574601, 3608645; 
574490, 3608679; 574390, 3608710; 574377, 3608716; 574203, 3608800; 
574198, 3608803; 574018, 3608889; 573950, 3608954; 573770, 3609124; 
573586, 3609379; 573412, 3609620; 573227, 3609838; 573109, 3609978; 
573149, 3610253; 573259, 3610819; 573038, 3611122; 573002, 3611221; 
572980, 3611281; 572926, 3611429; 572872, 3611577; 572831, 3611688; 
572824, 3611763; 572807, 3611925; 572803, 3611958; 572762, 3612351; 
572770, 3612391; 572850, 3612772; 572860, 3612821; 573028, 3613163; 
573037, 3613182; 573049, 3613205; 573238, 3613440; 573433, 3613566; 
573668, 3613480; 573731, 3613440; 573737, 3613337; thence returning to 
573863, 3613297.
    (ii) Note: Unit 10 (Jacumba) for the Quino checkerspot butterfly is 
depicted on the map in paragraph (13)(ii) of this entry.

             Hine's Emerald Dragonfly (Somatochlora hineana)

    (1) Critical habitat units are depicted for Cook, DuPage, and Will 
Counties in Illinois; Alpena, Mackinac, and Presque Isle Counties in 
Michigan; Crawford, Dent, Iron, Phelps, Reynolds, Ripley, Washington, 
and Wayne Counties in Missouri; and Door and Ozaukee Counties in 
Wisconsin, on the maps below.
    (2) The primary constituent elements of critical habitat for the 
Hine's emerald dragonfly are:
    (i) For egg deposition and larval growth and development:
    (A) Organic soils (histosols, or with organic surface horizon) 
overlying calcareous substrate (predominantly dolomite and limestone 
bedrock);
    (B) Calcareous water from intermittent seeps and springs and 
associated shallow, small, slow-flowing streamlet channels, rivulets, 
and/or sheet flow within fens;
    (C) Emergent herbaceous and woody vegetation for emergence 
facilitation and refugia;
    (D) Occupied burrows maintained by crayfish for refugia; and
    (E) Prey base of aquatic macroinvertebrates, including mayflies, 
aquatic isopods, caddisflies, midge larvae, and aquatic worms.
    (ii) For adult foraging, reproduction, dispersal, and refugia 
necessary for roosting, for resting, for adult females to escape from 
male harassment, and for predator avoidance (especially during the 
vulnerable teneral stage):
    (A) Natural plant communities near the breeding/larval habitat which 
may include fen, marsh, sedge meadow, dolomite prairie, and the fringe 
(up to 328 ft (100 m)) of bordering shrubby and forested areas with open 
corridors for movement and dispersal; and
    (B) Prey base of small, flying insect species (e.g., dipterans).
    (3) Critical habitat does not include human-made structures existing 
on the effective date of this rule and not containing one or more of the 
primary constituent elements, such as buildings, lawns, old fields, hay 
meadows, fallow crop fields, manicured lawns, pastures, piers and docks, 
aqueducts, airports, and roads, and the land on which such structures 
are located. We define ``old field'' here as cleared areas that were 
formerly forested and may have been used as crop or pasture land that 
currently support a mixture of native and nonnative herbs and low 
shrubs. ``Fallow field'' is defined as a formerly plowed field that has 
been left unseeded for a season or more and is presently uncultivated. 
In addition, critical habitat does not include open-water areas (i.e., 
areas beyond the zone of emergent vegetation) of lakes and ponds.
    (4) Critical habitat map units. Data layers defining map units were 
created on a base of USGS 7.5' quadrangles, and critical habitat units 
were then mapped using Geographical Information Systems, Universal 
Transverse Mercator (UTM) coordinates. Critical habitat units are 
described using the public land survey system (township (T), range (R) 
and section (Sec.)).
    (5) Note: Index map of critical habitat units (Index map) follows:

[[Page 925]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23AP10.000

    (6) Illinois Units 1 through 7, Cook, DuPage, and Will Counties, 
                                Illinois.

    (i) Illinois Unit 1: Will County. Located in T36N, R10E, Sec. 22, 
Sec. 27, SE1/4 NE1/4 Sec. 28, NE1/4 SE1/4 Sec. 28, NW1/4 NW1/4 Sec. 34 
of the Joliet 7.5' USGS topographic quadrangle. Land south of Illinois 
State Route 7, east of Illinois State Route 53, and west of the Des 
Plaines River.

[[Page 926]]

    (ii) Illinois Unit 2: Will County. Located in T36N, R10E, Sec. 3, 
NW1/4 E1/2 Sec. 10, E1/2 Sec. 15 of the Romeoville and Joliet 7.5' USGS 
topographic quadrangles. Land east of Illinois State Route 53, and west 
of the Des Plaines River.
    (iii) Illinois Unit 3: Will County. Located in T37N, R10E, SW1/4 
Sec. 26, NW1/4 SE1/4 Sec. 26, E1/2 Sec. 34, W1/2 NW 1/4 Sec. 35 of the 
Romeoville 7.5' USGS topographic quadrangle. Land west and north of the 
Des Plaines River and north of East Romeoville Road.
    (iv) Illinois Unit 4: Will and Cook Counties. Located in T37N, R10E, 
S1/2 NE1/4 Sec. 24, W1/2 SW1/4 Sec. 24, SE1/4 Sec. 24 and T37N, R11E, 
SW1/4 SW1/4 Sec. 17, Sec. 19, NW1/4 Sec. 20 of the Romeoville 7.5' USGS 
topographic quadrangle. Land to the south of Bluff Road, west of Lemont 
Road, and north of the Des Plaines River.
    (v) Illinois Unit 5: DuPage County. Located in T37N, R11E, NW1/4 
Sec. 15, NW1/4 SW1/4 Sec. 15, S1/2 NE1/4 Sec. 16, SW1/4 Sec. 16, N1/2 
SE1/4 Sec. 16, SE1/4 Sec. 17 of the Sag Bridge 7.5' USGS topographic 
quadrangle. Land to the north of the Des Plaines River.
    (vi) Illinois Unit 6: Cook County. Located in T37N, R12E, S1/2 Sec. 
16, S1/2 NE1/4 Sec. 17, N1/2 SE1/4 Sec. 17, N1/2 Sec. 21 of the Sag 
Bridge and Palos Park 7.5' USGS topographic quadrangles. Land to the 
north of the Calumet Sag Channel, south of 107th Street, and east of 
U.S. Route 45.
    (vii) Illinois Unit 7: Will County. Located in T36N, R10E, W1/2 Sec. 
1, Sec. 2, N1/2 Sec. 11 of the Romeoville and Joliet 7.5' USGS 
topographic quadrangles. Land east of the Illinois and Michigan Canal.
    (viii) Note: Map of Illinois Units 1 through 7 (Illinois Map 1) 
follows:

[[Page 927]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23AP10.001

         (7) Michigan Units 1 and 2, Mackinac County, Michigan.

    (i) Michigan Unit 1: Mackinac County. The unit is located 
approximately 2 miles north of the village of St. Ignace. The unit 
contains all of T41N, R4W, Secs. 3, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11, 14, 15, 16, 23; 
portions of T41N, R4W, Secs. 4, 7, 17, 18, 22, 24, 25, 26, 27; and T41N, 
R5W, Secs. 1 and 12 of the Moran and Evergreen Shores 7.5' USGS 
topographic quadrangles. The unit is west of I-75, east of Brevort Lake, 
and north of Castle Rock Road.
    (ii) Michigan Unit 2: Mackinac County. The unit is located 
approximately 2 miles north of the village of St. Ignace. The unit 
contains all of T41N, R3W, Sec. 6; portions of

[[Page 928]]

T41N, R4W, Secs. 1, 12, 13, 24; portions of T41N, R3W, Secs. 4, 5, 7; 
and portions of T42N, R3W, Sec. 31 of the Evergreen Shores 7.5' USGS 
topographic quadrangle. The unit is west of Lake Huron and east of I-75.

   (iii) Note: Map of Michigan Units 1 and 2 (Michigan Map 1) follows:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23AP10.002


[[Page 929]]



             (8) Michigan Unit 3, Mackinac County, Michigan.

    (i) Michigan Unit 3: Mackinac County. Located on the east end of 
Bois Blanc Island. Bois Blanc Island has not adopted an addressing 
system using the public land survey system. The unit is located in 
Government Lots 25 and 26 of the Cheboygan and McRae Bay 7.5' USGS 
topographic quadrangles. The unit extends from approximately Walker's 
Point south to Rosie Point on the west side of Bob-Lo Drive. It extends 
from the road approximately 328 ft (100 m) to the west.

       (ii) Note: Map of Michigan Unit 3 (Michigan Map 2) follows:

[[Page 930]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23AP10.003

           (9) Michigan Unit 4, Presque Isle County, Michigan.

    (i) Michigan Unit 4: Presque Isle County. Located approximately 12 
miles southeast of the village of Rogers City. The unit contains all of 
T34N, R7E, SW1/4 SW1/4 Sec. 14, SW1/4 NW1/4 Sec. 15, NE1/4 SW1/4 Sec. 
15, NW1/4 SE1/4 Sec. 15, NW1/4 SW1/4 Sec. 15, SE1/4 SE1/4 Sec. 15, NW1/4 
NE1/4 Sec. 16, NE1/4 NW1/4 Sec. 16, SE1/4 NE1/4 Sec. 16, and NW1/4 NW1/4 
Sec. 23. It also contains portions of T34N, R7E, all 1/4 sections in 
Secs. 15, all 1/4 sections in Sec. 16, SE1/4 and SW1/4 Sec. 9, SW1/

[[Page 931]]

4 Sec. 10, SW1/4 Sec. 14, NE1/4 Sec. 22, NW1/4 and NE1/4 Sec. 23 of the 
Thompson's Harbor 7.5' USGS topographic quadrangle. The northern 
boundary of the unit is Lake Huron and the southern boundary is north of 
M-23.

       (ii) Note: Map of Michigan Unit 4 (Michigan Map 3) follows:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23AP10.004


[[Page 932]]



             (10) Michigan Unit 5, Alpena County, Michigan.

    (i) Michigan Unit 5: Alpena County. Located approximately 9 miles 
northeast of the village of Alpena. The unit contains all of T31N, R9E, 
SE1/4 SW1/4 Sec 9. It also contains portions of T31N, R9E, NW1/4 SW1/4 
Sec. 9, NE1/4 SW1/4 Sec. 9, SW1/4 SW1/4 Sec. 9, SW1/4 SE1/4 Sec 9; and 
portions of T31N, R9E, NE1/4 NW1/4 Sec. 16, NW1/4 NE1/4 Sec. 16, NW1/4 
NW1/4 Sec. 16 of the 7.5' USGS topographic quadrangle North Point 
7.5[min] USGS topographic quadrangle. North Point Road is east of the 
area.

       (ii) Note: Map of Michigan Unit 5 (Michigan Map 4) follows:

[[Page 933]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23AP10.005

             (11) Michigan Unit 6, Alpena County, Michigan.

    (i) Michigan Unit 6: Alpena County. Located approximately 5 miles 
east of the village of Alpena. The unit contains all of T31N, R9E, SW1/4 
SE1/4 Sec. 27. It also contains portions of T31N, R9E, NW1/4 SE1/4 Sec. 
27, NE1/4 SW1/4 Sec. 27, SE1/4 SW1/4 Sec. 27, SE1/4 SE1/4 Sec. 27; 
portions of T31N, R9E, NE1/4 NW1/4 Sec. 34, NW1/4 NE1/4 Sec. 34, NE1/4 
NE1/4 Sec. 34; and portions of T31N, R9E, NW1/4 NW1/4 Sec. 35, NE1/4 
NW1/4, NW1/4 NE1/

[[Page 934]]

4 Sec. 35 of the North Point 7.5' USGS topographic quadrangle. Lake 
Huron is the east boundary of the unit.

       (ii) Note: Map of Michigan Unit 6 (Michigan Map 5) follows:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23AP10.006


[[Page 935]]



            (12) Missouri Unit 1, Crawford County, Missouri.

    (i) Missouri Unit 1: Crawford County. Located in T35N, R3W, Secs. 22 
and 23 of the Viburnum West 7.5' USGS topographic quadrangle. Missouri 
Unit 1 is associated with James Creek and is located approximately 1.5 
miles west of Billard, Missouri.

       (ii) Note: Map of Missouri Unit 1 (Missouri Map 1) follows:

[[Page 936]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23AP10.007

          (13) Missouri Units 2a and 4, Dent County, Missouri.

    (i) Missouri Unit 2a: Dent County. Located in T34N, R3W, Secs. 3 and 
4 of the Howes Mill Spring 7.5' USGS topographic quadrangle. Missouri 
Unit 2a is associated with an unnamed tributary to West Fork Huzzah 
Creek and is located approximately 2.5 air

[[Page 937]]

miles north of the village of Howes Mill, Missouri adjacent to county 
road 438.
    (ii) Missouri Unit 4: Dent County. Located in T34N, R4W, Secs. 15 
and 22 of the Howes Mill Spring 7.5' USGS topographic quadrangle. 
Missouri Unit 4 is associated with a tributary of Hutchins Creek in 
Fortune Hollow and is located approximately 1 mile east of the juncture 
of Highway 72 and Route MM.

  (iii) Note: Map of Missouri Units 2a and 4 (Missouri Map 2) follows:

[[Page 938]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23AP10.008


[[Page 939]]



              (14) Missouri Unit 5, Iron County, Missouri.

    (i) Missouri Unit 5: Iron County. Located in T34N, R1W, Sec. 17of 
the Viburnum East 7.5' USGS topographic quadrangle. Missouri Unit 5 is 
located adjacent to Neals Creek and Neals Creek Road, approximately 2.5 
miles southeast of Bixby.

       (ii) Note: Map of Missouri Unit 5 (Missouri Map 3) follows:

[[Page 940]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23AP10.009

             (15) Missouri Unit 7, Phelps County, Missouri.

    (i) Missouri Unit 7: Phelps County. Located in T36N, R9W, Sec. 9 of 
the Kaintuck Hollow 7.5' USGS topographic quadrangle. Missouri Unit 7 is 
associated with Kaintuck Hollow and a tributary of Mill Creek, and is 
located

[[Page 941]]

approximately 4 miles south southwest of the town of Newburg.

       (ii) Note: Map of Missouri Unit 7 (Missouri Map 4) follows:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23AP10.010


[[Page 942]]



        (16) Missouri Units 8and 11a, Reynolds County, Missouri.

    (i) Missouri Unit 8: Reynolds County. Located in T32N, R2W, Sec. 22, 
southeast 1/4, southwest 1/4 of the Bunker 7.5' USGS topographic 
quadrangle. Missouri Unit 8 is adjacent to Bee Fork Creek and is located 
approximately 3 miles east of Bunker.
    (ii) Missouri Unit 11a: Reynolds County. Located in T32N, R1W, Sec. 
30 of the Corridon 7.5' USGS topographic quadrangle. Missouri Unit 11 is 
located approximately 1 mile east of the intersection of Route TT and 
Highway 72, extending north to the Bee Fork Church on County Road 854.

  (iii) Note: Map of Missouri Units 8 and 11a (Missouri Map 5) follows:

[[Page 943]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23AP10.011


[[Page 944]]



             (17) Missouri Unit 21, Ripley County, Missouri.

    (i) Missouri Unit 21: Ripley County. Located in T23N, R1W, Sec. 23 
of the Bardley 7.5' USGS topographic quadrangle. Missouri Unit 21 is 
associated with an unnamed tributary of Fourche Creek and is located 
approximately 12 miles west of Doniphan.

      (ii) Note: Map of Missouri Unit 21 (Missouri Map 6) follows:

[[Page 945]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23AP10.012

     (18) Missouri Units 23 through 25, Washington County, Missouri.

    (i) Missouri Units 23 and 24: Washington County. Located in T36N, 
R1W, Sec. 13 of the Palmer 7.5' USGS topographic quadrangle. Missouri 
Units 23 and 24 comprise the Towns Branch and Welker Fen complex and are 
located near the town of Palmer.

[[Page 946]]

    (ii) Missouri Unit 25: Washington County. Located in T36N, R1W, 
Secs. 2 and 11 of the Courtois 7.5' USGS topographic quadrangle. 
Missouri Unit 25 is associated with a tributary of Hazel Creek and is 
located approximately 1.5 miles northwest of the town of Palmer.

    (iii) Note: Map of Missouri Units 23 through 25 (Missouri Map 7) 
                                follows:

[[Page 947]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23AP10.013


[[Page 948]]



              (19) Missouri Unit 26, Wayne County, Missouri

    (i) Missouri Unit 26: Wayne County. Located in T27N, R4E, Sec. 33 of 
the Ellsinore 7.5' USGS topographic quadrangle. Missouri Unit 26 is 
located near Williamsville and is associated with Brushy Creek.

      (ii) Note: Map of Missouri Unit 26 (Missouri Map 8) follows:

[[Page 949]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23AP10.014


[[Page 950]]



            (20) Missouri Unit 27, Crawford County, Missouri.

    (i) Missouri Unit 27: Crawford County. Located on the Courtois 
quadrangle in Township 36 north, Range 2 west, section 14, northeast 1/
4, southwest 1/4, northwest 1/4.

      (ii) Note: Map of Missouri Unit 27 (Missouri Map 9) follows:

[[Page 951]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23AP10.015

             (21) Wisconsin Unit 1, Door County, Wisconsin.

    (i) Wisconsin Unit 1: Washington Island, Door County. Located in 
T33N, R30E, W1/2 and NE1/4 Sec. 4, SE1/4 Sec. 5 of Washington Island SE 
and Washington Island NE 7.5' USGS topographic quadrangles. Lands 
included are located adjacent to and west of

[[Page 952]]

Wickman Road, south of Town Line Road, East of Deer Lane and East Side 
Roads, north of Lake View Road and include Big Marsh and Little Marsh.

      (ii) Note: Map of Wisconsin Unit 1 (Wisconsin Map 1) follows
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23AP10.016


[[Page 953]]



             (22) Wisconsin Unit 2, Door County, Wisconsin.

    (i) Wisconsin Unit 2: Door County. Located in T32N, R28E, SE 1/4 
Sec. 11, NW 1/4 Sec. 13, NE1/4 Sec. 14 of the Ellison Bay 7.5' USGS 
topographic quadrangle, and in T32N, R28E, W1/2 Sec. 13, E 1/2 Sec. 14, 
NE1/4 Sec. 23, portions of each 1/4 of Sec. 24, N1/2 Sec. 25, and T32N, 
R29E, S1/2 Sec. 19, W1/2 Sec. 29, NE1/4 Sec. 30 of Sister Bay 7.5' USGS 
topographic quadrangle. Lands included are located east of the Village 
of Ellison Bay, south of Garrett Bay Road and Mink River Roads, North of 
County Road ZZ, west of Badger Road, County Road NP and Juice Mill Road, 
and includes the Mink River.

      (ii) Note: Map of Wisconsin Unit 2 (Wisconsin Map 2) follows:

[[Page 954]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23AP10.017

        (23) Wisconsin Units 3 through 7, Door County, Wisconsin.

    (i) Wisconsin Unit 3: Door County. Located in T31N R28E, S 1/2 S10, 
NE 1/4 S15 of Sister Bay 7.5' USGS topographic quadrangle. Lands 
included are located south of County Road ZZ, north of North Bay (Lake 
Michigan), west of North Bay Road, east of Old Stage Road and about two 
miles east of the

[[Page 955]]

Village of Sister Bay and include a portion of Three-Springs Creek.
    (ii) Wisconsin Unit 4: Door County. Located in T31N, R28E, SW1/4 and 
S1/2 Sec. 15, portions of each 1/4 of Sec. 22, and N1/2 of Sec. 23 of 
the Sister Bay 7.5' USGS topographic quadrangle. Lands are located along 
the north and northwest sides of North Bay (Lake Michigan).
    (iii) Wisconsin Unit 5: Door County. Located in T31N, R28E, S1/2 
Sec. 20, E1/2 Sec. 29, NW1/4 and S1/2 Sec. 28, N1/2 and SE1/4 Sec. 33, 
and W1/2 Sec. 34. It also is located in T30N, R28E, W1/2 Sec. 3, E1/2 
and SW1/4 Sec. 4, SE1/4 Sec. 8, Sec. 9, N1/2 Sec. 10, W1/2 and SE 1/4 
Sec.15, Sec. 16, and Sec. 17 of the Baileys Harbor East, and Sister Bay 
7.5' USGS topographic quadrangles. Lands located south of German Road, 
east of State Highway 57, west of North Bay Drive, Sunset Drive and 
Moonlight Bay (Lake Michigan), north of Ridges Road and Point Drive and 
include Mud Lake and Reiboldt Creek.
    (iv) Wisconsin Unit 6: Door County. Located in T30N, R28E, portions 
of each 1/4 of Sec. 5 of the Baileys Harbor East 7.5' USGS topographic 
quadrangle and Baileys Harbor West 7.5' USGS topographic quadrangle. 
Lands are located about 2 1/4 miles north of the Town of Baileys Harbor, 
east of State Highway 57, south of Meadow Road and are associated with 
an unnamed stream.
    (v) Wisconsin Unit 7: Door County. Located in T30N, R27E, Sec. 11, 
SW1/4 Sec. 13, and N1/2 and SE 1/4 Sec. 14 of the Baileys Harbor West 
7.5' USGS topographic quadrangle. Lands are located north of County Road 
EE, east of County Road A and west of South Highland and High Plateau 
Roads, about two miles northeast of Town of Baileys Harbor and are 
associated with the headwaters of Piel Creek.

(vi) Note: Map of Wisconsin Units 3 through 7 (Wisconsin Map 3) follows:

[[Page 956]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23AP10.018


[[Page 957]]



             (24) Wisconsin Unit 8, Door County, Wisconsin.

    (i) Wisconsin Unit 8: Door County. Located in T28N, R27E, S1/2 Sec. 
16, N1/2 Sec. 21 of the Jacksonport 7.5' USGS topographic quadrangle. 
Lands are located east of Bechtel Road, South of Whitefish Bay Road, 
west of Glidden Drive and include Arbter Lake.

      (ii) Note: Map of Wisconsin Unit 8 (Wisconsin Map 4) follows:

[[Page 958]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23AP10.019

             (25) Wisconsin Unit 9, Door County, Wisconsin.

    (i) Wisconsin Unit 9: Door County, Wisconsin. Located in T27N, R24E, 
SE1/4 Sec.16, E1/2 Sec. 20, portions of each 1/4 of Secs. 21, 28 and 33, 
NW1/4 and S1/2 Sec. 34. Also located in T26N, R24E, NW1/4 Sec. 3 of the 
Little Sturgeon 7.5' USGS topographic quadrangle.

[[Page 959]]

Lands are located west of Pickeral Road and Cedar Lane, north of State 
Highway 57, east of Hilly Ridge Road and County Road C, south of Fox 
Lane Road, about 1.5 miles southwest of Little Sturgeon Bay (Lake 
Michigan) and include portions of Keyes Creek and associated wetlands.

      (ii) Note: Map of Wisconsin Unit 9 (Wisconsin Map 5) follows:

[[Page 960]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23AP10.020

           (26) Wisconsin Unit 10, Ozaukee County, Wisconsin.

    (i) Wisconsin Unit 10: Ozaukee County. Located in T11N, R21E, E1/2 
of Sec. 20, portions of each 1/4 of Sec. 21, W1/2 Sec. 28, Sec. 29, E1/2 
Sec. 30, E1/2 and portions of NW1/4 and SW1/4 Sec. 31, Sec. 32, and W1/2 
Sec. 33 of the Cedarburg, Five Corners, Newburg, and Port

[[Page 961]]

Washington West 7.5' USGS topographic quadrangles. Lands are located 
south of State Highway 33, east of County Road Y and Birchwood Road, 
north of Cedar Sauk Road about 2 miles west of Saukville, and includes 
the majority of Cedarburg Bog.

     (ii) Note: Map of Wisconsin Unit 10 (Wisconsin Map 6) follows:

[[Page 962]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23AP10.021

             (27) Wisconsin Unit 11, Door County, Wisconsin.

    (i) Wisconsin Unit 11: Door County. Located in T27N, R26E, SE 1/4 
Sec. 11, Sec. 12, NW 1/4 Sec. 13, and NE 1/4 Sec. 14 of the Sturgeon Bay 
East 7.5' USGS topographic quadrangle. Lands are located south of County

[[Page 963]]

Road TT, east of Mathey Road, north of Buffalo Ridge Trail, west of Lake 
Forest Park Road (also County Road TT), about 11/2 miles west of the 
City of Sturgeon Bay, and include portions of Kellner's Fen.

     (ii) Note: Map of Wisconsin Unit 11 (Wisconsin Map 7) follows:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR23AP10.022


[[Page 964]]



              Hawaiian picture-wing fly (Drosophila aglaia)

    (1) Critical habitat units are depicted for County of Honolulu, 
island of Oahu, Hawaii, on the maps below.
    (2) The primary constituent elements of critical habitat for 
Drosophila aglaia are:
    (i) Dry to mesic, lowland, Diospyros sp., ohia and koa forest 
between the elevations of 1,865-2,985 ft (568-910 m); and
    (ii) The larval host plant Urera glabra, which exhibits one or more 
life stages (from seedlings to senescent individuals).
    (3) Critical habitat does not include manmade structures (such as 
buildings, aqueducts, airports, and roads) and the land on which they 
are located existing within the legal boundaries on the effective date 
of this rule.
    (4) Critical habitat map units. Coordinates are in Universal 
Transverse Mercator (UTM) Zone 4 with units in meters using North 
American Datum of 1983 (NAD83).
    (5) Note: Index map of critical habitat units for Drosophila aglaia 
follows:

[[Page 965]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE08.000

    (6) Drosophila aglaia--Unit 1--Palikea, City and County of Honolulu, 
island of Oahu, Hawaii.
    (i) Land bounded by the following coordinates: 593529, 2367854; 
593448, 2367801; 593302, 2367874; 593242, 2367927; 593193, 2367967; 
593165, 2368065; 593217, 2368150; 593314, 2368283; 593399,

[[Page 966]]

2368425; 593448, 2368578; 593505, 2368716; 593622, 2368833; 593703, 
2368906; 593764, 2368963; 593832, 2369044; 593901, 2369145; 594002, 
2369262; 594079, 2369331; 594104, 2369396; 594120, 2369485; 594124, 
2369521; 594148, 2369525; 594213, 2369525; 594310, 2369497; 594395, 
2369473; 594399, 2369392; 594396, 2369356; 594417, 2369313; 594461, 
2369290; 594551, 2369278; 594579, 2369250; 594559, 2369197; 594472, 
2369183; 594391, 2369179; 594354, 2369153; 594302, 2369072; 594257, 
2369015; 594213, 2368914; 594136, 2368809; 594083, 2368672; 594035, 
2368550; 593966, 2368417; 593966, 2368324; 593909, 2368259; 593792, 
2368105; 593675, 2368000.
    (ii) Note: Map of Drosophila aglaia--Unit 1--Palikea follows:

[[Page 967]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE08.001

    (7) Drosophila aglaia--Unit 2--Puu Kaua, City and County of 
Honolulu, island of Oahu, Hawaii.
    (i) Land bounded by the following coordinates: 594166, 2370854; 
594166, 2370853; 594164, 2370854; 594122, 2370843; 594090, 2370815; 
594040, 2370789; 593996, 2370789; 593930, 2370827; 593852,

[[Page 968]]

2370875; 593778, 2370907; 593716, 2370947; 593642, 2370999; 593602, 
2371041; 593574, 2371067; 593558, 2371095; 593539, 2371118; 593531, 
2371121; 593534, 2371173; 593519, 2371375; 593533, 2371375; 593552, 
2371390; 593628, 2371404; 593716, 2371426; 593794, 2371431; 593876, 
2371437; 593974, 2371435; 594036, 2371431; 594138, 2371415; 594190, 
2371399; 594232, 2371385; 594246, 2371359; 594239, 2371354; 594170, 
2370879; 594172, 2370877; 594170, 2370855.
    (ii) Note: Map of Drosophila aglaia--Unit 2--Puu Kaua follows:

[[Page 969]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE08.002


[[Page 970]]



            Hawaiian picture-wing fly (Drosophila differens)

    (1) Critical habitat is depicted for County of Maui, island of 
Molokai, Hawaii, on the map below.
    (2) The primary constituent elements of critical habitat for 
Drosophila differens are:
    (i) Wet, montane, ohia forest between the elevations of 3,645-4,495 
ft (1,111-1,370 m); and
    (ii) The larval host plants Clermontia arborescens ssp. waihiae, C. 
granidiflora ssp. munroi, C. oblongifolia ssp. brevipes, C. kakeana, and 
C. pallida, which exhibit one or more life stages (from seedlings to 
senescent individuals).
    (3) Critical habitat does not include manmade structures (such as 
buildings, aqueducts, airports, and roads) and the land on which they 
are located existing within the legal boundaries on the effective date 
of this rule.
    (4) Critical habitat map unit. Coordinates are in Universal 
Transverse Mercator (UTM) Zone 4 with units in meters using North 
American Datum of 1983 (NAD83).
    (5) Drosophila differens--Unit 1--Puu Kolekole, Maui County, island 
of Molokai, Hawaii.
    (i) Land bounded by the following coordinates: 718527, 2337536; 
718533, 2337451; 718538, 2337370; 718543, 2337298; 718547, 2337236; 
718551, 2337182; 718555, 2337138; 718560, 2337098; 718571, 2337055; 
718586, 2337010; 718607, 2336962; 718632, 2336912; 718662, 2336860; 
718698, 2336807; 718739, 2336754; 718784, 2336700; 718835, 2336646; 
718892, 2336593; 718958, 2336551; 719034, 2336520; 719119, 2336502; 
719215, 2336497; 719320, 2336503; 719420, 2336509; 719506, 2336508; 
719579, 2336500; 719639, 2336484; 719685, 2336462; 719675, 2336394; 
719613, 2336327; 718980, 2335781; 718332, 2335236; 718002, 2334953; 
717930, 2334932; 717877, 2334988; 717855, 2335060; 717846, 2335123; 
717848, 2335175; 717862, 2335217; 717888, 2335249; 717921, 2335272; 
717946, 2335291; 717961, 2335308; 717965, 2335322; 717958, 2335333; 
717942, 2335342; 717928, 2335356; 717919, 2335377; 717915, 2335404; 
717916, 2335438; 717923, 2335478; 717935, 2335515; 717952, 2335542; 
717974, 2335558; 718001, 2335564; 718034, 2335559; 718070, 2335550; 
718107, 2335553; 718144, 2335567; 718182, 2335593; 718221, 2335630; 
718257, 2335675; 718280, 2335710; 718286, 2335733; 718277, 2335745; 
718253, 2335744; 718213, 2335731; 718166, 2335721; 718115, 2335717; 
718060, 2335719; 718001, 2335728; 717937, 2335742; 717873, 2335764; 
717812, 2335793; 717753, 2335829; 717697, 2335873; 717643, 2335924; 
717591, 2335977; 717543, 2336020; 717499, 2336052; 717458, 2336073; 
717420, 2336083; 717385, 2336085; 717351, 2336089; 717319, 2336098; 
717288, 2336110; 717258, 2336127; 717230, 2336148; 717204, 2336180; 
717183, 2336223; 717165, 2336280; 717151, 2336348; 717140, 2336429; 
717130, 2336510; 717118, 2336579; 717103, 2336636; 717085, 2336680; 
717065, 2336713; 717041, 2336739; 717009, 2336769; 716968, 2336806; 
716919, 2336847; 716862, 2336894; 716800, 2336946; 716745, 2337000; 
716702, 2337055; 716669, 2337112; 716647, 2337171; 716635, 2337231; 
716632, 2337289; 716634, 2337341; 716644, 2337388; 716660, 2337430; 
716683, 2337468; 716713, 2337497; 716751, 2337516; 716797, 2337523; 
716850, 2337520; 716912, 2337507; 716976, 2337488; 717031, 2337481; 
717077, 2337486; 717126, 2337542; 717183, 2337585; 718403, 2337817; 
718484, 2337833; 718487, 2337824; 718499, 2337760; 718510, 2337691; 
718519, 2337616.
    (ii) Note: Map of Drosophila differens--Unit 1--Puu Kolekole 
follows:

[[Page 971]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE08.003


[[Page 972]]



             Hawaiian picture-wing fly (Drosophila hemipeza)

    (1) Critical habitat units are depicted for County of Honolulu, 
island of Oahu, Hawaii, on the maps below.
    (2) The primary constituent elements of critical habitat for 
Drosophila hemipeza are:
    (i) Dry to mesic, lowland, ohia and koa forest between the 
elevations of 1,720-3,005 ft (524-916 m); and
    (ii) The larval host plants Cyanea angustifolia, C. calycina, C. 
grimesiana ssp. grimesiana, C. grimesiana ssp. obatae, C. membranacea, 
C. pinnatifida, C. superba ssp. superba, Lobelia hypoleuca, L. 
niihauensis, L. yuccoides, and Urera kaalae, which exhibit one or more 
life stages (from seedlings to senescent individuals).
    (3) Critical habitat does not include manmade structures (such as 
buildings, aqueducts, airports, and roads) and the land on which they 
are located existing within the legal boundaries on the effective date 
of this rule.
    (4) Critical habitat map units. Coordinates are in Universal 
Transverse Mercator (UTM) Zone 4 with units in meters using North 
American Datum of 1983 (NAD83).
    (5) Note: Index map of critical habitat units for Drosophila 
hemipeza follows:

[[Page 973]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE08.004

    (6) Drosophila hemipeza--Unit 1--Kaluaa Gulch, City and County of 
Honolulu, island of Oahu, Hawaii.
    (i) Land bounded by the following coordinates: 593240, 2374436; 
593231, 2374371; 593281, 2374410; 593315, 2374385; 593612, 2374173; 
593656, 2374138; 593621, 2374096; 593641, 2374077; 593676,

[[Page 974]]

2374072; 593703, 2374057; 593734, 2374039; 593758, 2374058; 593793, 
2374029; 593779, 2373964; 593731, 2373894; 593660, 2373784; 593609, 
2373702; 593592, 2373648; 593592, 2373594; 593598, 2373553; 593657, 
2373561; 593770, 2373549; 593792, 2373496; 593797, 2373417; 593842, 
2373411; 593842, 2373326; 593905, 2373404; 594053, 2373383; 594103, 
2373292; 594134, 2373228; 594156, 2373250; 594194, 2373256; 594178, 
2373323; 594196, 2373386; 594229, 2373390; 594312, 2373340; 594341, 
2373350; 594339, 2373421; 594383, 2373487; 594381, 2373513; 594460, 
2373552; 594496, 2373553; 594497, 2373518; 594526, 2373509; 594572, 
2373460; 594632, 2373519; 594649, 2373523; 594699, 2373475; 594728, 
2373476; 594762, 2373532; 594791, 2373529; 594828, 2373501; 594852, 
2373465; 594903, 2373501; 594933, 2373500; 594952, 2373489; 594974, 
2373334; 594800, 2373150; 594718, 2373120; 594718, 2373102; 594744, 
2373091; 594710, 2372721; 594720, 2372686; 594716, 2372633; 594678, 
2372623; 594566, 2372651; 594536, 2372666; 594506, 2372663; 594467, 
2372672; 594395, 2372663; 594406, 2372650; 594546, 2372567; 594558, 
2372553; 594551, 2372535; 594389, 2372452; 594395, 2372434; 594415, 
2372428; 594511, 2372449; 594603, 2372437; 594614, 2372421; 594607, 
2372385; 594593, 2372353; 594591, 2372317; 594618, 2372322; 594661, 
2372357; 594700, 2372384; 594696, 2372334; 594697, 2372333; 594697, 
2372283; 594652, 2372257; 594541, 2372266; 594454, 2372294; 594400, 
2372294; 594293, 2372267; 594231, 2372261; 594168, 2372241; 594126, 
2372258; 594075, 2372267; 594030, 2372303; 593999, 2372354; 593948, 
2372388; 593889, 2372397; 593812, 2372413; 593781, 2372425; 593756, 
2372442; 593742, 2372467; 593742, 2372490; 593736, 2372521; 593736, 
2372560; 593757, 2372587; 593790, 2372662; 593663, 2372772; 593543, 
2372859; 593558, 2372894; 593555, 2372910; 593526, 2372928; 593476, 
2372912; 593422, 2372953; 593420, 2372976; 593403, 2372997; 593400, 
2373025; 593373, 2373016; 593352, 2373044; 593328, 2373025; 593215, 
2373118; 593230, 2373171; 593214, 2373176; 593163, 2373154; 593095, 
2373213; 593091, 2373238; 593064, 2373243; 593019, 2373295; 592937, 
2373388; 592889, 2373462; 592897, 2373535; 592908, 2373597; 592923, 
2373668; 592914, 2373772; 592889, 2373866; 592868, 2373941; 592867, 
2373950; 592894, 2374029; 592908, 2374120; 592894, 2374162; 592860, 
2374213; 592854, 2374216; 593151, 2374494.
    (ii) Note: Map of Drosophila hemipeza--Unit 1--Kaluaa Gulch follows:

[[Page 975]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE08.005

    (7) Drosophila hemipeza--Unit 2--Makaha Valley, City and County of 
Honolulu, island of Oahu, Hawaii.
    (i) Land bounded by the following coordinates: 586712, 2378108; 
586877, 2378091; 587049, 2378091; 587173, 2378087; 587333, 2378079; 
587506, 2378079; 587592, 2378075; 587641, 2378046; 587641,

[[Page 976]]

2378038; 587666, 2377980; 587543, 2377935; 587399, 2377931; 587243, 
2377919; 587090, 2377906; 586794, 2377943; 586696, 2377943; 586597, 
2377869; 586507, 2377767; 586449, 2377684; 586449, 2377458; 586408, 
2377397; 586305, 2377368; 586206, 2377405; 586054, 2377643; 585968, 
2377726; 585869, 2377775; 585803, 2377849; 585803, 2377915; 585869, 
2377952; 585894, 2377956; 585956, 2377952; 586050, 2377923; 586120, 
2377869; 586194, 2377824; 586317, 2377828; 586383, 2377878; 586391, 
2377956; 586420, 2378034; 586461, 2378116; 586482, 2378174; 586552, 
2378190; 586630, 2378149; 586655, 2378128.
    (ii) Note: Map of Drosophila hemipeza--Unit 2--Makaha Valley 
follows:

[[Page 977]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE08.006

    (8) Drosophila hemipeza--Unit 3--Palikea, City and County of 
Honolulu, island of Oahu, Hawaii.
    (i) Land bounded by the following coordinates: 593529, 2367854; 
593448, 2367801; 593302, 2367874; 593242, 2367927; 593193, 2367967; 
593165, 2368065; 593217, 2368150; 593314, 2368283; 593399,

[[Page 978]]

2368425; 593448, 2368578; 593505, 2368716; 593622, 2368833; 593703, 
2368906; 593764, 2368963; 593832, 2369044; 593901, 2369145; 594002, 
2369262; 594079, 2369331; 594104, 2369396; 594120, 2369485; 594124, 
2369521; 594148, 2369525; 594213, 2369525; 594310, 2369497; 594395, 
2369473; 594399, 2369392; 594396, 2369356; 594417, 2369313; 594461, 
2369290; 594551, 2369278; 594579, 2369250; 594559, 2369197; 594472, 
2369183; 594391, 2369179; 594354, 2369153; 594302, 2369072; 594257, 
2369015; 594213, 2368914; 594136, 2368809; 594083, 2368672; 594035, 
2368550; 593966, 2368417; 593966, 2368324; 593909, 2368259; 593792, 
2368105; 593675, 2368000.
    (ii) Note: Map of Drosophila hemipeza--Unit 3--Palikea follows:

[[Page 979]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE08.007

    (9) Drosophila hemipeza--Unit 4--Puu Kaua, City and County of 
Honolulu, island of Oahu, Hawaii.
    (i) Land bounded by the following coordinates: 594166, 2370854; 
594166, 2370853; 594164, 2370854; 594122, 2370843; 594090, 2370815; 
594040, 2370789; 593996, 2370789; 593930, 2370827; 593852,

[[Page 980]]

2370875; 593778, 2370907; 593716, 2370947; 593642, 2370999; 593602, 
2371041; 593574, 2371067; 593558, 2371095; 593539, 2371118; 593531, 
2371121; 593534, 2371173; 593519, 2371375; 593533, 2371375; 593552, 
2371390; 593628, 2371404; 593716, 2371426; 593794, 2371431; 593876, 
2371437; 593974, 2371435; 594036, 2371431; 594138, 2371415; 594190, 
2371399; 594232, 2371385; 594246, 2371359; 594239, 2371354; 594170, 
2370879; 594172, 2370877; 594170, 2370855.
    (ii) Note: Map of Drosophila hemipeza--Unit 4--Puu Kaua follows:

[[Page 981]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE08.008


[[Page 982]]



           Hawaiian picture-wing fly (Drosophila heteroneura)

    (1) Critical habitat units are depicted for County of Hawaii, island 
of Hawaii, Hawaii, on the maps below.
    (2) The primary constituent elements of critical habitat for 
Drosophila heteroneura are:
    (i) Mesic to wet, montane, ohia and koa forest between the 
elevations of 2,908-5,755 ft (908-1,754 m); and
    (ii) The larval host plants Cheirodendron trigynum ssp. trigynum, 
Clermontia clermontioides, C. clermontioides ssp. rockiana, C. 
hawaiiensis, C. kohalae, C. lindseyana, C. montis-loa, C. parviflora, C. 
peleana, C. pyrularia, and Delissea parviflora, which exhibit one or 
more life stages (from seedlings to senescent individuals).
    (3) Critical habitat does not include manmade structures (such as 
buildings, aqueducts, airports, and roads) and the land on which they 
are located existing within the legal boundaries on the effective date 
of this rule.
    (4) Critical habitat map units. Coordinates are in Universal 
Transverse Mercator (UTM) Zone 4 with units in meters using North 
American Datum of 1983 (NAD83).
    (5) Note: Index map of critical habitat units for Drosophila 
heteroneura follows:

[[Page 983]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE08.009

    (6) Drosophila heteroneura--Unit 1--Kau Forest, Hawaii County, 
island of Hawaii, Hawaii.
    (i) Land bounded by the following coordinates: 859357, 2130685; 
859117, 2130401; 858810, 2130412; 858577, 2130667; 858596, 2130918; 
858800, 2131167; 858976, 2131240; 859117, 2131196; 859416, 2130970.
    (ii) Note: Map of Drosophila heteroneura--Unit 1--Kau Forest 
follows:

[[Page 984]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE08.010

    (7) Drosophila heteroneura--Unit 2--Kona Refuge, Hawaii County, 
island of Hawaii, Hawaii.
    (i) Land bounded by the following coordinates: 836880, 2145492; 
836927, 2144316; 836473, 2144373; 835378, 2144516; 831663, 2144980; 
31685, 2145029; 831718, 2145184; 831669, 2145289; 831669,

[[Page 985]]

2145387; 831694, 2145557; 31685, 2145727; 831685, 2145882; 831677, 
2146020; 831710, 2146149; 831767, 2146247; 31685, 2146482; 831572, 
2146766; 831572, 2146953; 831515, 2147156; 831442, 2147391; 31438, 
2147486; 837419, 2147183.
    (ii) Note: Map of Drosophila heteroneura--Unit 2--Kona Refuge 
follows:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE08.011


[[Page 986]]


    (8) Drosophila heteroneura--Unit 3--Lower Kahuku, Hawaii County, 
island of Hawaii, Hawaii.
    (i) Land bounded by the following coordinates: 849578, 2119874; 
849925, 2117860; 849842, 2117726; 849716, 2117636; 849492, 2117618; 
49240, 2117726; 849114, 2118058; 848962, 2118723; 848953, 2119065; 
848845, 2119720; 48728, 2120187; 848701, 2120646; 848638, 2120870; 
848620, 2121095; 848692, 2121194; 48782, 2121292; 849007, 2121310; 
849177, 2121319; 849350, 2121233; 849475, 2120505; 49474, 2120484; 
849447, 2120250; 849528, 2120044.
    (ii) Note: Map of Drosophila heteroneura--Unit 3--Lower Kahuku 
follows:

[[Page 987]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE08.012

    (9) Drosophila heteroneura--Unit 4--Pit Crater, Hawaii County, 
island of Hawaii, Hawaii.
    (i) Land bounded by the following coordinates: 821660, 2184453; 
821670, 2184348; 821617, 2184279; 821490, 2184191; 821428, 2184164; 
821304, 2184150; 821131, 2184187; 821052, 2184187; 821012, 2184150; 
820889, 2184086; 820850, 2184076; 820824, 2184102; 820778, 2184164; 
820705, 2184193; 820626,

[[Page 988]]

2184233; 820610, 2184289; 820657, 2184318; 820673, 2184316; 820707, 
2184310; 820723, 2184306; 820747, 2184293; 820790, 2184269; 820818, 
2184247; 820832, 2184215; 820861, 2184180; 820905, 2184168; 820929, 
2184191; 820939, 2184221; 820974, 2184255; 821024, 2184261; 821109, 
2184261; 821206, 2184261; 821264, 2184269; 821282, 2184285; 821292, 
2184322; 821254, 2184360; 821232, 2184396; 821276, 2184404; 821341, 
2184400; 821369, 2184431; 821363, 2184463; 821333, 2184499; 821345, 
2184528; 821426, 2184550; 821531, 2184554; 821619, 2184513.
    (ii) Note: Map of Drosophila heteroneura--Unit 4--Pit Crater 
follows:

[[Page 989]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE08.013

    (10) Drosophila heteroneura--Unit 5--Waihaka Gulch, Hawaii County, 
island of Hawaii, Hawaii.
    (i) Land bounded by the following coordinates: 868924, 2138585; 
868686, 2138463; 868564, 2138464; 868434, 2138482; 868325, 2138598; 
868350, 2138841; 868378, 2138886; 868503, 2139088; 868720,

[[Page 990]]

2139220; 868946, 2139193; 869076, 2139167; 869160, 2139055; 869238, 
2139018; 869248, 2138892.
    (ii) Note: Map of Drosophila heteroneura--Unit 5--Waihaka Gulch 
follows:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE08.014


[[Page 991]]



           Hawaiian picture-wing fly (Drosophila montgomeryi)

    (1) Critical habitat units are depicted for County of Honolulu, 
Oahu, Hawaii, on the maps below.
    (2) The primary constituent elements of critical habitat for 
Drosophila montgomeryi are:
    (i) Mesic, lowland, diverse ohia and koa forest between the 
elevations of 1,720-2,985 ft (524-910 m); and
    (ii) The larval host plant Urera kaalae, which exhibits one or more 
life stages (from seedlings to senescent individuals).
    (3) Critical habitat does not include manmade structures (such as 
buildings, aqueducts, airports, and roads) and the land on which they 
are located existing within the legal boundaries on the effective date 
of this rule.
    (4) Critical habitat map units. Coordinates are in Universal 
Transverse Mercator (UTM) Zone 4 with units in meters using North 
American Datum of 1983 (NAD83).
    (5) Note: Index map of critical habitat units for Drosophila 
montgomeryi follows:

[[Page 992]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE08.015

    (6) Drosophila montgomeryi--Unit 1--Kaluaa Gulch, City and County of 
Honolulu, island of Oahu, Hawaii.
    (i) Land bounded by the following coordinates: 593240, 2374436; 
593231, 2374371; 593281, 2374410; 593315, 2374385; 593612, 2374173; 
593656, 2374138; 593621, 2374096; 593641, 2374077; 593676,

[[Page 993]]

2374072; 593703, 2374057; 593734, 2374039; 593758, 2374058; 593793, 
2374029; 593779, 2373964; 593731, 2373894; 593660, 2373784; 593609, 
2373702; 593592, 2373648; 593592, 2373594; 593598, 2373553; 593657, 
2373561; 593770, 2373549; 593792, 2373496; 593797, 2373417; 593842, 
2373411; 593842, 2373326; 593905, 2373404; 594053, 2373383; 594103, 
2373292; 594134, 2373228; 594156, 2373250; 594194, 2373256; 594178, 
2373323; 594196, 2373386; 594229, 2373390; 594312, 2373340; 594341, 
2373350; 594339, 2373421; 594383, 2373487; 594381, 2373513; 594460, 
2373552; 594496, 2373553; 594497, 2373518; 594526, 2373509; 594572, 
2373460; 594632, 2373519; 594649, 2373523; 594699, 2373475; 594728, 
2373476; 594762, 2373532; 594791, 2373529; 594828, 2373501; 594852, 
2373465; 594903, 2373501; 594933, 2373500; 594952, 2373489; 594974, 
2373334; 594800, 2373150; 594718, 2373120; 594718, 2373102; 594744, 
2373091; 594710, 2372721; 594720, 2372686; 594716, 2372633; 594678, 
2372623; 594566, 2372651; 594536, 2372666; 594506, 2372663; 594467, 
2372672; 594395, 2372663; 594406, 2372650; 594546, 2372567; 594558, 
2372553; 594551, 2372535; 594389, 2372452; 594395, 2372434; 594415, 
2372428; 594511, 2372449; 594603, 2372437; 594614, 2372421; 594607, 
2372385; 594593, 2372353; 594591, 2372317; 594618, 2372322; 594661, 
2372357; 594700, 2372384; 594696, 2372334; 594697, 2372333; 594697, 
2372283; 594652, 2372257; 594541, 2372266; 594454, 2372294; 594400, 
2372294; 594293, 2372267; 594231, 2372261; 594168, 2372241; 594126, 
2372258; 594075, 2372267; 594030, 2372303; 593999, 2372354; 593948, 
2372388; 593889, 2372397; 593812, 2372413; 593781, 2372425; 593756, 
2372442; 593742, 2372467; 593742, 2372490; 593736, 2372521; 593736, 
2372560; 593757, 2372587; 593790, 2372662; 593663, 2372772; 593543, 
2372859; 593558, 2372894; 593555, 2372910; 593526, 2372928; 593476, 
2372912; 593422, 2372953; 593420, 2372976; 593403, 2372997; 593400, 
2373025; 593373, 2373016; 593352, 2373044; 593328, 2373025; 593215, 
2373118; 593230, 2373171; 593214, 2373176; 593163, 2373154; 593095, 
2373213; 593091, 2373238; 593064, 2373243; 593019, 2373295; 592937, 
2373388; 592889, 2373462; 592897, 2373535; 592908, 2373597; 592923, 
2373668; 592914, 2373772; 592889, 2373866; 592868, 2373941; 592867, 
2373950; 592894, 2374029; 592908, 2374120; 592894, 2374162; 592860, 
2374213; 592854, 2374216; 593151, 2374494.
    (ii) Note: Map of Drosophila montgomery--Unit 1--Kaluaa Gulch 
follows:

[[Page 994]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE08.016

    (7) Drosophila montgomeryi--Unit 2--Palikea, City and County of 
Honolulu, island of Oahu, Hawaii.
    (i) Land bounded by the following coordinates: 593529, 2367854; 
593448, 2367801; 593302, 2367874; 593242, 2367927; 593193, 2367967; 
593165, 2368065; 593217, 2368150; 593314, 2368283; 593399,

[[Page 995]]

2368425; 593448, 2368578; 593505, 2368716; 593622, 2368833; 593703, 
2368906; 593764, 2368963; 593832, 2369044; 593901, 2369145; 594002, 
2369262; 594079, 2369331; 594104, 2369396; 594120, 2369485; 594124, 
2369521; 594148, 2369525; 594213, 2369525; 594310, 2369497; 594395, 
2369473; 594399, 2369392; 594396, 2369356; 594417, 2369313; 594461, 
2369290; 594551, 2369278; 594579, 2369250; 594559, 2369197; 594472, 
2369183; 594391, 2369179; 594354, 2369153; 594302, 2369072; 594257, 
2369015; 594213, 2368914; 594136, 2368809; 594083, 2368672; 594035, 
2368550; 593966, 2368417; 593966, 2368324; 593909, 2368259; 593792, 
2368105; 593675, 2368000.
    (ii) Note: Map of Drosophila montgomeryi--Unit 2--Palikea follows:

[[Page 996]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE08.017

    (8) Drosophila montgomeryi--Unit 3--Puu Kaua, City and County of 
Honolulu, island of Oahu, Hawaii.
    (i) Land bounded by the following coordinates: 594166, 2370854; 
594166, 2370853; 594164, 2370854; 594122, 2370843; 594090, 2370815; 
594040, 2370789; 593996, 2370789; 593930, 2370827; 593852,

[[Page 997]]

2370875; 593778, 2370907; 593716, 2370947; 593642, 2370999; 593602, 
2371041; 593574, 2371067; 593558, 2371095; 593539, 2371118; 593531, 
2371121; 593534, 2371173; 593519, 2371375; 593533, 2371375; 593552, 
2371390; 593628, 2371404; 593716, 2371426; 593794, 2371431; 593876, 
2371437; 593974, 2371435; 594036, 2371431; 594138, 2371415; 594190, 
2371399; 594232, 2371385; 594246, 2371359; 594239, 2371354; 594170, 
2370879; 594172, 2370877; 594170, 2370855.
    (ii) Note: Map of Drosophila montgomeryi--Unit 3--Puu Kaua follows:

[[Page 998]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE08.018

              Hawaiian picture-wing fly (Drosophila mulli)

    (1) Critical habitat units are depicted for County of Hawaii, island 
of Hawaii, Hawaii, on the maps below.
    (2) The primary constituent elements of critical habitat for 
Drosophila mulli are:
    (i) Wet, montane, ohia forest between the elevations of 1,955-3,250 
ft (596-1,093 m); and

[[Page 999]]

    (ii) The larval host plant Pritchardia beccariana, which exhibits 
one or more life stages (from seedlings to senescent individuals).
    (3) Critical habitat does not include manmade structures (such as 
buildings, aqueducts, airports, and roads) and the land on which they 
are located existing within the legal boundaries on the effective date 
of this rule.
    (4) Critical habitat map units. Coordinates are in Universal 
Transverse Mercator (UTM) Zone 4 with units in meters using North 
American Datum of 1983 (NAD83).
    (5) Note: Index map of critical habitat units for Drosophila mulli 
follows:

[[Page 1000]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE08.019

    (6) Drosophila mulli--Unit 1--Olaa Forest, Hawaii County, island of 
Hawaii, Hawaii.
    (i) Land bounded by the following coordinates: 898754, 2154890; 
898225, 2154740; 898030, 2154878; 897846, 2155268; 897927, 2155578; 
898328, 2155910; 898508, 2155922; 899064, 2155498; 899064, 2155268.
    (ii) Note: Map of Drosophila mulli--Unit 1--Olaa Forest follows:

[[Page 1001]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE08.020

    (7) Drosophila mulli--Unit 2--Stainback Forest, Hawaii County, 
island of Hawaii, Hawaii.
    (i) Land bounded by the following coordinates: 903259, 2169945; 
903159, 2169907; 903080, 2169965; 902974, 2170089; 902953, 2170247; 
903012, 2170346; 903101, 2170415; 903166, 2170439; 903245,

[[Page 1002]]

2170490; 903324, 2170521; 903420, 2170603; 903509, 2170651; 903636, 
2170699; 903732, 2170771; 903849, 2170799; 903914, 2170789; 903955, 
2170730; 903869, 2170662; 903866, 2170658; 903718, 2170579; 903653, 
2170521; 903622, 2170487; 903441, 2170394; 903386, 2170322; 903399, 
2170250; 903451, 2170133; 903403, 2170058.
    (ii) Note: Map of Drosophila mulli--Unit 2--Stainback Forest 
follows:

[[Page 1003]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE08.021

    (8) Drosophila mulli--Unit 3--Waiakea Forest, Hawaii County, island 
of Hawaii, Hawaii.
    (i) Land bounded by the following coordinates: 897021, 2168026; 
896225, 2167587; 895745, 2167704; 895687, 2167996; 895745, 2168207; 
896014, 2168335; 896480, 2168668; 896841, 2169108; 897302, 2169068; 
897522, 2168908; 897482, 2168607.

[[Page 1004]]

    (ii) Note: Map of Drosophila mulli--Unit 3--Waiakea Forest follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE08.022
    

[[Page 1005]]



            Hawaiian picture-wing fly (Drosophila musaphilia)

    (1) Critical habitat is depicted for County of Kauai, island of 
Kauai, Hawaii, on the map below.
    (2) The primary constituent elements of critical habitat for 
Drosophila musaphilia are:
    (i) Mesic, montane, ohia and koa forest between the elevations of 
3,310-3,740 ft (1,009-1,128 m); and
    (ii) The larval host plant Acacia koa, which exhibits one or more 
life stages (from seedlings to senescent individuals).
    (3) Critical habitat does not include manmade structures (such as 
buildings, aqueducts, airports, and roads) and the land on which they 
are located existing within the legal boundaries on the effective date 
of this rule.
    (4) Critical habitat map unit. Coordinates are in Universal 
Transverse Mercator (UTM) Zone 4 with units in meters using North 
American Datum of 1983 (NAD83).
    (5) Drosophila musaphilia--Unit 1--Kokee, Kauai County, island of 
Kauai, Hawaii.
    (i) Land bounded by the following coordinates: 432035, 2448683; 
432126, 2448510; 432111, 2448312; 432111, 2448119; 432106, 2447977; 
432010, 2447906; 432025, 2447779; 431992, 2447749; 431962, 2447768; 
431938, 2447766; 431926, 2447752; 431895, 2447719; 431861, 2447686; 
431825, 2447651; 431786, 2447616; 431745, 2447581; 431701, 2447544; 
431658, 2447505; 431616, 2447462; 431575, 2447417; 431535, 2447368; 
431496, 2447318; 431457, 2447271; 431418, 2447231; 431379, 2447198; 
431339, 2447172; 431299, 2447153; 431267, 2447131; 431247, 2447103; 
431239, 2447068; 431244, 2447027; 431260, 2446979; 431278, 2446930; 
431292, 2446881; 431300, 2446834; 431303, 2446788; 431302, 2446743; 
431300, 2446700; 431301, 2446659; 431306, 2446621; 431252, 2446466; 
431186, 2446345; 431181, 2446332; 430955, 2445963; 430860, 2445709; 
430831, 2445664; 430760, 2445497; 430648, 2445441; 430416, 2445421; 
430405, 2445422; 430396, 2445420; 430159, 2445358; 430153, 2445371; 
430148, 2445402; 430150, 2445437; 430157, 2445475; 430170, 2445517; 
430188, 2445562; 430212, 2445610; 430240, 2445660; 430270, 2445707; 
430302, 2445754; 430335, 2445799; 430371, 2445842; 430407, 2445883; 
430441, 2445921; 430474, 2445956; 430506, 2445988; 430535, 2446017; 
430559, 2446044; 430567, 2446070; 430558, 2446095; 430533, 2446120; 
430492, 2446144; 430441, 2446167; 430398, 2446193; 430363, 2446221; 
430337, 2446252; 430320, 2446284; 430311, 2446319; 430309, 2446353; 
430315, 2446388; 430327, 2446423; 430347, 2446457; 430373, 2446492; 
430401, 2446525; 430430, 2446558; 430459, 2446589; 430489, 2446619; 
430518, 2446649; 430531, 2446681; 430524, 2446716; 430497, 2446755; 
430451, 2446797; 430387, 2446842; 430330, 2446887; 430288, 2446930; 
430262, 2446971; 430250, 2447010; 430253, 2447047; 430263, 2447083; 
430274, 2447118; 430288, 2447153; 430304, 2447187; 430323, 2447220; 
430339, 2447254; 430350, 2447291; 430356, 2447331; 430358, 2447373; 
430354, 2447418; 430351, 2447461; 430354, 2447496; 430361, 2447524; 
430374, 2447545; 430392, 2447558; 430416, 2447567; 430445, 2447573; 
430479, 2447576; 430518, 2447577; 430563, 2447574; 430609, 2447572; 
430649, 2447573; 430684, 2447578; 430714, 2447587; 430737, 2447599; 
430755, 2447616; 430767, 2447639; 430772, 2447667; 430772, 2447701; 
430766, 2447740; 430756, 2447783; 430755, 2447821; 430762, 2447853; 
430778, 2447879; 430802, 2447900; 430834, 2447916; 430864, 2447928; 
430893, 2447937; 430920, 2447943; 430945, 2447947; 430968, 2447947; 
430989, 2447952; 431007, 2447961; 431022, 2447974; 431035, 2447992; 
431045, 2448014; 431049, 2448036; 431046, 2448057; 431036, 2448077; 
431019, 2448096; 430996, 2448113; 430971, 2448128; 430946, 2448140; 
430921, 2448149; 430896, 2448155; 430871, 2448158; 430849, 2448165; 
430830, 2448179; 430815, 2448200; 430804, 2448228; 430796, 2448263; 
430799, 2448299; 430816, 2448330; 430848, 2448356; 430894, 2448377; 
430956, 2448393; 431018, 2448407; 431064, 2448423; 431094, 2448440; 
431109, 2448459; 431107, 2448479; 431094, 2448502; 431076, 2448530; 
431054, 2448563; 431027, 2448601; 430996, 2448643; 430967, 2448687; 
430957, 2448722; 430966, 2448749; 430994, 2448766; 431042, 2448775; 
431103, 2448778; 431162, 2448779; 431218, 2448779; 431269, 2448779; 
431317, 2448777; 431361, 2448775; 431403, 2448767; 431443, 2448754; 
431480, 2448736; 431515, 2448712; 431548, 2448685; 431579, 2448661; 
431607, 2448643; 431633, 2448630; 431657, 2448622; 431678, 2448620; 
431692, 2448631; 431697, 2448656; 431694, 2448695; 431683, 2448749; 
431665, 2448816; 431657, 2448878; 431666, 2448928; 431692, 2448967; 
431735, 2448994; 431795, 2449009; 431857, 2449019; 431913, 2449024; 
431963, 2449027; 432008, 2449026; 432046, 2449022; 432076, 2449012; 
432094, 2448996; 432100, 2448974; 432095, 2448945; 432078, 2448910; 
432060, 2448872; 432053, 2448837; 432063, 2448834; 432035, 2448784.
    (ii) Note: Map of Drosophila musaphilia--Unit 1--Kokee follows:

[[Page 1006]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE08.023


[[Page 1007]]



          Hawaiian picture-wing fly (Drosophila neoclavisetae)

    (1) Critical habitat is depicted for County of Maui, island of Maui, 
Hawaii, on the map below.
    (2) The primary constituent elements of critical habitat for 
Drosophila neoclavisetae are:
    (i) Wet, montane, ohia forest between the elevations of 3,405-4,590 
ft (1,036-1,399 m); and
    (ii) The larval host plants Cyanea kunthiana and C. macrostegia ssp. 
macrostegia, which exhibit one or more life stages (from seedlings to 
senescent individuals).
    (3) Critical habitat does not include manmade structures (such as 
buildings, aqueducts, airports, and roads) and the land on which they 
are located existing within the legal boundaries on the effective date 
of this rule.
    (4) Critical habitat map unit. Coordinates are in Universal 
Transverse Mercator (UTM) Zone 4 with units in meters using North 
American Datum of 1983 (NAD83).
    (5) Drosophila neoclavisetae--Unit 1--Puu Kukui, Maui County, island 
of Maui, Hawaii.
    (i) Land bounded by the following coordinates: 749957, 2315007; 
750017, 2314927; 750054, 2314874; 750054, 2314874; 750070, 2314854; 
750070, 2314854; 750070, 2314853; 750070, 2314853; 750095, 2314828; 
750095, 2314828; 750095, 2314828; 750118, 2314807; 750118, 2314807; 
750118, 2314806; 750119, 2314806; 750119, 2314806; 750137, 2314795; 
750137, 2314795; 750137, 2314795; 750137, 2314795; 750138, 2314795; 
750138, 2314795; 750172, 2314783; 750197, 2314770; 750214, 2314760; 
750222, 2314756; 750222, 2314756; 750222, 2314756; 750231, 2314751; 
750244, 2314735; 750244, 2314735; 750244, 2314735; 750245, 2314735; 
750263, 2314718; 750263, 2314718; 750263, 2314718; 750283, 2314702; 
750381, 2314361; 750381, 2314360; 750421, 2314232; 750421, 2314232; 
750421, 2314232; 750421, 2314231; 750421, 2314231; 750421, 2314231; 
750422, 2314231; 750422, 2314230; 750422, 2314230; 750402, 2314210; 
750397, 2314126; 750357, 2314098; 750329, 2314098; 750312, 2314143; 
750290, 2314227; 750239, 2314244; 750194, 2314227; 750133, 2314238; 
750076, 2314255; 750009, 2314238; 749958, 2314259; 749885, 2314289; 
749773, 2314435; 749721, 2314492; 749520, 2314710; 749515, 2314969; 
749509, 2315036; 749509, 2315093; 749565, 2315087; 749649, 2315036; 
749739, 2314991; 749756, 2315031; 749655, 2315132; 749599, 2315244; 
749554, 2315340; 749458, 2315407; 749368, 2315480; 749254, 2315543; 
749183, 2315602; 749145, 2315636; 749117, 2315676; 749125, 2315679; 
749125, 2315679; 749125, 2315679; 749125, 2315679; 749125, 2315678; 
749125, 2315678; 749126, 2315678; 749126, 2315678; 749126, 2315677; 
749138, 2315668; 749138, 2315668; 749172, 2315644; 749172, 2315644; 
749172, 2315644; 749172, 2315644; 749172, 2315644; 749186, 2315637; 
749203, 2315624; 749221, 2315611; 749221, 2315611; 749221, 2315611; 
749222, 2315611; 749222, 2315611; 749222, 2315611; 749243, 2315602; 
749331, 2315566; 749351, 2315553; 749351, 2315553; 749383, 2315533; 
749383, 2315533; 749383, 2315533; 749403, 2315522; 749419, 2315511; 
749468, 2315475; 749476, 2315462; 749483, 2315449; 749483, 2315449; 
749484, 2315449; 749484, 2315449; 749498, 2315429; 749498, 2315429; 
749498, 2315428; 749522, 2315400; 749522, 2315400; 749522, 2315400; 
749522, 2315400; 749523, 2315399; 749523, 2315399; 749523, 2315399; 
749548, 2315382; 749548, 2315382; 749548, 2315382; 749570, 2315370; 
749570, 2315370; 749570, 2315370; 749616, 2315349; 749626, 2315340; 
749626, 2315340; 749627, 2315340; 749650, 2315324; 749664, 2315305; 
749675, 2315287; 749679, 2315278; 749679, 2315278; 749679, 2315278; 
749679, 2315278; 749680, 2315278; 749698, 2315255; 749698, 2315254; 
749698, 2315254; 749718, 2315234; 749718, 2315234; 749718, 2315234; 
749718, 2315233; 749718, 2315233; 749734, 2315222; 749779, 2315184; 
749779, 2315184; 749780, 2315183; 749780, 2315183; 749780, 2315183; 
749802, 2315170; 749831, 2315145; 749872, 2315096; 749872, 2315096; 
749872, 2315096; 749872, 2315096; 749873, 2315095; 749873, 2315095; 
749886, 2315085; 749931, 2315044; 749957, 2315008.
    (ii) Note: Map of Drosophila neoclavisetae--Unit 1--Puu Kukui 
follows:

[[Page 1008]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE08.024


[[Page 1009]]



              Hawaiian picture-wing fly (Drosophila obatai)

    (1) Critical habitat is depicted for County of Honolulu, island of 
Oahu, Hawaii, on the maps below.
    (2) The primary constituent elements of critical habitat for 
Drosophila obatai are:
    (i) Dry to mesic, lowland, ohia and koa forest between the 
elevations of 1,475-2,535 ft (450-773 m); and
    (ii) The larval host plant Pleomele forbesii, which exhibits one or 
more life stages (from seedlings to senescent individuals).
    (3) Critical habitat does not include manmade structures (such as 
buildings, aqueducts, airports, and roads) and the land on which they 
are located existing within the legal boundaries on the effective date 
of this rule.
    (4) Critical habitat map units. Coordinates are in Universal 
Transverse Mercator (UTM) Zone 4 with units in meters using North 
American Datum of 1983 (NAD83).
    (5) Note: Index map of the critical habitat units for Drosophila 
obatai follows:

[[Page 1010]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE08.025

    (6) Drosophila obatai--Unit 1--Puu Pane, City and County of 
Honolulu, island of Oahu, Hawaii.
    (i) Land bounded by the following coordinates: 591489, 2379704; 
591662, 2379690; 591807, 2379704; 591822, 2379699; 591901, 2379571; 
591871, 2379579; 591830, 2379596; 591830, 2379596; 591830,

[[Page 1011]]

2379596; 591830, 2379596; 591830, 2379596; 591830, 2379596; 591830, 
2379596; 591791, 2379600; 591791, 2379600; 591791, 2379601; 591791, 
2379600; 591791, 2379600; 591791, 2379600; 591766, 2379597; 591766, 
2379597; 591766, 2379597; 591766, 2379597; 591766, 2379597; 591766, 
2379597; 591766, 2379597; 591741, 2379583; 591741, 2379583; 591710, 
2379565; 591672, 2379554; 591672, 2379554; 591635, 2379542; 591614, 
2379537; 591614, 2379537; 591614, 2379537; 591582, 2379526; 591582, 
2379526; 591582, 2379526; 591582, 2379526; 591582, 2379526; 591545, 
2379500; 591523, 2379495; 591496, 2379495; 591461, 2379505; 591461, 
2379505; 591461, 2379505; 591461, 2379505; 591461, 2379505; 591461, 
2379505; 591461, 2379505; 591461, 2379505; 591461, 2379505; 591444, 
2379502; 591444, 2379502; 591444, 2379502; 591444, 2379502; 591444, 
2379502; 591432, 2379498; 591421, 2379497; 591421, 2379497; 591421, 
2379497; 591421, 2379497; 591421, 2379497; 591420, 2379497; 591420, 
2379497; 591420, 2379497; 591420, 2379497; 591420, 2379497; 591405, 
2379487; 591405, 2379487; 591405, 2379487; 591405, 2379486; 591405, 
2379486; 591405, 2379486; 591403, 2379483; 591354, 2379454; 591283, 
2379460; 591240, 2379449; 591113, 2379474; 591116, 2379531; 591169, 
2379618; 591284, 2379716; 591345, 2379723.
    (ii) Note: Map of Drosophila obatai--Unit 1--Puu Pane follows:

[[Page 1012]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE08.026

    (7) Drosophila obatai--Unit 2--Wailupe, City and County of Honolulu, 
island of Oahu, Hawaii.
    (i) Land bounded by the following coordinates: 629222, 2358352; 
629208, 2358307; 629199, 2358225; 629147, 2358205; 629100, 2358307; 
629048, 2358343; 629028, 2358316; 629023, 2358250; 629005,

[[Page 1013]]

2358174; 628908, 2358169; 628890, 2358110; 628922, 2358034; 628883, 
2358011; 628795, 2358007; 628791, 2357939; 628753, 2357885; 628759, 
2357799; 628705, 2357743; 628676, 2357619; 628606, 2357592; 628536, 
2357607; 628552, 2357673; 628610, 2357731; 628574, 2357806; 628559, 
2357874; 628619, 2357932; 628637, 2357973; 628635, 2358074; 628660, 
2358185; 628735, 2358298; 628775, 2358411; 628936, 2358634; 629070, 
2358711; 629243, 2358647; 629307, 2358506.
    (ii) Note: Map of Drosophila obatai--Unit 2--Wailupe follows:

[[Page 1014]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE08.027


[[Page 1015]]



            Hawaiian picture-wing fly (Drosophila ochrobasis)

    (1) Critical habitat units are depicted for County of Hawaii, island 
of Hawaii, Hawaii, on the maps below.
    (2) The primary constituent elements of critical habitat for 
Drosophila ochrobasis are:
    (i) Mesic to wet, montane, ohia, koa, and Cheirodendron sp. forest 
between the elevations of 3,850-5,390 ft (1,173-1,643 m); and
    (ii) The larval host plants Clermontia calophylla, C. 
clermontioides, C. clermontioides ssp. rockiana, C. drepanomorpha, C. 
hawaiiensis, C. kohalae, C. lindseyana, C. montis-loa, C. parviflora, C. 
peleana, C. pyrularia, C. waimeae, Marattia douglasii, Myrsine 
lanaiensis, M. lessertiana, and M. sandwicensis, which exhibit one or 
more life stages (from seedlings to senescent individuals).
    (3) Critical habitat does not include manmade structures (such as 
buildings, aqueducts, airports, and roads) and the land on which they 
are located existing within the legal boundaries on the effective date 
of this rule.
    (4) Critical habitat map units. Coordinates are in Universal 
Transverse Mercator (UTM) Zone 4 with units in meters using North 
American Datum of 1983 (NAD83).
    (5) Note: Index map of critical habitat units for Drosophila 
ochrobasis follows:

[[Page 1016]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE08.028

    (6) Drosophila ochrobasis--Unit 1--Kipuka 9, Hawaii County, island 
of Hawaii, Hawaii.
    (i) Land bounded by the following coordinates: 884112, 2179392; 
884090, 2179333; 884069, 2179303; 884023, 2179281; 883971, 2179292; 
883936, 2179295; 883896, 2179273; 883855, 2179287; 883825, 2179319; 
883828, 2179335; 883861, 2179349; 883869, 2179346; 883885, 2179346; 
883888, 2179373; 883893, 2179409; 883896, 2179441; 883934, 2179473; 
883985, 2179484; 884036, 2179444; 884112, 2179409.

[[Page 1017]]

    (ii) Note: Map of Drosophila ochrobasis--Unit 1--Kipuka 9 follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE08.029
    

[[Page 1018]]


    (7) Drosophila ochrobasis--Unit 2--Kipuka 14, Hawaii County, island 
of Hawaii, Hawaii.
    (i) Land bounded by the following coordinates: 884379, 2179103; 
884375, 2179051; 884351, 2178992; 884320, 2178889; 884264, 2178832; 
884236, 2178818; 884211, 2178834; 884141, 2178891; 884099, 2178924; 
884064, 2178929; 884026, 2178959; 884026, 2178976; 884052, 2178983; 
884071, 2179008; 884101, 2179013; 884137, 2179021; 884160, 2179035; 
884148, 2179051; 884151, 2179065; 884210, 2179063; 884208, 2179084; 
884242, 2179101; 884280, 2179131; 884323, 2179146; 884365, 2179146.
    (ii) Note: Map of Drosophila ochrobasis--Unit 2--Kipuka 14 follows:

[[Page 1019]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE08.030

    (8) Drosophila ochrobasis--Unit 3--Kohala Mountains East, Hawaii 
County, island of Hawaii, Hawaii.
    (i) Land bounded by the following coordinates: 848091, 2222077; 
847912, 2222077; 847578, 2222142; 847461, 2222323; 847396, 2222654; 
847508, 2222900; 847620, 2223146; 847773, 2223179; 848104,

[[Page 1020]]

2223079; 848172, 2222934; 848235, 2222798; 848327, 2222764; 848361, 
2222693; 848350, 2222595; 848317, 2222476; 848177, 2222184.
    (ii) Note: Map of Drosophila ochrobasis--Unit 3--Kohala Mountains 
East follows:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE08.031


[[Page 1021]]


    (9) Drosophila ochrobasis--Unit 4--Kohala Mountains West, Hawaii 
County, island of Hawaii, Hawaii.
    (i) Land bounded by the following coordinates: 841990, 2224000; 
842156, 2223966; 842268, 2223966; 842486, 2223897; 842666, 2223757; 
842803, 2223586; 842840, 2223426; 842812, 2223314; 842758, 2223157; 
842584, 2223047; 842430, 2223096; 842355, 2223157; 842260, 2223278; 
842154, 2223345; 842020, 2223634; 841988, 2223746; 841967, 2223882.
    (ii) Note: Map of Drosophila ochrobasis--Unit 4--Kohala Mountains 
West follows:

[[Page 1022]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE08.032

    (10) Drosophila ochrobasis--Unit 5--Upper Kahuku, Hawaii County, 
island of Hawaii, Hawaii.
    (i) Land bounded by the following coordinates: 850211, 2124185; 
849989, 2124179; 849874, 2124347; 849874, 2124516; 849975, 2124603; 
850177, 2124724; 850332, 2124866; 850474, 2124900; 850589,

[[Page 1023]]

2124832; 850669, 2124785; 850690, 2124684; 850669, 2124549; 850508, 
2124448; 850339, 2124320.
    (ii) Note: Map of Drosophila ochrobasis--Unit 5--Upper Kahuku 
follows:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE08.033


[[Page 1024]]



              Hawaiian picture-wing fly (Drosophila sharpi)

    (1) Critical habitat units are depicted for Kauai County, Hawaii, on 
the maps below.
    (2) Primary constituent elements.
    (i) In units 1, 2, and 3, the primary constituent elements of 
critical habitat for Hawaiian picture-wing fly (Drosophila sharpi) are:
    (A) Elevation: 3,000 to 5,243 ft (914 to 1,598 m).
    (B) Annual precipitation: 50 to 75 inches (127 to 190 centimeters).
    (C) Substrate: Weathered aa lava flows, rocky mucks, thin silty 
loams, deep volcanic ash soils.
    (D) Canopy: Acacia, Metrosideros, Psychotria, Tetraplasandra, 
Zanthoxylum.
    (E) Subcanopy: Cheirodendron, Coprosma, Kadua, Ilex, Myoporum, 
Myrsine.
    (F) Understory: Bidens, Dryopteris, Leptecophylla, Poa, Scaevola, 
Sophora.
    (G) Larval host plants (Cheirodendron sp., Tetraplasandra sp.).
    (ii) In units 4, 5, and 6, the primary constituent elements of 
critical habitat for Hawaiian picture-wing fly (Drosophila sharpi) are:
    (A) Elevation: 3,000 to 5,243 ft (914 to 1,598 m).
    (B) Annual precipitation: Greater than 75 inches (190 centimeters).
    (C) Substrate: Well-developed soils, montane bogs.
    (D) Canopy: Acacia, Charpentiera, Cheirodendron, Metrosideros.
    (E) Subcanopy: Broussaisia, Cibotium, Eurya, Ilex, Myrsine.
    (F) Understory: Ferns, Carex, Coprosma, Leptecophylla, Oreobolus, 
Rhynchospora, Vaccinium.
    (G) Larval host plants (Cheirodendron sp., Tetraplasandra sp.).
    (3) Manmade features and structures, such as buildings, roads, 
railroads, airports, runways, other paved areas, lawns, and other urban 
landscaped areas, existing on the effective date of this rule do not 
contain one or more of the primary constituent elements.
    (4) Critical habitat maps. Maps were created in GIS, with 
coordinates in UTM Zone 4 with units in meters using North American 
datum of 1983 (NAD 83).
    (5) Index map of critical habitat units for Hawaiian picture-wing 
fly (Drosophila sharpi) follows:

[[Page 1025]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR13AP10.028

    (6) Unit 1-Montane Mesic, Kauai County, Hawaii.
    (i) Unit 1-Montane Mesic consists of 2,422.6 ac (980.4 ha) and 
includes land bounded by the following UTM Zone 4, NAD83 coordinates (E, 
N): 430107, 2447429; 430242, 2447664; 430073, 2447126; 430793, 2448310; 
430124, 2446907; 430393, 2447748; 430690, 2447765; 430671, 2447997; 
430764, 2448188; 430886, 2448507; 430903, 2448664; 430985, 2448705; 
431560, 2448675; 431414, 2448890; 430291, 2446570; 431058, 2446300; 
431200, 2449070; 431362, 2449169; 431171, 2448699; 430854, 2445930; 
432530, 2450196; 431391, 2449273; 431323, 2447013; 431211, 2446394; 
431101, 2446447; 431112, 2446394; 431069, 2446331; 431007, 2446203; 
430944, 2446145; 430902, 2445976; 430191, 2446386; 430826, 2445805; 
430857, 2445727; 430824, 2445631; 430442, 2445640; 430323, 2445779; 
430204, 2445809; 430191, 2445898; 429898, 2446100; 429871, 2446234; 
430939, 2446061; 432796, 2450365; 432504, 2449961; 432579, 2450036;

[[Page 1026]]

432552, 2450080; 432551, 2450083; 432001, 2447726; 432534, 2450174; 
431629, 2448739; 432565, 2450262; 432531, 2450116; 432740, 2450249; 
432441, 2449848; 432808, 2450383; 432882, 2450351; 432904, 2450341; 
432827, 2447751; 432932, 2447668; 433014, 2447717; 433109, 2447775; 
433094, 2447922; 432560, 2450267; 431875, 2449780; 431322, 2449418; 
431403, 2449436; 431727, 2449372; 431769, 2449447; 431705, 2449569; 
431720, 2449620; 431805, 2449591; 431919, 2449578; 432498, 2449952; 
431904, 2449665; 432486, 2449909; 432046, 2449781; 432052, 2449783; 
432113, 2449740; 432217, 2449712; 432251, 2449685; 432259, 2449679; 
432344, 2449744; 432419, 2449806; 431322, 2449372; 431905, 2449660; 
434486, 2447126; 434073, 2448685; 434228, 2448620; 434292, 2448479; 
434318, 2448298; 434279, 2447951; 434163, 2447783; 434086, 2447693; 
434073, 2447500; 434623, 2446526; 434357, 2447229; 433545, 2449136; 
434627, 2447088; 434686, 2447020; 434682, 2447017; 434657, 2446977; 
434652, 2446933; 434612, 2446807; 434641, 2446663; 434631, 2446528; 
434202, 2447345; 433399, 2449709; 431205, 2448983; 432073, 2447674; 
433046, 2450280; 433196, 2450196; 433287, 2450063; 433353, 2449880; 
433467, 2449787; 433429, 2449741; 433880, 2448827; 433407, 2449708; 
433725, 2448994; 433401, 2449697; 433339, 2449600; 433313, 2449484; 
433339, 2449381; 433368, 2449293; 433368, 2449292; 433369, 2449255; 
433389, 2449256; 434254, 2447886; 433408, 2449708; 433527, 2447856; 
434086, 2446095; 433862, 2446165; 433606, 2446193; 433449, 2446235; 
433397, 2446440; 433257, 2446958; 433577, 2447086; 433706, 2447138; 
434090, 2446098; 433562, 2447841; 432639, 2447624; 432918, 2447407; 
432672, 2447598; 434620, 2446512; 432609, 2447647; 434318, 2448182; 
432195, 2447587; 432136, 2447629; 432133, 2447631; 432081, 2447668; 
433746, 2447766; 434500, 2446448; 432320, 2447497; 434103, 2446297; 
434618, 2446459; 434582, 2446443; 434558, 2446439; 434514, 2446449; 
434471, 2446422; 434457, 2446416; 434447, 2446420; 434392, 2446421; 
434423, 2446441; 434416, 2446441; 434625, 2446467; 434201, 2446573; 
434403, 2446435; 434628, 2446479; 434400, 2446429; 434434, 2446428; 
434386, 2446429; 434533, 2446441.
    (ii) Map of Unit 1-Montane Mesic for Hawaiian picture-wing fly 
(Drosophila sharpi) follows:

[[Page 1027]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR13AP10.029

    (7) Unit 2-Montane Mesic, Kauai County, Hawaii.
    (i) Unit 2-Montane Mesic consists of 375.6 ac (152.0 ha) and 
includes land bounded by the following UTM Zone 4, NAD83 coordinates (E, 
N): 431975, 2446280; 432559, 2446255; 432659, 2446240; 432948, 2446150; 
433067, 2445928; 432758, 2445304; 432001, 2445941; 431873, 2444849;

[[Page 1028]]

432912, 2445580; 432674, 2444970; 431626, 2445435; 431730, 2445114; 
431950, 2444792; 432135, 2444807; 432377, 2444722; 432548, 2444752; 
431645, 2445326; 431736, 2445617.
    (ii) Map of Unit 2-Montane Mesic for Hawaiian picture-wing fly 
(Drosophila sharpi) follows:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR13AP10.030


[[Page 1029]]


    (8) Unit 3-Montane Mesic, Kauai County, Hawaii.
    (i) Unit 3-Montane Mesic consists of 138.5 ac (56.0 ha) and includes 
land bounded by the following UTM Zone 4, NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 
438012, 2440389; 438014, 2440437; 438023, 2440484; 438111, 2440652; 
438112, 2440588; 437817, 2440071; 438028, 2440577; 437922, 2440355; 
437336, 2440335; 437912, 2440201; 437827, 2440132; 437785, 2440013; 
437687, 2439960; 437636, 2439819; 437870, 2440140; 437545, 2439761; 
438149, 2440714; 437529, 2439721; 437987, 2441027; 437450, 2440047; 
437335, 2440180; 437335, 2440329; 438159, 2440914; 438249, 2440857; 
438253, 2440854; 438243, 2440830; 438287, 2440738; 437602, 2440771; 
438227, 2440730; 437586, 2439743.
    (ii) Map of Unit 3-Montane Mesic for Hawaiian picture-wing fly 
(Drosophila sharpi) follows:

[[Page 1030]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR13AP10.031

    (9) Unit 4-Montane Wet, Kauai County, Hawaii.
    (i) Unit 4-Montane Wet consists of 13,055.0 ac (5,283.2 ha) and 
includes land bounded by the following UTM Zone 4, NAD83 coordinates (E, 
N): 448638, 2440764; 448601, 2440679; 448606, 2440704; 448612, 2440722; 
448615, 2440731; 448619, 2440740; 448630, 2440759; 448650, 2440769;

[[Page 1031]]

448600, 2440668; 448622, 2440749; 448599, 2440647; 448601, 2440652; 
448678, 2440741; 448777, 2440842; 448663, 2440773; 449006, 2441012; 
448764, 2440857; 449068, 2441051; 449121, 2441114; 449121, 2441114; 
448887, 2440934; 448811, 2440896; 448954, 2441097; 448943, 2441063; 
448943, 2441053; 448943, 2441044; 448941, 2441024; 448940, 2441006; 
448918, 2440982; 448877, 2440939; 448861, 2440927; 448735, 2440829; 
448837, 2440912; 448678, 2440780; 448802, 2440889; 448788, 2440878; 
449115, 2442038; 448745, 2440841; 449111, 2441196; 448727, 2440820; 
448720, 2440813; 448711, 2440806; 448691, 2440790; 448841, 2440914; 
447374, 2443275; 449244, 2441819; 447623, 2443445; 447616, 2443588; 
447603, 2443646; 447556, 2443686; 447325, 2443651; 447295, 2443639; 
447247, 2443586; 448634, 2443800; 447287, 2443339; 448657, 2443629; 
447481, 2443262; 447636, 2443160; 447645, 2443143; 447645, 2443146; 
447894, 2443371; 447865, 2443358; 447712, 2443351; 447631, 2443389; 
448948, 2441084; 447249, 2443451; 448917, 2442504; 449106, 2441435; 
449173, 2441529; 449201, 2441638; 449249, 2441697; 449275, 2441773; 
449148, 2441893; 449090, 2442135; 449064, 2442221; 448614, 2443950; 
448983, 2442384; 449078, 2441297; 448880, 2442563; 448861, 2442593; 
448805, 2442677; 448765, 2442787; 448696, 2442955; 448653, 2443075; 
448651, 2443187; 448674, 2443301; 448669, 2443477; 449024, 2442290; 
444824, 2443350; 444161, 2444181; 445808, 2442898; 445681, 2442977; 
445559, 2443010; 445437, 2443077; 446100, 2442628; 445045, 2443240; 
446256, 2442602; 444659, 2443447; 444532, 2443516; 444456, 2443572; 
444423, 2443638; 444334, 2443811; 446499, 2441271; 445254, 2443156; 
446686, 2441764; 441856, 2446328; 446673, 2441408; 446651, 2441424; 
446641, 2441436; 446587, 2441501; 445966, 2442725; 446640, 2441627; 
444075, 2444349; 446694, 2442007; 446591, 2442195; 446650, 2442430; 
446675, 2442432; 446482, 2442513; 446373, 2442574; 446587, 2441543; 
443497, 2444548; 444237, 2444013; 443579, 2444514; 443571, 2444521; 
443557, 2444532; 443553, 2444537; 443610, 2444483; 443516, 2444546; 
443617, 2444477; 443483, 2444551; 443478, 2444555; 443464, 2444570; 
443459, 2444579; 443452, 2444591; 443447, 2444608; 443534, 2444543; 
443722, 2444464; 444016, 2444444; 443984, 2444419; 443985, 2444416; 
443769, 2444440; 443760, 2444446; 443598, 2444493; 443732, 2444458; 
446375, 2441172; 443703, 2444469; 443685, 2444463; 443677, 2444459; 
443666, 2444456; 443647, 2444460; 443628, 2444469; 443740, 2444454; 
441656, 2441573; 442568, 2441274; 440114, 2440528; 440464, 2440832; 
440528, 2440844; 440586, 2440905; 440110, 2440524; 441650, 2441573; 
440014, 2440441; 441659, 2441579; 441727, 2441586; 441774, 2441575; 
441900, 2441576; 441968, 2441515; 446610, 2441349; 441637, 2441552; 
439096, 2441847; 438866, 2442347; 438934, 2442351; 438960, 2442270; 
438967, 2442246; 438976, 2442220; 440113, 2440527; 439088, 2441871; 
442723, 2441295; 439491, 2440617; 439551, 2440431; 439556, 2440414; 
439832, 2440430; 439931, 2440426; 440002, 2440430; 439037, 2442031; 
445551, 2441162; 442287, 2441225; 445235, 2441328; 445344, 2441376; 
445380, 2441414; 445392, 2441392; 444560, 2441032; 445510, 2441194; 
444480, 2440997; 445886, 2441308; 446122, 2441415; 446214, 2441291; 
448944, 2441075; 446300, 2441227; 446357, 2441185; 445395, 2441389; 
443889, 2441172; 442843, 2441314; 442924, 2441340; 442982, 2441350; 
442977, 2441356; 443016, 2441342; 445124, 2441205; 443707, 2441132; 
443440, 2444655; 444062, 2441230; 444083, 2441215; 444109, 2441224; 
444113, 2441221; 444124, 2441223; 444455, 2440990; 443023, 2441344; 
442711, 2445664; 442430, 2445827; 442668, 2445560; 442666, 2445576; 
442668, 2445590; 442674, 2445604; 442672, 2445510; 442713, 2445661; 
442668, 2445494; 442501, 2445803; 442492, 2445803; 442467, 2445799; 
442448, 2445805; 442444, 2445807; 443444, 2444627; 442710, 2445647; 
442709, 2445399; 442804, 2445357; 442798, 2445359; 442785, 2445364; 
442765, 2445370; 442747, 2445377; 442673, 2445515; 442727, 2445386; 
442430, 2445830; 442694, 2445414; 442689, 2445419; 442682, 2445433; 
442675, 2445453; 442671, 2445471; 442667, 2445490; 442743, 2445378; 
441897, 2446273; 442435, 2445813; 442019, 2446165; 442005, 2446171; 
441982, 2446194; 441963, 2446219; 442059, 2446159; 441929, 2446268; 
442071, 2446146; 441879, 2446263; 441852, 2446219; 441838, 2446221; 
441834, 2446230; 441848, 2446265; 441855, 2446295; 441943, 2446256; 
442202, 2445986; 442428, 2445851; 442381, 2445882; 442372, 2445885; 
442317, 2445917; 442301, 2445924; 442039, 2446165; 442261, 2445949; 
442858, 2445342; 442175, 2445995; 442100, 2446007; 442082, 2446029; 
442072, 2446052; 442067, 2446082; 442073, 2446121; 442273, 2445945; 
443240, 2444927; 442821, 2445353; 443294, 2444870; 443290, 2444876; 
443281, 2444890; 443271, 2444898; 443307, 2444833; 443252, 2444914; 
443309, 2444829; 443234, 2444932; 443215, 2444938; 443196, 2444944; 
443193, 2444946; 443177, 2444962; 443175, 2444965; 443260, 2444907; 
443352, 2444721; 438757, 2442331; 443435, 2444664; 443423, 2444686; 
443403, 2444695; 443385, 2444699; 443301, 2444851; 443366, 2444706; 
443156, 2445003; 443346, 2444728; 443341, 2444740; 443333, 2444758; 
443327, 2444778; 443320, 2444796; 443313, 2444815; 443373, 2444702; 
442952, 2445303; 443029, 2445263; 443009, 2445266; 443006, 2445268; 
442990, 2445276; 442981, 2445284; 443163, 2444984; 442956, 2445301; 
443068, 2445227; 442934, 2445314; 442915, 2445323; 442898, 2445330; 
442877, 2445336; 442862, 2445341; 443443, 2444647; 442972, 2445292; 
443122, 2445132; 442842, 2445347; 443153, 2445020; 443153, 2445040; 
443152, 2445059; 443150, 2445078; 443144, 2445096; 443047, 2445260; 
443135, 2445115; 443065, 2445247; 443103, 2445152; 443083, 2445171; 
443066, 2445190; 443066, 2445209; 443067, 2445215; 443158, 2444995; 
443140, 2445105; 440025, 2445056; 439668, 2444981; 440214, 2445151; 
440216, 2445150; 440347, 2445106; 440289, 2445097; 440078, 2445204; 
440124, 2445056; 439994, 2445245; 439910, 2445087; 439796, 2445123; 
439719, 2445133; 439696, 2445110; 439681, 2445072; 439364, 2444192; 
440216, 2445076; 439480, 2445095; 438927, 2444790; 438982, 2444746; 
439037, 2444786; 439157, 2444829; 439238, 2444846; 440165, 2445166; 
439434, 2444999; 439643, 2444902; 439484, 2445120; 439501, 2445220; 
439598, 2445317; 439699, 2445360; 439794, 2445352; 439883, 2445309; 
439360, 2444907; 439945, 2444540; 439673, 2445011; 439890, 2444912; 
439948, 2444922; 439994, 2444883; 440052, 2444784; 439859, 2444782; 
439996, 2444642; 439859, 2444723; 439876, 2444423; 439825, 2444344; 
439759, 2444342; 439685, 2444334; 439583, 2444266; 438838, 2442340; 
440032, 2444731; 439254, 2444472; 439571, 2444823; 439485, 2444800; 
439386, 2444762; 439258, 2444658; 439172, 2444564; 439864, 2444845; 
439156, 2444527; 438580, 2444854; 439413, 2444371; 439522, 2444418; 
439617, 2444459; 439747, 2444522; 439800, 2444594; 439843, 2444655; 
439145, 2444538; 435698, 2452376;

[[Page 1032]]

438807, 2444845; 436003, 2452334; 435955, 2452326; 435902, 2452378; 
435838, 2452443; 436579, 2452559; 435719, 2452378; 436804, 2452559; 
435477, 2452358; 435478, 2452345; 435479, 2452304; 435517, 2452192; 
435519, 2452190; 435540, 2452168; 435810, 2452427; 438006, 2453313; 
438476, 2452702; 438465, 2452788; 438430, 2452817; 438386, 2452854; 
438269, 2452930; 436189, 2452365; 438110, 2453148; 435895, 2451700; 
437935, 2453510; 437933, 2453512; 437797, 2453318; 437592, 2453026; 
437202, 2452948; 437201, 2452932; 438116, 2453088; 438263, 2444805; 
436811, 2449026; 437237, 2447714; 437230, 2447713; 437248, 2447657; 
437232, 2447645; 435631, 2452072; 438179, 2444732; 436566, 2449559; 
438343, 2444896; 438406, 2444952; 438475, 2444955; 438523, 2444886; 
438536, 2444858; 439298, 2444154; 438168, 2444734; 436235, 2450550; 
438677, 2444833; 435961, 2451591; 436027, 2451466; 436103, 2451262; 
436162, 2451016; 436212, 2450766; 436739, 2449180; 436234, 2450558; 
436706, 2449252; 436250, 2450410; 436234, 2450237; 436386, 2449952; 
436472, 2449769; 436566, 2449560; 435779, 2451881; 436230, 2450590; 
438030, 2442243; 438130, 2442234; 437996, 2442188; 437998, 2442202; 
437998, 2442205; 437999, 2442211; 437973, 2442147; 438012, 2442229; 
437954, 2442136; 438049, 2442246; 438065, 2442246; 438088, 2442240; 
438095, 2442238; 438098, 2442237; 439456, 2444205; 438000, 2442216; 
437826, 2442106; 437754, 2441991; 437758, 2441998; 437766, 2442017; 
437777, 2442052; 437791, 2442074; 437984, 2442167; 437806, 2442092; 
438157, 2442234; 437839, 2442110; 437873, 2442121; 437887, 2442121; 
437912, 2442123; 437926, 2442125; 437939, 2442128; 437799, 2442084; 
438656, 2442321; 438114, 2442232; 438535, 2442314; 438536, 2442314; 
438561, 2442316; 438577, 2442315; 438517, 2442310; 438626, 2442315; 
438496, 2442310; 438668, 2442322; 438679, 2442324; 438694, 2442327; 
438704, 2442326; 438721, 2442329; 446348, 2441177; 438609, 2442314; 
438392, 2442294; 438219, 2442244; 438238, 2442248; 438254, 2442248; 
438305, 2442256; 438355, 2442265; 438523, 2442310; 438376, 2442278; 
437745, 2441950; 438418, 2442311; 438433, 2442319; 438436, 2442321; 
438453, 2442321; 438453, 2442321; 438460, 2442320; 438373, 2442277; 
437363, 2443282; 437751, 2441981; 437981, 2443476; 437808, 2443397; 
437928, 2443310; 437950, 2443233; 438143, 2443587; 437364, 2443298; 
438183, 2443628; 437277, 2443228; 437144, 2443208; 437065, 2443211; 
437060, 2443212; 436974, 2443182; 436997, 2443061; 437657, 2443231; 
438835, 2443883; 439282, 2444110; 439268, 2444068; 439181, 2444032; 
439094, 2444009; 439048, 2443913; 438208, 2443477; 438964, 2443837; 
437226, 2442709; 438723, 2443923; 438608, 2443916; 438453, 2443825; 
438438, 2443814; 438318, 2443723; 438201, 2443629; 439043, 2443859; 
437697, 2441878; 437601, 2441867; 437602, 2441867; 437617, 2441866; 
437635, 2441866; 437647, 2441866; 437052, 2442940; 437689, 2441877; 
437522, 2441879; 437705, 2441878; 437711, 2441887; 437717, 2441899; 
437736, 2441928; 437740, 2441938; 438821, 2442339; 437674, 2441875; 
437294, 2442356; 437747, 2441961; 437088, 2442647; 437103, 2442643; 
437156, 2442615; 437159, 2442579; 437120, 2442503; 437566, 2441876; 
437174, 2442422; 437532, 2441880; 437425, 2442191; 437307, 2442101; 
437476, 2442051; 437493, 2441868; 437495, 2441869; 437182, 2442830; 
437105, 2442445; 448431, 2442766; 448447, 2442675; 448469, 2442871; 
448462, 2442858; 448442, 2442821; 448437, 2442805; 448481, 2442894; 
448432, 2442775; 448486, 2442910; 448428, 2442750; 448428, 2442738; 
448432, 2442727; 448437, 2442711; 448443, 2442699; 448671, 2442369; 
448435, 2442791; 448579, 2443112; 448582, 2443190; 448582, 2443172; 
448582, 2443162; 448583, 2443151; 448585, 2443140; 448477, 2442887; 
448585, 2443122; 448447, 2442663; 448562, 2443086; 448545, 2443051; 
448529, 2443019; 448507, 2442976; 448498, 2442952; 448490, 2442930; 
448586, 2443129; 448642, 2442440; 448447, 2442688; 448602, 2442477; 
448615, 2442472; 448623, 2442466; 448634, 2442459; 448566, 2442503; 
448640, 2442451; 448550, 2442513; 448642, 2442430; 448642, 2442419; 
448643, 2442410; 448648, 2442399; 448657, 2442387; 447996, 2444312; 
448637, 2442455; 448464, 2442531; 448443, 2442636; 448443, 2442627; 
448440, 2442604; 448438, 2442565; 448441, 2442549; 448587, 2442486; 
448455, 2442534; 448589, 2443224; 448474, 2442530; 448488, 2442531; 
448505, 2442534; 448515, 2442533; 448530, 2442527; 448536, 2442523; 
448449, 2442536; 448502, 2443743; 448586, 2443203; 448512, 2443792; 
448512, 2443783; 448513, 2443779; 448513, 2443769; 448473, 2443878; 
448504, 2443752; 448470, 2443888; 448504, 2443735; 448507, 2443727; 
448522, 2443706; 448538, 2443682; 448546, 2443665; 448552, 2443643; 
448509, 2443760; 447932, 2443750; 447925, 2444320; 447843, 2444325; 
447864, 2444277; 447942, 2444178; 448003, 2444015; 448500, 2443823; 
447967, 2443867; 448549, 2443613; 447904, 2443646; 447921, 2443582; 
447949, 2443460; 447939, 2443412; 448458, 2443882; 448470, 2443889; 
448008, 2443903; 448590, 2443306; 448578, 2443441; 448572, 2443417; 
448576, 2443405; 448584, 2443388; 448590, 2443369; 448552, 2443630; 
448593, 2443325; 448591, 2443484; 448591, 2443291; 448592, 2443277; 
448592, 2443261; 448592, 2443254; 448591, 2443241; 448673, 2442365; 
448595, 2443352; 448553, 2443539; 448587, 2443214; 448544, 2443601; 
448533, 2443587; 448527, 2443576; 448523, 2443570; 448518, 2443559; 
448585, 2443461; 448528, 2443546; 448588, 2443466; 448560, 2443535; 
448569, 2443527; 448577, 2443516; 448582, 2443508; 448589, 2443493; 
448551, 2443621; 448518, 2443552; 449003, 2441449; 448936, 2441403; 
449064, 2441492; 449060, 2441481; 449053, 2441472; 449049, 2441471; 
449066, 2441511; 449032, 2441461; 449061, 2441528; 448971, 2441443; 
448964, 2441441; 448952, 2441427; 448948, 2441420; 448945, 2441411; 
448665, 2442379; 449040, 2441466; 449012, 2441616; 448972, 2441689; 
446228, 2441279; 448995, 2441668; 449000, 2441660; 449004, 2441650; 
449065, 2441502; 449009, 2441625; 448930, 2441400; 449017, 2441611; 
449030, 2441595; 449037, 2441588; 449043, 2441578; 449046, 2441569; 
449050, 2441561; 449006, 2441639; 448967, 2441159; 448940, 2441404; 
448926, 2441212; 448930, 2441194; 448933, 2441184; 448941, 2441177; 
448940, 2441238; 448961, 2441163; 448944, 2441250; 448972, 2441150; 
448973, 2441143; 448972, 2441136; 448971, 2441119; 448969, 2441116; 
448964, 2441109; 448949, 2441170; 448928, 2441313; 448922, 2441392; 
448918, 2441381; 448916, 2441369; 448917, 2441357; 448919, 2441341; 
448934, 2441230; 448925, 2441322; 448933, 2441715; 448935, 2441302; 
448944, 2441291; 448948, 2441281; 448948, 2441273; 448948, 2441264; 
448946, 2441259; 448920, 2441333; 448677, 2442140; 441868, 2446401; 
448673, 2442209; 448671, 2442202; 448674, 2442187; 448680, 2442169; 
448684, 2442226; 448682, 2442148; 448692, 2442233; 448675, 2442123; 
448677, 2442115; 448683, 2442101; 448694, 2442089; 448710, 2442077; 
448718, 2442069; 448684, 2442157;

[[Page 1033]]

448722, 2442303; 448677, 2442356; 448682, 2442350; 448697, 2442342; 
448711, 2442341; 448721, 2442331; 448678, 2442221; 448723, 2442309; 
448736, 2442055; 448718, 2442295; 448712, 2442283; 448707, 2442267; 
448706, 2442257; 448705, 2442250; 448699, 2442238; 448724, 2442320; 
448915, 2441796; 448850, 2441844; 448877, 2441825; 448884, 2441820; 
448890, 2441818; 448892, 2441817; 448723, 2442061; 448910, 2441807; 
448820, 2441871; 448913, 2441774; 448914, 2441760; 448913, 2441753; 
448915, 2441738; 448925, 2441722; 448957, 2441700; 448900, 2441814; 
448787, 2441967; 448939, 2441710; 448746, 2442051; 448755, 2442041; 
448764, 2442029; 448768, 2442019; 448773, 2442013; 448840, 2441852; 
448781, 2441990; 448831, 2441859; 448789, 2441938; 448803, 2441914; 
448813, 2441900; 448814, 2441894; 448817, 2441884; 448728, 2442058; 
448777, 2442002; 440375, 2448361; 440198, 2448467; 440421, 2448239; 
440415, 2448290; 440416, 2448314; 440411, 2448336; 440401, 2448191; 
440391, 2448353; 440384, 2448138; 440350, 2448395; 440331, 2448411; 
440307, 2448418; 440254, 2448428; 440237, 2448434; 439526, 2448944; 
440402, 2448352; 440409, 2447991; 440377, 2447819; 440378, 2447845; 
440384, 2447871; 440395, 2447896; 440436, 2447941; 440413, 2448216; 
440426, 2447974; 440190, 2448485; 440343, 2448005; 440329, 2448016; 
440325, 2448033; 440331, 2448061; 440341, 2448084; 440374, 2448123; 
440435, 2447959; 439678, 2448950; 440218, 2448446; 439853, 2448941; 
439830, 2448945; 439788, 2448929; 439761, 2448926; 439900, 2448928; 
439697, 2448941; 439922, 2448928; 439656, 2448949; 439633, 2448940; 
439611, 2448928; 439578, 2448906; 439553, 2448909; 439539, 2448922; 
439733, 2448930; 440089, 2448747; 440179, 2448496; 440157, 2448511; 
440136, 2448537; 440120, 2448633; 440125, 2448690; 439875, 2448932; 
440112, 2448732; 440451, 2447620; 440073, 2448762; 440036, 2448815; 
440000, 2448878; 439982, 2448899; 439961, 2448915; 439941, 2448924; 
440121, 2448718; 441363, 2447030; 440383, 2447794; 441405, 2446869; 
441402, 2446899; 441403, 2446972; 441399, 2446995; 441455, 2446804; 
441373, 2447026; 441476, 2446797; 441317, 2447043; 441283, 2447083; 
441268, 2447104; 441240, 2447171; 441231, 2447186; 441219, 2447195; 
441398, 2446997; 441674, 2446682; 448141, 2444294; 448986, 2441677; 
441864, 2446424; 441847, 2446451; 441836, 2446475; 441434, 2446820; 
441829, 2446505; 441148, 2447188; 441648, 2446705; 441620, 2446723; 
441584, 2446741; 441549, 2446752; 441532, 2446763; 441521, 2446777; 
441829, 2446501; 440674, 2447485; 440710, 2447368; 440699, 2447389; 
440693, 2447407; 440695, 2447430; 440703, 2447452; 441201, 2447195; 
440693, 2447475; 440800, 2447339; 440599, 2447501; 440579, 2447511; 
440540, 2447539; 440487, 2447571; 440468, 2447593; 440124, 2448663; 
440703, 2447461; 440941, 2447230; 440413, 2447711; 441133, 2447183; 
441113, 2447170; 441095, 2447154; 441083, 2447147; 441058, 2447153; 
440722, 2447354; 440969, 2447210; 440740, 2447346; 440888, 2447250; 
440873, 2447265; 440865, 2447286; 440858, 2447311; 440842, 2447328; 
441172, 2447190; 441039, 2447168; 438599, 2451708; 438434, 2451069; 
438440, 2451600; 438425, 2451652; 438429, 2451670; 438442, 2451682; 
438419, 2451509; 438529, 2451692; 438410, 2451464; 438657, 2451738; 
439516, 2448971; 438675, 2451766; 440125, 2448578; 438680, 2451858; 
438715, 2451908; 438484, 2451690; 438467, 2451228; 438455, 2451089; 
438463, 2451098; 438475, 2451113; 438484, 2451141; 438486, 2451163; 
438435, 2451571; 438472, 2451209; 438888, 2452163; 438472, 2451261; 
438481, 2451287; 438485, 2451346; 438478, 2451359; 438454, 2451380; 
438422, 2451414; 438481, 2451188; 448609, 2443974; 438669, 2452384; 
438605, 2452379; 438540, 2452374; 438510, 2452340; 438449, 2452330; 
438761, 2452013; 438490, 2452605; 438816, 2452396; 448591, 2444072; 
448566, 2444172; 448548, 2444233; 448510, 2444279; 448464, 2444284; 
448299, 2444289; 438431, 2452414; 439138, 2452428; 438670, 2451754; 
438936, 2452213; 438977, 2452232; 438979, 2452233; 439031, 2452285; 
439037, 2452297; 438716, 2452393; 439083, 2452342; 438779, 2452391; 
439171, 2452514; 439201, 2452565; 439114, 2452513; 438954, 2452430; 
438851, 2452395; 438833, 2452090; 439061, 2452327; 439044, 2449631; 
438944, 2449813; 439167, 2449414; 439146, 2449435; 439114, 2449463; 
439102, 2449480; 439220, 2449318; 439065, 2449586; 439230, 2449287; 
439037, 2449642; 439025, 2449671; 439016, 2449687; 438999, 2449702; 
438974, 2449738; 438965, 2449767; 439076, 2449548; 439382, 2449107; 
439508, 2448984; 439451, 2449000; 439437, 2449023; 438680, 2451783; 
439433, 2449078; 439200, 2449362; 439399, 2449097; 439421, 2449088; 
439361, 2449126; 439330, 2449145; 439307, 2449169; 439277, 2449220; 
439260, 2449242; 439244, 2449261; 438425, 2451047; 438554, 2450559; 
438737, 2450311; 438736, 2450325; 438731, 2450342; 438715, 2450373; 
438690, 2450392; 438621, 2450415; 438732, 2450286; 438578, 2450438; 
438501, 2450796; 438488, 2450686; 438472, 2450910; 438435, 2450985; 
438427, 2450964; 438919, 2449853; 439437, 2449066; 438581, 2450423; 
438816, 2450028; 438717, 2450241; 438894, 2449879; 438884, 2449918; 
438904, 2449863; 438831, 2450010; 438850, 2449982; 438791, 2450036; 
438765, 2450051; 438744, 2450081; 438730, 2450109; 438717, 2450158; 
438716, 2450162; 438713, 2450206.
    (ii) Map of Unit 4-Montane Wet for Hawaiian picture-wing fly 
(Drosophila sharpi) follows:

[[Page 1034]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR13AP10.032

    (10) Unit 5-Montane Wet, Kauai County, Hawaii.
    (i) Unit 5-Montane Wet consists of 789.9 ac (319.7 ha) and includes 
land bounded by the following UTM Zone 4, NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 
433436, 2449707; 433445, 2449707; 433444, 2449707; 433443, 2449707; 
433458, 2449707; 433436, 2449707; 433426, 2449707; 433408, 2449708; 
433429,

[[Page 1035]]

2449741; 433493, 2449765; 433633, 2449724; 433742, 2449724; 433467, 
2449787; 433460, 2449707; 433468, 2449706; 433484, 2449694; 433414, 
2449628; 433461, 2449623; 433457, 2449622; 433339, 2449600; 433440, 
2449604; 433437, 2449592; 433426, 2449556; 433419, 2449599; 433831, 
2449767; 434991, 2449344; 433401, 2449697; 433480, 2449629; 434938, 
2449321; 433313, 2449484; 433455, 2449620; 434842, 2449253; 434839, 
2449258; 434834, 2449277; 434833, 2449278; 434833, 2449278; 434833, 
2449280; 434833, 2449281; 434872, 2449294; 434881, 2449297; 434884, 
2449298; 435010, 2449343; 434899, 2449305; 433903, 2449882; 435011, 
2449352; 435010, 2449343; 435005, 2449310; 434948, 2449300; 434908, 
2449290; 434908, 2449290; 434890, 2449251; 434872, 2449246; 434848, 
2449239; 434844, 2449248; 434034, 2449950; 434026, 2449951; 433969, 
2449958; 434898, 2449304; 435183, 2449401; 434713, 2447038; 434738, 
2447045; 434738, 2447030; 434795, 2447069; 434994, 2447085; 435093, 
2447245; 435290, 2447449; 435295, 2447440; 435360, 2447538; 435282, 
2448685; 435266, 2448909; 435236, 2449351; 434686, 2447020; 435232, 
2449399; 435272, 2448835; 435080, 2449407; 434920, 2449394; 434752, 
2449405; 434498, 2449522; 434338, 2449660; 434208, 2449767; 434141, 
2449863; 434137, 2449869; 434124, 2449948; 434074, 2449972; 433461, 
2449623; 433339, 2449381; 435234, 2449384; 433589, 2449323; 433725, 
2448994; 433545, 2449136; 433389, 2449256; 433567, 2449260; 433588, 
2449244; 433880, 2448827; 433612, 2449262; 433525, 2449415; 433567, 
2449398; 433546, 2449412; 434627, 2447088; 433448, 2449426; 435236, 
2449347; 433368, 2449293; 433599, 2449252; 434202, 2447345; 433367, 
2449352; 434073, 2448685; 434357, 2447229; 434073, 2447500; 434086, 
2447693; 434163, 2447783; 434254, 2447886; 434318, 2448182; 434318, 
2448298; 434292, 2448479; 434279, 2447951; 434486, 2447126; 434228, 
2448620.
    (ii) Map of Unit 5-Montane Wet for Hawaiian picture-wing fly 
(Drosophila sharpi) follows:

[[Page 1036]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR13AP10.033

    (11) Unit 6-Montane Wet, Kauai County, Hawaii.
    (i) Unit 6-Montane Wet consists of 413.5 ac (167.3 ha) and includes 
land bounded by the following UTM Zone 4, NAD83 coordinates (E, N): 
448516, 2447525; 447976, 2448470; 448042, 2448338; 448133, 2448200; 
448235, 2448042; 448834, 2447273; 448288, 2447915; 448412, 2447653; 
448669,

[[Page 1037]]

2447406; 447943, 2448562; 448763, 2447342; 448059, 2449434; 448321, 
2447795; 447961, 2448628; 448037, 2448780; 448088, 2448897; 448122, 
2449037; 448119, 2449134; 448056, 2449368; 448099, 2449454; 448242, 
2449457; 448328, 2449449; 448440, 2449296; 448382, 2449406; 448887, 
2447191; 448091, 2449266; 448610, 2449255; 448931, 2447092; 448511, 
2449199; 448623, 2449141; 448641, 2449184; 448593, 2449298; 448613, 
2449357; 448702, 2449395; 448812, 2449420; 448906, 2449440; 448959, 
2449443; 448964, 2449425; 448952, 2449316; 448954, 2449143; 448881, 
2447609; 448987, 2448959; 448980, 2446980; 448979, 2446983; 448577, 
2449143; 448980, 2446982; 448981, 2446981; 449105, 2447827; 449087, 
2447916; 449044, 2448132; 449032, 2448326; 449045, 2448506; 449040, 
2448659; 449012, 2448822.
    (ii) Map of Unit 6-Montane Wet for Hawaiian picture-wing fly 
(Drosophila sharpi) follows:

[[Page 1038]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR13AP10.034


[[Page 1039]]



          Hawaiian picture-wing fly (Drosophila substenoptera)

    (1) Critical habitat is depicted for County of Honolulu, island of 
Oahu, Hawaii, on the maps below.
    (2) The primary constituent elements of critical habitat for 
Drosophila substenoptera are:
    (i) Mesic to wet, lowland to montane, ohia and koa forest between 
the elevations of 1,920-4,030 ft (585-1,228 m); and
    (ii) The larval host plants Cheirodendron platyphyllum ssp. 
platyphyllum, C. trigynum ssp. trigynum, Tetraplasandra kavaiensis, and 
T. oahuensis, which exhibit one or more life stages (from seedlings to 
senescent individuals).
    (3) Critical habitat does not include manmade structures (such as 
buildings, aqueducts, airports, and roads) and the land on which they 
are located existing within the legal boundaries on the effective date 
of this rule.
    (4) Critical habitat map units. Coordinates are in Universal 
Transverse Mercator (UTM) Zone 4 with units in meters using North 
American Datum of 1983 (NAD83).
    (5) Note: Index map of critical habitat units for Drosophila 
substenoptera follows:

[[Page 1040]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE08.034

    (6) Drosophila substenoptera--Unit 1--Mt. Kaala, City and County of 
Honolulu, island of Oahu, Hawaii.
    (i) Land bounded by the following coordinates: 588692, 2378661; 
588740, 2378622; 588806, 2378595; 588799, 2378573; 588790, 2378564; 
588785, 2378562; 588776, 2378565; 588776, 2378565; 588776,

[[Page 1041]]

2378565; 588776, 2378565; 588776, 2378565; 588776, 2378565; 588776, 
2378566; 588766, 2378566; 588766, 2378566; 588766, 2378566; 588766, 
2378566; 588766, 2378566; 588766, 2378566; 588766, 2378566; 588766, 
2378566; 588766, 2378566; 588766, 2378566; 588766, 2378566; 588766, 
2378566; 588766, 2378566; 588765, 2378566; 588765, 2378566; 588765, 
2378566; 588753, 2378551; 588731, 2378529; 588722, 2378520; 588722, 
2378520; 588722, 2378520; 588714, 2378509; 588660, 2378470; 588660, 
2378470; 588660, 2378470; 588660, 2378470; 588617, 2378429; 588584, 
2378412; 588563, 2378405; 588530, 2378398; 588530, 2378398; 588484, 
2378387; 588466, 2378384; 588466, 2378384; 588466, 2378384; 588466, 
2378384; 588466, 2378384; 588466, 2378384; 588466, 2378384; 588466, 
2378384; 588459, 2378380; 588459, 2378380; 588459, 2378380; 588459, 
2378380; 588459, 2378379; 588459, 2378379; 588459, 2378379; 588459, 
2378379; 588395, 2378293; 588361, 2378254; 588361, 2378254; 588361, 
2378254; 588361, 2378254; 588361, 2378254; 588349, 2378234; 588349, 
2378234; 588349, 2378234; 588349, 2378234; 588349, 2378234; 588349, 
2378234; 588344, 2378210; 588344, 2378210; 588344, 2378210; 588344, 
2378210; 588344, 2378210; 588344, 2378210; 588344, 2378186; 588344, 
2378186; 588344, 2378186; 588344, 2378186; 588349, 2378161; 588349, 
2378161; 588349, 2378161; 588349, 2378161; 588373, 2378097; 588385, 
2378041; 588384, 2378026; 588380, 2378003; 588364, 2377972; 588364, 
2377972; 588364, 2377972; 588351, 2377941; 588351, 2377941; 588351, 
2377941; 588351, 2377941; 588351, 2377941; 588351, 2377941; 588351, 
2377941; 588351, 2377941; 588351, 2377941; 588351, 2377941; 588354, 
2377924; 588354, 2377924; 588354, 2377923; 588354, 2377923; 588354, 
2377923; 588362, 2377904; 588362, 2377904; 588362, 2377904; 588362, 
2377904; 588362, 2377904; 588369, 2377893; 588369, 2377893; 588369, 
2377893; 588369, 2377893; 588369, 2377893; 588369, 2377893; 588376, 
2377888; 588308, 2377906; 588255, 2377885; 588156, 2377924; 588103, 
2377905; 588064, 2377903; 587879, 2378062; 587792, 2378228; 587806, 
2378342; 587939, 2378515; 588067, 2378659; 588232, 2378655; 588363, 
2378748; 588503, 2378737; 588614, 2378668.
    (ii) Note: Map of Drosophila substenoptera--Unit 1--Mt. Kaala 
follows:

[[Page 1042]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE08.035

    (7) Drosophila substenoptera--Unit 2--Palikea, City and County of 
Honolulu, island of Oahu, Hawaii.
    (i) Land bounded by the following coordinates: 593529, 2367854; 
593448, 2367801; 593302, 2367874; 593242, 2367927; 593193, 2367967; 
593165, 2368065; 593217, 2368150; 593314, 2368283; 593399,

[[Page 1043]]

2368425; 593448, 2368578; 593505, 2368716; 593622, 2368833; 593703, 
2368906; 593764, 2368963; 593832, 2369044; 593901, 2369145; 594002, 
2369262; 594079, 2369331; 594104, 2369396; 594120, 2369485; 594124, 
2369521; 594148, 2369525; 594213, 2369525; 594310, 2369497; 594395, 
2369473; 594399, 2369392; 594396, 2369356; 594417, 2369313; 594461, 
2369290; 594551, 2369278; 594579, 2369250; 594559, 2369197; 594472, 
2369183; 594391, 2369179; 594354, 2369153; 594302, 2369072; 594257, 
2369015; 594213, 2368914; 594136, 2368809; 594083, 2368672; 594035, 
2368550; 593966, 2368417; 593966, 2368324; 593909, 2368259; 593792, 
2368105; 593675, 2368000.
    (ii) Note: Map of Drosophila substenoptera--Unit 2--Palikea follows:

[[Page 1044]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE08.036


[[Page 1045]]



          Hawaiian picture-wing fly (Drosophila tarphytrichia)

    (1) Critical habitat units are depicted for County of Honolulu, 
island of Oahu, Hawaii, on the maps below.
    (2) The primary constituent elements of critical habitat for 
Drosophila tarphytrichia are:
    (i) Dry to mesic, lowland, ohia and koa forest between the 
elevations of 1,720-2,985 ft (524-910 m); and
    (ii) The larval host plant Charpentiera obovata, which exhibits one 
or more life stages (from seedlings to senescent individuals).
    (3) Critical habitat does not include manmade structures (such as 
buildings, aqueducts, airports, and roads) and the land on which they 
are located existing within the legal boundaries on the effective date 
of this rule.
    (4) Critical habitat map units. Coordinates are in Universal 
Transverse Mercator (UTM) Zone 4 with units in meters using North 
American Datum of 1983 (NAD83).
    (5) Note: Index map of critical habitat units for Drosophila 
tarphytrichia follows:

[[Page 1046]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE08.037

    (6) Drosophila tarphytrichia--Unit 1--Kaluaa Gulch, City and County 
of Honolulu, island of Oahu, Hawaii.
    (i) Land bounded by the following coordinates: 593240, 2374436; 
593231, 2374371; 593281, 2374410; 593315, 2374385; 593612, 2374173; 
593656, 2374138; 593621, 2374096; 593641, 2374077; 593676,

[[Page 1047]]

2374072; 593703, 2374057; 593734, 2374039; 593758, 2374058; 593793, 
2374029; 593779, 2373964; 593731, 2373894; 593660, 2373784; 593609, 
2373702; 593592, 2373648; 593592, 2373594; 593598, 2373553; 593657, 
2373561; 593770, 2373549; 593792, 2373496; 593797, 2373417; 593842, 
2373411; 593842, 2373326; 593905, 2373404; 594053, 2373383; 594103, 
2373292; 594134, 2373228; 594156, 2373250; 594194, 2373256; 594178, 
2373323; 594196, 2373386; 594229, 2373390; 594312, 2373340; 594341, 
2373350; 594339, 2373421; 594383, 2373487; 594381, 2373513; 594460, 
2373552; 594496, 2373553; 594497, 2373518; 594526, 2373509; 594572, 
2373460; 594632, 2373519; 594649, 2373523; 594699, 2373475; 594728, 
2373476; 594762, 2373532; 594791, 2373529; 594828, 2373501; 594852, 
2373465; 594903, 2373501; 594933, 2373500; 594952, 2373489; 594974, 
2373334; 594800, 2373150; 594718, 2373120; 594718, 2373102; 594744, 
2373091; 594710, 2372721; 594720, 2372686; 594716, 2372633; 594678, 
2372623; 594566, 2372651; 594536, 2372666; 594506, 2372663; 594467, 
2372672; 594395, 2372663; 594406, 2372650; 594546, 2372567; 594558, 
2372553; 594551, 2372535; 594389, 2372452; 594395, 2372434; 594415, 
2372428; 594511, 2372449; 594603, 2372437; 594614, 2372421; 594607, 
2372385; 594593, 2372353; 594591, 2372317; 594618, 2372322; 594661, 
2372357; 594700, 2372384; 594696, 2372334; 594697, 2372333; 594697, 
2372283; 594652, 2372257; 594541, 2372266; 594454, 2372294; 594400, 
2372294; 594293, 2372267; 594231, 2372261; 594168, 2372241; 594126, 
2372258; 594075, 2372267; 594030, 2372303; 593999, 2372354; 593948, 
2372388; 593889, 2372397; 593812, 2372413; 593781, 2372425; 593756, 
2372442; 593742, 2372467; 593742, 2372490; 593736, 2372521; 593736, 
2372560; 593757, 2372587; 593790, 2372662; 593663, 2372772; 593543, 
2372859; 593558, 2372894; 593555, 2372910; 593526, 2372928; 593476, 
2372912; 593422, 2372953; 593420, 2372976; 593403, 2372997; 593400, 
2373025; 593373, 2373016; 593352, 2373044; 593328, 2373025; 593215, 
2373118; 593230, 2373171; 593214, 2373176; 593163, 2373154; 593095, 
2373213; 593091, 2373238; 593064, 2373243; 593019, 2373295; 592937, 
2373388; 592889, 2373462; 592897, 2373535; 592908, 2373597; 592923, 
2373668; 592914, 2373772; 592889, 2373866; 592868, 2373941; 592867, 
2373950; 592894, 2374029; 592908, 2374120; 592894, 2374162; 592860, 
2374213; 592854, 2374216; 593151, 2374494.
    (ii) Note: Map of Drosophila tarphytrichia--Unit 1--Kaluaa Gulch 
follows:

[[Page 1048]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE08.038

    (7) Drosophila tarphytrichia--Unit 2--Palikea, City and County of 
Honolulu, island of Oahu, Hawaii.
    (i) Land bounded by the following coordinates: 593529, 2367854; 
593448, 2367801; 593302, 2367874; 593242, 2367927; 593193, 2367967; 
593165, 2368065; 593217, 2368150; 593314, 2368283; 593399,

[[Page 1049]]

2368425; 593448, 2368578; 593505, 2368716; 593622, 2368833; 593703, 
2368906; 593764, 2368963; 593832, 2369044; 593901, 2369145; 594002, 
2369262; 594079, 2369331; 594104, 2369396; 594120, 2369485; 594124, 
2369521; 594148, 2369525; 594213, 2369525; 594310, 2369497; 594395, 
2369473; 594399, 2369392; 594396, 2369356; 594417, 2369313; 594461, 
2369290; 594551, 2369278; 594579, 2369250; 594559, 2369197; 594472, 
2369183; 594391, 2369179; 594354, 2369153; 594302, 2369072; 594257, 
2369015; 594213, 2368914; 594136, 2368809; 594083, 2368672; 594035, 
2368550; 593966, 2368417; 593966, 2368324; 593909, 2368259; 593792, 
2368105; 593675, 2368000.
    (ii) Note: Map of Drosophila tarphytrichia--Unit 2--Palikea follows:

[[Page 1050]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE08.039

    (8) Drosophila tarphytrichia--Unit 3--Puu Kaua, City and County of 
Honolulu, island of Oahu, Hawaii.
    (i) Land bounded by the following coordinates: 594166, 2370854; 
594166, 2370853; 594164, 2370854; 594122, 2370843; 594090, 2370815; 
594040, 2370789; 593996, 2370789; 593930, 2370827; 593852,

[[Page 1051]]

2370875; 593778, 2370907; 593716, 2370947; 593642, 2370999; 593602, 
2371041; 593574, 2371067; 593558, 2371095; 593539, 2371118; 593531, 
2371121; 593534, 2371173; 593519, 2371375; 593533, 2371375; 593552, 
2371390; 593628, 2371404; 593716, 2371426; 593794, 2371431; 593876, 
2371437; 593974, 2371435; 594036, 2371431; 594138, 2371415; 594190, 
2371399; 594232, 2371385; 594246, 2371359; 594239, 2371354; 594170, 
2370879; 594172, 2370877; 594170, 2370855.
    (ii) Note: Map of Drosophila tarphytrichia--Unit 3--Puu Kaua 
follows:

[[Page 1052]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR04DE08.040


[[Page 1053]]



       Zayante Band-Winged Grasshopper (Trimerotropis infantilis)

    1. The unit of critical habitat is depicted for Santa Cruz County, 
California, on the map below.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR07FE01.017


[[Page 1054]]


    2. Within this area, the primary constituent elements for the 
Zayante band-winged grasshopper are those physical and biological 
elements that provide conditions that are essential for the primary 
biological needs of thermoregulation, foraging, sheltering, 
reproduction, and dispersal. The primary constituent elements are--(a) 
the presence of Zayante soils, (b) the occurrence of Zayante sand hills 
habitat and the associated plant species, and (c) certain microhabitat 
conditions, including areas that receive large amounts of sunlight, 
widely scattered tree and shrub cover, bare or sparsely vegetated 
ground, and loose sand. Zayante sand hills habitat is characterized by 
plant species associated with ponderosa pine sand parkland and/or 
silverleaf manzanita mixed chaparral. Plant species that may occur 
within the boundaries include, but are not limited to--ponderosa pine 
(Pinus ponderosa), silver-leafed manzanita (Arctostaphylos silvicola), 
California lilac (Ceonothus sp.), Adenostoma sp., yerba santa 
(Eriodictyon sp.), sandwort (Minuartia sp.), pussypaws (Calyptridium 
umbellatum), Ben Lomond spineflower (Erysimum teretifolium), 
monkeyflower (Mimulus rattanii), miniature lupine (Lupinis bicolor), 
gilia (Gilia tenuiflora), California aster (Lessingia filaginifolia), 
Ben Lomond buckwheat (Eriogonum nudum ssp. decurrens), and Ben Lomond 
spineflower (Chorizanthe pungens var. hartwegiana).
    3. Critical habitat does not include existing developed sites 
consisting of buildings, roads, aquaducts, railroads, airports, paved 
areas, and similar features and structures.
    Santa Cruz County, California. Boundaries are based upon the Public 
Land Survey System. Within the historical boundaries of the Land Grants 
of Zayanta, San Augustin, La Carbonera, and Canada Del Rincon En El Rio 
San Lorenzo De Santa Cruz, boundaries are based upon section lines that 
are extensions to the Public Land Survey System developed by the 
California Department of Forestry and obtained by the Service from the 
State of California's Stephen P. Teale Data Center. Township and Range 
numbering is derived from the Mount Diablo Base and Meridian. The 
following lands located within Santa Cruz County are being proposed for 
critical habitat: T.9 S., R.1 W., SE\1/4\ sec. 31; T.9 S., R.2 W., SE\1/
4\ sec. 33, E\1/2\ sec. 34, SW\1/4\ sec. 35, S\1/2\ sec. 3; T.10 S., R1 
W., W\1/2\ sec. 6; T.10 S., R.2 W., sec. 1, S\1/2\ NW\1/4\ sec. 2, sec. 
3, W\1/2\ sec. 4, W\1/2\ sec. 9, sec. 10, sec. 11, sec. 13, sec. 14, 
N\1/2\ SE\1/4\ sec. 15, NE\1/4\ sec. 22, secs. 23-26, N\1/2\ sec. 35, 
sec. 36, excluding all lands covered under the Revised Habitat 
Conservation Plan for the Quail Hollow Quarry and the Habitat 
Conservation Plan for the Hanson Aggregates' Felton Plant.

              Blackburn's Sphinx Moth (Manduca blackburni)

    (1) Critical habitat units are depicted for the Hawaiian islands of 
Maui, Kahoolawe, Hawaii, and Molokai on the maps below.
    (2) The primary constituent elements of critical habitat for 
Blackburn's sphinx moth include specific habitat components identified 
as essential for the primary biological needs of foraging, sheltering, 
maturation, dispersal, breeding, and egg-laying.
    (i) Based on our current knowledge of the species, the primary 
constituent elements required by Blackburn's sphinx moth larvae for 
foraging and maturation are two larval host plant species in the endemic 
genus Nothocestrum (N. breviflorum and N. latifolium) and the habitats 
that support these plants, i.e., dry and mesic habitats between the 
elevations of sea level and 1,525 m (5,000 ft) that receive between 25 
and 250 cm (10 and 100 in) of annual precipitation.
    (ii) Based on our current knowledge of the species, the primary 
constituent elements required by Blackburn's sphinx moth adults for 
foraging, sheltering, dispersal, breeding, and egg production are native 
nectar-supplying plants, including, but not limited to, Ipomoea spp., 
Capparis sandwichiana, and Plumbago zeylanica, and the habitats that 
support these plants, i.e., dry and mesic habitats between the 
elevations of sea level and 1,525 m (5,000 ft) that receive between 25 
and 250 cm (10 and 100 in) of annual precipitation.
    (3) Existing manmade features and structures within the boundaries 
of the mapped areas do not contain one or more of the primary 
constituent elements described for the species in paragraph (2) of this 
section, and therefore, are not included in the critical habitat 
designations. These features include, but are not limited to: buildings; 
roads; aqueducts and other water system features such as pumping 
stations, irrigation ditches, pipelines, siphons, tunnels, water tanks, 
gauging stations (section in a stream channel equipped with facilities 
for obtaining streamflow data), intakes, and wells; telecommunications 
towers and associated structures and equipment; electrical power 
transmission lines and associated rights-of-way; radars; telemetry 
antennas; missile launch sites; arboreta and gardens; heiau (indigenous 
places of worship or shrines); airports; other paved areas; lawns; and 
other rural residential landscaped areas.
    (4) Critical habitat units are described below. Coordinates are in 
UTM Zone 4 with units in meters using North American Datum of 1983 
(NAD83). The following index map shows the general locations of the 9 
critical habitat units designated on the islands of Hawaii, Kahoolawe, 
Maui, and Molokai.
    (i) Note:Map 1--State of Hawaii General Locations of Units for 
Blackburn's Sphinx

[[Page 1055]]

Moth on Molokai, Maui, Kahoolawe, and Hawaii follows:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10JN03.004

    (ii) Unit 1: Island of Maui, Puu O Kali (1,604 ha; 3,965 ac):
    (A) Unit 1 consists of the following 38 boundary points: Start at 
770230, 2293671; 769969, 2293640; 769876, 2293794; 769523, 2293779; 
769444, 2293784; 769146, 2293904; 769358, 2294451; 769492, 2294471; 
769569, 2294563; 770123, 2294379; 770384, 2294317; 770707, 2294517; 
770169, 2294794; 769629, 2295149; 769732, 2295410; 770032, 2295219; 
769985, 2295371; 770360, 2295328; 769892, 2295671; 770362, 2295705; 
770578, 2295954; 771492, 2296086; 772138, 2296102; 772522, 2296179; 
772876, 2295933; 773384, 2295733; 773324, 2296764; 775265, 2296040; 
775041, 2295484; 774484, 2295757; 774033, 2294844; 774654, 2294538; 
774448, 2294006; 774392, 2292779; 773825, 2291760; 772032, 2292639; 
770772, 2293255; 770524, 2293353; return to starting point.

    (B) Note: Unit 1 is depicted below on Map 2--Units 1, 2, 3, and 4--
Island of Maui.

    (iii) Unit 2: Island of Maui, Cape Kinau (603 ha; 1,490 ac):
    (A) Unit 2 consists of the following 36 boundary points: 769419, 
2281688; 769716, 2281856; 769854, 2281648; 769726, 2281351; 769548, 
2281173; 769433, 2280683; 769312, 2280406; 769251, 2280342; 769175, 
2280353; 769073, 2280442; 768954, 2280466; 768791, 2280406; 768658, 
2280329; 768621, 2280282; 768645, 2279874; 768737, 2279820; 767046, 
2281800; 767136, 2281768; 767208, 2281837; 767139, 2281940; 767151, 
2281994; 767136, 2282020; 767607, 2282308; 767710, 2282266; 767837, 
2282318; 767857, 2282291; 768160, 2282410; 769380, 2282944; 769746, 
2282588; 769429, 2282400; 769103, 2282123; 768598, 2281510; 768687, 
2281391; 768737, 2281399; 768836, 2281460. 768738, 2279820. Coast.

    (B) Note: Unit 2 is depicted below on Map 2--Units 1, 2, 3, and 4--
Island of Maui.

    (iv) Unit 3: Island of Maui, Kanaio (2,420 ha; 5,981 ac):
    (A) Unit 3 consists of the following 45 boundary points: 777366, 
2282219; 777421, 2281595; 777453, 2281235; 777531, 2280334; 777588, 
2279661; 777719, 2278166; 770402, 2278173; 770445, 2278268; 770936, 
2279194; 771208, 2279714; 771289, 2279691; 771211, 2279314; 771211, 
2278906; 771368, 2278922; 771525, 2279173; 771854, 2279424; 772011, 
2279707; 772231, 2279974; 772357, 2280335; 772451, 2280445; 772514, 
2280351; 772561, 2280068; 772687,

[[Page 1056]]

2279848; 772938, 2279801; 773221, 2279817; 773425, 2280021; 773676, 
2280335; 773676, 2280665; 773888, 2280993; 773606, 2281355; 774253, 
2281430; 774897, 2280433; 775340, 2281119; 774662, 2281499; 775105, 
2281701; 775435, 2282376; 775590, 2284264; 776004, 2284678; 776020, 
2285055; 776484, 2284998; 776553, 2285169; 776691, 2285141; 776878, 
2283402; 777021, 2282206; 777227, 2278017. Coast.
    (B) Unit excludes an area (1 ha; 2 ac) consisting of the following 6 
boundary points: 771887, 2277914; 771944, 2277910; 771986, 2277995; 
771948, 2277989; 771909, 2277980; 771870, 2277975.

    (C) Note: Unit 3 is depicted below on Map 2--Units 1, 2, 3, and 4--
Island of Maui.

    (v) Unit 4: Island of Maui, Kahikinui (4,799 ha; 11,859 ac):
    (A) Unit 4 consists of the following 79 boundary points: 786068, 
2283893; 786089, 2283760; 782956, 2282353; 783312, 2282399; 784167, 
2282606; 784764, 2282682; 785521, 2282878; 786198, 2283068; 786227, 
2282882; 786706, 2282953; 786657, 2283206; 787388, 2283424; 787555, 
2283500; 788907, 2284087; 789388, 2283321; 789534, 2283053; 788185, 
2282559; 786399, 2281761; 785563, 2281400; 785715, 2281039; 786057, 
2280754; 786112, 2280548; 779950, 2278500; 779720, 2280135; 779703, 
2280237; 779617, 2280887; 779412, 2282307; 779402, 2282377; 779372, 
2282585; 779368, 2282602; 779376, 2282933; 779427, 2285142; 779549, 
2285133; 779550, 2285007; 780604, 2285092; 781898, 2285373; 781956, 
2285061; 781923, 2284848; 781966, 2284607; 781902, 2284320; 782032, 
2283672; 782491, 2282783; 782731, 2282340; 783230, 2282514; 783112, 
2282850; 782587, 2283565; 782996, 2283744; 783721, 2283912; 784941, 
2284106; 784823, 2284611; 785088, 2284724; 785012, 2285109; 784719, 
2285271; 784639, 2285526; 784482, 2285613; 784385, 2285910; 786498, 
2286367; 787288, 2286710; 787415, 2286765; 787506, 2286804; 787311, 
2286772; 782285, 2285909; 782162, 2286366; 781651, 2286291; 781569, 
2286457; 782827, 2286695; 786589, 2287817; 787091, 2287913; 787800, 
2286248; 787893, 2286297; 787957, 2285636; 788105, 2285388; 788261, 
2285257; 788481, 2284803; 788363, 2284742; 786517, 2283943; 786510, 
2283966; 786068, 2283893; 779965, 2278394. Coast.

    (B) Note: Unit 4 is depicted on Map 2--Units 1, 2, 3, and 4--Island 
of Maui, which follows:

[[Page 1057]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10JN03.005

    (vi) Unit 5: Island of Maui, Kanaha Pond (56 ha; 139 ac):
    (A) Unit 5 consists of the following 35 boundary points: Start at 
764695, 2312624; 764849, 2312615; 765062, 2312636; 765174, 2312639; 
765226, 2312636; 765201, 2312573; 765221, 2312534; 765223, 2312502; 
765259, 2312452; 765291, 2312304; 765287, 2312260; 765291, 2312223; 
765281, 2312190; 765356, 2312144; 765352, 2312121; 765325, 2312090; 
765284, 2312093; 765213, 2312118; 765183, 2312109; 765157, 2312091; 
765106, 2312075; 765069, 2312044; 765036, 2312036; 764954, 2311971; 
764872, 2311927; 764845, 2311912; 764588, 2311880; 764530, 2311946; 
764474, 2311988; 764424, 2312038; 764390, 2312140; 764336, 2312293; 
764397, 2312539; 764542, 2312565; 764615, 2312613; return to starting 
point.

    (B) Note: Unit 5 is depicted below on Map 3--Units 5 and 6--Island 
of Maui.
    (vii) Unit 6: Island of Maui, Kanaha Park (25 ha; 62 ac):
    (A) Unit 6 consists of the following 7 boundary points: 766783, 
2313583; 766781, 2313351; 766330, 2313141; 765776, 2312874; 765717, 
2312838; 765689, 2312823; 765557, 2313073. Coast.

    (B) Note: Unit 6 is depicted on Map 3--Units 5 and 6--Island of 
Maui, which follows:

[[Page 1058]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10JN03.006

    (viii) Unit 7: Island of Kahoolawe, Upper Kahoolawe (1,721 ha; 4,252 
ac):
    (A) Unit 7 consists of the following 39 boundary points: Start at 
751848, 2276600; 751944, 2276801; 752021, 2277051; 752708, 2277402; 
752817, 2277444; 752922, 2277482; 753039, 2277468; 754266, 2276996; 
754390, 2276868; 754486, 2276715; 754758, 2275711; 754871, 2275319; 
754880, 2275141; 754868, 2275021; 754822, 2274844; 754523, 2273789; 
754438, 2273635; 754364, 2273546; 754213, 2273418; 753057, 2272446; 
752825, 2272362; 750995, 2272184; 750869, 2272206; 750787, 2272247; 
749069, 2273302; 749575, 2273659; 750287, 2273729; 750943, 2273970; 
751205, 2274403; 751431, 2274927; 751475, 2275037; 751531, 2275180; 
751447, 2275330; 751428, 2275366; 751291, 2275543; 751032, 2275938; 
751109, 2276062; 751570, 2276254; 751752, 2276408; return to starting 
point.

    (B) Note: Unit 7 is depicted on Map 4--Unit 7--Island of Kahoolawe, 
which follows:

[[Page 1059]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10JN03.007

    (ix) Unit 8: Island of Hawaii, Puuwaawaa--Hualalai (9,954 ha; 24,598 
ac):
    (A) Unit 8 consists of the following 449 boundary points: Start at 
193748, 2193379; 193979, 2193518; 194022, 2193428; 194091, 2193386; 
194109, 2193303; 194145, 2193281; 194185, 2193225; 194212, 2193188; 
194225, 2193213; 194201, 2193260; 194232, 2193325; 194227, 2193356; 
194266, 2193381; 194290, 2193366; 194306, 2193379; 194301, 2193431; 
194281, 2193478; 194292, 2193504; 194286, 2193538; 194291, 2193598; 
194328, 2193648; 194331, 2193666; 194320, 2193710; 194969, 2194077; 
195027, 2194069; 195065, 2194098; 195121, 2194107; 195172, 2194152; 
195231, 2194087; 195235, 2194013; 195256, 2193957; 195324, 2193909; 
195378, 2193840; 195441, 2193804; 195564, 2193455; 195558, 2193407; 
195590, 2193322; 195588, 2193245; 195641, 2193182; 195659, 2193134; 
195645, 2193064; 195682, 2192983; 195722, 2192963; 195793, 2192836; 
195838, 2192773; 195829, 2192664; 195844, 2192499; 195907, 2192445; 
196009, 2192213; 196079, 2192144; 196061, 2192063; 196077, 2191999; 
196121, 2191888; 196184, 2191891; 196196, 2191837; 196250, 2191837; 
196287, 2191749; 196280, 2191681; 196331, 2191672; 196361, 2191560; 
196379, 2191428; 196414, 2191446; 196473, 2191524; 196497, 2191624; 
196494, 2191708; 196593, 2191768; 196656, 2191837; 196644, 2191885; 
196593, 2192093; 196576, 2192195; 196596, 2192288; 196581, 2192409; 
196566, 2192451; 196506, 2192484; 196397, 2192655; 196367, 2192770; 
196427, 2192764; 196452, 2192703; 196581, 2192577; 196614, 2192547; 
196623, 2192577; 196605, 2192634; 196608, 2192685; 196679, 2192667; 
196749, 2192610; 196804, 2192476; 196831, 2192436; 196879, 2192403; 
196885, 2192466; 196815, 2192586; 196717, 2192687; 196614, 2192809; 
196241, 2193037; 196094, 2193227; 196003, 2193494; 195985, 2193759; 
196088, 2193858; 195949, 2194099; 195958, 2194379; 195865, 2194469; 
195811, 2194559; 196050, 2194687; 196076, 2194653; 196055, 2194610; 
196109, 2194511; 196184, 2194505; 196223, 2194361; 196256, 2194337; 
196322, 2194285; 196334, 2194171; 196370, 2194174; 196348, 2194291; 
196379, 2194331; 196367, 2194427; 196363, 2194508; 196372, 2194578; 
196427, 2194610; 196385, 2194670; 196314, 2194718; 196304, 2194841; 
196831, 2195161; 196944, 2195021; 196930, 2194959; 197092, 2194830; 
197104, 2194773; 197179, 2194752; 197273, 2194622; 197279, 2194550; 
197361, 2194467; 197477, 2194325; 197573, 2194252; 197613, 2194177; 
197654, 2194115;

[[Page 1060]]

197640, 2194033; 197654, 2193943; 197697, 2193753; 197750, 2193692; 
197778, 2193488; 197871, 2193374; 197922, 2193401; 197995, 2193392; 
198304, 2193109; 198362, 2193103; 198518, 2192944; 198584, 2192854; 
198620, 2192761; 198680, 2192715; 198716, 2192658; 198731, 2192586; 
198801, 2192589; 198879, 2192547; 198921, 2192493; 199051, 2192352; 
199101, 2192412; 199177, 2192324; 199171, 2192201; 199246, 2192141; 
199252, 2192243; 199294, 2192252; 199303, 2192291; 199225, 2192348; 
199243, 2192397; 199186, 2192439; 199156, 2192529; 199084, 2192566; 
199047, 2192643; 198948, 2192736; 198956, 2192786; 198949, 2192835; 
198931, 2192888; 198913, 2192924; 198819, 2192954; 198760, 2192979; 
198741, 2193028; 198777, 2193070; 198746, 2193098; 198718, 2193126; 
198730, 2193180; 198683, 2193290; 198609, 2193325; 198679, 2193472; 
198648, 2193542; 198669, 2193598; 198623, 2193633; 198602, 2193685; 
198553, 2193675; 198480, 2193748; 198442, 2193839; 198494, 2193857; 
198550, 2193860; 198819, 2193594; 198819, 2193514; 198882, 2193479; 
198872, 2193388; 198872, 2193252; 198861, 2193199; 198844, 2193143; 
198935, 2193063; 198981, 2193027; 199010, 2192968; 199103, 2193492; 
199103, 2193552; 199015, 2193608; 198931, 2193619; 198910, 2193717; 
198753, 2193867; 198735, 2193951; 198805, 2193972; 198889, 2193941; 
198942, 2193853; 199005, 2193794; 199050, 2193829; 199001, 2193880; 
199029, 2193930; 199092, 2193962; 199110, 2194004; 199025, 2194133; 
199012, 2194241; 198896, 2194308; 198861, 2194399; 198799, 2194485; 
198862, 2194479; 198938, 2194378; 199015, 2194329; 198987, 2194392; 
198934, 2194434; 198931, 2194472; 198798, 2194560; 198795, 2194672; 
198749, 2194749; 198623, 2194860; 198553, 2194937; 198550, 2195004; 
198637, 2195060; 198683, 2195074; 198746, 2195175; 198714, 2195256; 
198707, 2195340; 198588, 2195399; 198497, 2195417; 198402, 2195429; 
198344, 2195490; 198302, 2195511; 198274, 2195563; 198179, 2195584; 
198172, 2195658; 198127, 2195703; 198641, 2195878; 198662, 2195829; 
198714, 2195780; 198732, 2195665; 198809, 2195633; 198970, 2195626; 
199047, 2195549; 199075, 2195469; 199141, 2195427; 199087, 2195235; 
199101, 2195127; 199124, 2194955; 199208, 2194840; 199267, 2194675; 
199270, 2194567; 199260, 2194504; 199263, 2194437; 199310, 2194460; 
199347, 2194479; 199306, 2194541; 199326, 2194591; 199424, 2194595; 
199508, 2194525; 199522, 2194441; 199582, 2194392; 199598, 2194329; 
199643, 2194295; 199662, 2194406; 199599, 2194462; 199596, 2194588; 
199515, 2194853; 199368, 2195011; 199260, 2195319; 199312, 2195434; 
199235, 2195476; 199274, 2195696; 199169, 2195847; 199138, 2195938; 
199071, 2196039; 199663, 2196234; 199977, 2195921; 200985, 2194989; 
201320, 2194454; 201268, 2194305; 201289, 2194176; 201150, 2193708; 
201809, 2193212; 202487, 2192751; 202713, 2192557; 202794, 2192559; 
203007, 2192869; 203088, 2192979; 203136, 2192967; 203139, 2192921; 
203197, 2192911; 203224, 2192943; 203218, 2192991; 203264, 2193014; 
203275, 2193130; 203278, 2193165; 203253, 2193224; 203277, 2193250; 
203296, 2193248; 203321, 2193200; 203355, 2193261; 203340, 2193353; 
203398, 2193434; 203487, 2193372; 203534, 2193296; 203580, 2193267; 
203611, 2193247; 203631, 2193197; 203661, 2193126; 203650, 2193032; 
203644, 2192994; 203649, 2192943; 203665, 2192930; 203692, 2192935; 
203681, 2193005; 203695, 2193038; 203743, 2193045; 203751, 2193024; 
203738, 2192991; 203747, 2192970; 203800, 2192948; 203810, 2192905; 
203819, 2192867; 203833, 2192838; 203878, 2192830; 203916, 2192790; 
203944, 2192724; 203935, 2192680; 203951, 2192655; 203968, 2192628; 
203952, 2192587; 203978, 2192535; 203975, 2192477; 203992, 2192466; 
204025, 2192444; 204044, 2192404; 204086, 2192392; 204133, 2192395; 
204170, 2192417; 204186, 2192474; 204162, 2192528; 204130, 2192602; 
204129, 2192641; 204081, 2192714; 204046, 2192717; 204022, 2192755; 
204021, 2192835; 204057, 2192840; 204076, 2192827; 204105, 2192829; 
204151, 2192846; 204218, 2192835; 204283, 2192808; 204311, 2192754; 
204327, 2192655; 204350, 2192684; 204434, 2192709; 204459, 2192700; 
204478, 2192684; 204469, 2192614; 204482, 2192593; 204485, 2192570; 
204478, 2192547; 204485, 2192512; 204523, 2192529; 204540, 2192511; 
204553, 2192479; 204294, 2191977; 203325, 2189871; 203670, 2189403; 
203884, 2188867; 203876, 2188804; 204461, 2186966; 204241, 2186814; 
203491, 2186573; 202905, 2186615; 201914, 2186332; 201935, 2186229; 
201876, 2186192; 201969, 2186029; 201914, 2185947; 201962, 2185871; 
201921, 2185754; 201866, 2185830; 201776, 2185816; 201838, 2185534; 
201270, 2183971; 200424, 2183478; 194641, 2182859; 194391, 2182952; 
194378, 2183030; 194326, 2183157; 194456, 2183246; 194375, 2183319; 
194389, 2183392; 194641, 2183400; 195006, 2183522; 195441, 2183574; 
195719, 2183591; 196066, 2183591; 196362, 2183670; 196372, 2183812; 
195923, 2185051; 195805, 2185370; 195527, 2186175; 195324, 2186794; 
195333, 2187189; 195544, 2187388; 195515, 2187690; 195450, 2187775; 
193517, 2187814; 192035, 2187735; 191436, 2188145; 191395, 2188201; 
191330, 2188228; 191183, 2188413; 191053, 2188549; 192020, 2188888; 
192202, 2189030; 192137, 2189101; 192046, 2189432; 191945, 2189652; 
191926, 2189817; 192000, 2189918; 191994, 2190055; 192009, 2190194; 
191926, 2190322; 191954, 2190387; 191972, 2190616; 191961, 2190800; 
191953, 2190938; 191917, 2191094; 191981, 2191296; 191943, 2191461; 
191923, 2191548; 191871, 2191672; 191850, 2191864; 191834, 2192269; 
return to starting point.
    (B) This unit excludes three areas:
    (1) Unit excludes an area (292 ha; 723 ac) consisting of the 
following 53 boundary points: Start at 194866, 2189663; 194567, 2189462; 
194355, 2189326; 194325, 2189306; 194187, 2189261; 193786, 2189183; 
193790, 2189211; 193677, 2189413; 193430, 2189605; 193325, 2189528; 
192941, 2190012; 192773, 2190361; 192668, 2190673; 192763, 2190854; 
192807, 2191149; 192721, 2191436; 192600, 2191671; 192527, 2191928; 
192513, 2192089; 192642, 2191999; 192658, 2191915; 192697, 2191881; 
192913, 2191886; 193004, 2191923; 193133, 2191855; 193180, 2191784; 
193280, 2191621; 193278, 2191563; 193175, 2191653; 193109, 2191763; 
193075, 2191789; 192949, 2191779; 192960, 2191622; 193028, 2191556; 
193012, 2191490; 193102, 2191393; 193291, 2191346; 193364, 2191272; 
193540, 2191230; 193782, 2191099; 193918, 2190994; 193958, 2190933; 
193989, 2190799; 193984, 2190718; 194048, 2190643; 194008, 2190547; 
194039, 2190466; 194149, 2190358; 194304, 2190298; 194449, 2190177; 
194695, 2189967; 194808, 2189833; 194848, 2189683; return to starting 
point.
    (2) Unit excludes an area (15 ha; 38 ac) consisting of the following 
12 boundary points: Start at 202034, 2189562; 202141, 2189566; 202153, 
2189649; 202308, 2189645; 202298, 2189564; 202339, 2189548; 202329, 
2189219; 202193, 2189187; 202230,

[[Page 1061]]

2189088; 202042, 2189024; 202020, 2189151; 202024, 2189554; return to 
starting point.
    (3) Unit excludes an area (11 ha; 28 ac) consisting of the following 
23 boundary points: Start at 199447, 2195793; 199533, 2195796; 199635, 
2195736; 199639, 2195696; 199701, 2195643; 199708, 2195591; 199713, 
2195537; 199743, 2195499; 199737, 2195444; 199746, 2195368; 199725, 
2195312; 199732, 2195273; 199753, 2195207; 199772, 2195162; 199732, 
2195181; 199706, 2195245; 199646, 2195283; 199615, 2195345; 199573, 
2195368; 199509, 2195416; 199449, 2195478; 199437, 2195611; 199430, 
2195734; return to starting point.

    (C) Note: Unit 8 is depicted on Map 5-Unit 8--Island of Hawaii, 
which follows:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10JN03.008

    (x) Unit 9: Island of Molokai, Kamoko Flats--Puukolekole (1,256 ha; 
3,105 ac):
    (A) Unit 9 consists of the following 170 boundary points: Start at 
713960, 2337883; 713787, 2337815; 713641, 2337737; 713587, 2337686; 
713542, 2337635; 713525, 2337608; 713514, 2337604; 713488, 2337574; 
713275, 2337497; 713260, 2337442; 713302, 2337415; 713444, 2337400; 
713651, 2337482; 713677, 2337507; 713828, 2337580; 713834, 2337585; 
713841, 2337587; 713989, 2337659; 714006, 2337664; 714030, 2337681; 
714036, 2337674; 714090, 2337691; 714150, 2337601; 714065, 2337490; 
714169, 2337531; 714182, 2337553; 714217, 2337500; 714313, 2337356; 
714267, 2337327; 713658, 2336950; 713641, 2336937; 713639, 2336938; 
713638, 2336937; 713592, 2336909; 713171, 2337020; 713128, 2337025; 
713101, 2337039; 712948, 2337083; 712768, 2337134; 712739, 2337127; 
712714, 2337150; 712707, 2337152; 712647, 2337156;

[[Page 1062]]

711929, 2337023; 712115, 2336844; 712527, 2336930; 712811, 2336772; 
712314, 2336653; 712783, 2336203; 712700, 2336108; 712785, 2336093; 
712927, 2336085; 713147, 2336184; 713257, 2336224; 713265, 2336238; 
712778, 2336365; 712783, 2336372; 712923, 2336457; 713217, 2336633; 
714333, 2337309; 714341, 2337313; 715056, 2336242; 715073, 2336232; 
716805, 2335668; 717490, 2335146; 717565, 2335112; 718350, 2334490; 
718276, 2333666; 717554, 2332806; 717447, 2332851; 717080, 2333001; 
716796, 2333195; 715114, 2334345; 715139, 2334491; 715684, 2334688; 
716000, 2334857; 715980, 2334880; 715849, 2335177; 715914, 2335254; 
715842, 2335306; 715274, 2335635; 715213, 2335636; 715076, 2335749; 
715046, 2335773; 714377, 2335948; 714372, 2335938; 714373, 2335938; 
714280, 2335711; 714494, 2335653; 714617, 2335594; 714901, 2335519; 
715544, 2335359; 715547, 2335358; 715174, 2335053; 715005, 2334932; 
714716, 2334982; 714205, 2335078; 714040, 2335127; 714024, 2335088; 
711244, 2336986; 711354, 2337009; 711401, 2337037; 711322, 2337112; 
711727, 2337380; 711733, 2337403; 711948, 2337483; 712220, 2337776; 
712433, 2338103; 712602, 2338152; 712517, 2338265; 712284, 2338486; 
711968, 2338683; 711759, 2338845; 711681, 2338900; 711900, 2338941; 
711710, 2339118; 711642, 2339123; 711579, 2339096; 711465, 2339097; 
711625, 2339356; 711763, 2339365; 711777, 2339323; 711817, 2339308; 
711969, 2339303; 712089, 2339324; 712130, 2339297; 712272, 2339304; 
712447, 2339115; 712346, 2339007; 712231, 2338953; 712098, 2338911; 
712002, 2338805; 712132, 2338664; 712392, 2338783; 712579, 2338783; 
712421, 2338675; 712279, 2338579; 712353, 2338489; 712568, 2338528; 
712635, 2338591; 712780, 2338508; 712777, 2338472; 712895, 2338488; 
713001, 2338534; 713003, 2338502; 713072, 2338512; 713177, 2338629; 
713424, 2338561; 713452, 2338533; 712978, 2338207; 712867, 2337997; 
712845, 2337873; 713121, 2337952; 713150, 2337771; 713181, 2337784; 
713184, 2337801; 713189, 2337803; 713196, 2337826; 713191, 2337829; 
713197, 2337831; 713204, 2337853; 713303, 2337864; 713482, 2338023; 
713503, 2338044; 713520, 2338067; 713525, 2338081; 713557, 2338108; 
713664, 2338205; 713713, 2338254; 713731, 2338228; return to starting 
point.
    (B) This unit excludes two areas:
    (1) Unit excludes an area (2 ha; 4 ac) consisting of the following 5 
boundary points: Start at 712804, 2337632; 712923, 2337724; 712990, 
2337608; 712917, 2337600; 712748, 2337553; return to starting point.
    (2) Unit excludes an area (5 ha; 13 ac) consisting of the following 
10 boundary points: Start at 712742, 2337968; 712839, 2337857; 712748, 
2337850; 712646, 2337870; 712632, 2337823; 712481, 2337590; 712425, 
2337550; 712313, 2337564; 712299, 2337574; 712360, 2337661; return to 
starting point.

    (C) Note: Unit 9 is depicted on Map 6-Unit 9-Island of Molokai, 
which follows:

[[Page 1063]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR10JN03.009

                Ash Meadows Naucorid (Ambrysus amargosus)

    Nevada, Nye County, Point of Rocks Springs and their immediate 
outflows in SE\1/4\ sec. 7, T18S, R51E.
    Known primary constituent elements include flowing warm water over 
rock and gravel substrate.
    Note: Map follows:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC01JN91.153
    

[[Page 1064]]



            Laguna Mountains Skipper (Pyrgus ruralis lagunae)

    (1) Critical habitat units are depicted for San Diego County, 
California, on the maps below.
    (2) The primary constituent elements of critical habitat for the 
Laguna Mountains skipper are the habitat components that provide:
    (i) The hostplants, Horkelia clevelandii or Potentilla glandulosa, 
which are needed for reproduction, in meadows or forest openings.
    (ii) Nectar sources suitable for feeding by adult Laguna Mountains 
skipper, including Lasthenia spp., Pentachaeta aurea, Ranunculus spp., 
and Sidalcea spp., found in woodlands or meadows.
    (iii) Wet soil or standing water associated with features such as 
seeps, springs, or creeks where water and minerals are obtained during 
the adult flight season.
    (3) Critical habitat does not include man-made structures existing 
on the effective date of this rule and not containing one or more of the 
primary constituent elements, such as buildings, aqueducts, airports, 
and roads, and the land on which such structures are located.
    (4) Data layers defining map units were created on a base of USGS 
1:24,000 quadrangle maps, and critical habitat units were then mapped 
using Universal Transverse Mercator (UTM) coordinates.
    (5) Note: Map 1 (index map) follows:

[[Page 1065]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR12DE06.001

    (6) Unit 1: Laguna Mountain, San Diego County, California. From USGS 
1:24,000 quadrangle maps Monument Peak and Mount Laguna.
    (i) Subunit 1A: lands bounded by the following UTM NAD27 coordinates 
(E,N): 551900, 3635400; 551900, 3635600; 551800, 3635600; 551800, 
3635300; 552000, 3635300; 552000, 3634900; 551800, 3634900; 551800, 
3635000; 551600, 3635000; 551600, 3634900; 551400, 3634900; 551400, 
3635300; 551300, 3635300; 551300, 3635600; 551200,

[[Page 1066]]

3635600; 551200, 3635700; 551100, 3635700; 551100, 3636000; 551000, 
3636000; 551000, 3636100; 550900, 3636100; 550900, 3636200; 550800, 
3636200; 550800, 3636100; 550700, 3636100; 550700, 3636000; 550800, 
3636000; 550800, 3635800; 550600, 3635800; 550600, 3635700; 550500, 
3635700; 550500, 3635500; 550400, 3635500; 550400, 3635400; 550300, 
3635400; 550300, 3635300; 550100, 3635300; 550100, 3635500; 550000, 
3635500; 550000, 3636200; 549800, 3636200; 549800, 3636500; 549900, 
3636500; 549900, 3636600; 549800, 3636600; 549800, 3636700; 549700, 
3636700; 549700, 3637000; 549800, 3637000; 549800, 3637100; 549900, 
3637100; 549900, 3637600; 550200, 3637600; 550200, 3637900; 550100, 
3637900; 550100, 3638500; 550000, 3638500; 550000, 3638600; 549900, 
3638600; 549900, 3638500; 549800, 3638500; 549800, 3638000; 549700, 
3638000; 549700, 3637700; 549500, 3637700; 549500, 3638000; 549600, 
3638000; 549600, 3638100; 549500, 3638100; 549500, 3638200; 549100, 
3638200; 549100, 3638400; 549200, 3638400; 549200, 3638500; 549300, 
3638500; 549300, 3638800; 549400, 3638800; 549400, 3638900; 549300, 
3638900; 549300, 3639000; 549600, 3639000; 549600, 3638600; 549700, 
3638600; 549700, 3638700; 549800, 3638700; 549800, 3638900; 549900, 
3638900; 549900, 3639000; 549700, 3639000; 549700, 3639200; 549600, 
3639200; 549600, 3639300; 549500, 3639300; 549500, 3639500; 549400, 
3639500; 549400, 3639600; 549300, 3639600; 549300, 3640000; 549400, 
3640000; 549400, 3640100; 549700, 3640100; 549700, 3640000; 549800, 
3640000; 549800, 3640100; 549900, 3640100; 549900, 3640200; 549700, 
3640200; 549700, 3640300; 549600, 3640300; 549600, 3640500; 549800, 
3640500; 549800, 3640600; 550100, 3640600; 550100, 3640500; 550200, 
3640500; 550200, 3640400; 550300, 3640400; 550300, 3640000; 551000, 
3640000; 551000, 3639900; 551100, 3639900; 551100, 3639700; 550500, 
3639700; 550500, 3639400; 550400, 3639400; 550400, 3639300; 550500, 
3639300; 550500, 3639200; 550600, 3639200; 550600, 3639100; 550700, 
3639100; 550700, 3639000; 550800, 3639000; 550800, 3638900; 551000, 
3638900; 551000, 3639300; 551100, 3639300; 551100, 3639500; 551300, 
3639500; 551300, 3639700; 551700, 3639700; 551700, 3639400; 551800, 
3639400; 551800, 3639300; 551900, 3639300; 551900, 3639100; 551800, 
3639100; 551800, 3639000; 551900, 3639000; 551900, 3638900; 551800, 
3638900; 551800, 3638800; 551900, 3638800; 551900, 3638700; 552100, 
3638700; 552100, 3638800; 552200, 3638800; 552200, 3638700; 552500, 
3638700; 552500, 3638300; 552300, 3638300; 552300, 3638400; 552200, 
3638400; 552200, 3638300; 551900, 3638300; 551900, 3638100; 551500, 
3638100; 551500, 3637900; 551700, 3637900; 551700, 3637800; 551800, 
3637800; 551800, 3637700; 552100, 3637700; 552100, 3637600; 552200, 
3637600; 552200, 3637500; 552500, 3637500; 552500, 3637700; 552600, 
3637700; 552600, 3637800; 553000, 3637800; 553000, 3638000; 553100, 
3638000; 553100, 3638100; 553600, 3638100; 553600, 3638000; 553800, 
3638000; 553800, 3637900; 553700, 3637900; 553700, 3637600; 553800, 
3637600; 553800, 3637400; 553700, 3637400; 553700, 3637500; 553500, 
3637500; 553500, 3637200; 553100, 3637200; 553100, 3637100; 553200, 
3637100; 553200, 3636900; 552900, 3636900; 552900, 3637000; 552800, 
3637000; 552800, 3637100; 552700, 3637100; 552700, 3637000; 552600, 
3637000; 552600, 3637100; 552400, 3637100; 552400, 3637200; 552300, 
3637200; 552300, 3637100; 552200, 3637100; 552200, 3637000; 552000, 
3637000; 552000, 3637100; 551900, 3637100; 551900, 3637300; 551500, 
3637300; 551500, 3637200; 551400, 3637200; 551400, 3637100; 551200, 
3637100; 551200, 3636700; 551300, 3636700; 551300, 3636600; 551400, 
3636600; 551400, 3636500; 551600, 3636500; 551600, 3636400; 551700, 
3636400; 551700, 3636300; 551800, 3636300; 551800, 3636200; 552000, 
3636200; 552000, 3636100; 552100, 3636100; 552100, 3636000; 552200, 
3636000; 552200, 3635900; 552300, 3635900; 552300, 3635500; 552200, 
3635500; 552200, 3635400; 551900, 3635400.
    (ii) Subunit 1B: lands bounded by the following UTM NAD27 
coordinates (E,N): 549300, 3642300; 549400, 3642300; 549400, 3642400; 
549600, 3642400; 549600, 3642300; 549800, 3642300; 549800, 3642200; 
549900, 3642200; 549900, 3641900; 550000, 3641900; 550000, 3641400; 
550100, 3641400; 550100, 3640900; 549600, 3640900; 549600, 3641000; 
549300, 3641000; 549300, 3642300.
    (iii) Subunit 1C: lands bounded by the following UTM NAD27 
coordinates (E,N): 553000, 3634400; 553000, 3634500; 552900, 3634500; 
552900, 3634900; 552800, 3634900; 552800, 3635600; 553100, 3635600; 
553100, 3635400; 553300, 3635400; 553300, 3635300; 553400, 3635300; 
553400, 3635200; 553300, 3635200; 553300, 3635100; 553200, 3635100; 
553200, 3635000; 553300, 3635000; 553300, 3634900; 553400, 3634900; 
553400, 3634800; 553600, 3634800; 553600, 3634600; 553700, 3634600; 
553700, 3634200; 553600, 3634200; 553600, 3634100; 553500, 3634100; 
553500, 3634000; 553400, 3634000; 553400, 3633800; 553300, 3633800; 
553300, 3633600; 553200, 3633600; 553200, 3633300; 553300,

[[Page 1067]]

3633300; 553300, 3633200; 553500, 3633200; 553500, 3633300; 553600, 
3633300; 553600, 3633000; 553700, 3633000; 553700, 3632300; 553600, 
3632300; 553600, 3632200; 553300, 3632200; 553300, 3632300; 553200, 
3632300; 553200, 3633000; 553100, 3633000; 553100, 3633200; 553000, 
3633200; 553000, 3633300; 552900, 3633300; 552900, 3632800; 552600, 
3632800; 552600, 3633000; 552700, 3633000; 552700, 3633400; 552800, 
3633400; 552800, 3633800; 552700, 3633800; 552700, 3634300; 552800, 
3634300; 552800, 3634400; 553000, 3634400.
    (iv) Note: Map of Unit 1 (Map 2, Subunits 1A, 1B, and 1C) follows:

[[Page 1068]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR12DE06.002

    (7) Unit 2: Palomar Mountain, San Diego County, California. From 
USGS 1:24,000 quadrangle maps Boucher Hill and Palomar Observatory.
    (i) Subunit 2A: lands bounded by the following UTM NAD27 coordinates 
(E, N): 511300, 3689300; 511400, 3689300; 511400, 3689200; 511600, 
3689200; 511600, 3689100; 511700, 3689100; 511700, 3689000; 511800, 
3689000; 511800, 3688900; 512300, 3688900; 512300, 3688800; 512400, 
3688800; 512400, 3689000; 512900, 3689000; 512900, 3688900;

[[Page 1069]]

513200, 3688900; 513200, 3688800; 513400, 3688800; 513400, 3688700; 
513700, 3688700; 513700, 3688600; 513900, 3688600; 513900, 3688500; 
514000, 3688500; 514000, 3688400; 514100, 3688400; 514100, 3688300; 
514400, 3688300; 514400, 3688200; 514500, 3688200; 514500, 3688100; 
515300, 3688100; 515300, 3688000; 515400, 3688000; 515400, 3687900; 
515500, 3687900; 515500, 3687800; 515700, 3687800; 515700, 3687600; 
515900, 3687600; 515900, 3687300; 515800, 3687300; 515800, 3687200; 
515900, 3687200; 515900, 3687100; 516000, 3687100; 516000, 3687000; 
516300, 3687000; 516300, 3686900; 516400, 3686900; 516400, 3686800; 
516500, 3686800; 516500, 3686700; 516600, 3686700; 516600, 3686600; 
517000, 3686600; 517000, 3686300; 517200, 3686300; 517200, 3686200; 
517300, 3686200; 517300, 3686000; 517100, 3686000; 517100, 3685800; 
517200, 3685800; 517200, 3685700; 516700, 3685700; 516700, 3685800; 
516600, 3685800; 516600, 3686000; 516500, 3686000; 516500, 3686100; 
516400, 3686100; 516400, 3686200; 516300, 3686200; 516300, 3686300; 
516200, 3686300; 516200, 3686400; 516000, 3686400; 516000, 3686600; 
515900, 3686600; 515900, 3686700; 515800, 3686700; 515800, 3686800; 
515700, 3686800; 515700, 3686900; 515500, 3686900; 515500, 3687000; 
515200, 3687000; 515200, 3687100; 514900, 3687100; 514900, 3687200; 
514800, 3687200; 514800, 3687300; 514500, 3687300; 514500, 3687500; 
514400, 3687500; 514400, 3687600; 514300, 3687600; 514300, 3687700; 
514200, 3687700; 514200, 3687800; 514100, 3687800; 514100, 3687900; 
514000, 3687900; 514000, 3688000; 513700, 3688000; 513700, 3688100; 
513500, 3688100; 513500, 3688000; 513400, 3688000; 513400, 3687700; 
513300, 3687700; 513300, 3687400; 513200, 3687400; 513200, 3687300; 
513000, 3687300; 513000, 3687600; 512900, 3687600; 512900, 3688000; 
512800, 3688000; 512800, 3688100; 512500, 3688100; 512500, 3688200; 
512400, 3688200; 512400, 3688400; 512300, 3688400; 512300, 3688500; 
512000, 3688500; 512000, 3688600; 511900, 3688600; 511900, 3688500; 
511700, 3688500; 511700, 3688800; 511500, 3688800; 511500, 3688900; 
511400, 3688900; 511400, 3689000; 511300, 3689000; 511300, 3689100; 
511200, 3689100; 511200, 3689200; 511300, 3689200; 511300, 3689300.
    (ii) Subunit 2B: lands bounded by the following UTM NAD27 
coordinates (E,N): 513000, 3690900; 513000, 3690800; 513200, 3690800; 
513200, 3690600; 513100, 3690600; 513100, 3690400; 513200, 3690400; 
513200, 3690300; 513300, 3690300; 513300, 3690000; 513200, 3690000; 
513200, 3689900; 513300, 3689900; 513300, 3689600; 512900, 3689600; 
512900, 3689400; 512700, 3689400; 512700, 3689500; 512600, 3689500; 
512600, 3689300; 512300, 3689300; 512300, 3689400; 512200, 3689400; 
512200, 3689500; 512000, 3689500; 512000, 3689700; 511900, 3689700; 
511900, 3689900; 511800, 3689900; 511800, 3690200; 511700, 3690200; 
511700, 3690300; 511600, 3690300; 511600, 3690500; 511500, 3690500; 
511500, 3690600; 511200, 3690600; 511200, 3690700; 511100, 3690700; 
511100, 3690800; 510800, 3690800; 510800, 3690900; 510700, 3690900; 
510700, 3690800; 510600, 3690800; 510600, 3690900; 510500, 3690900; 
510500, 3691000; 510200, 3691000; 510200, 3690900; 510300, 3690900; 
510300, 3690600; 510400, 3690600; 510400, 3690300; 510200, 3690300; 
510200, 3690400; 509800, 3690400; 509800, 3690500; 509700, 3690500; 
509700, 3690600; 509500, 3690600; 509500, 3690700; 509400, 3690700; 
509400, 3690800; 509300, 3690800; 509300, 3690900; 509100, 3690900; 
509100, 3691000; 509000, 3691000; 509000, 3691200; 509200, 3691200; 
509200, 3691100; 509400, 3691100; 509400, 3691300; 509300, 3691300; 
509300, 3691500; 509500, 3691500; 509500, 3691400; 510000, 3691400; 
510000, 3691500; 510100, 3691500; 510100, 3691600; 510200, 3691600; 
510200, 3691700; 510700, 3691700; 510700, 3691600; 511000, 3691600; 
511000, 3691500; 511100, 3691500; 511100, 3691400; 511400, 3691400; 
511400, 3691200; 511600, 3691200; 511600, 3691100; 511700, 3691100; 
511700, 3691000; 511900, 3691000; 511900, 3690900; 512000, 3690900; 
512000, 3690700; 511800, 3690700; 511800, 3690600; 511900, 3690600; 
511900, 3690500; 512000, 3690500; 512000, 3690400; 512100, 3690400; 
512100, 3690300; 512200, 3690300; 512200, 3690200; 512500, 3690200; 
512500, 3690300; 512700, 3690300; 512700, 3690400; 512600, 3690400; 
512600, 3690600; 512500, 3690600; 512500, 3690700; 512400, 3690700; 
512400, 3690800; 512300, 3690800; 512300, 3691100; 512500, 3691100; 
512500, 3691200; 513100, 3691200; 513100, 3691300; 513200, 3691300; 
513200, 3691200; 513300, 3691200; 513300, 3690900; 513000, 3690900; 
excluding lands bounded by the following UTM NAD27 coordinates (E,N): 
509900, 3691000; 510100, 3691000; 510100, 3690900; 510000, 3690900; 
510000, 3690800; 509900, 3690800; 509900, 3691000; and 512800, 3691000; 
513000, 3691000; 513000, 3690900; 512800, 3690900; 512800, 3691000.
    (iii) Subunit 2C: lands bounded by the following UTM NAD27 
coordinates (E, N): 509200, 3689100; 509400, 3689100; 509400, 3689000; 
509700, 3689000; 509700, 3688700;

[[Page 1070]]

509800, 3688700; 509800, 3688600; 510200, 3688600; 510200, 3688900; 
510800, 3688900; 510800, 3688800; 511100, 3688800; 511100, 3688600; 
511200, 3688600; 511200, 3688500; 511300, 3688500; 511300, 3688400; 
511200, 3688400; 511200, 3688300; 511500, 3688300; 511500, 3688200; 
511600, 3688200; 511600, 3687900; 511300, 3687900; 511300, 3687600; 
511200, 3687600; 511200, 3687500; 511100, 3687500; 511100, 3687400; 
511200, 3687400; 511200, 3687100; 511000, 3687100; 511000, 3687200; 
510900, 3687200; 510900, 3687300; 510600, 3687300; 510600, 3687500; 
510500, 3687500; 510500, 3687400; 510400, 3687400; 510400, 3687500; 
510300, 3687500; 510300, 3687600; 510400, 3687600; 510400, 3687700; 
510500, 3687700; 510500, 3687800; 510400, 3687800; 510400, 3687900; 
510300, 3687900; 510300, 3687800; 510100, 3687800; 510100, 3687900; 
509900, 3687900; 509900, 3688200; 509800, 3688200; 509800, 3688300; 
509700, 3688300; 509700, 3688400; 509500, 3688400; 509500, 3688500; 
509300, 3688500; 509300, 3688600; 509200, 3688600; 509200, 3689100.
    (iv) Subunit 2D: lands bounded by the following UTM NAD27 
coordinates (E,N): 507700, 3690800; 508000, 3690800; 508000, 3690700; 
508100, 3690700; 508100, 3690800; 508300, 3690800; 508300, 3690600; 
508400, 3690600; 508400, 3690500; 508500, 3690500; 508500, 3690300; 
508400, 3690300; 508400, 3690100; 508500, 3690100; 508500, 3690000; 
508600, 3690000; 508600, 3689900; 508700, 3689900; 508700, 3689700; 
508800, 3689700; 508800, 3689600; 508900, 3689600; 508900, 3689100; 
508700, 3689100; 508700, 3689200; 508600, 3689200; 508600, 3689300; 
508400, 3689300; 508400, 3689400; 508200, 3689400; 508200, 3689800; 
508000, 3689800; 508000, 3690000; 507900, 3690000; 507900, 3690200; 
507800, 3690200; 507800, 3690400; 507500, 3690400; 507500, 3690300; 
507400, 3690300; 507400, 3690500; 507500, 3690500; 507500, 3690700; 
507700, 3690700; 507700, 3690800.
    (v) Note: Map of Unit 2 (Map 3, Subunits 2A, 2B, 2C, and 2D) 
follows:

[[Page 1071]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR12DE06.003


[42 FR 47840, Sept. 22, 1977]

    Editorial Note: For Federal Register citations affecting Sec.  
17.95, see the List of CFR Sections Affected, which appears in the 
Finding Aids section of the printed volume and on GPO Access.

[[Page 1073]]


<R02>
                              FINDING AIDS


<R03>

  --------------------------------------------------------------------

  A list of CFR titles, subtitles, chapters, subchapters and parts and 
an alphabetical list of agencies publishing in the CFR are included in 
the CFR Index and Finding Aids volume to the Code of Federal Regulations 
which is published separately and revised annually.

  Table of CFR Titles and Chapters
  Alphabetical List of Agencies Appearing in the CFR
  List of CFR Sections Affected

[[Page 1075]]


<R03>
                    Table of CFR Titles and Chapters


<R04>

                     (Revised as of October 1, 2010)

                      Title 1--General Provisions

         I  Administrative Committee of the Federal Register 
                (Parts 1--49)
        II  Office of the Federal Register (Parts 50--299)
        IV  Miscellaneous Agencies (Parts 400--500)

                    Title 2--Grants and Agreements

            Subtitle A--Office of Management and Budget Guidance 
                for Grants and Agreements
         I  Office of Management and Budget Governmentwide 
                Guidance for Grants and Agreements (Parts 100--
                199)
        II  Office of Management and Budget Circulars and Guidance 
                (200--299)
            Subtitle B--Federal Agency Regulations for Grants and 
                Agreements
       III  Department of Health and Human Services (Parts 300-- 
                399)
        IV  Department of Agriculture (Parts 400--499)
        VI  Department of State (Parts 600--699)
      VIII  Department of Veterans Affairs (Parts 800--899)
        IX  Department of Energy (Parts 900--999)
        XI  Department of Defense (Parts 1100--1199)
       XII  Department of Transportation (Parts 1200--1299)
      XIII  Department of Commerce (Parts 1300--1399)
       XIV  Department of the Interior (Parts 1400--1499)
        XV  Environmental Protection Agency (Parts 1500--1599)
     XVIII  National Aeronautics and Space Administration (Parts 
                1880--1899)
        XX  United States Nuclear Regulatory Commission (Parts 
                2000--2099)
      XXII  Corporation for National and Community Service (Parts 
                2200--2299)
     XXIII  Social Security Administration (Parts 2300--2399)
      XXIV  Housing and Urban Development (Parts 2400--2499)
       XXV  National Science Foundation (Parts 2500--2599)
      XXVI  National Archives and Records Administration (Parts 
                2600--2699)
     XXVII  Small Business Administration (Parts 2700--2799)
    XXVIII  Department of Justice (Parts 2800--2899)
       XXX  Department of Homeland Security (Parts 3000--3099)
      XXXI  Institute of Museum and Library Services (Parts 3100--
                3199)

[[Page 1076]]

     XXXII  National Endowment for the Arts (Parts 3200--3299)
    XXXIII  National Endowment for the Humanities (Parts 3300--
                3399)
      XXXV  Export-Import Bank of the United States (Parts 3500--
                3599)
    XXXVII  Peace Corps (Parts 3700--3799)
     LVIII  Election Assistance Commission (Parts 5800--5899)

                        Title 3--The President

         I  Executive Office of the President (Parts 100--199)

                           Title 4--Accounts

         I  Government Accountability Office (Parts 1--99)
        II  Recovery Accountability and Transparency Board (Parts 
                200--299)

                   Title 5--Administrative Personnel

         I  Office of Personnel Management (Parts 1--1199)
        II  Merit Systems Protection Board (Parts 1200--1299)
       III  Office of Management and Budget (Parts 1300--1399)
         V  The International Organizations Employees Loyalty 
                Board (Parts 1500--1599)
        VI  Federal Retirement Thrift Investment Board (Parts 
                1600--1699)
      VIII  Office of Special Counsel (Parts 1800--1899)
        IX  Appalachian Regional Commission (Parts 1900--1999)
        XI  Armed Forces Retirement Home (Parts 2100--2199)
       XIV  Federal Labor Relations Authority, General Counsel of 
                the Federal Labor Relations Authority and Federal 
                Service Impasses Panel (Parts 2400--2499)
        XV  Office of Administration, Executive Office of the 
                President (Parts 2500--2599)
       XVI  Office of Government Ethics (Parts 2600--2699)
       XXI  Department of the Treasury (Parts 3100--3199)
      XXII  Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (Parts 3200--
                3299)
     XXIII  Department of Energy (Parts 3300--3399)
      XXIV  Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (Parts 3400--
                3499)
       XXV  Department of the Interior (Parts 3500--3599)
      XXVI  Department of Defense (Parts 3600-- 3699)
    XXVIII  Department of Justice (Parts 3800--3899)
      XXIX  Federal Communications Commission (Parts 3900--3999)
       XXX  Farm Credit System Insurance Corporation (Parts 4000--
                4099)
      XXXI  Farm Credit Administration (Parts 4100--4199)
    XXXIII  Overseas Private Investment Corporation (Parts 4300--
                4399)
     XXXIV  Securities and Exchange Commission (Parts 4400--4499)
      XXXV  Office of Personnel Management (Parts 4500--4599)

[[Page 1077]]

        XL  Interstate Commerce Commission (Parts 5000--5099)
       XLI  Commodity Futures Trading Commission (Parts 5100--
                5199)
      XLII  Department of Labor (Parts 5200--5299)
     XLIII  National Science Foundation (Parts 5300--5399)
       XLV  Department of Health and Human Services (Parts 5500--
                5599)
      XLVI  Postal Rate Commission (Parts 5600--5699)
     XLVII  Federal Trade Commission (Parts 5700--5799)
    XLVIII  Nuclear Regulatory Commission (Parts 5800--5899)
         L  Department of Transportation (Parts 6000--6099)
       LII  Export-Import Bank of the United States (Parts 6200--
                6299)
      LIII  Department of Education (Parts 6300--6399)
       LIV  Environmental Protection Agency (Parts 6400--6499)
        LV  National Endowment for the Arts (Parts 6500--6599)
       LVI  National Endowment for the Humanities (Parts 6600--
                6699)
      LVII  General Services Administration (Parts 6700--6799)
     LVIII  Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 
                (Parts 6800--6899)
       LIX  National Aeronautics and Space Administration (Parts 
                6900--6999)
        LX  United States Postal Service (Parts 7000--7099)
       LXI  National Labor Relations Board (Parts 7100--7199)
      LXII  Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (Parts 7200--
                7299)
     LXIII  Inter-American Foundation (Parts 7300--7399)
      LXIV  Merit Systems Protection Board (Parts 7400--7499)
       LXV  Department of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 
                7500--7599)
      LXVI  National Archives and Records Administration (Parts 
                7600--7699)
     LXVII  Institute of Museum and Library Services (Parts 7700--
                7799)
    LXVIII  Commission on Civil Rights (Parts 7800--7899)
      LXIX  Tennessee Valley Authority (Parts 7900--7999)
      LXXI  Consumer Product Safety Commission (Parts 8100--8199)
     LXXII  Special Inspector General for Iraq Reconstruction 
                (Parts 8200--8299)
    LXXIII  Department of Agriculture (Parts 8300--8399)
     LXXIV  Federal Mine Safety and Health Review Commission 
                (Parts 8400--8499)
     LXXVI  Federal Retirement Thrift Investment Board (Parts 
                8600--8699)
    LXXVII  Office of Management and Budget (Parts 8700--8799)
      LXXX  Federal Housing Finance Agency (Parts 8700--8799)
    LXXXII  Special Inspector General for Iraq Reconstruction 
                (Parts 9200--9299)
     XCVII  Department of Homeland Security Human Resources 
                Management System (Department of Homeland 
                Security--Office of Personnel Management) (Parts 
                9700--9799)
      XCIX  Department of Defense Human Resources Management and 
                Labor Relations Systems (Department of Defense--
                Office of Personnel Management) (Parts 9900--9999)

[[Page 1078]]

                      Title 6--Domestic Security

         I  Department of Homeland Security, Office of the 
                Secretary (Parts 0--99)

                         Title 7--Agriculture

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of Agriculture 
                (Parts 0--26)
            Subtitle B--Regulations of the Department of 
                Agriculture
         I  Agricultural Marketing Service (Standards, 
                Inspections, Marketing Practices), Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 27--209)
        II  Food and Nutrition Service, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 210--299)
       III  Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service, Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Federal Crop Insurance Corporation, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 400--499)
         V  Agricultural Research Service, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Natural Resources Conservation Service, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 600--699)
       VII  Farm Service Agency, Department of Agriculture (Parts 
                700--799)
      VIII  Grain Inspection, Packers and Stockyards 
                Administration (Federal Grain Inspection Service), 
                Department of Agriculture (Parts 800--899)
        IX  Agricultural Marketing Service (Marketing Agreements 
                and Orders; Fruits, Vegetables, Nuts), Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 900--999)
         X  Agricultural Marketing Service (Marketing Agreements 
                and Orders; Milk), Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 1000--1199)
        XI  Agricultural Marketing Service (Marketing Agreements 
                and Orders; Miscellaneous Commodities), Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 1200--1299)
       XIV  Commodity Credit Corporation, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 1400--1499)
        XV  Foreign Agricultural Service, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 1500--1599)
       XVI  Rural Telephone Bank, Department of Agriculture (Parts 
                1600--1699)
      XVII  Rural Utilities Service, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 1700--1799)
     XVIII  Rural Housing Service, Rural Business-Cooperative 
                Service, Rural Utilities Service, and Farm Service 
                Agency, Department of Agriculture (Parts 1800--
                2099)
        XX  Local Television Loan Guarantee Board (Parts 2200--
                2299)
      XXVI  Office of Inspector General, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 2600--2699)
     XXVII  Office of Information Resources Management, Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 2700--2799)

[[Page 1079]]

    XXVIII  Office of Operations, Department of Agriculture (Parts 
                2800--2899)
      XXIX  Office of Energy Policy and New Uses, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 2900--2999)
       XXX  Office of the Chief Financial Officer, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 3000--3099)
      XXXI  Office of Environmental Quality, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 3100--3199)
     XXXII  Office of Procurement and Property Management, 
                Department of Agriculture (Parts 3200--3299)
    XXXIII  Office of Transportation, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 3300--3399)
     XXXIV  National Institute of Food and Agriculture (Parts 
                3400--3499)
      XXXV  Rural Housing Service, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 3500--3599)
     XXXVI  National Agricultural Statistics Service, Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 3600--3699)
    XXXVII  Economic Research Service, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 3700--3799)
   XXXVIII  World Agricultural Outlook Board, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 3800--3899)
       XLI  [Reserved]
      XLII  Rural Business-Cooperative Service and Rural Utilities 
                Service, Department of Agriculture (Parts 4200--
                4299)
         L  Rural Business-Cooperative Service, Rurual Housing 
                Service, and Rural Utilities Service, Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 5000--5099)

                    Title 8--Aliens and Nationality

         I  Department of Homeland Security (Immigration and 
                Naturalization) (Parts 1--499)
         V  Executive Office for Immigration Review, Department of 
                Justice (Parts 1000--1399)

                 Title 9--Animals and Animal Products

         I  Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service, Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 1--199)
        II  Grain Inspection, Packers and Stockyards 
                Administration (Packers and Stockyards Programs), 
                Department of Agriculture (Parts 200--299)
       III  Food Safety and Inspection Service, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 300--599)

                           Title 10--Energy

         I  Nuclear Regulatory Commission (Parts 0--199)
        II  Department of Energy (Parts 200--699)
       III  Department of Energy (Parts 700--999)

[[Page 1080]]

         X  Department of Energy (General Provisions) (Parts 
                1000--1099)
      XIII  Nuclear Waste Technical Review Board (Parts 1303--
                1399)
      XVII  Defense Nuclear Facilities Safety Board (Parts 1700--
                1799)
     XVIII  Northeast Interstate Low-Level Radioactive Waste 
                Commission (Parts 1800--1899)

                      Title 11--Federal Elections

         I  Federal Election Commission (Parts 1--9099)
        II  Election Assistance Commission (Parts 9400--9499)

                      Title 12--Banks and Banking

         I  Comptroller of the Currency, Department of the 
                Treasury (Parts 1--199)
        II  Federal Reserve System (Parts 200--299)
       III  Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Export-Import Bank of the United States (Parts 400--
                499)
         V  Office of Thrift Supervision, Department of the 
                Treasury (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Farm Credit Administration (Parts 600--699)
       VII  National Credit Union Administration (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Federal Financing Bank (Parts 800--899)
        IX  Federal Housing Finance Board (Parts 900--999)
        XI  Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council 
                (Parts 1100--1199)
       XII  Federal Housing Finance Agency (Parts 1200--1299)
       XIV  Farm Credit System Insurance Corporation (Parts 1400--
                1499)
        XV  Department of the Treasury (Parts 1500--1599)
      XVII  Office of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight, 
                Department of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 
                1700--1799)
     XVIII  Community Development Financial Institutions Fund, 
                Department of the Treasury (Parts 1800--1899)

               Title 13--Business Credit and Assistance

         I  Small Business Administration (Parts 1--199)
       III  Economic Development Administration, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Emergency Steel Guarantee Loan Board (Parts 400--499)
         V  Emergency Oil and Gas Guaranteed Loan Board (Parts 
                500--599)

                    Title 14--Aeronautics and Space

         I  Federal Aviation Administration, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 1--199)
        II  Office of the Secretary, Department of Transportation 
                (Aviation Proceedings) (Parts 200--399)

[[Page 1081]]

       III  Commercial Space Transportation, Federal Aviation 
                Administration, Department of Transportation 
                (Parts 400--499)
         V  National Aeronautics and Space Administration (Parts 
                1200--1299)
        VI  Air Transportation System Stabilization (Parts 1300--
                1399)

                 Title 15--Commerce and Foreign Trade

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of Commerce (Parts 
                0--29)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Commerce and 
                Foreign Trade
         I  Bureau of the Census, Department of Commerce (Parts 
                30--199)
        II  National Institute of Standards and Technology, 
                Department of Commerce (Parts 200--299)
       III  International Trade Administration, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Foreign-Trade Zones Board, Department of Commerce 
                (Parts 400--499)
       VII  Bureau of Industry and Security, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Bureau of Economic Analysis, Department of Commerce 
                (Parts 800--899)
        IX  National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, 
                Department of Commerce (Parts 900--999)
        XI  Technology Administration, Department of Commerce 
                (Parts 1100--1199)
      XIII  East-West Foreign Trade Board (Parts 1300--1399)
       XIV  Minority Business Development Agency (Parts 1400--
                1499)
            Subtitle C--Regulations Relating to Foreign Trade 
                Agreements
        XX  Office of the United States Trade Representative 
                (Parts 2000--2099)
            Subtitle D--Regulations Relating to Telecommunications 
                and Information
     XXIII  National Telecommunications and Information 
                Administration, Department of Commerce (Parts 
                2300--2399)

                    Title 16--Commercial Practices

         I  Federal Trade Commission (Parts 0--999)
        II  Consumer Product Safety Commission (Parts 1000--1799)

             Title 17--Commodity and Securities Exchanges

         I  Commodity Futures Trading Commission (Parts 1--199)
        II  Securities and Exchange Commission (Parts 200--399)
        IV  Department of the Treasury (Parts 400--499)

[[Page 1082]]

          Title 18--Conservation of Power and Water Resources

         I  Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, Department of 
                Energy (Parts 1--399)
       III  Delaware River Basin Commission (Parts 400--499)
        VI  Water Resources Council (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Susquehanna River Basin Commission (Parts 800--899)
      XIII  Tennessee Valley Authority (Parts 1300--1399)

                       Title 19--Customs Duties

         I  U.S. Customs and Border Protection, Department of 
                Homeland Security; Department of the Treasury 
                (Parts 0--199)
        II  United States International Trade Commission (Parts 
                200--299)
       III  International Trade Administration, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 300--399)
        IV  U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement, Department 
                of Homeland Security (Parts 400--599)

                     Title 20--Employees' Benefits

         I  Office of Workers' Compensation Programs, Department 
                of Labor (Parts 1--199)
        II  Railroad Retirement Board (Parts 200--399)
       III  Social Security Administration (Parts 400--499)
        IV  Employees Compensation Appeals Board, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 500--599)
         V  Employment and Training Administration, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 600--699)
        VI  Employment Standards Administration, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 700--799)
       VII  Benefits Review Board, Department of Labor (Parts 
                800--899)
      VIII  Joint Board for the Enrollment of Actuaries (Parts 
                900--999)
        IX  Office of the Assistant Secretary for Veterans' 
                Employment and Training Service, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 1000--1099)

                       Title 21--Food and Drugs

         I  Food and Drug Administration, Department of Health and 
                Human Services (Parts 1--1299)
        II  Drug Enforcement Administration, Department of Justice 
                (Parts 1300--1399)
       III  Office of National Drug Control Policy (Parts 1400--
                1499)

                      Title 22--Foreign Relations

         I  Department of State (Parts 1--199)
        II  Agency for International Development (Parts 200--299)
       III  Peace Corps (Parts 300--399)

[[Page 1083]]

        IV  International Joint Commission, United States and 
                Canada (Parts 400--499)
         V  Broadcasting Board of Governors (Parts 500--599)
       VII  Overseas Private Investment Corporation (Parts 700--
                799)
        IX  Foreign Service Grievance Board (Parts 900--999)
         X  Inter-American Foundation (Parts 1000--1099)
        XI  International Boundary and Water Commission, United 
                States and Mexico, United States Section (Parts 
                1100--1199)
       XII  United States International Development Cooperation 
                Agency (Parts 1200--1299)
      XIII  Millenium Challenge Corporation (Parts 1300--1399)
       XIV  Foreign Service Labor Relations Board; Federal Labor 
                Relations Authority; General Counsel of the 
                Federal Labor Relations Authority; and the Foreign 
                Service Impasse Disputes Panel (Parts 1400--1499)
        XV  African Development Foundation (Parts 1500--1599)
       XVI  Japan-United States Friendship Commission (Parts 
                1600--1699)
      XVII  United States Institute of Peace (Parts 1700--1799)

                          Title 23--Highways

         I  Federal Highway Administration, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 1--999)
        II  National Highway Traffic Safety Administration and 
                Federal Highway Administration, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 1200--1299)
       III  National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 
                Department of Transportation (Parts 1300--1399)

                Title 24--Housing and Urban Development

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary, Department of 
                Housing and Urban Development (Parts 0--99)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Housing and Urban 
                Development
         I  Office of Assistant Secretary for Equal Opportunity, 
                Department of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 
                100--199)
        II  Office of Assistant Secretary for Housing-Federal 
                HousingCommissioner, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Parts 200--299)
       III  Government National Mortgage Association, Department 
                of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Office of Housing and Office of Multifamily Housing 
                Assistance Restructuring, Department of Housing 
                and Urban Development (Parts 400--499)
         V  Office of Assistant Secretary for Community Planning 
                and Development, Department of Housing and Urban 
                Development (Parts 500--599)

[[Page 1084]]

        VI  Office of Assistant Secretary for Community Planning 
                and Development, Department of Housing and Urban 
                Development (Parts 600--699) [Reserved]
       VII  Office of the Secretary, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Housing Assistance Programs and 
                Public and Indian Housing Programs) (Parts 700--
                799)
      VIII  Office of the Assistant Secretary for Housing--Federal 
                Housing Commissioner, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Section 8 Housing Assistance 
                Programs, Section 202 Direct Loan Program, Section 
                202 Supportive Housing for the Elderly Program and 
                Section 811 Supportive Housing for Persons With 
                Disabilities Program) (Parts 800--899)
        IX  Office of Assistant Secretary for Public and Indian 
                Housing, Department of Housing and Urban 
                Development (Parts 900--1699)
         X  Office of Assistant Secretary for Housing--Federal 
                Housing Commissioner, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Interstate Land Sales 
                Registration Program) (Parts 1700--1799)
       XII  Office of Inspector General, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Parts 2000--2099)
        XX  Office of Assistant Secretary for Housing--Federal 
                Housing Commissioner, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Parts 3200--3899)
      XXIV  Board of Directors of the HOPE for Homeowners Program 
                (Parts 4000--4099)
       XXV  Neighborhood Reinvestment Corporation (Parts 4100--
                4199)

                           Title 25--Indians

         I  Bureau of Indian Affairs, Department of the Interior 
                (Parts 1--299)
        II  Indian Arts and Crafts Board, Department of the 
                Interior (Parts 300--399)
       III  National Indian Gaming Commission, Department of the 
                Interior (Parts 500--599)
        IV  Office of Navajo and Hopi Indian Relocation (Parts 
                700--799)
         V  Bureau of Indian Affairs, Department of the Interior, 
                and Indian Health Service, Department of Health 
                and Human Services (Part 900)
        VI  Office of the Assistant Secretary-Indian Affairs, 
                Department of the Interior (Parts 1000--1199)
       VII  Office of the Special Trustee for American Indians, 
                Department of the Interior (Parts 1200--1299)

                      Title 26--Internal Revenue

         I  Internal Revenue Service, Department of the Treasury 
                (Parts 1--899)

[[Page 1085]]

           Title 27--Alcohol, Tobacco Products and Firearms

         I  Alcohol and Tobacco Tax and Trade Bureau, Department 
                of the Treasury (Parts 1--399)
        II  Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives, 
                Department of Justice (Parts 400--699)

                   Title 28--Judicial Administration

         I  Department of Justice (Parts 0--299)
       III  Federal Prison Industries, Inc., Department of Justice 
                (Parts 300--399)
         V  Bureau of Prisons, Department of Justice (Parts 500--
                599)
        VI  Offices of Independent Counsel, Department of Justice 
                (Parts 600--699)
       VII  Office of Independent Counsel (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Court Services and Offender Supervision Agency for the 
                District of Columbia (Parts 800--899)
        IX  National Crime Prevention and Privacy Compact Council 
                (Parts 900--999)
        XI  Department of Justice and Department of State (Parts 
                1100--1199)

                            Title 29--Labor

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of Labor (Parts 
                0--99)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Labor
         I  National Labor Relations Board (Parts 100--199)
        II  Office of Labor-Management Standards, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 200--299)
       III  National Railroad Adjustment Board (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Office of Labor-Management Standards, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 400--499)
         V  Wage and Hour Division, Department of Labor (Parts 
                500--899)
        IX  Construction Industry Collective Bargaining Commission 
                (Parts 900--999)
         X  National Mediation Board (Parts 1200--1299)
       XII  Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service (Parts 
                1400--1499)
       XIV  Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (Parts 1600--
                1699)
      XVII  Occupational Safety and Health Administration, 
                Department of Labor (Parts 1900--1999)
        XX  Occupational Safety and Health Review Commission 
                (Parts 2200--2499)
       XXV  Employee Benefits Security Administration, Department 
                of Labor (Parts 2500--2599)
     XXVII  Federal Mine Safety and Health Review Commission 
                (Parts 2700--2799)
        XL  Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation (Parts 4000--
                4999)

[[Page 1086]]

                      Title 30--Mineral Resources

         I  Mine Safety and Health Administration, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 1--199)
        II  Minerals Management Service, Department of the 
                Interior (Parts 200--299)
       III  Board of Surface Mining and Reclamation Appeals, 
                Department of the Interior (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Geological Survey, Department of the Interior (Parts 
                400--499)
       VII  Office of Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement, 
                Department of the Interior (Parts 700--999)

                 Title 31--Money and Finance: Treasury

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of the Treasury 
                (Parts 0--50)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Money and Finance
         I  Monetary Offices, Department of the Treasury (Parts 
                51--199)
        II  Fiscal Service, Department of the Treasury (Parts 
                200--399)
        IV  Secret Service, Department of the Treasury (Parts 
                400--499)
         V  Office of Foreign Assets Control, Department of the 
                Treasury (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Bureau of Engraving and Printing, Department of the 
                Treasury (Parts 600--699)
       VII  Federal Law Enforcement Training Center, Department of 
                the Treasury (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Office of International Investment, Department of the 
                Treasury (Parts 800--899)
        IX  Federal Claims Collection Standards (Department of the 
                Treasury--Department of Justice) (Parts 900--999)

                      Title 32--National Defense

            Subtitle A--Department of Defense
         I  Office of the Secretary of Defense (Parts 1--399)
         V  Department of the Army (Parts 400--699)
        VI  Department of the Navy (Parts 700--799)
       VII  Department of the Air Force (Parts 800--1099)
            Subtitle B--Other Regulations Relating to National 
                Defense
       XII  Defense Logistics Agency (Parts 1200--1299)
       XVI  Selective Service System (Parts 1600--1699)
      XVII  Office of the Director of National Intelligence (Parts 
                1700--1799)
     XVIII  National Counterintelligence Center (Parts 1800--1899)
       XIX  Central Intelligence Agency (Parts 1900--1999)
        XX  Information Security Oversight Office, National 
                Archives and Records Administration (Parts 2000--
                2099)
       XXI  National Security Council (Parts 2100--2199)
      XXIV  Office of Science and Technology Policy (Parts 2400--
                2499)
     XXVII  Office for Micronesian Status Negotiations (Parts 
                2700--2799)

[[Page 1087]]

    XXVIII  Office of the Vice President of the United States 
                (Parts 2800--2899)

               Title 33--Navigation and Navigable Waters

         I  Coast Guard, Department of Homeland Security (Parts 
                1--199)
        II  Corps of Engineers, Department of the Army (Parts 
                200--399)
        IV  Saint Lawrence Seaway Development Corporation, 
                Department of Transportation (Parts 400--499)

                          Title 34--Education

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary, Department of 
                Education (Parts 1--99)
            Subtitle B--Regulations of the Offices of the 
                Department of Education
         I  Office for Civil Rights, Department of Education 
                (Parts 100--199)
        II  Office of Elementary and Secondary Education, 
                Department of Education (Parts 200--299)
       III  Office of Special Education and Rehabilitative 
                Services, Department of Education (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Office of Vocational and Adult Education, Department 
                of Education (Parts 400--499)
         V  Office of Bilingual Education and Minority Languages 
                Affairs, Department of Education (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Office of Postsecondary Education, Department of 
                Education (Parts 600--699)
       VII  Office of Educational Research and Improvmeent, 
                Department of Education [Reserved]
        XI  National Institute for Literacy (Parts 1100--1199)
            Subtitle C--Regulations Relating to Education
       XII  National Council on Disability (Parts 1200--1299)

                          Title 35 [Reserved]

             Title 36--Parks, Forests, and Public Property

         I  National Park Service, Department of the Interior 
                (Parts 1--199)
        II  Forest Service, Department of Agriculture (Parts 200--
                299)
       III  Corps of Engineers, Department of the Army (Parts 
                300--399)
        IV  American Battle Monuments Commission (Parts 400--499)
         V  Smithsonian Institution (Parts 500--599)
        VI  [Reserved]
       VII  Library of Congress (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Advisory Council on Historic Preservation (Parts 800--
                899)
        IX  Pennsylvania Avenue Development Corporation (Parts 
                900--999)
         X  Presidio Trust (Parts 1000--1099)

[[Page 1088]]

        XI  Architectural and Transportation Barriers Compliance 
                Board (Parts 1100--1199)
       XII  National Archives and Records Administration (Parts 
                1200--1299)
        XV  Oklahoma City National Memorial Trust (Parts 1500--
                1599)
       XVI  Morris K. Udall Scholarship and Excellence in National 
                Environmental Policy Foundation (Parts 1600--1699)

             Title 37--Patents, Trademarks, and Copyrights

         I  United States Patent and Trademark Office, Department 
                of Commerce (Parts 1--199)
        II  Copyright Office, Library of Congress (Parts 200--299)
       III  Copyright Royalty Board, Library of Congress (Parts 
                301--399)
        IV  Assistant Secretary for Technology Policy, Department 
                of Commerce (Parts 400--499)
         V  Under Secretary for Technology, Department of Commerce 
                (Parts 500--599)

           Title 38--Pensions, Bonuses, and Veterans' Relief

         I  Department of Veterans Affairs (Parts 0--99)
        II  Armed Forces Retirement Home

                       Title 39--Postal Service

         I  United States Postal Service (Parts 1--999)
       III  Postal Regulatory Commission (Parts 3000--3099)

                  Title 40--Protection of Environment

         I  Environmental Protection Agency (Parts 1--1099)
        IV  Environmental Protection Agency and Department of 
                Justice (Parts 1400--1499)
         V  Council on Environmental Quality (Parts 1500--1599)
        VI  Chemical Safety and Hazard Investigation Board (Parts 
                1600--1699)
       VII  Environmental Protection Agency and Department of 
                Defense; Uniform National Discharge Standards for 
                Vessels of the Armed Forces (Parts 1700--1799)

          Title 41--Public Contracts and Property Management

            Subtitle B--Other Provisions Relating to Public 
                Contracts
        50  Public Contracts, Department of Labor (Parts 50-1--50-
                999)
        51  Committee for Purchase From People Who Are Blind or 
                Severely Disabled (Parts 51-1--51-99)
        60  Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs, Equal 
                Employment Opportunity, Department of Labor (Parts 
                60-1--60-999)

[[Page 1089]]

        61  Office of the Assistant Secretary for Veterans' 
                Employment and Training Service, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 61-1--61-999)
 Chapters 
   62--100  [Reserved]
            Subtitle C--Federal Property Management Regulations 
                System
       101  Federal Property Management Regulations (Parts 101-1--
                101-99)
       102  Federal Management Regulation (Parts 102-1--102-299)
 Chapters 
  103--104  [Reserved]
       105  General Services Administration (Parts 105-1--105-999)
       109  Department of Energy Property Management Regulations 
                (Parts 109-1--109-99)
       114  Department of the Interior (Parts 114-1--114-99)
       115  Environmental Protection Agency (Parts 115-1--115-99)
       128  Department of Justice (Parts 128-1--128-99)
 Chapters 
  129--200  [Reserved]
            Subtitle D--Other Provisions Relating to Property 
                Management [Reserved]
            Subtitle E--Federal Information Resources Management 
                Regulations System [Reserved]
            Subtitle F--Federal Travel Regulation System
       300  General (Parts 300-1--300-99)
       301  Temporary Duty (TDY) Travel Allowances (Parts 301-1--
                301-99)
       302  Relocation Allowances (Parts 302-1--302-99)
       303  Payment of Expenses Connected with the Death of 
                Certain Employees (Part 303-1--303-99)
       304  Payment of Travel Expenses from a Non-Federal Source 
                (Parts 304-1--304-99)

                        Title 42--Public Health

         I  Public Health Service, Department of Health and Human 
                Services (Parts 1--199)
        IV  Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, Department 
                of Health and Human Services (Parts 400--499)
         V  Office of Inspector General-Health Care, Department of 
                Health and Human Services (Parts 1000--1999)

                   Title 43--Public Lands: Interior

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of the Interior 
                (Parts 1--199)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Public Lands
         I  Bureau of Reclamation, Department of the Interior 
                (Parts 200--499)
        II  Bureau of Land Management, Department of the Interior 
                (Parts 1000--9999)

[[Page 1090]]

       III  Utah Reclamation Mitigation and Conservation 
                Commission (Parts 10000--10010)

             Title 44--Emergency Management and Assistance

         I  Federal Emergency Management Agency, Department of 
                Homeland Security (Parts 0--399)
        IV  Department of Commerce and Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 400--499)

                       Title 45--Public Welfare

            Subtitle A--Department of Health and Human Services 
                (Parts 1--199)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Public Welfare
        II  Office of Family Assistance (Assistance Programs), 
                Administration for Children and Families, 
                Department of Health and Human Services (Parts 
                200--299)
       III  Office of Child Support Enforcement (Child Support 
                Enforcement Program), Administration for Children 
                and Families, Department of Health and Human 
                Services (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Office of Refugee Resettlement, Administration for 
                Children and Families, Department of Health and 
                Human Services (Parts 400--499)
         V  Foreign Claims Settlement Commission of the United 
                States, Department of Justice (Parts 500--599)
        VI  National Science Foundation (Parts 600--699)
       VII  Commission on Civil Rights (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Office of Personnel Management (Parts 800--899) 
                [Reserved]
         X  Office of Community Services, Administration for 
                Children and Families, Department of Health and 
                Human Services (Parts 1000--1099)
        XI  National Foundation on the Arts and the Humanities 
                (Parts 1100--1199)
       XII  Corporation for National and Community Service (Parts 
                1200--1299)
      XIII  Office of Human Development Services, Department of 
                Health and Human Services (Parts 1300--1399)
       XVI  Legal Services Corporation (Parts 1600--1699)
      XVII  National Commission on Libraries and Information 
                Science (Parts 1700--1799)
     XVIII  Harry S. Truman Scholarship Foundation (Parts 1800--
                1899)
       XXI  Commission on Fine Arts (Parts 2100--2199)
     XXIII  Arctic Research Commission (Part 2301)
      XXIV  James Madison Memorial Fellowship Foundation (Parts 
                2400--2499)
       XXV  Corporation for National and Community Service (Parts 
                2500--2599)

[[Page 1091]]

                          Title 46--Shipping

         I  Coast Guard, Department of Homeland Security (Parts 
                1--199)
        II  Maritime Administration, Department of Transportation 
                (Parts 200--399)
       III  Coast Guard (Great Lakes Pilotage), Department of 
                Homeland Security (Parts 400--499)
        IV  Federal Maritime Commission (Parts 500--599)

                      Title 47--Telecommunication

         I  Federal Communications Commission (Parts 0--199)
        II  Office of Science and Technology Policy and National 
                Security Council (Parts 200--299)
       III  National Telecommunications and Information 
                Administration, Department of Commerce (Parts 
                300--399)
        IV  National Telecommunications and Information 
                Administration, Department of Commerce, and 
                National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 
                Department of Transportation (Parts 400--499)

           Title 48--Federal Acquisition Regulations System

         1  Federal Acquisition Regulation (Parts 1--99)
         2  Defense Acquisition Regulations System, Department of 
                Defense (Parts 200--299)
         3  Health and Human Services (Parts 300--399)
         4  Department of Agriculture (Parts 400--499)
         5  General Services Administration (Parts 500--599)
         6  Department of State (Parts 600--699)
         7  Agency for International Development (Parts 700--799)
         8  Department of Veterans Affairs (Parts 800--899)
         9  Department of Energy (Parts 900--999)
        10  Department of the Treasury (Parts 1000--1099)
        12  Department of Transportation (Parts 1200--1299)
        13  Department of Commerce (Parts 1300--1399)
        14  Department of the Interior (Parts 1400--1499)
        15  Environmental Protection Agency (Parts 1500--1599)
        16  Office of Personnel Management, Federal Employees 
                Health Benefits Acquisition Regulation (Parts 
                1600--1699)
        17  Office of Personnel Management (Parts 1700--1799)
        18  National Aeronautics and Space Administration (Parts 
                1800--1899)
        19  Broadcasting Board of Governors (Parts 1900--1999)
        20  Nuclear Regulatory Commission (Parts 2000--2099)
        21  Office of Personnel Management, Federal Employees 
                Group Life Insurance Federal Acquisition 
                Regulation (Parts 2100--2199)
        23  Social Security Administration (Parts 2300--2399)
        24  Department of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 
                2400--2499)

[[Page 1092]]

        25  National Science Foundation (Parts 2500--2599)
        28  Department of Justice (Parts 2800--2899)
        29  Department of Labor (Parts 2900--2999)
        30  Department of Homeland Security, Homeland Security 
                Acquisition Regulation (HSAR) (Parts 3000--3099)
        34  Department of Education Acquisition Regulation (Parts 
                3400--3499)
        51  Department of the Army Acquisition Regulations (Parts 
                5100--5199)
        52  Department of the Navy Acquisition Regulations (Parts 
                5200--5299)
        53  Department of the Air Force Federal Acquisition 
                Regulation Supplement [Reserved]
        54  Defense Logistics Agency, Department of Defense (Parts 
                5400--5499)
        57  African Development Foundation (Parts 5700--5799)
        61  Civilian Board of Contract Appeals, General Services 
                Administration (Parts 6100--6199)
        63  Department of Transportation Board of Contract Appeals 
                (Parts 6300--6399)
        99  Cost Accounting Standards Board, Office of Federal 
                Procurement Policy, Office of Management and 
                Budget (Parts 9900--9999)

                       Title 49--Transportation

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of Transportation 
                (Parts 1--99)
            Subtitle B--Other Regulations Relating to 
                Transportation
         I  Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety 
                Administration, Department of Transportation 
                (Parts 100--199)
        II  Federal Railroad Administration, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 200--299)
       III  Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration, 
                Department of Transportation (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Coast Guard, Department of Homeland Security (Parts 
                400--499)
         V  National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 
                Department of Transportation (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Federal Transit Administration, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 600--699)
       VII  National Railroad Passenger Corporation (AMTRAK) 
                (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  National Transportation Safety Board (Parts 800--999)
         X  Surface Transportation Board, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 1000--1399)
        XI  Research and Innovative Technology Administration, 
                Department of Transportation [Reserved]
       XII  Transportation Security Administration, Department of 
                Homeland Security (Parts 1500--1699)

[[Page 1093]]

                   Title 50--Wildlife and Fisheries

         I  United States Fish and Wildlife Service, Department of 
                the Interior (Parts 1--199)
        II  National Marine Fisheries Service, National Oceanic 
                and Atmospheric Administration, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 200--299)
       III  International Fishing and Related Activities (Parts 
                300--399)
        IV  Joint Regulations (United States Fish and Wildlife 
                Service, Department of the Interior and National 
                Marine Fisheries Service, National Oceanic and 
                Atmospheric Administration, Department of 
                Commerce); Endangered Species Committee 
                Regulations (Parts 400--499)
         V  Marine Mammal Commission (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Fishery Conservation and Management, National Oceanic 
                and Atmospheric Administration, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 600--699)

                      CFR Index and Finding Aids

            Subject/Agency Index
            List of Agency Prepared Indexes
            Parallel Tables of Statutory Authorities and Rules
            List of CFR Titles, Chapters, Subchapters, and Parts
            Alphabetical List of Agencies Appearing in the CFR

[[Page 1095]]




<R03>
           Alphabetical List of Agencies Appearing in the CFR


<R04>

                     (Revised as of October 1, 2010)

                                                  CFR Title, Subtitle or 
                     Agency                               Chapter

Administrative Committee of the Federal Register  1, I
Advanced Research Projects Agency                 32, I
Advisory Council on Historic Preservation         36, VIII
African Development Foundation                    22, XV
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 57
Agency for International Development              22, II
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 7
Agricultural Marketing Service                    7, I, IX, X, XI
Agricultural Research Service                     7, V
Agriculture Department                            2, IV; 5, LXXIII
  Agricultural Marketing Service                  7, I, IX, X, XI
  Agricultural Research Service                   7, V
  Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service      7, III; 9, I
  Chief Financial Officer, Office of              7, XXX
  Commodity Credit Corporation                    7, XIV
  Economic Research Service                       7, XXXVII
  Energy Policy and New Uses, Office of           2, IX; 7, XXIX
  Environmental Quality, Office of                7, XXXI
  Farm Service Agency                             7, VII, XVIII
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 4
  Federal Crop Insurance Corporation              7, IV
  Food and Nutrition Service                      7, II
  Food Safety and Inspection Service              9, III
  Foreign Agricultural Service                    7, XV
  Forest Service                                  36, II
  Grain Inspection, Packers and Stockyards        7, VIII; 9, II
       Administration
  Information Resources Management, Office of     7, XXVII
  Inspector General, Office of                    7, XXVI
  National Agricultural Library                   7, XLI
  National Agricultural Statistics Service        7, XXXVI
  National Institute of Food and Agriculture.     7, XXXIV
  Natural Resources Conservation Service          7, VI
  Operations, Office of                           7, XXVIII
  Procurement and Property Management, Office of  7, XXXII
  Rural Business-Cooperative Service              7, XVIII, XLII, L
  Rural Development Administration                7, XLII
  Rural Housing Service                           7, XVIII, XXXV, L
  Rural Telephone Bank                            7, XVI
  Rural Utilities Service                         7, XVII, XVIII, XLII, L
  Secretary of Agriculture, Office of             7, Subtitle A
  Transportation, Office of                       7, XXXIII
  World Agricultural Outlook Board                7, XXXVIII
Air Force Department                              32, VII
  Federal Acquisition Regulation Supplement       48, 53
Air Transportation Stabilization Board            14, VI
Alcohol and Tobacco Tax and Trade Bureau          27, I
Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives,       27, II
     Bureau of
AMTRAK                                            49, VII
American Battle Monuments Commission              36, IV
American Indians, Office of the Special Trustee   25, VII
Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service        7, III; 9, I
Appalachian Regional Commission                   5, IX
Architectural and Transportation Barriers         36, XI
   Compliance Board
[[Page 1096]]

Arctic Research Commission                        45, XXIII
Armed Forces Retirement Home                      5, XI
Army Department                                   32, V
  Engineers, Corps of                             33, II; 36, III
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 51
Benefits Review Board                             20, VII
Bilingual Education and Minority Languages        34, V
     Affairs, Office of
Blind or Severely Disabled, Committee for         41, 51
     Purchase From People Who Are
Broadcasting Board of Governors                   22, V
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 19
Census Bureau                                     15, I
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services          42, IV
Central Intelligence Agency                       32, XIX
Chief Financial Officer, Office of                7, XXX
Child Support Enforcement, Office of              45, III
Children and Families, Administration for         45, II, III, IV, X
Civil Rights, Commission on                       5, LXVIII; 45, VII
Civil Rights, Office for                          34, I
Coast Guard                                       33, I; 46, I; 49, IV
Coast Guard (Great Lakes Pilotage)                46, III
Commerce Department                               44, IV
  Census Bureau                                   15, I
  Economic Affairs, Under Secretary               37, V
  Economic Analysis, Bureau of                    15, VIII
  Economic Development Administration             13, III
  Emergency Management and Assistance             44, IV
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 13
  Fishery Conservation and Management             50, VI
  Foreign-Trade Zones Board                       15, IV
  Industry and Security, Bureau of                15, VII
  International Trade Administration              15, III; 19, III
  National Institute of Standards and Technology  15, II
  National Marine Fisheries Service               50, II, IV, VI
  National Oceanic and Atmospheric                15, IX; 50, II, III, IV, 
       Administration                             VI
  National Telecommunications and Information     15, XXIII; 47, III, IV
       Administration
  National Weather Service                        15, IX
  Patent and Trademark Office, United States      37, I
  Productivity, Technology and Innovation,        37, IV
       Assistant Secretary for
  Secretary of Commerce, Office of                15, Subtitle A
  Technology, Under Secretary for                 37, V
  Technology Administration                       15, XI
  Technology Policy, Assistant Secretary for      37, IV
Commercial Space Transportation                   14, III
Commodity Credit Corporation                      7, XIV
Commodity Futures Trading Commission              5, XLI; 17, I
Community Planning and Development, Office of     24, V, VI
     Assistant Secretary for
Community Services, Office of                     45, X
Comptroller of the Currency                       12, I
Construction Industry Collective Bargaining       29, IX
     Commission
Consumer Product Safety Commission                5, LXXI; 16, II
Copyright Office                                  37, II
Copyright Royalty Board                           37, III
Corporation for National and Community Service    2, XXII; 45, XII, XXV
Cost Accounting Standards Board                   48, 99
Council on Environmental Quality                  40, V
Court Services and Offender Supervision Agency    28, VIII
     for the District of Columbia
Customs and Border Protection Bureau              19, I
Defense Contract Audit Agency                     32, I
Defense Department                                5, XXVI; 32, Subtitle A; 
                                                  40, VII
  Advanced Research Projects Agency               32, I
  Air Force Department                            32, VII

[[Page 1097]]

  Army Department                                 32, V; 33, II; 36, III, 
                                                  48, 51
  Defense Acquisition Regulations System          48, 2
  Defense Intelligence Agency                     32, I
  Defense Logistics Agency                        32, I, XII; 48, 54
  Engineers, Corps of                             33, II; 36, III
  Human Resources Management and Labor Relations  5, XCIX
       Systems
  National Imagery and Mapping Agency             32, I
  Navy Department                                 32, VI; 48, 52
  Secretary of Defense, Office of                 2, XI; 32, I
Defense Contract Audit Agency                     32, I
Defense Intelligence Agency                       32, I
Defense Logistics Agency                          32, XII; 48, 54
Defense Nuclear Facilities Safety Board           10, XVII
Delaware River Basin Commission                   18, III
District of Columbia, Court Services and          28, VIII
     Offender Supervision Agency for the
Drug Enforcement Administration                   21, II
East-West Foreign Trade Board                     15, XIII
Economic Affairs, Under Secretary                 37, V
Economic Analysis, Bureau of                      15, VIII
Economic Development Administration               13, III
Economic Research Service                         7, XXXVII
Education, Department of                          5, LIII
  Bilingual Education and Minority Languages      34, V
       Affairs, Office of
  Civil Rights, Office for                        34, I
  Educational Research and Improvement, Office    34, VII
       of
  Elementary and Secondary Education, Office of   34, II
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 34
  Postsecondary Education, Office of              34, VI
  Secretary of Education, Office of               34, Subtitle A
  Special Education and Rehabilitative Services,  34, III
       Office of
  Vocational and Adult Education, Office of       34, IV
Educational Research and Improvement, Office of   34, VII
Election Assistance Commission                    2, LVIII; 11, II
Elementary and Secondary Education, Office of     34, II
Emergency Oil and Gas Guaranteed Loan Board       13, V
Emergency Steel Guarantee Loan Board              13, IV
Employee Benefits Security Administration         29, XXV
Employees' Compensation Appeals Board             20, IV
Employees Loyalty Board                           5, V
Employment and Training Administration            20, V
Employment Standards Administration               20, VI
Endangered Species Committee                      50, IV
Energy, Department of                             5, XXIII; 10, II, III, X
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 9
  Federal Energy Regulatory Commission            5, XXIV; 18, I
  Property Management Regulations                 41, 109
Energy, Office of                                 7, XXIX
Engineers, Corps of                               33, II; 36, III
Engraving and Printing, Bureau of                 31, VI
Environmental Protection Agency                   2, XV; 5, LIV; 40, I, IV, 
                                                  VII
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 15
  Property Management Regulations                 41, 115
Environmental Quality, Office of                  7, XXXI
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission           5, LXII; 29, XIV
Equal Opportunity, Office of Assistant Secretary  24, I
     for
Executive Office of the President                 3, I
  Administration, Office of                       5, XV
  Environmental Quality, Council on               40, V
  Management and Budget, Office of                5, III, LXXVII; 14, VI; 
                                                  48, 99
  National Drug Control Policy, Office of         21, III
  National Security Council                       32, XXI; 47, 2

[[Page 1098]]

  Presidential Documents                          3
  Science and Technology Policy, Office of        32, XXIV; 47, II
  Trade Representative, Office of the United      15, XX
       States
Export-Import Bank of the United States           2, XXXV; 5, LII; 12, IV
Family Assistance, Office of                      45, II
Farm Credit Administration                        5, XXXI; 12, VI
Farm Credit System Insurance Corporation          5, XXX; 12, XIV
Farm Service Agency                               7, VII, XVIII
Federal Acquisition Regulation                    48, 1
Federal Aviation Administration                   14, I
  Commercial Space Transportation                 14, III
Federal Claims Collection Standards               31, IX
Federal Communications Commission                 5, XXIX; 47, I
Federal Contract Compliance Programs, Office of   41, 60
Federal Crop Insurance Corporation                7, IV
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation             5, XXII; 12, III
Federal Election Commission                       11, I
Federal Emergency Management Agency               44, I
Federal Employees Group Life Insurance Federal    48, 21
     Acquisition Regulation
Federal Employees Health Benefits Acquisition     48, 16
     Regulation
Federal Energy Regulatory Commission              5, XXIV; 18, I
Federal Financial Institutions Examination        12, XI
     Council
Federal Financing Bank                            12, VIII
Federal Highway Administration                    23, I, II
Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation            1, IV
Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight Office       12, XVII
Federal Housing Finance Agency                    5, LXXX; 12, XII
Federal Housing Finance Board                     12, IX
Federal Labor Relations Authority, and General    5, XIV; 22, XIV
     Counsel of the Federal Labor Relations 
     Authority
Federal Law Enforcement Training Center           31, VII
Federal Management Regulation                     41, 102
Federal Maritime Commission                       46, IV
Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service        29, XII
Federal Mine Safety and Health Review Commission  5, LXXIV; 29, XXVII
Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration       49, III
Federal Prison Industries, Inc.                   28, III
Federal Procurement Policy Office                 48, 99
Federal Property Management Regulations           41, 101
Federal Railroad Administration                   49, II
Federal Register, Administrative Committee of     1, I
Federal Register, Office of                       1, II
Federal Reserve System                            12, II
  Board of Governors                              5, LVIII
Federal Retirement Thrift Investment Board        5, VI, LXXVI
Federal Service Impasses Panel                    5, XIV
Federal Trade Commission                          5, XLVII; 16, I
Federal Transit Administration                    49, VI
Federal Travel Regulation System                  41, Subtitle F
Fine Arts, Commission on                          45, XXI
Fiscal Service                                    31, II
Fish and Wildlife Service, United States          50, I, IV
Fishery Conservation and Management               50, VI
Food and Drug Administration                      21, I
Food and Nutrition Service                        7, II
Food Safety and Inspection Service                9, III
Foreign Agricultural Service                      7, XV
Foreign Assets Control, Office of                 31, V
Foreign Claims Settlement Commission of the       45, V
     United States
Foreign Service Grievance Board                   22, IX
Foreign Service Impasse Disputes Panel            22, XIV
Foreign Service Labor Relations Board             22, XIV
Foreign-Trade Zones Board                         15, IV
Forest Service                                    36, II
General Services Administration                   5, LVII; 41, 105
  Contract Appeals, Board of                      48, 61

[[Page 1099]]

  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 5
  Federal Management Regulation                   41, 102
  Federal Property Management Regulations         41, 101
  Federal Travel Regulation System                41, Subtitle F
  General                                         41, 300
  Payment From a Non-Federal Source for Travel    41, 304
       Expenses
  Payment of Expenses Connected With the Death    41, 303
       of Certain Employees
  Relocation Allowances                           41, 302
  Temporary Duty (TDY) Travel Allowances          41, 301
Geological Survey                                 30, IV
Government Accountability Office                  4, I
Government Ethics, Office of                      5, XVI
Government National Mortgage Association          24, III
Grain Inspection, Packers and Stockyards          7, VIII; 9, II
     Administration
Harry S. Truman Scholarship Foundation            45, XVIII
Health and Human Services, Department of          2, III; 5, XLV; 45, 
                                                  Subtitle A,
  Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services        42, IV
  Child Support Enforcement, Office of            45, III
  Children and Families, Administration for       45, II, III, IV, X
  Community Services, Office of                   45, X
  Family Assistance, Office of                    45, II
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 3
  Food and Drug Administration                    21, I
  Human Development Services, Office of           45, XIII
  Indian Health Service                           25, V
  Inspector General (Health Care), Office of      42, V
  Public Health Service                           42, I
  Refugee Resettlement, Office of                 45, IV
Homeland Security, Department of                  2, XXX; 6, I
  Coast Guard                                     33, I; 46, I; 49, IV
  Coast Guard (Great Lakes Pilotage)              46, III
  Customs and Border Protection Bureau            19, I
  Federal Emergency Management Agency             44, I
  Human Resources Management and Labor Relations  5, XCVII
       Systems
  Immigration and Customs Enforcement Bureau      19, IV
  Immigration and Naturalization                  8, I
  Transportation Security Administration          49, XII
HOPE for Homeowners Program, Board of Directors   24, XXIV
     of
Housing and Urban Development, Department of      2, XXIV; 5, LXV; 24, 
                                                  Subtitle B
  Community Planning and Development, Office of   24, V, VI
       Assistant Secretary for
  Equal Opportunity, Office of Assistant          24, I
       Secretary for
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 24
  Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight, Office    12, XVII
       of
  Government National Mortgage Association        24, III
  Housing--Federal Housing Commissioner, Office   24, II, VIII, X, XX
       of Assistant Secretary for
  Housing, Office of, and Multifamily Housing     24, IV
       Assistance Restructuring, Office of
  Inspector General, Office of                    24, XII
  Public and Indian Housing, Office of Assistant  24, IX
       Secretary for
  Secretary, Office of                            24, Subtitle A, VII
Housing--Federal Housing Commissioner, Office of  24, II, VIII, X, XX
     Assistant Secretary for
Housing, Office of, and Multifamily Housing       24, IV
     Assistance Restructuring, Office of
Human Development Services, Office of             45, XIII
Immigration and Customs Enforcement Bureau        19, IV
Immigration and Naturalization                    8, I
Immigration Review, Executive Office for          8, V
Independent Counsel, Office of                    28, VII
Indian Affairs, Bureau of                         25, I, V
Indian Affairs, Office of the Assistant           25, VI
   Secretary
[[Page 1100]]

Indian Arts and Crafts Board                      25, II
Indian Health Service                             25, V
Industry and Security, Bureau of                  15, VII
Information Resources Management, Office of       7, XXVII
Information Security Oversight Office, National   32, XX
     Archives and Records Administration
Inspector General
  Agriculture Department                          7, XXVI
  Health and Human Services Department            42, V
  Housing and Urban Development Department        24, XII
Institute of Peace, United States                 22, XVII
Inter-American Foundation                         5, LXIII; 22, X
Interior Department
  American Indians, Office of the Special         25, VII
       Trustee
  Endangered Species Committee                    50, IV
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 14
  Federal Property Management Regulations System  41, 114
  Fish and Wildlife Service, United States        50, I, IV
  Geological Survey                               30, IV
  Indian Affairs, Bureau of                       25, I, V
  Indian Affairs, Office of the Assistant         25, VI
       Secretary
  Indian Arts and Crafts Board                    25, II
  Land Management, Bureau of                      43, II
  Minerals Management Service                     30, II
  National Indian Gaming Commission               25, III
  National Park Service                           36, I
  Reclamation, Bureau of                          43, I
  Secretary of the Interior, Office of            2, XIV; 43, Subtitle A
  Surface Mining and Reclamation Appeals, Board   30, III
       of
  Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement,     30, VII
       Office of
Internal Revenue Service                          26, I
International Boundary and Water Commission,      22, XI
     United States and Mexico, United States 
     Section
International Development, United States Agency   22, II
     for
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 7
International Development Cooperation Agency,     22, XII
     United States
International Fishing and Related Activities      50, III
International Joint Commission, United States     22, IV
     and Canada
International Organizations Employees Loyalty     5, V
     Board
International Trade Administration                15, III; 19, III
International Trade Commission, United States     19, II
Interstate Commerce Commission                    5, XL
Investment Security, Office of                    31, VIII
James Madison Memorial Fellowship Foundation      45, XXIV
Japan-United States Friendship Commission         22, XVI
Joint Board for the Enrollment of Actuaries       20, VIII
Justice Department                                2, XXVII; 5, XXVIII; 28, 
                                                  I, XI; 40, IV
  Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives,     27, II
       Bureau of
  Drug Enforcement Administration                 21, II
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 28
  Federal Claims Collection Standards             31, IX
  Federal Prison Industries, Inc.                 28, III
  Foreign Claims Settlement Commission of the     45, V
       United States
  Immigration Review, Executive Office for        8, V
  Offices of Independent Counsel                  28, VI
  Prisons, Bureau of                              28, V
  Property Management Regulations                 41, 128
Labor Department                                  5, XLII
  Benefits Review Board                           20, VII
  Employee Benefits Security Administration       29, XXV
  Employees' Compensation Appeals Board           20, IV
  Employment and Training Administration          20, V
  Employment Standards Administration             20, VI
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 29

[[Page 1101]]

  Federal Contract Compliance Programs, Office    41, 60
       of
  Federal Procurement Regulations System          41, 50
  Labor-Management Standards, Office of           29, II, IV
  Mine Safety and Health Administration           30, I
  Occupational Safety and Health Administration   29, XVII
  Public Contracts                                41, 50
  Secretary of Labor, Office of                   29, Subtitle A
  Veterans' Employment and Training Service,      41, 61; 20, IX
       Office of the Assistant Secretary for
  Wage and Hour Division                          29, V
  Workers' Compensation Programs, Office of       20, I
Labor-Management Standards, Office of             29, II, IV
Land Management, Bureau of                        43, II
Legal Services Corporation                        45, XVI
Library of Congress                               36, VII
  Copyright Office                                37, II
  Copyright Royalty Board                         37, III
Local Television Loan Guarantee Board             7, XX
Management and Budget, Office of                  5, III, LXXVII; 14, VI; 
                                                  48, 99
Marine Mammal Commission                          50, V
Maritime Administration                           46, II
Merit Systems Protection Board                    5, II, LXIV
Micronesian Status Negotiations, Office for       32, XXVII
Millenium Challenge Corporation                   22, XIII
Mine Safety and Health Administration             30, I
Minerals Management Service                       30, II
Minority Business Development Agency              15, XIV
Miscellaneous Agencies                            1, IV
Monetary Offices                                  31, I
Morris K. Udall Scholarship and Excellence in     36, XVI
     National Environmental Policy Foundation
Museum and Library Services, Institute of         2, XXXI
National Aeronautics and Space Administration     2, XVIII; 5, LIX; 14, V
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 18
National Agricultural Library                     7, XLI
National Agricultural Statistics Service          7, XXXVI
National and Community Service, Corporation for   45, XII, XXV
National Archives and Records Administration      2, XXVI; 5, LXVI; 36, XII
  Information Security Oversight Office           32, XX
National Capital Planning Commission              1, IV
National Commission for Employment Policy         1, IV
National Commission on Libraries and Information  45, XVII
     Science
National Council on Disability                    34, XII
National Counterintelligence Center               32, XVIII
National Credit Union Administration              12, VII
National Crime Prevention and Privacy Compact     28, IX
     Council
National Drug Control Policy, Office of           21, III
National Endowment for the Arts                   2, XXXII
National Endowment for the Humanities             2, XXXIII
National Foundation on the Arts and the           45, XI
     Humanities
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration    23, II, III; 47, VI; 49, V
National Imagery and Mapping Agency               32, I
National Indian Gaming Commission                 25, III
National Institute for Literacy                   34, XI
National Institute of Food and Agriculture.       7, XXXIV
National Institute of Standards and Technology    15, II
National Intelligence, Office of Director of      32, XVII
National Labor Relations Board                    5, LXI; 29, I
National Marine Fisheries Service                 50, II, IV, VI
National Mediation Board                          29, X
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration   15, IX; 50, II, III, IV, 
                                                  VI
National Park Service                             36, I
National Railroad Adjustment Board                29, III
National Railroad Passenger Corporation (AMTRAK)  49, VII
National Science Foundation                       2, XXV; 5, XLIII; 45, VI

[[Page 1102]]

  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 25
National Security Council                         32, XXI
National Security Council and Office of Science   47, II
     and Technology Policy
National Telecommunications and Information       15, XXIII; 47, III, IV
     Administration
National Transportation Safety Board              49, VIII
Natural Resources Conservation Service            7, VI
Navajo and Hopi Indian Relocation, Office of      25, IV
Navy Department                                   32, VI
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 52
Neighborhood Reinvestment Corporation             24, XXV
Northeast Interstate Low-Level Radioactive Waste  10, XVIII
     Commission
Nuclear Regulatory Commission                     2, XX; 5, XLVIII; 10, I
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 20
Occupational Safety and Health Administration     29, XVII
Occupational Safety and Health Review Commission  29, XX
Offices of Independent Counsel                    28, VI
Oklahoma City National Memorial Trust             36, XV
Operations Office                                 7, XXVIII
Overseas Private Investment Corporation           5, XXXIII; 22, VII
Patent and Trademark Office, United States        37, I
Payment From a Non-Federal Source for Travel      41, 304
     Expenses
Payment of Expenses Connected With the Death of   41, 303
     Certain Employees
Peace Corps                                       22, III
Pennsylvania Avenue Development Corporation       36, IX
Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation              29, XL
Personnel Management, Office of                   5, I, XXXV; 45, VIII
  Human Resources Management and Labor Relations  5, XCIX
       Systems, Department of Defense
  Human Resources Management and Labor Relations  5, XCVII
       Systems, Department of Homeland Security
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 17
  Federal Employees Group Life Insurance Federal  48, 21
       Acquisition Regulation
  Federal Employees Health Benefits Acquisition   48, 16
       Regulation
Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety           49, I
     Administration
Postal Regulatory Commission                      5, XLVI; 39, III
Postal Service, United States                     5, LX; 39, I
Postsecondary Education, Office of                34, VI
President's Commission on White House             1, IV
     Fellowships
Presidential Documents                            3
Presidio Trust                                    36, X
Prisons, Bureau of                                28, V
Procurement and Property Management, Office of    7, XXXII
Productivity, Technology and Innovation,          37, IV
     Assistant Secretary
Public Contracts, Department of Labor             41, 50
Public and Indian Housing, Office of Assistant    24, IX
     Secretary for
Public Health Service                             42, I
Railroad Retirement Board                         20, II
Reclamation, Bureau of                            43, I
Recovery Accountability and Transparency Board    4, II
Refugee Resettlement, Office of                   45, IV
Relocation Allowances                             41, 302
Research and Innovative Technology                49, XI
     Administration
Rural Business-Cooperative Service                7, XVIII, XLII, L
Rural Development Administration                  7, XLII
Rural Housing Service                             7, XVIII, XXXV, L
Rural Telephone Bank                              7, XVI
Rural Utilities Service                           7, XVII, XVIII, XLII, L
Saint Lawrence Seaway Development Corporation     33, IV
Science and Technology Policy, Office of          32, XXIV
Science and Technology Policy, Office of, and     47, II
   National Security Council
[[Page 1103]]

Secret Service                                    31, IV
Securities and Exchange Commission                5, XXXIV; 17, II
Selective Service System                          32, XVI
Small Business Administration                     2, XXVII; 13, I
Smithsonian Institution                           36, V
Social Security Administration                    2, XXIII; 20, III; 48, 23
Soldiers' and Airmen's Home, United States        5, XI
Special Counsel, Office of                        5, VIII
Special Education and Rehabilitative Services,    34, III
     Office of
Special Inspector General for Iraq                5, LXXXVII
     Reconstruction
State Department                                  2, VI; 22, I; 28, XI
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 6
Surface Mining and Reclamation Appeals, Board of  30, III
Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement,       30, VII
     Office of
Surface Transportation Board                      49, X
Susquehanna River Basin Commission                18, VIII
Technology Administration                         15, XI
Technology Policy, Assistant Secretary for        37, IV
Technology, Under Secretary for                   37, V
Tennessee Valley Authority                        5, LXIX; 18, XIII
Thrift Supervision Office, Department of the      12, V
     Treasury
Trade Representative, United States, Office of    15, XX
Transportation, Department of                     2, XII; 5, L
  Commercial Space Transportation                 14, III
  Contract Appeals, Board of                      48, 63
  Emergency Management and Assistance             44, IV
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 12
  Federal Aviation Administration                 14, I
  Federal Highway Administration                  23, I, II
  Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration     49, III
  Federal Railroad Administration                 49, II
  Federal Transit Administration                  49, VI
  Maritime Administration                         46, II
  National Highway Traffic Safety Administration  23, II, III; 47, IV; 49, V
  Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety         49, I
       Administration
  Saint Lawrence Seaway Development Corporation   33, IV
  Secretary of Transportation, Office of          14, II; 49, Subtitle A
  Surface Transportation Board                    49, X
  Transportation Statistics Bureau                49, XI
Transportation, Office of                         7, XXXIII
Transportation Security Administration            49, XII
Transportation Statistics Bureau                  49, XI
Travel Allowances, Temporary Duty (TDY)           41, 301
Treasury Department                               5, XXI; 12, XV; 17, IV; 
                                                  31, IX
  Alcohol and Tobacco Tax and Trade Bureau        27, I
  Community Development Financial Institutions    12, XVIII
       Fund
  Comptroller of the Currency                     12, I
  Customs and Border Protection Bureau            19, I
  Engraving and Printing, Bureau of               31, VI
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 10
  Federal Claims Collection Standards             31, IX
  Federal Law Enforcement Training Center         31, VII
  Fiscal Service                                  31, II
  Foreign Assets Control, Office of               31, V
  Internal Revenue Service                        26, I
  Investment Security, Office of                  31, VIII
  Monetary Offices                                31, I
  Secret Service                                  31, IV
  Secretary of the Treasury, Office of            31, Subtitle A
  Thrift Supervision, Office of                   12, V
Truman, Harry S. Scholarship Foundation           45, XVIII
United States and Canada, International Joint     22, IV
     Commission
United States and Mexico, International Boundary  22, XI
     and Water Commission, United States Section
Utah Reclamation Mitigation and Conservation      43, III
     Commission
Veterans Affairs Department                       2, VIII; 38, I

[[Page 1104]]

  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 8
Veterans' Employment and Training Service,        41, 61; 20, IX
     Office of the Assistant Secretary for
Vice President of the United States, Office of    32, XXVIII
Vocational and Adult Education, Office of         34, IV
Wage and Hour Division                            29, V
Water Resources Council                           18, VI
Workers' Compensation Programs, Office of         20, I
World Agricultural Outlook Board                  7, XXXVIII

[[Page 1105]]


<R03>
List of CFR Sections Affected

<R04>

All changes in this volume of the Code of Federal Regulations that were 
made by documents published in the Federal Register since January 1, 
2001, are enumerated in the following list. Entries indicate the nature 
of the changes effected. Page numbers refer to Federal Register pages. 
The user should consult the entries for chapters and parts as well as 
sections for revisions.
For the period before January 1, 2001, see the ``List of CFR Sections 
Affected, 1949-1963, 1964-1972, 1973-1985, and 1986-2000'' published in 
11 separate volumes.

                                  2001

50 CFR
                                                                   66 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter I
17.95 (i) amended............................................9231, 21475
    (f) added.......................................................9244
    (d) amended..............................................9450, 14659
        (d) corrected............................................13657--
                                                                   13671
    (e) amended....................................................18031
    (h) amended....................................................29404
    (g) added......................................................35560
    (e) amended; eff. 10-9-01......................................46560

                                  2002

50 CFR
                                                                   67 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter I
17.95 (i) amended..................................................18383
    (f) amended.............................................44515, 54053
    (f) amended; eff. 10-28-02.....................................61034

                                  2003

50 CFR
                                                                   68 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter I
17.95 (e) amended............................................8132, 13406
    (g) and (h) amended............................................17456
    (g) and (i) amended............................................17191
    (i) amended....................................................34758
    (h) amended....................................................46757

                                  2004

50 CFR
                                                                   69 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter I
17.95 (e) amended.....................................8851, 44761, 60046
    (f) amended.............................................40117, 53161
    (d) amended....................................................68597

                                  2005

50 CFR
                                                                   70 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter I
17.95 (e) amended..................448, 15240-15244, 17927, 59844, 66706
    (e) corrected...................................................8037
    (h) amended.............................................19199, 46956
    (d) amended......................................19616, 49417, 74163
    Regulation at 69 FR 60046 comment period opened.........29998, 32732
    (f) amended....................................................46329
    (e) amended; eff. 10-26-05.....................................56265

                                  2006

50 CFR
                                                                   71 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter I
17.95 (d) amended..................................................19294
    (e) amended; interim............................................6394
    (h) amended.....................................................7123
    (d) amended; eff. 10-16-06.....................................54371
    (c) amended....................................................58206
    (f) amended.............................................63908, 74609

                                  2007

50 CFR
                                                                   72 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter I
17.95 (e) amended..................................................13404
    (h) and (i) amended............................................39265
    (i) amended; eff. 10-5-07......................................51137
    (d) amended....................................................60081

[[Page 1106]]

    (f) amended....................................................64314
    (h) amended....................................................70692

                                  2008

50 CFR
                                                                   73 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter I
17.95 (e) amended.....................................5953, 39521, 47020
    (i) amended.............................................50433, 73821

                                  2009

50 CFR
                                                                   74 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter I
17.95 (d) amended...................................................6742
    (e) amended....................................................26509
    (i) amended....................................................28837

                                  2010

  (Regulations published from January 1, 2010 through October 1, 2010)

50 CFR
                                                                   75 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter 
</pre></body></html>
