<html><body><pre>
[Title 26 CFR ]
[Code of Federal Regulations (annual edition) - April 1, 1997 Edition]
[From the U.S. Government Printing Office]


          26


<R02>
          Internal Revenue

<R03>

[[Page i]]

          PART 1 (Secs. 1.908 to 1.1000)

          Revised as of April 1, 1997
          CONTAINING
          A CODIFICATION OF DOCUMENTS
          OF GENERAL APPLICABILITY
          AND FUTURE EFFECT

          AS OF APRIL 1, 1997
          With Ancillaries
          Published by
          the Office of the Federal Register
          National Archives and Records
           Administration

          as a Special Edition of
          the Federal Register



[[Page ii]]


                                      




                     U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
                            WASHINGTON : 1997



               For sale by U.S. Government Printing Office
 Superintendent of Documents, Mail Stop: SSOP, Washington, DC 20402-9328



[[Page iii]]



<R02>
                            Table of Contents

<R03>

                                                                    Page
  Explanation.................................................       v
  Title 26:
    Chapter I--Internal Revenue Service, Department of the 
        Treasury (Continued)..................................
  Finding Aids:
    Table of CFR Titles and Chapters..........................     721
    Alphabetical List of Agencies Appearing in the CFR........     737
    Table of OMB Control Numbers..............................     747
    List of CFR Sections Affected.............................     763

[[Page iv]]



      



                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                  ----------------------------------------------------------                    
                                   Cite this Code:  CFR                                                         
                                                                                                                
                                   To cite the regulations in this volume use title, part                       
                                    and section number. Thus, 26 CFR 1.911-1 refers to                          
                                    title 26, part 1, section 911-1.                                            
                                                                                                                
                                  ----------------------------------------------------------                    
                                                                                                                


[[Page v]]

                               EXPLANATION

    The Code of Federal Regulations is a codification of the general and 
permanent rules published in the Federal Register by the Executive 
departments and agencies of the Federal Government. The Code is divided 
into 50 titles which represent broad areas subject to Federal 
regulation. Each title is divided into chapters which usually bear the 
name of the issuing agency. Each chapter is further subdivided into 
parts covering specific regulatory areas.
    Each volume of the Code is revised at least once each calendar year 
and issued on a quarterly basis approximately as follows:

Title 1 through Title 16.................................as of January 1
Title 17 through Title 27..................................as of April 1
Title 28 through Title 41...................................as of July 1
Title 42 through Title 50................................as of October 1
    The appropriate revision date is printed on the cover of each 
volume.

LEGAL STATUS

    The contents of the Federal Register are required to be judicially 
noticed (44 U.S.C. 1507). The Code of Federal Regulations is prima facie 
evidence of the text of the original documents (44 U.S.C. 1510).

HOW TO USE THE CODE OF FEDERAL REGULATIONS

    The Code of Federal Regulations is kept up to date by the individual 
issues of the Federal Register. These two publications must be used 
together to determine the latest version of any given rule.
    To determine whether a Code volume has been amended since its 
revision date (in this case, April 1, 1997), consult the ``List of CFR 
Sections Affected (LSA),'' which is issued monthly, and the ``Cumulative 
List of Parts Affected,'' which appears in the Reader Aids section of 
the daily Federal Register. These two lists will identify the Federal 
Register page number of the latest amendment of any given rule.

EFFECTIVE AND EXPIRATION DATES

    Each volume of the Code contains amendments published in the Federal 
Register since the last revision of that volume of the Code. Source 
citations for the regulations are referred to by volume number and page 
number of the Federal Register and date of publication. Publication 
dates and effective dates are usually not the same and care must be 
exercised by the user in determining the actual effective date. In 
instances where the effective date is beyond the cut-off date for the 
Code a note has been inserted to reflect the future effective date. In 
those instances where a regulation published in the Federal Register 
states a date certain for expiration, an appropriate note will be 
inserted following the text.

OMB CONTROL NUMBERS

    The Paperwork Reduction Act of 1980 (Pub. L. 96-511) requires 
Federal agencies to display an OMB control number with their information 
collection request.

[[Page vi]]

Many agencies have begun publishing numerous OMB control numbers as 
amendments to existing regulations in the CFR. These OMB numbers are 
placed as close as possible to the applicable recordkeeping or reporting 
requirements.

OBSOLETE PROVISIONS

    Provisions that become obsolete before the revision date stated on 
the cover of each volume are not carried. Code users may find the text 
of provisions in effect on a given date in the past by using the 
appropriate numerical list of sections affected. For the period before 
January 1, 1986, consult either the List of CFR Sections Affected, 1949-
1963, 1964-1972, or 1973-1985, published in seven separate volumes. For 
the period beginning January 1, 1986, a ``List of CFR Sections 
Affected'' is published at the end of each CFR volume.

CFR INDEXES AND TABULAR GUIDES

    A subject index to the Code of Federal Regulations is contained in a 
separate volume, revised annually as of January 1, entitled CFR Index 
and Finding Aids. This volume contains the Parallel Table of Statutory 
Authorities and Agency Rules (Table I), and Acts Requiring Publication 
in the Federal Register (Table II). A list of CFR titles, chapters, and 
parts and an alphabetical list of agencies publishing in the CFR are 
also included in this volume.
    An index to the text of ``Title 3--The President'' is carried within 
that volume.
    The Federal Register Index is issued monthly in cumulative form. 
This index is based on a consolidation of the ``Contents'' entries in 
the daily Federal Register.
    A List of CFR Sections Affected (LSA) is published monthly, keyed to 
the revision dates of the 50 CFR titles.

REPUBLICATION OF MATERIAL

    There are no restrictions on the republication of material appearing 
in the Code of Federal Regulations.

INQUIRIES

    For a legal interpretation or explanation of any regulation in this 
volume, contact the issuing agency. The issuing agency's name appears at 
the top of odd-numbered pages.
    For inquiries concerning CFR reference assistance, call 202-523-5227 
or write to the Director, Office of the Federal Register, National 
Archives and Records Administration, Washington, DC 20408.
SALES

    The Government Printing Office (GPO) processes all sales and 
distribution of the CFR. For payment by credit card, call 202-512-1800, 
M-F, 8 a.m. to 4 p.m. e.s.t. or fax your order to 202-512-2233, 24 hours 
a day. For payment by check, write to the Superintendent of Documents, 
Attn: New Orders, P.O. Box 371954, Pittsburgh, PA 15250-7954. For GPO 
Customer Service call 202-512-1803.

                              Raymond A. Mosley,
                                    Director,
                          Office of the Federal Register.

April 1, 1997.



[[Page vii]]



                               THIS TITLE

    Title 26--Internal Revenue is composed of nineteen volumes. The 
contents of these volumes represent all current regulations issued by 
the Internal Revenue Service, Department of the Treasury, as of April 1, 
1997. The first twelve volumes comprise part 1 (Subchapter A--Income 
Tax) and are arranged by sections as follows: Secs. 1.0-1-1.60; 
Secs. 1.61-1.169; Secs. 1.170-1.300; Secs. 1.301-1.400; Secs. 1.401-
1.440; Secs. 1.441-1.500; Secs. 1.501-1.640; Secs. 1.641-1.850; 
Secs. 1.851-1.907; Secs. 1.908-1.1000; Secs. 1.1001-1.1400 and 
Sec. 1.1401 to end. The thirteenth volume containing parts 2-29, 
includes the remainder of subchapter A and all of Subchapter B--Estate 
and Gift Taxes. The last six volumes contain parts 30-39 (Subchapter C--
Employment Taxes and Collection of Income Tax at Source); parts 40-49; 
parts 50-299 (Subchapter D--Miscellaneous Excise Taxes); parts 300-499 
(Subchapter F--Procedure and Administration); parts 500-599 (Subchapter 
G--Regulations under Tax Conventions); and part 600 to end (Subchapter 
H--Internal Revenue Practice).

    The OMB control numbers for title 26 appear in Sec. 602.101 of this 
chapter. For the convenience of the user, Sec. 602.101 appears in the 
Finding Aids section of the volumes containing parts 1 to 599.

    For this volume, Scott D. Andreae was Chief Editor. The Code of 
Federal Regulations publication program is under the direction of 
Frances D. McDonald, assisted by Alomha S. Morris.

[[Page viii]]

<GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT>

 

[[Page 1]]


<R01>
                       TITLE 26--INTERNAL REVENUE


<R02>

           (This book contains part 1, Secs. 1.908 to 1.1000)

  --------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                    Part
chapter i--Internal Revenue Service, Department of the 
  Treasury (continued)......................................           1

[[Page 3]]


<R02>
   CHAPTER I--INTERNAL REVENUE SERVICE, DEPARTMENT OF THE TREASURY

                               (CONTINUED)


<R03>

                     (Part 1, Secs. 1.908 to 1.1000)

  --------------------------------------------------------------------

                  SUBCHAPTER A--INCOME TAX (CONTINUED)
Part                                                                Page
1               Income taxes (continued)....................

  Supplementary Publications: Internal Revenue Service Looseleaf 
Regulations System.

  Additional supplementary publications are issued covering Alcohol and 
Tobacco Tax Regulations and Regulations Under Tax Conventions.

[[Page 5]]

                  SUBCHAPTER A--INCOME TAX (CONTINUED)

                   PART 1--INCOME TAXES (CONTINUED)

                 Normal Taxes and Surtaxes (Continued)

  TAX BASED ON INCOME FROM SOURCES WITHIN OR WITHOUT THE UNITED STATES 
                               (CONTINUED)

         Earned Income of Citizens or Residents of United States

                              1.911-1  Partial exclusion for earned 
                              income from sources within a foreign 
                              country and foreign housing costs.
                              1.911-2  Qualified individuals.
                              1.911-3  Determination of amount of 
                              foreign earned income to be excluded.
                              1.911-4  Determination of housing cost 
                              amount eligible for exclusion or 
                              deduction.
                              1.911-5  Special rules for married 
                              couples.
                              1.911-6  Disallowance of deductions, 
                              exclusions, and credits.
                              1.911-7  Procedural rules.
                              1.911-8  Former deduction for certain 
                              expenses of living abroad.

               earned income of citizens of united states

                              1.912-1  Exclusion of certain cost-of-
                              living allowances.
                              1.912-2  Exclusion of certain allowances 
                              of Foreign Service personnel.
                              1.921-1T  Temporary regulations providing 
                              transition rules for DISCs and FSCs.
                              1.921-2  Foreign Sales Corporation--
                              general rules.
                              1.921-3T  Temporary regulations; Foreign 
                              Sales Corporation general rules.
                              1.922-1  Requirements that a corporation 
                              must satisfy to be a FSC or a small FSC.
                              1.923-1T  Temporary regulations; exempt 
                              foreign trade income.
                              1.924(a)-1T  Temporary regulations; 
                              definition of foreign trading gross 
                              receipts.
                              1.924(c)-1  Requirement that a FSC be 
                              managed outside the United States.
                              1.924(d)-1  Requirement that economic 
                              processes take place outside the United 
                              States.
                              1.924(e)-1  Activities relating to the 
                              disposition of export property.
                              1.925(a)-1T  Temporary regulations; 
                              transfer pricing rules for FSCs.
                              1.925(b)-1T  Temporary regulations; 
                              marginal costing rules.
                              1.926(a)-1  Distributions to shareholders.
                              1.926(a)-1T  Temporary regulations; 
                              distributions to shareholders.
                              1.927(a)-1T  Temporary regulations; 
                              definition of export property.
                              1.927(b)-1T  Temporary regulations; 
                              definition of gross receipts.
                              1.927(d)-1  Other definitions.
                              1.927(d)-2T  Temporary regulations; 
                              definitions and special rules relating to 
                              Foreign Sales Corporation.
                              1.927(e)-1T  Temporary regulations; 
                              special sourcing rule.
                              1.927(e)-2T  Temporary regulations; effect 
                              of boycott participation on FSC and small 
                              FSC benefits.
                              1.927(f)-1  Election and termination of 
                              status as a Foreign Sales Corporation.

                    possessions of the united states

                              1.931-1  Citizens of the United States and 
                              domestic corporations deriving income from 
                              sources within a certain possession of the 
                              United States.

[[Page 6]]

                              1.932-1  Status of citizens of U.S. 
                              possessions.
                              1.933-1  Exclusion of certain income from 
                              sources within Puerto Rico.
                              1.934-1  Limitation on reduction in income 
                              tax liability incurred to the Virgin 
                              Islands.
                              1.935-1  Coordination of U.S. and Guam 
                              individual income taxes.
                              1.936-1  Elections.
                              1.936-4  Intangible property income in the 
                              absence of an election out.
                              1.936-5  Intangible property income when 
                              an election out is made: Product, business 
                              presence, and contract manufacturing.
                              1.936-6  Intangible property income when 
                              an election out is made: cost sharing and 
                              profit split options; covered intangibles.
                              1.936-7  Manner of making election under 
                              section 936 (h)(5); special election for 
                              export sales; revocation of election under 
                              section 936(a).
                              1.936-8T  Qualified possession source 
                              investment income (temporary). [Reserved]
                              1.936-9T  Source of qualified possession 
                              source investment income (temporary). 
                              [Reserved]
                              1.936-10  Qualified investments.

                      china trade act corporations

                              1.941-1  Special deduction for China Trade 
                              Act corporations.
                              1.941-2  Meaning of terms used in 
                              connection with China Trade Act 
                              corporations.
                              1.941-3  Illustration of principles.
                              1.943-1  Withholding by a China Trade Act 
                              corporation.

                     controlled foreign corporations

                              1.951-1  Amounts included in gross income 
                              of United States shareholders.
                              1.951-2  Coordination of subpart F with 
                              election of a foreign investment company 
                              to distribute income.
                              1.951-3  Coordination of subpart F with 
                              foreign personal holding company 
                              provisions.
                              1.952-1  Subpart F income defined.
                              1.952-2  Determination of gross income and 
                              taxable income of a foreign corporation.
                              1.953-1  Income from insurance of United 
                              States risks.
                              1.953-2  Actual United States risks.
                              1.953-3  Risks deemed to be United States 
                              risks.
                              1.953-4  Taxable income to which section 
                              953 applies.
                              1.953-5  Corporations not qualifying as 
                              insurance companies.
                              1.953-6  Relationship of sections 953 and 
                              954.
                              1.954-0  Introduction.
                              1.954-1  Foreign base company income.
                              1.954-2  Foreign personal holding company 
                              income.
                              1.954-3  Foreign base company sales 
                              income.
                              1.954-4  Foreign base company services 
                              income.
                              1.954-5  Increase in qualified investments 
                              in less developed countries; taxable years 
                              of controlled foreign corporations 
                              beginning before January 1, 1976.
                              1.954-6  Foreign base company shipping 
                              income.
                              1.954-7  Increase in qualified investments 
                              in foreign base company shipping 
                              operations.
                              1.954-8  Foreign base company oil related 
                              income.
                              1.955-0  Effective dates.
                              1.955-1  Shareholder's pro rata share of 
                              amount of previously excluded subpart F 
                              income withdrawn from investment in less 
                              developed countries.
                              1.955-2  Amount of a controlled foreign 
                              corporation's qualified investments in 
                              less developed countries.
                              1.955-3  Election as to date of 
                              determining qualified investments in less 
                              developed countries.
                              1.955-4  Definition of less developed 
                              country.
                              1.955-5  Definition of less developed 
                              country corporation.

[[Page 7]]

                              1.955-6  Gross income from sources within 
                              less developed countries.
                              1.955A-1  Shareholder's pro rata share of 
                              amount of previously excluded subpart F 
                              income withdrawn from investment in 
                              foreign base company shipping operations.
                              1.955A-2  Amount of a controlled foreign 
                              corporation's qualified investments in 
                              foreign base company shipping operations.
                              1.955A-3  Election as to qualified 
                              investments by related persons.
                              1.955A-4  Election as to date of 
                              determining qualified investment in 
                              foreign base company shipping operations.
                              1.956-1  Shareholder's pro rata share of a 
                              controlled foreign corporation's increase 
                              in earnings invested in United States 
                              property.
                              1.956-1T  Shareholder's pro rata share of 
                              a controlled foreign corporation's 
                              increase in earnings invested in United 
                              States property (temporary).
                              1.956-2  Definition of United States 
                              property.
                              1.956-2T  Definition of United States 
                              property (temporary).
                              1.956-3T  Certain trade or service 
                              receivables acquired from United States 
                              persons (temporary).
                              1.957-1  Definition of controlled foreign 
                              corporation.
                              1.957-2  Controlled foreign corporation 
                              deriving income from insurance of United 
                              States risks.
                              1.957-3  Corporations organized in United 
                              States possessions.
                              1.957-4  United States person defined.
                              1.958-1  Direct and indirect ownership of 
                              stock.
                              1.958-2  Constructive ownership of stock.
                              1.959-1  Exclusion from gross income of 
                              United States persons of previously taxed 
                              earning and profits.
                              1.959-2  Exclusion from gross income of 
                              controlled foreign corporations of 
                              previously taxed earnings and profits.
                              1.959-3  Allocation of distributions to 
                              earnings and profits of foreign 
                              corporations.
                              1.959-4  Distributions to United States 
                              persons not counting as dividends.
                              1.960-1  Foreign tax credit with respect 
                              to taxes paid on earnings and profits of 
                              controlled foreign corporations.
                              1.960-2  Interrelation of section 902 and 
                              section 960 when dividends are paid by 
                              third-, second-, or first-tier 
                              corporation.
                              1.960-3  Gross-up of amounts included in 
                              income under section 951.
                              1.960-4  Additional foreign tax credit in 
                              year of receipt of previously taxed 
                              earnings and profits.
                              1.960-5  Credit for taxable year of 
                              inclusion binding for taxable year of 
                              exclusion.
                              1.960-6  Overpayments resulting from 
                              increase in limitation for taxable year of 
                              exclusion.
                              1.960-7  Effective dates.
                              1.961-1  Increase in basis of stock in 
                              controlled foreign corporations and of 
                              other property.
                              1.961-2  Reduction in basis of stock in 
                              foreign corporations and of other 
                              property.
                              1.962-1  Limitation of tax for individuals 
                              on amounts included in gross income under 
                              section 951(a).
                              1.962-2  Election of limitation of tax for 
                              individuals.
                              1.962-3  Treatment of actual 
                              distributions.
                              1.962-4  Transitional rules for certain 
                              taxable years.
                              1.963-0  Repeal of section 963; effective 
                              dates.
                              1.963-1  Exclusion of subpart F income 
                              upon receipt of minimum distribution.
                              1.963-2  Determination of the amount of 
                              the minimum distribution.
                              1.963-3  Distributions counting toward a 
                              minimum distribution.
                              1.963-4  Limitations on minimum 
                              distribution from a chain or group.
                              1.963-5  Foreign corporations with 
                              variation in foreign tax rate because of 
                              distributions.
                              1.963-6  Deficiency distribution.
                              1.963-7  Transitional rules for certain 
                              taxable years.

[[Page 8]]

                              1.963-8  Determination of minimum 
                              distribution during the surcharge period.
                              1.964-1  Determination of the earnings and 
                              profits of a foreign corporation.
                              1.964-1T  Special rules for computing 
                              earnings and profits of controlled foreign 
                              corporations in taxable years beginning 
                              after December 31, 1986 (temporary).
                              1.964-2  Treatment of blocked earnings and 
                              profits.
                              1.964-3  Records to be provided by United 
                              States shareholders.
                              1.964-4  Verification of certain classes 
                              of income.
                              1.964-5  Effective date of subpart F.

                        Export Trade Corporations

                              1.970-1  Export trade corporations.
                              1.970-2  Elections as to date of 
                              determining investments in export trade 
                              assets.
                              1.970-3  Effective date of subpart G.
                              1.971-1  Definitions with respect to 
                              export trade corporations.
                              1.972-1  Consolidation of group of export 
                              trade corporations.
                              1.981-0  Repeal of section 981; effective 
                              dates.
                              1.981-1  Foreign law community income for 
                              taxable years beginning after December 31, 
                              1966, and before January 1, 1977.
                              1.981-2  Foreign law community income for 
                              taxable years beginning before January 1, 
                              1967.
                              1.981-3  Definitions and other special 
                              rules.
                              1.985-0  Outline of regulation.
                              1.985-1  Functional currency.
                              1.985-2  Election to use the United States 
                              dollar as the functional currency of a 
                              QBU.
                              1.985-3  United States dollar approximate 
                              separate transactions method.
                              1.985-4  Method of accounting.
                              1.985-5  Adjustments required upon change 
                              in functional currency.
                              1.985-6  Transition rules for a QBU that 
                              uses the dollar approximate separate 
                              transactions method for its first taxable 
                              year beginning in 1987.
                              1.987-1  Profit and loss method of 
                              accounting for a qualified business unit 
                              of a taxpayer having a different 
                              functional currency from the taxpayer. 
                              [Reserved]
                              1.987-2  Accounting for gain or loss on 
                              certain transfers of property. [Reserved]
                              1.987-3  Termination. [Reserved]
                              1.987-4  Special rules relating to QBU 
                              branches of foreign taxpayers. [Reserved]
                              1.987-5  Transition rules for certain 
                              qualified business units using a profit 
                              and loss method of accounting for taxable 
                              years beginning before January 1, 1987.
                              1.988-0  Taxation of gain or loss from a 
                              section 988 transaction; table of 
                              contents.
                              1.988-1  Certain definitions and special 
                              rules.
                              1.988-2  Recognition and computation of 
                              exchange gain or loss.
                              1.988-3  Character of exchange gain or 
                              loss.
                              1.988-4  Source of gain or loss realized 
                              on a section 988 transaction.
                              1.988-5  Section 988(d) hedging 
                              transactions.
                              1.989(a)-1  Definition of a qualified 
                              business unit.
                              1.989(b)-1  Definition of weighted average 
                              exchange rate.
                              1.989(c)-1  Transition rules for certain 
                              branches of United States persons using a 
                              net worth method of accounting for taxable 
                              years beginning before January 1, 1987.

                Domestic International Sales Corporations

                              1.991-1  Taxation of a domestic 
                              international sales corporation.
                              1.992-1  Requirements of a DISC.
                              1.992-2  Election to be treated as a DISC.
                              1.992-3  Deficiency distributions to meet 
                              qualification requirements.
                              1.992-4  Coordination with personal 
                              holding company provisions in case of 
                              certain produced film rents.
                              1.993-1  Definition of qualified export 
                              receipts.
                              1.993-2  Definition of qualified export 
                              assets.
                              1.993-3  Definition of export property.

[[Page 9]]

                              1.993-4  Definition of producer's loans.
                              1.993-5  Definition of related foreign 
                              export corporation.
                              1.993-6  Definition of gross receipts.
                              1.993-7  Definition of United States.
                              1.994-1  Inter-company pricing rules for 
                              DISC's.
                              1.994-2  Marginal costing rules.
                              1.995-1  Taxation of DISC income to 
                              shareholders.
                              1.995-2  Deemed distributions in qualified 
                              years.
                              1.995-3  Distributions upon 
                              disqualification.
                              1.995-4  Gain on disposition of stock in a 
                              DISC.
                              1.995-5  Foreign investment attributable 
                              to producer's loans.
                              1.995-6  Taxable income attributable to 
                              military property.
                              1.996-1  Rules for actual distributions 
                              and certain deemed distributions.
                              1.996-2  Ordering rules for losses.
                              1.996-3  Divisions of earnings and 
                              profits.
                              1.996-4  Subsequent effect of previous 
                              disposition of DISC stock.
                              1.996-5  Adjustment to basis.
                              1.996-6  Effectively connected income.
                              1.996-7  Carryover of DISC tax attributes.
                              1.996-8  Effect of carryback of capital 
                              loss or net operating loss to prior DISC 
                              taxable year.
                              1.997-1  Special rules for subchapter C of 
                              the Code.

  Authority: 26 U.S.C. 7805.

  Section 1.911-7 also issued under 26 U.S.C. 911(d)(9).
  Sections 1.924(c)-1, 1.924(d)-1, and 1.924(e)-1 also issued under 26 
U.S.C. 924(d).
  Section 1.925(a)-1T also issued under 26 U.S.C. 925(b)(1) and 
927(d)(2)(B).
  Section 1.925(b)-1T also issued under 26 U.S.C. 925(b)(2).
  Section 1.927(d)-1 also issued under 26 U.S.C. 927(d)(1)(B).
  Section 1.927(e)-1T also issued under 26 U.S.C. 927(e)(1).
  Section 1.927(e)-2T also issued under 26 U.S.C. 927(e)(2).
  Section 1.927(f)-1 also issued under 26 U.S.C. 927(f).
  Sections 1.936-4 through 1.936-7 also issued under 26 U.S.C. 936(h).
  Section 1.952-11T is also issued under 26 U.S.C. 852(b)(3)(C), 
852(b)(8), and 852(c).
  Section 1.953-2 also issued under 26 U.S.C. 7701(b)(11).
  Section 1.954-0 also issued under 26 U.S.C. 954 (b) and (c).
  Section 1.954-1 also issued under 26 U.S.C. 954 (b) and (c).
  Section 1.954-2 also issued under 26 U.S.C. 954 (b) and (c).
  Section 1.956-3T also issued under 26 U.S.C. 864(d)(8).
  Section 1.957-1 also issued under 26 U.S.C. 957.
  Section 1.960-1 also issued under 26 U.S.C. 960(a).
  Sections 1.985-0 through 1.985-5 also issued under 26 U.S.C. 985.
  Sections 1.987-1 through 1.987-5 also issued under 26 U.S.C. 987.
  Sections 1.988-0 through 1.988-5 also issued under 26 U.S.C. 988.
  Sections 1.989(a)-0T and 1.989(a)-1T also issued under 26 U.S.C. 
989(c).
  Section 1.989(b)-1 also issued under 26 U.S.C. 989(b).
  Section 1.989-1(c) also issued under 26 U.S.C. 989(c).

  Source: T.D. 6500, 25 FR 11910, Nov. 26, 1960; 25 FR 14021, Dec. 31, 
1960, unless otherwise noted.


[[Page 11]]

         Earned Income of Citizens or Residents of United States


<R05>
Sec. 1.911-1  Partial exclusion for earned income from sources within a foreign country and foreign housing costs.

    (a) In general. Section 911 provides that a qualified individual may 
elect to exclude the individual's foreign earned income and the housing 
cost amount from the individual's gross income for the taxable year. 
Foreign earned income is excludable to the extent of the applicable 
limitation for the taxable year. The housing cost amount for the taxable 
year is excludable to the extent attributable to employer provided 
amounts. If a portion of the housing cost amount for the taxable year is 
attributable to non-employer provided amounts, such amount may be 
deductible by the qualified individual subject to a limitation. The 
amounts excluded under section 911(a) and the amount deducted under 
section 911(c)(3)(A) for the taxable year shall not exceed the 
individual's foreign earned income for such taxable year. Foreign earned 
income must be earned during a period for which the individual qualifies 
to make an election under section 911(d)(1). A housing cost amount that 
would be deductible except for the application of this limitation may be 
carried over to the next taxable year and is deductible to the extent of 
the limitation for that year. Except as otherwise provided, Secs. 1.911-
1 through 1.911-7 apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 
1981. These sections do not apply to any item of income, expense, 
deduction, or credit arising before January 1, 1982, even if such item 
is attributable to services performed after December 31, 1981.
    (b) Scope. Section 1.911-2 provides rules for determining whether an 
individual qualifies to make an election under section 911. Section 
1.911-3 provides rules for determining the amount of foreign earned 
income that is excludable under section 911(a)(1). Section 1.911-4 
provides rules for determining the housing cost amount and the portions 
excludable under section 911(a)(2) or deductible under section 
911(c)(3). Section 1.911-5 provides special rules applicable to married 
couples. Section 1.911-6 provides for the disallowance of deductions, 
exclusions, and credits attributable to amounts excluded under section 
911. Section 1.911-7 provides procedural rules for making or revoking an 
election under section 911. Section 1.911-8 provides a reference to 
rules applicable to taxable years beginning before January 1, 1982.

(Sec. 911 (95 Stat. 194; 26 U.S.C. 911) and sec. 7805 (68A Stat. 917; 26 
U.S.C. 7805) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954)

[T.D. 8006, 50 FR 2964, Jan. 23, 1985]


<R05>
Sec. 1.911-2  Qualified individuals.

    (a) In general. An individual is a qualified individual if:
    (1) The individual's tax home is in a foreign country or countries 
throughout--
    (i) The period of bona fide residence described in paragraph 
(a)(2)(i) of this section, or
    (ii) The 330 full days of presence described in paragraph (a)(2)(ii) 
of this section, and
    (2) The individual is either--
    (i) A citizen of the United States who establishes to the 
satisfaction of the Commissioner or his delegate that the individual has 
been a bona fide resident of a foreign country or countries for an 
uninterrupted period which includes an entire taxable year, or
    (ii) A citizen or resident of the United States who has been 
physically present in a foreign country or countries for at least 330 
full days during any period of twelve consecutive months.
    (b) Tax home. For purposes of paragraph (a)(i) of this section, the 
term ``tax home'' has the same meaning which it has for purposes of 
section 162(a)(2) (relating to travel expenses away from home). Thus, 
under section 911, an individual's tax home is considered to be located 
at his regular or principal (if more than one regular) place of business 
or, if the individual has no regular or principal place of business 
because of the nature of the business, then at his regular place of 
abode in a real and substantial sense. An individual shall not, however, 
be considered to have a tax home in a foreign country for any period for 
which the individual's abode is in the United

[[Page 12]]

States. Temporary presence of the individual in the United States does 
not necessarily mean that the individual's abode is in the United States 
during that time. Maintenance of a dwelling in the United States by an 
individual, whether or not that dwelling is used by the individual's 
spouse and dependents, does not necessarily mean that the individual's 
abode is in the United States.
    (c) Determination of bona fide residence. For purposes of paragraph 
(a)(2)(i) of this section, whether an individual is a bona fide resident 
of a foreign country shall be determined by applying, to the extent 
practical, the principles of section 871 and the regulations thereunder, 
relating to the determination of the residence of aliens. Bona fide 
residence in a foreign country or countries for an uninterrupted period 
may be established, even if temporary visits are made during the period 
to the United States or elsewhere on vacation or business. An individual 
with earned income from sources within a foreign country is not a bona 
fide resident of that country if:
    (1) The individual claims to be a nonresident of that foreign 
country in a statement submitted to the authorities of that country, and
    (2) The earned income of the individual is not subject, by reason of 
nonresidency in the foreign country, to the income tax of that country.

If an individual has submitted a statement of nonresidence to the 
authorities of a foreign country the accuracy of which has not been 
resolved as of any date when a determination of the individual's bona 
fide residence is being made, then the individual will not be considered 
a bona fide resident of the foreign country as of that date.
    (d) Determination of physical presence. For purposes of paragraph 
(a)(2)(ii) of this section, the following rules apply.
    (1) Twelve-month test. A period of twelve consecutive months may 
begin with any day but must end on the day before the corresponding day 
in the twelfth succeeding month. The twelve-month period may begin 
before or after arrival in a foreign country and may end before or after 
departure.
    (2) 330-day test. The 330 full days need not be consecutive but may 
be interrupted by periods during which the individual is not present in 
a foreign country. In computing the minimum 330 full days of presence in 
a foreign country or countries, all separate periods of such presence 
during the period of twelve consecutive months are aggregated. A full 
day is a continuous period of twenty-four hours beginning with midnight 
and ending with the following midnight. An individual who has been 
present in a foreign country and then travels over areas not within any 
foreign country for less than twenty-four hours shall not be deemed 
outside a foreign country during the period of travel. If an individual 
who is in transit between two points outside the United States is 
physically present in the United States for less than twenty-four hours, 
such individual shall not be treated as present in the United States 
during such transit but shall be treated as travelling over areas not 
within any foreign country. For purposes of this paragraph (d)(2), the 
term ``transit between two points outside the United States'' has the 
same meaning that it has when used in section 7701(b)(6)(C).
    (3) Illustrations of the physical presence requirement. The physical 
presence requirement of paragraph (a)(2)(ii) of this section is 
illustrated by the following examples:

    Example 1. B, a U.S. citizen, arrives in Venezuela from New York at 
12 noon on April 24, 1982. B remains in Venezuela until 2 p.m. on March 
21, 1983, at which time B departs for the United States. Among other 
possible twelve month periods, B is present in a foreign country an 
aggregate of 330 full days during each of the following twelve month 
periods: March 21, 1982 through March 20, 1983; and April 25, 1982 
through April 24, 1983.
    Example 2. C, a U.S. citizen, travels extensively from the time C 
leaves the United States on March 5, 1982, until the time C departs the 
United Kingdom on January 1, 1984, to return to the United States 
permanently. The schedule of C's travel and the number of full days at 
each location are listed below:

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                                                       Full days
                                                                                                           in   
                   Country                      Time and date of arrival   Time and date of departure   foreign 
                                                                                                        country 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
United States................................  ..........................  10 p.m. (by air) Mar. 5,             
                                                                            1982.                               

[[Page 13]]

                                                                                                                
United Kingdom...............................  9 a.m. Mar. 6, 1982.......  10 p.m. (by ship) June 25,        110
                                                                            1982.                               
United States................................  11 a.m. June 30, 1982.....  1 p.m. (by ship) July 19,           0
                                                                            1982.                               
France.......................................  3 p.m. July 24, 1982......  11 a.m. (by air) Aug. 22,         393
                                                                            1983.                               
United States................................  4 p.m. Aug. 22, 1983......  9 a.m. (by air) Sept. 4,            0
                                                                            1983.                               
United Kingdom...............................  9 a.m. Sept. 5, 1983......  9 a.m. (by air) Jan. 1,           117
                                                                            1984.                               
United States................................  1 p.m. Jan. 1, 1984.......  ..........................           
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    Among other possible twelve-month periods, C is present in a foreign 
country or countries an aggregate of 330 full days during the following 
twelve-month periods: March 2, 1982 through March 1, 1983; and January 
21, 1983 through January 20, 1984. The computation of days with respect 
to each twelve month period may be illustrated as follows:
    First twelve-month period (March 2, 1982 through March 1, 1983):

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                               Full days
                                                                   in   
                                                                foreign 
                                                                country 
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Mar. 2, 1982 through Mar. 6, 1982............................          0
Mar. 7, 1982 through June 24, 1982...........................        110
June 25, 1982 through July 24, 1982..........................          0
July 25, 1982 through Mar. 1, 1983...........................        220
                                                              ----------
    Total full days..........................................        330
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    Second twelve-month period (January 21, 1983 through January 20, 
1984):

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                               Full days
                                                                   in   
                                                                foreign 
                                                                country 
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Jan. 21, 1983 through Aug. 21, 1983..........................        213
Aug. 22, 1983 through Sept. 5, 1983..........................          0
Sept. 6, 1983 through Dec. 31, 1983..........................        117
Jan. 1, 1984 through Jan. 20, 1984...........................          0
                                                              ----------
    Total full days..........................................        330
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (e) Special rules. For purposes only of establishing that an 
individual is a qualified individual under paragraph (a) of this 
section, residence or presence in a foreign country while there employed 
by the U.S. government or any agency or instrumentality of the U.S. 
government counts towards satisfaction of the requirements of 
Sec. 1.911-2(a). (But see section 911(b)(1)(B)(ii) and Sec. 1.911-
3(c)(3) for the rule excluding amounts paid by the U.S. government to an 
employee from the definition of foreign earned income.) Time spent in a 
foreign country prior to January 1, 1982, counts toward satisfaction of 
the bona fide residence and physical presence requirements, even though 
no exclusion or deduction may be allowed under section 911 for income 
attributable to services performed during that time. For purposes or 
paragraph (a)(2)(ii) of this section, the term ``resident of the United 
States'' includes an individual for whom a valid election is in effect 
under section 6013 (g) or (h) for the taxable year or years during which 
the physical presence requirement is satisfied.
    (f) Waiver of period of stay in foreign country due to war or civil 
unrest.  Notwithstanding the requirements of paragraph (a) of this 
section, an individual whose tax home is in, a foreign country, and who 
is a bona fide resident of, or present in a foreign country for any 
period, who leaves the foreign country after August 31, 1978, before 
meeting the requirements of paragraph (a) of this section, may as 
provided in this paragraph, qualify to make an election under section 
911(a) and Sec. 1.911-7(a). If the Secretary determines, after 
consultation with the Secretary of State or his delegate, that war, 
civil unrest, or similar adverse conditions existed in a foreign 
country, then the Secretary shall publish the name of the foreign 
country and the dates between which such conditions were deemed to 
exist. In order to qualify to make an election under this paragraph, the 
individual must establish to the satisfaction of the Secretary that the 
individual left a foreign country, the name of which has been published 
by the Secretary, during the period when adverse conditions existed and 
that the individual could reasonably have expected to meet the 
requirements of paragraph (a) of this section but for the adverse 
conditions. The individual shall attach to his return for the taxable 
year a statement that the individual expected to meet the requirements 
of paragraph (a) of this section but for the conditions in the foreign 
country which precluded the normal conduct of business by the 
individual. Such individual shall be

[[Page 14]]

treated as a qualified individual, but only for the actual period of 
residence or presence. Thus, in determining the number of the 
individual's qualifying days, only days within the period of actual 
residence or presence shall be counted.
    (g) United States. The term ``United States'' when used in a 
geographical sense includes any territory under the sovereignty of the 
United States. It includes the states, the District of Columbia, the 
possessions and territories of the United States, the territorial waters 
of the United States, the air space over the United States, and the 
seabed and subsoil of those submarine areas which are adjacent to the 
territorial waters of the United States and over which the United States 
has exclusive rights, in accordance with international law, with respect 
to the exploration and exploitation of natural resources.
    (h) Foreign country. The term ``foreign country'' when used in a 
geographical sense includes any territory under the sovereignty of a 
government other than that of the United States. It includes the 
territorial waters of the foreign country (determined in accordance with 
the laws of the United States), the air space over the foreign country, 
and the seabed and subsoil of those submarine areas which are adjacent 
to the territorial waters of the foreign country and over which the 
foreign country has exclusive rights, in accordance with international 
law, with respect to the exploration and exploitation of natural 
resources.

(Sec. 911 (95 Stat. 194; 26 U.S.C. 911) and sec. 7805 (68A Stat. 917; 26 
U.S.C. 7805) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954)

[T.D. 8006, 50 FR 2965, Jan. 23, 1985]


<R05>
Sec. 1.911-3  Determination of amount of foreign earned income to be excluded.

    (a) Definition of foreign earned income. For purposes of section 911 
and the regulations thereunder, the term ``foreign earned income'' means 
earned income (as defined in paragraph (b) of this section) from sources 
within a foreign country (as defined in Sec. 1.911-2(h)) that is earned 
during a period for which the individual qualifies under Sec. 1.911-2(a) 
to make an election. Earned income is from sources within a foreign 
country if it is attributable to services performed by an individual in 
a foreign country or countries. The place of receipt of earned income is 
immaterial in determining whether earned income is attributable to 
services performed in a foreign country or countries.
    (b) Definition of earned income--(1) In general. The term ``earned 
income'' means wages, salaries, professional fees, and other amounts 
received as compensation for personal services actually rendered 
including the fair market value of all remuneration paid in any medium 
other than cash. Earned income does not include any portion of an amount 
paid by a corporation which represents a distribution of earnings and 
profits rather than a reasonable allowance as compensation for personal 
services actually rendered to the corporation.
    (2) Earned income from business in which capital is material. In the 
case of an individual engaged in a trade or business (other than in 
corporate form) in which both personal services and capital are material 
income producing factors, a reasonable allowance as compensation for the 
personal services actually rendered by the individual shall be 
considered earned income, but the total amount which shall be treated as 
the earned income of the individual from such trade or business shall in 
no case exceed thirty percent of the individual's share of the net 
profits of such trade or business.
    (3) Professional fees. Earned income includes all fees received by 
an individual engaged in a professional occupation (such as doctor or 
lawyer) in the performance of professional activities. Professional fees 
constitute earned income even though the individual employs assistants 
to perform part or all of the services, provided the patients or clients 
are those of the individual and look to the individual as the person 
responsible for the services rendered.
    (c) Amounts not included in foreign earned income. Foreign earned 
income does not include an amount:
    (1) Excluded from gross income under section 119;
    (2) Received as a pension or annuity (including social security 
benefits);

[[Page 15]]

    (3) Paid to an employee by an employer which is the U.S. government 
or any U.S. government agency or instrumentality;
    (4) Included in the individual's gross income by reason of section 
402(b) (relating to the taxability of a beneficiary of a nonexempt 
trust) or section 403(c) (relating to the taxability of a beneficiary 
under a nonqualified annuity or under annuities purchased by exempt 
organizations);
    (5) Included in gross income by reason of Sec. 1.911-6(b)(4)(ii); or
    (6) Received after the close of the first taxable year following the 
taxable year in which the services giving rise to the amounts were 
performed. For treatment of amounts received after December 31, 1962, 
which are attributable to services performed on or before December 31, 
1962, and with respect to which there existed on March 12, 1962, a right 
(whether forfeitable or nonforfeitable) to receive such amounts, see 
Sec. 1.72-8.
    (d) Determination of the amount of foreign earned income that may be 
excluded under section 911(a)(1)--(1) In general. Foreign earned income 
described in this section may be excluded under section 911(a)(1) and 
this paragraph only to the extent of the limitation specified in 
paragraph (d)(2) of this section. Income is considered to be earned in 
the taxable year in which the services giving rise to the income are 
performed. The determination of the amount of excluded earned income in 
this manner does not affect the time for reporting any amounts included 
in gross income.
    (2) Limitation--(i) In general. The term ``section 911(a)(1) 
limitation'' means the amount of foreign earned income for a taxable 
year which may be excluded under section 911(a)(1). The section 
911(a)(1) limitation shall be equal to the lesser of the qualified 
individual's foreign earned income for the taxable year in excess of 
amounts that the individual elected to exclude from gross income under 
section 911(a)(2) or the product of the annual rate for the taxable year 
(as specified in paragraph (d)(2)(ii) of this section) multiplied by the 
following fraction:

                                                                        
            The number of qualifying days in the taxable year           
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
                 The number of days in the taxable year                 
                                                                        

    (ii) Annual rate for the taxable year. The annual rate for the 
taxable year is the rate set forth in section 911(b)(2)(A).
    (3) Number of qualifying days. For purposes of section 911 and the 
regulations thereunder, the number of qualifying days is the number of 
days in the taxable year within the period during which the individual 
met the tax home requirement and either the bona fide residence 
requirement or the physical presence requirement of Sec. 1.911-2(a). 
Although the period of bona fide residence must include an entire 
taxable year, the entire uninterrupted period of residence may include 
fractional parts of a taxable year. For instance, if an individual who 
was a calendar year taxpayer established a tax home and a residence in a 
foreign country as of November 1, 1982, and maintained the tax home and 
the residence through March 31, 1984, then the uninterrupted period of 
bona fide residence includes fractional parts of the years 1982 and 
1984, and all of 1983. The number of qualifying days in 1982 is sixty-
one. The number of qualifying days in 1983 is 365. The number of 
qualifying days in 1984 is ninety-one. The period during which the 
physical presence requirement of Sec. 1.911-2(a)(2)(ii) is met is any 
twelve consecutive month period during which the individual is 
physically present in one or more foreign countries for 330 days and the 
individual's tax home is in a foreign country during each day of such 
physical presence. Such period may include days when the individual is 
not physically present in a foreign country, and days when the 
individual does not maintain a tax home in a foreign country. Such 
period may include fractional parts of a taxable year. Thus, if an 
individual's period of physical, presence is the twelve-month period 
beginning June 1, 1982, and ending May 31, 1983, the number of 
qualifying days in 1982 is 214 and the number of qualifying days in 1983 
is 151.
    (e) Attribution rules--(1) In general. Foreign earned income is 
considered to be earned in the taxable year in which

[[Page 16]]

the individual performed the services giving rise to the income. If 
income is earned in one taxable year and received in another taxable 
year, then, for purposes of determining the amount of foreign earned 
income that the individual may exclude under section 911(a), the 
individual must attribute the income to the taxable year in which the 
services giving rise to the income were performed. Thus, any 
reimbursement would be attributable to the taxable year in which the 
services giving rise to the obligation to pay the reimbursement were 
performed, not the taxable year in which the reimbursement was received. 
For example, tax equalization payments are normally received in the year 
after the year in which the services giving rise to the obligation to 
pay the tax equalization payment were performed. Therefore, such 
payments will almost always have to be attributed to the prior year. 
Foreign earned income attributable to services performed in a preceding 
taxable year shall be excludable from gross income in the year of 
receipt only to the extent such amount could have been excluded under 
paragraph (d)(1) in the preceding taxable year, had such amount been 
received in the preceding taxable year. The taxable year to which income 
is attributable will be determined on the basis of all the facts and 
circumstances.
    (2) Priority of use of the section 911(a)(1) limitation. Foreign 
earned income received in the year in which it is earned shall be 
applied to the section 911(a)(1) limitation for that year before 
applying income earned in that year that is received in any other year. 
Foreign earned income that is earned in one year and received in another 
year shall be applied to the section 911(a)(1) limitation for the year 
in which it was earned, on a year by year basis, in any order that the 
individual chooses. (But see section 911(b)(1)(B)(iv)). An individual 
may not amend his return to change the treatment of income with respect 
to the section 911(a)(1) exclusion after the period provided by section 
6511(a). The special period of limitation provided by section 6511(d)(3) 
does not apply for this purpose. For example, C, a qualified individual, 
receives an advance bonus of $10,000 in 1982, salary of $70,000 in 1983, 
and a performance bonus of $10,000 in 1984, all of which are foreign 
earned income for 1983. C has a section 911(a)(1) limitation for 1983 of 
$80,000, and has no housing cost amount exclusion. On his income tax 
return for 1983, C elects to exclude foreign earned income of $70,000 
received in 1983. C may also exclude his $10,000 advance bonus received 
in 1982 (by filing an amended return for 1982), or he may exclude the 
$10,000 performance bonus received in 1984 on his 1984 income tax 
return. However, C may not exclude part of the 1982 bonus and part of 
the 1984 bonus.
    (3) Exception for year-end payroll period. Notwithstanding paragraph 
(e)(1) of this section, salary or wage payments of a cash basis taxpayer 
shall be attributed entirely to the year of receipt under the following 
circumstances:
    (i) The period for which the payment is made is a normal payroll 
period of the employer which regularly applies to the employee;
    (ii) The payroll period includes the last day of the employee's 
taxable year;
    (iii) The payroll period does not exceed 16 days; and
    (iv) The payment is part of a normal payroll of the employer that is 
distributed at the same time, in relation to the payroll period, that 
such payroll would normally be distributed, and is distributed before 
the end of the next succeeding payroll period.
    (4) Attribution of bonuses and substantially nonvested property to 
periods in which services were performed--(i) In general. Bonuses and 
substantially nonvested property are attributable to all of the services 
giving rise to the income on the basis of all the facts and 
circumstances. If an individual receives a bonus or substantially 
nonvested property (as defined in Sec. 1.83-3(b)) and it is determined 
to be attributable to services performed in more than one taxable year, 
then, for purposes of determining the amount eligible for exclusion from 
gross income in the year the bonus is received or the property vests, a 
portion of such amount shall be treated as attributable to services 
performed in each taxable year (or portion thereof) during the period 
when services giving rise to the

[[Page 17]]

bonus or the substantially nonvested property were performed. Such 
portion shall be determined by dividing the amount of the bonus or the 
excess of the fair market value of the vested property over the amount 
paid, if any, for the vested property, by the number of months in the 
period when services giving rise to such amount were performed, and 
multiplying the quotient by the number of months in such period in the 
taxable year. For purposes of this section, the term ``month'' means a 
calendar month. A fraction of a calendar month shall be deemed a month 
if it includes fifteen or more days.
    (ii) Examples. The following examples illustrate the application of 
this paragraph (e)(4).

    Example 1. A, an employee of M Corporation during all of 1983 and 
1984, worked in the United States from January 1 through April 30, 1983, 
and received $12,000 of salary for that period. A worked in country F 
from May 1, 1983 through the end of 1984, and is a qualified individual 
under Sec. 1.911-2(a) for that period. For the period from May 1 through 
December 31, 1983, A received $32,000 of salary. M pays a bonus on 
December 20, 1983 to each of M's employees in an amount equal to 10 
percent of the employee's regular wages or salary for the 1983 calendar 
year. The amount of A's bonus is $4,400 for 1983. The portion of A's 
bonus that is attributable to services performed in country F and is 
foreign earned income for 1983 is $3,200, or $32,000 x 10 percent. The 
remaining $1,200 of A's bonus is attributable to services performed in 
the United States, and is not foreign earned income.
    Example 2. The facts are the same as in example 1, except that M 
determines bonuses separately for each country based on the productivity 
of the employees in that country. M pays a bonus to employees in country 
F, in the amount of 15 percent of each employee's wages or salary earned 
in country F. A's country F bonus is $4,800 for 1983 ($32,000 x 15 
percent), and is foreign earned income for 1983. If A also receives a 
bonus (or if A's bonus is increased) for working in the United States 
during 1983, that amount is not foreign earned income.
    Example 3. X corporation offers its employees a bonus of $40,000 if 
the employee accepts employment in a foreign country and remains in a 
foreign country for a period of at least four years. A, an employee of 
X, is a calendar year and cash basis taxpayer. A accepts employment with 
X in foreign country F. A begins work in F on July 1, 1983 and continues 
to work in F for X until June 30, 1987. In 1987 X pays A a $40,000 
bonus. The bonus is attributable to services A performed from July 1, 
1983 through June 30, 1987. The amount of the bonus attributable to 1987 
is $5,000 (($40,000<divide>48) x 6). The amount of the bonus 
attributable to 1986 is $10,000 (($40,000<divide>48) x 12). A may 
exclude the $10,000 attributable to 1986 only to the extent that amount 
could have been excluded under section 911(a)(1) had A received it in 
1986. The remaining $25,000 is attributable to services performed in 
taxable years before 1986. Such amounts may not be excluded under 
section 911 because they are received after the close of the taxable 
year following the taxable year in which the services giving rise to the 
income were performed.

    (iii) Special rule for elections under section 83(b). If an 
individual receives substantially nonvested property and makes an 
election under section 83(b) and Sec. 1.83-2(a) to include in his gross 
income the amount determined under section 83(b)(1)(A) and (B) and 
Sec. 1.83-2(a) for the taxable year in which the property is transferred 
(as defined in Sec. 1.83-3(a)), then, for the purpose of determining the 
amount eligible for exclusion in the year of receipt, the individual may 
elect either of the following options:
    (A) Substantially nonvested property may be treated as attributable 
entirely to services performed in the taxable year in which an election 
to include it in income is made. If so treated, then the amount 
otherwise included in gross income as determined under Sec. 1.83-2(a) 
will be excludable under section 911(a) for such year subject to the 
limitation provided in Sec. 1.911-3(d)(2) for such year.
    (B) A portion of the substantially nonvested property may be treated 
as attributable to services performed or to be performed in each taxable 
year during which the substantial risk of forfeiture (as defined in 
section 83(c) and Sec. 1.83-3(c)) exists. The portion treated as 
attributable to services performed or to be performed in each taxable 
year is determined by dividing the amount of the substantially nonvested 
property included in gross income as determined under Sec. 1.83-2(a) by 
the number of months during the period when a substantial risk of 
forfeiture exists. The quotient is multiplied by the total number of 
months in the taxable year during which a substantial risk of forfeiture 
exists. The amount determined to be attributable to services performed 
in the year the election is made shall be excluded from gross

[[Page 18]]

income for such year as provided in paragraph (d)(2) of this section. 
Amounts treated as attributable to services performed in subsequent 
taxable years shall be excludable in the year of receipt only to the 
extent such amounts could be excluded under paragraph (d)(2) of this 
section in such subsequent years. An individual may obtain such 
additional exclusion by filing an amended return for the taxable year in 
which the property was transferred. The individual may only amend his or 
her return within the period provided by section 6511(a) and the 
regulations thereunder.
    (5) Moving expense reimbursements--(i) Source of reimbursements. For 
the purpose of determining whether a moving expense reimbursement is 
attributable to services performed within a foreign country or within 
the United States, in the absence of evidence to the contrary, the 
reimbursement shall be attributable to future services to be performed 
at the new principal place of work. Thus, a reimbursement received by an 
employee from his employer for the expenses of a move to a foreign 
country will generally be attributable to services performed in the 
foreign country. A reimbursement received by an employee from his 
employer for the expenses of a move from a foreign country to the United 
States will generally be attributable to services performed in the 
United States. For purposes of this paragraph (e)(5), evidence to the 
contrary includes, but is not limited to, an agreement, between the 
employer and the employee, or a statement of company policy, which is 
reduced to writing before the move to the foreign country and which is 
entered into or established to induce the employee or employees to move 
to a foreign country. The writing must state that the employer will 
reimburse the employee for moving expenses incurred in returning to the 
United States regardless of whether the employee continues to work for 
the employer after the employee returns to the United States. The 
writing may contain conditions upon which the right to reimbursement is 
determined as long as the conditions set forth standards that are 
definitely ascertainable and the conditions can only be fulfilled prior 
to, or through completion of the employee's return move to the United 
States that is the subject of the writing. In no case will an oral 
agreement or statement of company policy concerning moving expenses be 
considered evidence to the contrary. For the purpose of determining 
whether a storage expense reimbursement is attributable to services 
performed within a foreign country, in the case of storage expenses 
incurred after December 31, 1983, the reimbursement shall be 
attributable to services performed during the period of time for which 
the storage expenses are incurred.
    (ii) Attribution of foreign source reimbursements to taxable years 
in which services are performed--(A) In general. If a reimbursement for 
moving expenses is determined to be from foreign sources under paragraph 
(e)(5)(i) of this section, then for the purpose of determining the 
amount eligible for exclusion in accordance with paragraphs (d)(2) and 
(e)(2) of this section, the reimbursement shall be considered 
attributable to services performed in the year of the move as long as 
the individual is a qualified individual for a period that includes 120 
days in the year of the move. The period that is used in determining the 
number of qualifying days for purposes of the individual's section 
911(a)(1) limitation (under paragraph (d)(2) of this section) must also 
be used in determining whether the individual is a qualified individual 
for a period that includes 120 days in the year of the move. If the 
individual is not a qualified individual for such period, then the 
individual shall treat a portion of the reimbursement as attributable to 
services performed in the year of the move, and a portion as 
attributable to services performed in the succeeding taxable year, if 
the move is from the United States to a foreign country, or to the prior 
taxable year, if the move is from a foreign country to the United 
States. The portion of the reimbursement treated as attributable to 
services performed in the year of the move shall be determined by 
multiplying the total reimbursement by the following fraction:

[[Page 19]]



                                                                        
  The number of qualifying days (as defined in paragraph (d)(3) of this 
                    section) in the year of the move                    
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
           The number of days in the taxable year of the move.          
                                                                        

The remaining portion of the reimbursement shall be treated as 
attributable to services performed in the year succeeding or preceding 
the year of the move. Amounts treated as attributable to services 
performed in a year succeeding or preceding the year of the move shall 
be excludable in the year of receipt only to the extent such amounts 
could be excluded under paragraph (d)(2) of this section in such 
succeeding or preceding year.
    (B) Moves beginning before January 1, 1984. Notwithstanding 
paragraph (e)(5)(ii)(A) of this section, this paragraph (e)(5)(ii)(B) 
shall apply for moves begun before January 1, 1984. If a reimbursement 
for moving expenses is determined to be from foreign sources under 
paragraph (e)(5)(i) of this section, then for the purpose of determining 
the amount eligible for exclusion in accordance with paragraphs (d)(2) 
and (e)(2) of this section, the reimbursement shall be considered 
attributable to services performed in the year of the move. However, if 
the individual does not qualify under section 911(d)(1) and Sec. 1.911-
2(a) for the entire taxable year of the move, then the individual shall 
treat a portion of the reimbursement as attributable to services 
performed in the succeeding taxable year, if the move is from the United 
States to a foreign country, or to the prior taxable year, if the move 
is from a foreign country to the United States. The portion of the 
reimbursement treated as attributable to services performed in the year 
succeeding or preceding the move shall be determined by multiplying the 
total reimbursement by the following fraction:

                                                                        
  The number of qualifying days (as defined in paragraph (d)(3) of this 
                    section) in the year of the move                    
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
           The number of days in the taxable year of the move.          
                                                                        

and subtracting the product from the total reimbursement. Amounts 
treated as attributable to services performed in a year succeeding or 
preceding the year of the move shall be excludable in the year of 
receipt only to the extent such amounts could be excluded under 
paragraph (d)(2) of this section in such succeeding or preceding year.
    (f) Examples. The following examples illustrate the application of 
this section.

    Example 1. A is a U.S. citizen and calendar year taxpayer. A's tax 
home was in foreign country F and A was physically present in F for 330 
days during the period from July 4, 1982 through July 3, 1983. The 
number of A's qualifying days in 1982 as determined under paragraph 
(d)(2) of this section is 181. In 1982 A receives $40,000 attributable 
to services performed in foreign country F in 1982. Under paragraph 
(d)(2) of this section A's section 911(a)(1) limitation is $37,192, that 
is the lesser of $40,000 (foreign earned income) or
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC09OC91.000

    Example 2. The facts are the same as in example 1 except that in 
1982 A receives $30,000 attributable to services performed in foreign 
country F. A excludes this amount from gross income under paragraph (d) 
of this section. In addition, in 1983 A receives $10,000 attributable to 
services performed in F in 1982 and $35,000 attributable to services 
performed in F in 1983. On his return for 1983, A must report $45,000 of 
income. A's section 911(a)(1) limitation for 1983 is the lesser of 
$35,000 (foreign earned income) or $49,329, the annual rate for the 
taxable year multiplied by a fraction the numerator of which is A's 
qualifying days in the taxable year and the denominator of which is the 
number of days in the taxable year ($80,000 x 184/365). On his tax 
return for 1983 A may exclude $35,000 attributable to services performed 
in 1983. A may only exclude $7,192 of the $10,000 received in 1983 
attributable to services performed in 1982 because such amount is only 
excludable in 1983 to the extent such amount could have been excluded in 
1982 subject to

[[Page 20]]

the section 911(a)(1) limitation for 1982 which is $37,192 
($75,000 x 181/365). No portion of amounts attributable to services 
performed in 1982 may be used in calculating A's section 911(a)(1) 
limitation for 1983. Thus, even though A could have excluded an 
additional $5,329 in 1983 if A had had more foreign earned income 
attributable to 1983, A may not exclude the $2,808 of remaining foreign 
earned income attributable to 1982.

    Example 3. C is a U.S. citizen and calendar year taxpayer. C 
establishes a bona fide residence and a tax home in foreign country J on 
March 1, 1982, and maintains a tax home and a residence in J until 
December 31, 1986. In March of 1982 C's employer, Y corporation, 
transfers stock in Y to C. The stock is subject to forfeiture if C 
returns to the U.S. before January 1, 1985. C elects under section 83(b) 
to include $15,000, the amount determined with respect to such stock 
under section 83(b)(1), in gross income in 1982. C's other foreign 
earned income in 1982 is $58,000. C elects under paragraph 
(e)(4)(iii)(B) of this section to treat the stock as if earned over the 
period of the substantial risk of forfeiture. The number of months in 
the period of the substantial risk of forfeiture is thirty-four. The 
number of months in the taxable year 1982 within the period of foreign 
employment is ten. For purposes of determining C's section 911(a)(1) 
limitation, $4,412 (($15,000/34) x 10) of the amount included in gross 
income under section 83(b) is treated as attributable to services 
performed in 1982, $5,294 is treated as attributable to services to be 
performed in 1983, and $5,294 is treated as attributable to services to 
be performed in 1984. In 1982, C excludes $62,412 under section 
911(a)(1). That is the lesser of foreign earned income for 1982 
($58,000+$4,412) or the annual rate for the taxable year multiplied by a 
fraction the numerator of which is C's qualifying days in the taxable 
year and the denominator of which is the number of days in the taxable 
year ($75,000 x 306/365). C continues to perform services in foreign 
country J throughout 1983 and 1984. C would be able to exclude the 
remaining $5,294 attributable to services performed in 1983 and $5,294 
attributable to services performed in 1984 if those amounts would be 
excludable if they had been received in 1983 or 1984 respectively. If C 
is entitled to exclude the additional amounts, C must claim the 
exclusion by filing an amended return for 1982.
    Example 4. D is a U.S. citizen and a calendar year taxpayer. In 
September, 1984 D moves to a foreign country K. D is physically present 
in K, and D's tax home is in K, from September 15, 1984 through December 
31, 1985. D receives $6,000 in April, 1985 from his employer, as a 
reimbursement for expenses of moving to K, pursuant to a written 
agreement that such moving expenses would be reimbursed to D upon 
successful completion of 6 months employment in K. Under paragraph 
(e)(15)(i) of this section, the reimbursement is attributable to 
services performed in K. Under the physical presence test of Sec. 1.911-
2(a)(2)(ii), among other periods D is a qualified individual for the 
period of August 10, 1984 through August 9, 1985, which includes 144 
days in 1984. Under paragraph (e)(5)(ii)(A) of this section, for the 
purpose of determining the amount eligible for exclusion, the 
reimbursement is considered attributable to services performed in 1984 
(the year of the move) because D is a qualified individual under 
Sec. 1.911-2(a) for a period that includes 120 days in 1984. The 
reimbursement may be excluded under paragraphs (d)(2) and (e)(2) of this 
section, to the extent that D's foreign earned income for 1984 that was 
earned and received in 1984 was less than the annual rate for the 
taxable year multiplied by the number of D's qualifying days in the 
taxable year over the number of days in D's taxable year ($80,000 x 144/
366), or $31,475.
    Example 5. The facts are the same as in example 4 except that D is 
not a qualified individual under the physical presence test, but is a 
qualified individual under the bona fide residence test for the period 
of September 15, 1984 through December 31, 1985. Under paragraph 
(e)(5)(ii)(A) of this section, for the purpose of determining the amount 
eligible for exclusion, the reimbursement is considered attributable to 
services performed in 1984 and 1985 because D is not a qualified 
individual for a period that includes 120 days in 1984 (the year of the 
move). The portion of the reimbursement treated as attributable to 
services performed in 1984 is $6,000 x 108/366, or $1,770, and may be 
excluded, subject to D's 1984 section 911(a)(1) limitation. The balance 
of the reimbursement, $4,230, is treated as attributable to services 
performed in 1985, and may be excluded to the extent provided in 
paragraphs (d)(2) and (e)(2) of this section.
    Example 6. The facts are the same as in example 4, with the 
following additions. Before D moved to K, D and his employer signed a 
written agreement that D would perform services for the employer for at 
least one year, primarily in country K, and, if D did not voluntarily 
cease to work for the employer primarily in country K before one year 
had elapsed, the employer would reimburse D for one half of D's 
expenses, up to a maximum of $4,000, of moving back to the United 
States. The agreement also stated that, if D did not voluntarily leave 
the employment in K before two years had elapsed, the employer would 
reimburse D for all of D's reasonable expenses of moving back to the 
United States. The agreement further stated that D's right to 
reimbursement would not be conditioned upon the performance of services 
after D ceased to work in K. D worked in country K for all of 1985. On 
January 1, 1986, D left K and moved to the

[[Page 21]]

United States. In February, 1986 the employer paid D $3,500 as 
reimbursement for one-half of D's expenses of moving to the United 
States. Although D did not fulfill the condition in the agreement to 
receive full reimbursement, all of the conditions in the agreement set 
forth definitely ascertainable standards and no condition could be 
fulfilled after D moved back to the United States. The agreement 
fulfills the requirements of paragraph (e)(5)(i) of this section, and 
therefore is evidence that the reimbursement should not be attributable 
to future services to be performed at D's new principal place of work. 
Under the facts and circumstances, the reimbursement is attributable to 
services performed in K. Under paragraph (e)(5)(ii)(A) of this section, 
the entire reimbursement is attributable to services performed in 1985. 
The amount attributable to 1985 may be excluded to the extent provided 
in paragraphs (d)(2) and (e)(2) of this section.

(Sec. 911 (95 Stat. 194; 26 U.S.C. 911) and sec. 7805 (68A Stat. 917; 26 
U.S.C. 7805) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954)

[T.D. 8006, 50 FR 2966, Jan. 23, 1985]


<R05>
Sec. 1.911-4  Determination of housing cost amount eligible for exclusion or deduction.

    (a) Definition of housing cost amount. The term ``housing cost 
amount'' means an amount equal to the reasonable expenses paid or 
incurred (as defined in section 7701(a)(25)) during the taxable year by 
or on behalf of the individual attributable to housing in a foreign 
country for the individual and any spouse or dependents who reside with 
the individual (or live in a second foreign household described in 
paragraph (b)(5) of this section) less the base housing amount as 
defined in paragraph (c) of this section. The housing cost amount must 
be reduced by the amount of any military or section 912 allowance or 
similar allowance excludable from gross income that is intended to 
compensate the individual or the individual's spouse in whole or in part 
for the expenses of housing during the same period for which the 
individual claims a housing cost amount exclusion or deduction.
    (b) Housing expenses--(1) Included expenses. For purposes of 
paragraph (a) of this section, housing expenses include rent, the fair 
rental value of housing provided in kind by the employer, utilities 
(other than telephone charges), real and personal property insurance, 
occupancy taxes not described in paragraph (b)(2)(v) of this section, 
nonrefundable fees paid for securing a leasehold, rental of furniture 
and accessories, household repairs, and residential parking.
    (2) Excluded expenses. Housing expenses do not include:
    (i) The cost of house purchase, improvements, and other costs that 
are capital expenditures;
    (ii) The cost of purchased furniture or accessories or domestic 
labor (maids, gardeners, etc.);
    (iii) Amortized payments of principal with respect to an evidence of 
indebtedness secured by a mortgage on the taxpayer's housing;
    (iv) Depreciation of housing owned by the taxpayer, or amortization 
or depreciation of capital improvements made to housing leased by the 
taxpayer;
    (v) Interest and taxes deductible under section 163 or 164 or other 
amounts deductible under section 216(a) (relating to deduction of 
interest and taxes by cooperative housing corporation tenant);
    (vi) The expenses of more than one foreign household except as 
provided in paragraph (b)(5) of this section;
    (vii) Expenses excluded from gross income under section 119;
    (viii) Expenses claimed as deductible moving expenses under section 
217; or
    (ix) The cost of a pay television subscription.
    (3) Limitation. Housing expenses are taken into account for purposes 
of this section only to the extent attributable to housing for portions 
of the taxable year within the period during which the individual 
satisfies the requirements of Sec. 1.911-2(a). Housing expenses are not 
taken into account for the period during which the value of the 
individual's housing is excluded from gross income under section 119, 
unless the individual maintains a second foreign household described in 
paragraph (b)(5) of this section. If an individual maintains two foreign 
households, only expenses incurred with respect to the abode which bears 
the closest relationship, not necessarily geographic, with respect to 
the individual's tax home shall be taken into account, unless one of the 
households is a second foreign household.

[[Page 22]]

    (4) Reasonableness. An amount paid for housing shall not be treated 
as reasonable, for purposes of paragraph (a) of this section, to the 
extent that the expense is lavish or extravagant under the 
circumstances.
    (5) Expenses of a second foreign household--(i) In general. The term 
``second foreign household'' means a separate abode maintained by an 
individual outside of the U.S. for his or her spouse or dependents (who, 
if minors, are in the individual's legal custody or the joint custody of 
the individual and the individual's spouse) at a place other than the 
tax home of the individual because of adverse living conditions at the 
individual's tax home. If an individual maintains a second foreign 
household the expenses of the second foreign household may be included 
in the individual's housing expenses under paragraph (b)(1) of this 
section. Under no circumstances shall an individual be considered to 
maintain more than one second foreign household at the same time.
    (ii) Adverse living conditions. Solely for purposes of paragraph 
(b)(5)(i) of this section, adverse living conditions are living 
conditions which are dangerous, unhealthful, or otherwise adverse. 
Adverse living conditions include a state of warfare or civil 
insurrection in the general area of the individual's tax home. Adverse 
living conditions exist if the individual resides on the business 
premises of the employer for the convenience of the employer and, 
because of the nature of the business (for example, a construction site 
or drilling rig), it is not feasible for the employer to provide housing 
for the individual's spouse or dependents. The criteria used by the 
Department of State in granting a separate maintenance allowance are 
relevant, but not determinative, for purposes of determining whether a 
separate household is provided because of adverse living conditions.
    (c) Base housing amount--(1) In general. The base housing amount is 
equal to the product of 16 percent of the annual salary of an employee 
of the United States who is compensated at a rate equal to the annual 
salary rate paid for step 1 of grade GS-14, multiplied by the following 
fraction:

                                                                        
                      The number of qualifying days                     
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
                 The number of days in the taxable year                 
                                                                        

For purposes of the above fraction, the number of qualifying days is 
determined in accordance with Sec. 1.911-3(d)(3).
    (2) Annual salary of step 1 of grade GS-14. The annual salary rate 
for a step 1 of grade GS-14 is determined on January first of the 
calendar year in which the individual's taxable year begins.
    (d) Housing cost amount exclusion--(1) Limitation. A qualified 
individual who has elected to exclude his or her housing cost amount may 
only exclude the lesser of the full amount of either the individual's 
housing cost amount attributable to employer provided amounts or the 
individual's foreign earned income for the taxable year. A qualified 
individual who elects to exclude his or her housing cost amount may not 
claim less than the full amount of the housing cost exclusion determined 
under this paragraph.
    (2) Employer provided amounts. For purposes of this section, the 
term ``employer provided amounts'' means any amounts paid or incurred on 
behalf of the individual by the individual's employer which are foreign 
earned income included in the individual's gross income for the taxable 
year (without regard to section 911). Employer provided amounts include, 
but are not limited to, the following amounts: Any salary paid by the 
employer to the employee; any reimbursement paid by the employer to the 
employee for housing expenses, educational expenses for the individual's 
dependents, or as part of a tax equalization plan; the fair market value 
of compensation provided in kind (including lodging, unless excluded 
under section 119, relating to meals and lodging furnished for the 
convenience of the employer); and any amount paid by the employer to any 
third party on behalf of the employee. An individual will only have 
earnings that are not employer provided amounts if the individual has 
earnings from self-employment.
    (3) Housing cost amount attributable to employer provided amounts. 
For the purpose of determining what portion of the housing cost amount 
is excludable

[[Page 23]]

and what portion is deductible the following rules apply. If the 
individual has no income from self-employment, then the entire housing 
cost amount is attributable to employer provided amounts and is, 
therefore, excludable to the extent of the limitation provided in 
paragraph (d)(1) of this section. If the individual only has income from 
self-employment, then the entire housing cost amount is attributable to 
non-employer provided amounts and is, therefore, deductible to the 
extent of the limitation provided in paragraph (e) of this section. In 
all other instances, the housing cost amount attributable to employer 
provided amounts shall be determined by multiplying the housing cost 
amount by the following fraction: Employer provided amounts over foreign 
earned income for the taxable year. The housing cost amount attributable 
to non-employer provided amounts shall be determined by subtracting the 
portion of the housing cost amount attributable to employer provided 
amounts from the total housing cost amount.
    (e) Housing cost amount deduction--(1) In general. If a portion of 
the individual's housing cost amount is determined under paragraph 
(d)(3) of this section to be attributable to non-employer provided 
amounts, the individual may deduct that amount from gross income for the 
taxable year but only to the extent of the individual's foreign earned 
income (as defined in Sec. 1.911-3) for the taxable year in excess of 
foreign earned income excluded and the housing cost amount excluded from 
gross income for the taxable year under Sec. 1.911-3 and this section.
    (2) Carryover. If any portion of the individual's housing cost 
amount deduction is disallowed for the taxable year under paragraph 
(e)(1) of this section, such portion shall be carried over and treated 
as a deduction from gross income for the succeeding taxable year (but 
only for the succeeding taxable year) to the extent of the excess, if 
any, of:
    (i) The amount of foreign earned income for the succeeding taxable 
year less the foreign earned income and the housing cost amount excluded 
from gross income under Sec. 1.911-3 and this section for the succeeding 
taxable year over,
    (ii) The portion, if any, of the housing cost amount that is 
deductible under paragraph (e)(1) of this section for the succeeding 
taxable year.
    (f) Examples. The following examples illustrate the application of 
this section. In all examples the annual rate for a step 1 of GS-14 as 
of January first of the calendar year in which the individual's taxable 
year begins is $39,689.

    Example 1. B, a U.S. citizen is a calendar year taxpayer who was a 
bona fide resident of and whose tax home was located in foreign country 
G for the entire taxable year 1982. B receives an $80,000 salary from 
B's employer for services performed in G. B incurs no business expenses. 
B receives housing provided by B's employer with a fair rental value of 
$15,000. The value of the housing furnished by B's employer is not 
excluded from gross income under section 119. B pays $10,000 for housing 
expenses. B's gross income and foreign earned income for 1982 is 
$95,000. B elects the foreign earned income exclusion of section 
911(a)(1) and the housing cost amount exclusion of section 911(a)(2). B 
must first compute his housing cost amount exclusion. B's housing cost 
amount is $18,650 determined by reducing B's housing expenses, $25,000 
($15,000 fair rental value of housing and $10,000 of other expenses), by 
the base housing amount of $6,350 (($39,689 x .16) x 365/365). Because B 
has no income from self-employment, the entire amount is attributable to 
employer provided amounts and therefore, is excludable. B's section 
911(a)(1) limitation is $75,000. That is the lesser of $75,000 x 365/365 
or $95,000-18,650. B's total exclusion for 1982 under section 911(a)(1) 
and (2) is $93,650.
    Example 2. The facts are the same as in example 1 except that B's 
salary for 1982 is $70,000. B's foreign earned income for 1982 is 
$85,000. B's housing cost amount is $18,650, all of which is 
attributable to employer provided amounts. B's housing cost amount is 
excludable to the extent of the lesser of B's housing cost amount 
attributable to employer provided amounts, $18,650, or the foreign 
earned income for the taxable year, $85,000. Thus, B excludes $18,650 
under section 911(a)(2). B's section 911(a)(1) limitation for 1982 is 
$66,350 (the lesser of $75,000 x 365/365 or $85,000-18,650). B's total 
exclusion for 1982 under section 911(a)(1) and (2) is $85,000.
    Example 3. The facts are the same as in example 2 except that in 
1983, B receives $5,000 attributable to services performed in 1982. B 
may exclude the entire $5,000 in 1983 because such amount would have 
been excludable under Sec. 1.911-3(d)(1) had it been received in 1982.
    Example 4. C is a U.S. citizen self-employed and a calendar year and 
cash basis taxpayer.

[[Page 24]]

C arrived in foreign country H on October 3, 1982, and departed from H 
on March 8, 1984. C's tax home was located in H throughout that period. 
C was physically present for 330 full days during the twelve consecutive 
month period August 30, 1982, through August 29, 1983. The number of C's 
qualifying days in 1982 is 124. During 1982 C had $35,000 of foreign 
earned income, none of which was attributable to employer provided 
amounts and $8,000 of reasonable housing expenses. C's housing cost 
amount is $5,843 ($8,000-((39,689 x .16) x 124/365)). C elects to 
exclude her foreign earned income under Sec. 1.911-3(d)(1). C's section 
911(a)(1) limitation for 1982 is $25,479 (the lesser of C's foreign 
earned income for the taxable year ($35,000) or the annual rate for the 
taxable year multiplied by the number of C's qualifying days over the 
number of days in the taxable year ($75,000 x 124/365=$25,479). C may 
not claim the housing cost amount exclusion under section 911(a)(2) 
because no portion of the housing cost amount is attributable to 
employer provided amounts. C may deduct the lesser of her housing cost 
amount ($5,843) or her foreign earned income in excess of amounts 
excluded under section 911(a) ($35,000-25,479=$9,521). Thus, C's housing 
cost amount deduction is $5,843.
    Example 5. The facts are the same as in example 4 except that C had 
$30,000 of foreign earned income for 1982, none of which was 
attributable to employer provided amounts. C elects to exclude $25,479 
under Sec. 1.911-3(d)(1). C may only deduct $4,521 of her housing cost 
amount under paragraph (e)(1) of this section because her foreign earned 
income in excess of amounts excluded under section 911(a) is 
$4,521($30,000-25,479). The $1,322 of unused housing cost amount 
deduction may be carried over to the subsequent taxable year.
    Example 6. The facts are the same as in example 4 except that C had 
$15,000 of foreign earned income of 1982, none of which was attributable 
to employer provided amounts. C elects to exclude the entire $15,000 
under Sec. 1.911-3(d)(1). C is not entitled to a housing cost amount 
deduction for 1982 since she has no foreign earned income in excess of 
amounts excluded under section 911(a). C may carry over her entire 
housing cost amount deduction to 1983.
    Example 7. The facts are the same as in example 6. In addition, 
during taxable year 1983 C had $115,000 of foreign earned income, none 
of which was attributable to employer provided amounts, and $40,000 of 
reasonable housing expenses C elects to exclude her foreign earned 
income under Sec. 1.911-3(d)(1). C's section 911(a)(1) limitation is the 
lesser of $115,000 or $80,000 ($80,000 x 365/365). C's housing cost 
amount for 1983 is $33,650 (40,000-(39,689 x .16) x 365/365). Since no 
portion of that amount is attributable to employer provided amounts, C 
may not claim a housing cost amount exclusion. C may deduct the lesser 
of her housing cost amount ($33,650) or her foreign earned income in 
excess of amounts excluded under section 911(a) 
($115,000-80,000=35,000). Thus, C may deduct her $33,650 housing cost 
amount in 1983. In addition, C may deduct $1,350 of the housing cost 
amount deduction carried over from taxable year 1982.
(($115.000-80,000)-33,650=$1,350). The remaining $4,493 ($5,843-1,350) 
of the housing cost amount deduction carried over from taxable year 1982 
may not be deducted in 1983 or carried over to 1984.
    Example 8. D is a U.S. citizen and a calendar year and cash basis 
taxpayer. D is a bona fide resident of and maintains his tax home in 
foreign country J for all of taxable year 1984. In 1984, D earns $80,000 
of foreign earned income, $60,000 of which is an employer provided 
amount and $20,000 of which is a non-employer provided amount. D's total 
housing cost amount for 1984 is $25,000. D elects to exclude, under 
section 911(a)(2), the portion of his housing cost amount that is 
attributable to employer provided amounts. D's excludable housing cost 
amount is $18,750; that is the total housing cost amount ($25,000) 
multiplied by employer provided amounts for the taxable year ($60,000) 
over foreign earned income for the taxable year ($80,000). D also elects 
to exclude his foreign earned income under Sec. 1.911-3(d)(1). D's 
section 911(a)(1) limitation for 1984 is $61,250 (the lesser of 
$80,000-$18,750 or $80,000 x 366/366). D's total exclusion for 1984 
under section 911(a)(1) and (2) is $80,000. D cannot claim a housing 
cost amount deduction in 1984 because D has no foreign earned income in 
excess of his foreign earned income and housing cost amount excluded 
from gross income for the taxable year under Sec. 1.911-3 and this 
section. D may carry over his housing cost amount deduction of $6,250, 
the total housing cost amount less the portion attributable to employer 
provided amounts ($25,000-18,750), to taxable year 1985.

(Sec. 911 (95 Stat. 194; 26 U.S.C. 911) and sec. 7805 (68A Stat. 917; 26 
U.S.C. 7805) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954)

[T.D. 8006, 50 FR 2970, Jan. 23, 1985]


<R05>
Sec. 1.911-5  Special rules for married couples.

    (a) Married couples with two qualified individuals--(1) In general. 
In the case in which a husband and wife both are qualified individuals 
under Sec. 1.911-2(a), each individual may make one or more elections 
under Sec. 1.911-7 and exclude from gross income foreign earned income 
and exclude or deduct housing cost amounts subject to the rules of 
paragraphs (a)(2) and (3) of this section.

[[Page 25]]

    (2) Computation of excluded foreign earned income. The amount of 
excludable foreign earned income is determined separately for each 
spouse under the rule of Sec. 1.911-3 on the basis of the income 
attributable to the services of that spouse. If the spouses file 
separate returns each may exclude the amount of his or her foreign 
earned income attributable to his or her services subject to the 
limitations of Sec. 1.911-3(d)(2). If the spouses file a joint return, 
the sum of these foreign earned income amounts so determined for each 
spouse may be excluded. For example, H and W both qualify under 
Sec. 1.911-2(a)(2)(i) for the entire 1983 taxable year. During 1983 W 
earns $100,000 of foreign earned income and H earns $45,000 of foreign 
earned income. H and W file a joint return for 1983. On their joint 
return H and W may exclude from gross income a total of $125,000. That 
amount is determined by adding W's section 911(a)(1) limitation, $80,000 
(the lesser of $80,000 x 365/365 or $100,000), and H's section 911(a)(1) 
limitation, $45,000 (the lesser of $80,000 x 365/365 or $45,000).
    (3) Computation of housing cost amount--(i) Spouses residing 
together. If the spouses reside together, and file a joint return, they 
may compute their housing cost amount either jointly or separately. If 
the spouses reside together and file separate returns, they must compute 
their housing cost amounts separately. If the spouses compute their 
housing cost amounts separately, they may allocate the housing expenses 
to either of them or between them for the purpose of calculating 
separate housing cost amounts, but each spouse claiming a housing cost 
amount exclusion or deduction must use his or her full base housing 
amount in such computation. If the spouses compute their housing cost 
amount jointly, then only one of the spouses may claim the housing cost 
amount exclusion or deduction.

Either spouse may claim the housing cost amount exclusion or deduction; 
however, if the spouses have different periods of residence or presence 
and the spouse with the shorter period of residence or presence claims 
the exclusion or deduction, then only the expenses incurred in that 
shorter period may be claimed as housing expenses. The spouse claiming 
the exclusion or deduction may aggregate the couple's housing expenses, 
and subtract his or her base housing amount. For example, H and W reside 
together and file a joint return. H was a bona fide resident of and 
maintained his tax home in foreign country M from August 17, 1982, 
through December 31, 1983. W was a bona fide resident of and maintained 
her tax home in foreign country M from September 15, 1982, through 
December 31, 1983. During 1982, H and W earn and receive, respectively, 
$25,000 and $10,000 of foreign earned income. H paid $10,000 for 
qualified housing expenses in 1982, $7,500 of that was for qualified 
housing expenses incurred from September 15, 1982, through December 31, 
1982. W paid $3,000 for qualified housing expenses in 1982 all of which 
were incurred during her period of residence. H and W may choose to 
compute their housing cost amount jointly. If they do so and H claims 
the housing cost amount exclusion his exclusion would be $10,617. H's 
housing expenses would be $13,000 ($10,000+$3,000) and his base housing 
amount would be $2,383 ((39,689 x .16) x 137/365=$2,383). If instead W 
claims the housing cost amount exclusion her exclusion would be $8,621. 
W's housing expenses would be $10,500 ($7,500+3,000) and her base 
housing amount would be $1,879 (($39,689 x .16) x 108/365=$1,879). If H 
and W file jointly and both claim a housing cost amount exclusion, then 
H's and W's housing cost amounts would be, respectively, $7,617 
($10,000-2,383) and $1,121 ($3,000-1,879).
    (ii) Spouses residing apart. If the spouses reside apart, both 
spouses may exclude or deduct their housing cost amount if the spouses 
have different tax homes that are not within reasonable commuting 
distance (as defined in Sec. 1.119-1(d)(4)) of each other and neither 
spouse's residence is within a reasonable commuting distance of the 
other spouse's tax home. If the spouses' tax homes, or one spouse's 
residence and the other spouse's tax home, are within a reasonable 
commuting distance of each other, only one spouse may exclude or deduct 
his or her housing cost amount. Regardless of whether the spouses file 
joint or separate returns, the amount of the housing cost amount

[[Page 26]]

exclusion or deduction must be determined separately for each spouse 
under the rules of Sec. 1.911-4. If both spouses claim a housing cost 
amount exclusion or deduction directly as qualified individuals, neither 
may claim any such exclusion or deduction under section 
911(c)(2)(B)(ii), relating to a second foreign household maintained for 
the other spouse. If one spouse fails to claim a housing cost amount 
exclusion or deduction which that spouse could claim directly, the other 
spouse may claim such exclusion or deduction under section 
911(c)(2)(B)(ii), relating to a second foreign household maintained for 
the first spouse, provided that all the requirements of that section are 
met. Spouses may not claim more than one second foreign household and 
the expenses of such household may only be claimed by one spouse. For 
example, if both H and W are qualified individuals and H's tax home is 
in London and W's tax home is in Paris, then both H and W may exclude or 
deduct their housing cost amounts; however, H and W must compute these 
amounts separately regardless of whether they file joint or separate 
returns. If instead of living in Paris, W lives in an area where there 
are adverse living conditions and W maintains H's home in London, then W 
may add those housing expenses to her housing expenses and compute one 
base housing amount. In that case H may not claim a housing cost amount 
exclusion or deduction.
    (iii) Housing cost amount attributable to employer provided amounts. 
Each spouse claiming a housing cost amount exclusion or deduction shall 
compute the portion of the housing cost amount that is attributable to 
employer provided amounts separately, based on his or her separate 
foreign earned income, in accordance with Sec. 1.911-4(d)(3).
    (b) Married couples with community income. The amount of excludable 
foreign earned income of a husband and wife with community income is 
determined separately for each spouse in accordance with paragraph (a) 
of this section on the basis of income attributable to that spouse's 
services without regard to community property laws. See sections 879 and 
6013 (g) and (h) for special rules regarding treatment of community 
income of a nonresident alien individual married to a U.S. citizen or 
resident.

(Sec. 911 (95 Stat. 194; 26 U.S.C. 911) and sec. 7805 (68A Stat. 917; 26 
U.S.C. 7805) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954)

[T.D. 8006, 50 FR 2972, Jan. 23, 1985]


<R05>
Sec. 1.911-6  Disallowance of deductions, exclusions, and credits.

    (a) In general. No deduction or exclusion from gross income under 
subtitle A of the Code or credit against the tax imposed by chapter 1 of 
the Code shall be allowed to the extent the deduction, exclusion, or 
credit is properly allocable to or chargeable against amounts excluded 
from gross income under section 911(a). For purposes of the preceding 
sentence, deductions, exclusions, and credits which are definitely 
related (as provided in Sec. 1.861-8), in whole or in part, to earned 
income shall be allocated and apportioned to foreign earned income and 
U.S. source earned income in accordance with the rules contained in 
Sec. 1.861-8. Deductions, exclusions, and credits which are definitely 
related to all gross income under Sec. 1.861-8, including deductions for 
interest described in Sec. 1.861-8(e)(2)(ii), are definitely related, in 
whole or in part, to earned income. In the case of interest expense 
allocable, in whole or in part, to foreign earned income under 
Sec. 1.861-8(e)(2)(ii), the expense shall normally be apportioned under 
option one of the optional gross income methods of apportionment 
(Sec. 1.861-8(e)(2)(v)i(A)), but without regard to conditions (1) and 
(2) of subdivision (vi)(A) (the fifty percent conditions). Such interest 
expense shall not normally be apportioned under the asset method of 
Sec. 1.861-8(e)(2)(v). This is because, where section 911 is the 
operative section, the expense normally relates more closely to gross 
income generated from activities than to the amount of capital utilized 
or invested in activities or property. Deductions that are allocated and 
apportioned to foreign earned income must then be allocated and 
apportioned to foreign earned income that is excluded under section 
911(a). If an individual has foreign earned income from both self-
employment and other employment, the amount excluded under

[[Page 27]]

section 911(a)(1) shall be deemed to include a pro rata amount of the 
self-employment income and the income from other employment; thus, a pro 
rata portion of deductible expenses attributable to self-employment 
income must be disallowed. For purposes of section 911 (d)(6) and this 
section only, deductions, exclusions, or credits which are not 
definitely related to any class of gross income shall not be allocable 
or chargeable to excluded amounts and are, therefore, deductible to the 
extent allowed by chapter 1 of the Code. Examples of deductions that are 
not definitely related to a class of gross income are personal and 
family medical expenses, qualified retirement contributions (but see 
section 219(b)(1)), real estate taxes and mortgage interest on a 
personal residence, charitable contributions, alimony payments, and 
deductions for personal exemptions. In addition, for purposes of this 
section, amounts excludable or deductible under section 911 or 119 shall 
not be allocable or chargeable to other amounts excluded under section 
911(a). Thus, an individual's housing cost amount which is excludable or 
deductible under Sec. 1.911-4(d) for a taxable year is not apportioned 
in part to the individual's foreign earned income which is excluded for 
such year under Sec. 1.911-3(d). Therefore, the entire amount of such 
exclusion or deduction is allowed to the extent provided in Sec. 1.911-
4. This section does not affect the time for claiming any deduction, 
exclusion, or credit that is not allocated or apportioned to excluded 
amounts.
    (b) Moving expenses--(1) In general. No deduction shall be allowed 
for moving expenses under section 217 to the extent the deduction is 
properly allocable to or chargeable against amounts of foreign earned 
income excluded from gross income under section 911(a). If an 
individual's new principal place of work is in a foreign country, 
deductible moving expenses will be allocable to foreign earned income. 
If an individual treats a reimbursement from his employer for the 
expenses of a move from a foreign country to the United States as 
attributable to services performed in a foreign country under 
Sec. 1.911-3(e)(5)(i), then deductible moving expenses attributable to 
that move will be allocable to foreign earned income. If the individual 
is a qualified individual who elects to exclude foreign earned income 
under section 911(a), then some or all of such moving expenses must be 
disallowed as a deduction.
    (2) Attribution of moving expense deduction to taxable years in 
which services are performed. If a moving expense deduction is properly 
allocable to foreign earned income, the deduction shall be considered 
attributable to services performed in the year of the move as long as 
the individual is a qualified individual under Sec. 1.911-2(a) for a 
period that includes 120 days in the year of the move. If the individual 
is not a qualified individual for such period, then the individual shall 
treat the deduction as attributable to services performed in both the 
year of the move and the succeeding taxable year, if the move is from 
the United States to the foreign country, or the prior taxable year, if 
the move is from a foreign country to the United States. Notwithstanding 
the preceding two sentences, storage expenses incurred after December 
31, 1983 shall be treated as attributable to services performed in the 
year in which the expenses are incurred.
    (3) Formula for disallowance of moving expense deduction. The 
portion of the moving expense deduction that is disallowed shall be 
determined by multiplying the moving expense deduction by a fraction the 
numerator of which is all amounts excluded under section 911(a) for the 
year or years to which the deduction is attributable (under paragraph 
(b)(2) of this section) and the denominator of which is foreign earned 
income (as defined in Sec. 1.911-3(a)) for that year or years.
    (4) Effect of disallowance based on attribution of deduction to 
subsequent year's income. An individual may claim a moving expense 
deduction in the taxable year in which the amount of the expense is paid 
or incurred even if attributable, in part, to the succeeding year. 
However, at such time as the individual excludes income under section 
911(a) for the year or years to which the deduction is attributable, the 
individual shall either--
    (i) File an amended return for the year in which the deduction was

[[Page 28]]

claimed that does not claim the portion of the deduction that is 
disallowed because it is chargeable against excluded income, or
    (ii) Include in income for the year following the year in which the 
deduction was claimed an amount equal to the amount of the deduction 
that is disallowed.

Any amount included in income under paragraph (b)(4)(ii) of this section 
is not foreign earned income.
    (5) Moves beginning before January 1, 1984. Notwithstanding 
paragraphs (b)(1) through (3) of this section, the rules of this 
paragraph (b)(5) shall apply for moves beginning before January 1, 1984.
    (i) Individual qualifies for the entire taxable year of the move. If 
the individual is a qualified individual for the entire taxable year of 
the move, then the amount of moving expense disallowed shall be 
determined by multiplying the moving expense deduction otherwise 
allowable by a fraction the numerator of which is the foreign earned 
income excluded under section 911(a) for the taxable year of the move 
and the denominator of which is the foreign earned income for the same 
taxable year.
    (ii) Individual qualifies for less than the entire taxable year of 
the move. If the individual is a qualified individual for less than the 
entire taxable year of the move, then, for the purpose of determining 
the portion of the otherwise allowable moving expense deduction that is 
disallowed, the individual must attribute a portion of the otherwise 
allowable moving expense deduction either to the succeeding taxable 
year, if the move is from the United States to a foreign country, or to 
the prior taxable year, if the move is from a foreign country to the 
United States. The
portion of the moving expense deduction treated as attributable to 
services performed in the year of the move shall be determined by 
multiplying the otherwise allowable moving expense deduction by the 
following fraction:

                                                                        
 The number of qualifying days (as defined in Sec.  1.911-3(d)(3) in the
                            year of the move                            
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
           The number of days in the taxable year of the move.          
                                                                        

The portion of the moving expense deduction treated as attributable to 
the year succeeding or preceding the move shall be determined by 
subtracting the portion of the moving expense deduction that is 
attributable to the year of the move from the total moving expense 
deduction. The allocation of a portion of the moving expense deduction 
to a succeeding or preceding taxable year does not affect the time for 
claiming the allowable moving expense deduction. The portion of the 
moving expense deduction that is disallowed shall be determined by 
multiplying the moving expense deduction attributable to the year of the 
move or the succeeding or preceding year, as the case may be, by a 
fraction the numerator of which is amounts excluded under section 911(a) 
for that year and the denominator of which is foreign earned income for 
that year.
    (c) Foreign taxes--(1) Amount disallowed. No deduction or credit is 
allowed for foreign income, war profits, or excess profits taxes paid or 
accrued with respect to amounts excluded from gross income under section 
911. To determine the amount of disallowed foreign taxes, multiply the 
foreign tax imposed on foreign earned income (as defined in Sec. 1.911-
3(a)) received or accrued during the taxable year by a fraction, the 
numerator of which is amounts excluded under section 911(a) in such 
taxable year less deductible expenses properly allocated to such amounts 
(see paragraphs (a) and (b) of this section), and the denominator of 
which is foreign earned income (as defined in Sec. 1.911-3(a)) received 
or accrued during the taxable year less deductible expenses properly 
allocated or apportioned thereto. For the purpose of determining the 
extent to which foreign taxes are disallowed, the housing cost amount 
deduction is treated as definitely related to foreign earned income that 
is not excluded. If the foreign tax is imposed on foreign earned income 
and some other income (for example earned income from sources within the 
United States or an amount not subject to tax in the United States), and 
the taxes on the other amount cannot be segregated, then the denominator 
equals the total of the amounts subject

[[Page 29]]

to tax less deductible expenses allocable to all such amounts.
    (2) Definitions and special rules--(i) Taxable year. For purposes of 
paragraph (c)(1) of this section, the term ``taxable year'' means the 
individual's taxable year for U.S. tax purposes. Such term includes the 
portion of any foreign taxable year within the individual's U.S. taxable 
year and excludes the portion of any foreign taxable year not within the 
individual's U.S. taxable year.
    (ii) Apportionment of foreign taxes. For purposes of this paragraph 
(c), foreign taxes imposed on foreign earned income shall be deemed to 
accrue, on a pro rata basis, to income as the income is received or 
accrued. The taxes so accrued shall be apportioned to the taxable year 
during which the income is received or accrued. This rule applies for 
all individuals, regardless of their method of accounting.
    (iii) Effect of disallowance. The disallowance of foreign taxes 
under this paragraph (c) shall not affect the time for claiming any 
deduction or credit for foreign taxes paid. Rather, the disallowance 
shall only affect the amount of taxes considered paid or accrued to any 
foreign country.
    (iv) Interest on foreign taxes. Any interest expense incurred on a 
liability for foreign taxes is allocated and apportioned not under this 
paragraph (c) but under paragraph (a) of this section to foreign earned 
income and then to excluded foreign earned income and to that extent 
disallowed as a deduction under paragraph (a). In that regard, see also 
Sec. 1.861-8(e)(2) for the specific rules for allocation and 
apportionment of interest expense.
    (d) Examples. The following examples illustrate the application of 
this section.

    Example 1. In 1982 A, an architect, operates his business as a sole 
proprietorship in which capital is not a material income producing 
factor. A receives $1,000,000 in gross receipts, all of which is foreign 
source earned income, and incurs $500,000 of otherwise deductible 
business expenses definitely related to the foreign earned income. A 
elects to exclude $75,000 under section 911(a)(1). The expenses must be 
apportioned to excluded earned income as follows: $500,000 x $75,000/
1,000,000. Thus, $37,500 of the business expenses are not deductible.
    Example 2. The facts are the same as in example 1, except that 
$100,000 of A's gross receipts is U.S. source earned income and $68,000 
of A's business expenses are attributable to the U.S. source earned 
income. Thus, A has $900,000 of foreign earned income and $432,000 of 
deductions allocated to foreign earned income. The expenses apportioned 
to excluded earned income are $432,000 x $75,000/$900,000, or $36,000, 
which are not deductible.
    Example 3. B is a U.S. citizen, calendar year and cash basis 
taxpayer. B moves to foreign country N and maintains a tax home and is 
physically present there from July 1, 1984 through May 26, 1985. Among 
other possible periods, B is a qualified individual for 219 days in the 
year of the move. B pays $6,000 of otherwise deductible moving expenses 
in 1984. For 1984, B's foreign earned income is $60,000 and B excludes 
$47,869 ($80,000 x 219/366) under section 911(a). Under paragraph (b)(2) 
of this section, B's moving expenses are attributable to services 
performed in 1984. Under paragraph (b)(3) of this section, 
$6,000 x $47,869/$60,000, or $4,789, of B's moving expense deduction is 
disallowed. B may deduct $1,211 of moving expenses on his 1984 return.
    Example 4. The facts are the same as in example 3 except that B 
maintains a tax home and is physically present in foreign country N from 
October 9, 1984 through September 3, 1985. Among other possible periods, 
B is a qualified individual for no more than 119 days in 1984 and 281 
days in 1985. B's foreign earned income for 1984 is $60,000. B's foreign 
earned income for 1985 is $150,000. Because B is a qualified individual 
for less than 120 days in the year of the move, under paragraph (b)(2) 
of this section, B's moving expenses are attributable to services 
performed in 1984 and 1985. At the close of 1984, B may either seek an 
extension of time to file under Sec. 1.911-7(c) or may file an income 
tax return without claiming the exclusions or deduction under section 
911. B does not seek an extension and files without excluding foreign 
earned income; thus B may deduct his moving expenses in full. B later 
amends his 1984 return and excludes foreign earned income for that year. 
B excludes foreign earned income for 1985. B must determine the portion 
of the moving expense deduction that is disallowed. The portion of the 
moving expense deduction that is disallowed is determined by multiplying 
the otherwise allowable moving expense deduction by a fraction. The 
numerator of the fraction is the sum of amounts excluded under section 
911(a) for 1984 and 1985, that is $26,082 or $80,000 x 119/365, plus 
$61,589, or $80,000 x 281/365, which totals $87,671. The denominator of 
the fraction is the sum of foreign earned income for 1984 and 1985, that 
is $60,000 plus $150,000, or $210,000. B's allowable moving expense 
deduction is $3,495, or $6,000-($6,000 x $87,671/

[[Page 30]]

$210,000). If B does not file an amended 1984 return (and does not 
exclude foreign earned income for 1984), but excludes foreign earned 
income under section 911(a) for 1985, a portion of his moving expense 
deduction is disallowed, based on the same formula. The amount 
disallowed is $6,000 x $61,589/$210,000, or $1,760. This amount may be 
recaptured either by filing an amended return for 1984 or by including 
it in income for 1985 (in which case it is not foreign earned income).
    Example 5. C is a U.S. citizen, a self-employed individual, and a 
cash basis and calendar year taxpayer. For the entire 1982 taxable year 
C maintained his tax home and his bona fide residence in foreign country 
P. During 1982 C earned and received $120,000 of foreign earned income, 
none of which was attributable to employer provided amounts. C paid 
$40,000 of business expenses. C elected to exclude foreign earned income 
under section 911(a)(1) and claimed a housing cost amount deduction of 
$15,000. C received $10,000 of foreign source interest income which was 
included with C's earned income in a single tax base and taxed at 
graduated rates. For 1982, C paid $30,000 in income tax to foreign 
country P. The amount of C's business expenses that is properly 
apportioned to excluded amounts (and therefore, not deductible) equals 
$25,000, which is determined by multiplying the otherwise allowable 
deductions by C's excluded amounts over C's foreign earned income 
($40,000 x 75,000/120,000). The amount of country P tax that is properly 
apportioned to excluded amounts (and therefore, not deductible or 
creditable) equals $20,000, which is determined by multiplying the tax 
of $30,000 by the following fraction:

                                                                        
                                                                        
$50,000 ($75,000 excluded amounts less $25,000 of deductible expenses   
 allocable thereto)                                                     
                                                                        
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                        
$75,000 ((($120,000 foreign earned income less $40,000 of deductible    
 expenses allocable thereto) less $15,000 housing cost amount deduction 
 allocable thereto) plus $10,000 other taxable income).                 

    Example 6. D is a U.S. citizen and an accrual basis and calendar 
year taxpayer for U.S. tax purposes. For the entire period from January 
1, 1982 through December 31, 1983, D maintains his tax home and his bona 
fide residence in foreign country R. For purposes of R's income tax, D 
is a cash basis taxpayer and uses a fiscal year that begins on April 1 
and ends on the following March 31. During his entire period of 
residence in R, D receives foreign earned income of $10,000 each month, 
all of which is attributable to employer provided amounts. For his 
foreign taxable year ending March 31, 1982, D pays $10,000 of income tax 
to R. For his foreign taxable year ending March 31, 1983, D pays $54,000 
of income tax to R. Under paragraph (c)(2)(ii) of this section, all of 
the $10,000 of tax paid for this foreign taxable year ending March 31, 
1982 is imposed on foreign earned income received in 1982, as is 
$40,500, or \9/12\ x $54,000, of tax paid for his foreign taxable year 
ending March 31, 1983. (D received $10,000 per month for the last 3 
months of his foreign taxable year ending March 31, 1982, all of which 
are within his U.S. taxable year ending December 31, 1982 under 
paragraph (c)(2)(i) of this section, and $10,000 per month for each 
month of his foreign taxable year ending March 31, 1983, of which the 
first 9 months are within his U.S. taxable year ending December 31, 
1982. Under paragraph (c)(2)(ii) of this section, foreign taxes are 
deemed to accrue on a pro rata basis to income as it is received or 
accrued. Thus, all of the $10,000 of foreign taxes imposed on the income 
received during D's foreign taxable year ending March 31, 1982 accrue to 
D's 1982 foreign earned income, as do \9/12\ (or $90,000/120,000) of 
foreign taxes imposed on income received during D's foreign taxable year 
ending March 31, 1983, for purposes of determining the amount of D's 
foreign taxes that is disallowed.) For 1982, D has no deductible 
expenses, and elects to exclude his housing cost amount of $21,000 under 
section 911(a)(2) and foreign earned income of $75,000 under section 
911(a)(1). The amount of D's foreign taxes disallowed for deduction or 
credit purposes for 1982 is $8,000 (that is, $10,000 x $96,000/$120,000) 
of the taxes for his foreign taxable year ending March 31, 1982, plus 
$32,400 (that is, $40,500 x $96,000/$120,000) of the taxes for his 
foreign taxable year ending March 31, 1983, or $40,400. From 1982, D has 
$2,000 ($10,000-$8,000) of deductible or creditable taxes accrued on 
March 31, 1982, and $8,100 ($40,500-$32,400) of deductible or creditable 
taxes accrued on March 31, 1983, after the disallowance based on his 
1982 excluded income.
    Example 7. E is a United States citizen, calendar year and cash 
basis taxpayer. E is physically present in and establishes his tax home 
in foreign country S on May 1, 1981. For purposes of country S, E's 
taxable year begins on April 1 and ends the following March 31. E 
receives foreign earned income of $15,000 each month beginning on May 1, 
1981. At the end of his foreign taxable year ending on March 31, 1982, E 
pays $70,000 of income tax to S on $165,000 of foreign earned income. 
Under section 911, as in effect for taxable years beginning before 
January 1, 1982, E may not exclude any income that is earned or received 
during 1981. None of E's taxes paid in 1982 that are attributable to 
income earned or received in 1981 are subject to disallowance because, 
under paragraph (c)(2)(ii) of this section, the only taxes disallowed 
are those deemed to accrue on income earned and received after December 
31, 1981, and excluded from gross income. The amount of E's taxes paid 
in 1982 that are attributable to 1981 is $50,909, or $70,000 x $120,000/
$165,000. E elects to exclude

[[Page 31]]

foreign earned income for 1982. The amount of E's taxes paid to S in 
1982 that accrue to 1982 foreign earned income, and are therefore 
subject to disallowance based on excluded income, is $19,091, or 
$70,000 x $45,000/$165,000.

(Sec. 911 (95 Stat. 194; 26 U.S.C. 911) and sec. 7805 (68A Stat. 917; 26 
U.S.C. 7805) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954)

[T.D. 8006, 50 FR 2973, Jan. 23, 1985]


<R05>
Sec. 1.911-7  Procedural rules.

    (a) Elections of a qualified individual --(1) In general. In order 
to receive either exclusion provided by section 911(a), a qualified 
individual must elect, separately with respect to each exclusion, to 
exclude foreign earned income under section 911(a)(1) and the housing 
cost amount under section 911(a)(2). Any such elections may be made on 
Form 2555 or on a comparable form. Each election must be filed either 
with the income tax return, or with an amended return, for the first 
taxable year of the individual for which the election is to be 
effective. An election once made remains in effect for that year and all 
subsequent years unless revoked under paragraph (b) of this section. 
Each election shall contain information sufficient to determine whether 
the individual is a qualified individual as provided in Sec. 1.911-2. 
The statement shall include the following information:
    (i) The individual's name, address, and social security number;
    (ii) The name of the individual's employer;
    (iii) Whether the individual claimed exclusions under section 911 
for earlier years after 1981 and within the five preceding taxable 
years;
    (iv) Whether the individual has revoked a previously made election 
and the taxable year for which such revocation was effective;
    (v) The exclusion or exclusions the individual is electing;
    (vi) The foreign country or countries in which the individual's tax 
home is located and the date when such tax home was established;
    (vii) The status (either bona fide residence or physical presence) 
under which the individual claims the exclusion;
    (viii) The individual's qualifying period of residence or presence;
    (ix) The individual's foreign earned income for the taxable year 
including the fair market value of all noncash remuneration; and,
    (x) If the individual elects to exclude the housing cost amount, the 
individual's housing expenses.
    (2) Requirement of a return--(i) In general. In order to make a 
valid election under this paragraph (a), the election must be made:
    (A) With an income tax return that is timely filed (including any 
extensions of time to file),
    (B) With a later return filed within the period prescribed in 
section 6511(a) amending the foregoing timely filed income tax return,
    (C) With an original income tax return that is filed within one year 
after the due date of the return (determined without regard to any 
extension of time to file); this one year period does not constitute an 
extension of time for any purpose--it is merely a period during which a 
valid election may be made on a late return, or
    (D) With an income tax return filed after the period described in 
paragraphs (a)(2)(i)(A), (B), or (C) of this section provided--
    (1) The taxpayer owes no federal income tax after taking into 
account the exclusion and files Form 1040 with Form 2555 or a comparable 
form attached either before or after the Internal Revenue Service 
discovers that the taxpayer failed to elect the exclusion; or
    (2) The taxpayer owes federal income tax after taking into account 
the exclusion and files Form 1040 with Form 2555 or a comparable form 
attached before the Internal Revenue Service discovers that the taxpayer 
failed to elect the exclusion.
    (3) A taxpayer filing an income tax return pursuant to paragraph 
(a)(2)(i)(D)(1) or (2) of this section must type or legibly print the 
following statement at the top of the first page of the Form 1040: 
``Filed Pursuant to Section 1.911-7(a)(2)(i)(D).''
    (ii) Election for 1982 and 1983 taxable years. Solely for purposes 
of paragraph (a)(2)(i)(A) of this section, an income tax return for any 
taxable year beginning before January 1, 1984, shall be

[[Page 32]]

considered timely filed if it is filed on or before July 23, 1985.
    (3) Housing cost amount deduction. An individual does not have to 
make an election in order to claim the housing cost amount deduction. 
However, such individual must provide the Commissioner with information 
sufficient to determine the individual's correct amount of tax. Such 
information shall include the following: The individual's name, address, 
and social security number; the name of the individual's employer; the 
foreign country in which the individual's tax home was established; the 
status under which the individual claims the deduction; the individual's 
qualifying period of residence or presence; the individual's foreign 
earned income for the taxable year; and the individual's housing 
expenses.
    (4) Effect of immaterial error or omission. An inadvertent error or 
omission of information required to be provided to make an election 
under this paragraph (a) shall not render the election invalid if the 
error or omission is not material in determining whether the individual 
is a qualified individual or whether the individual intends to make the 
election.
    (b) Revocation of election--(1) In general. An individual may revoke 
any election made under paragraph (a) of this section for any taxable 
year. A revocation must be made separately with respect to each 
election. The individual may revoke an election for any taxable year, 
including the first taxable year for which an election was effective, by 
filing a statement that the individual is revoking one or more of the 
previously made elections. The statement must be filed with the income 
tax return, or with an amended return, for the first taxable year of the 
individual for which the revocation is to be effective. A revocation 
once made is effective for that year and all subsequent years. If an 
election is revoked for any taxable year, including the first taxable 
year for which the election was effective, the individual may not, 
without the consent of the Commissioner, again make the same election 
until the sixth taxable year following the taxable year for which the 
revocation was first effective. For example, a qualified individual 
makes an election to exclude foreign earned income under section 
911(a)(1) and files it with his 1982 income tax return. The individual 
files 1983 and 1984 income tax returns on which he excludes his foreign 
earned income. Then, within 3 years after filing his 1982 income tax 
return, the individual files an amended 1982 income tax return with a 
statement revoking his election to exclude foreign earned income under 
section 911(a)(1). The revocation of the election is effective for 
taxable years 1982, 1983, and 1984. The individual may not elect to 
exclude income under section 911(a)(1) for any taxable year before 1988, 
unless he obtains consent to reelect under paragraph (b)(2) of this 
section.
    (2) Reelection before sixth taxable year after revocation. If an 
individual revoked an election under paragraph (b)(1) of this section 
and within five taxable years the individual wishes to reelect the same 
exclusion, then the individual may apply for consent to the reelection. 
The application for consent shall be made by requesting a ruling from 
the Associate Chief Counsel (Technical), National Office, Internal 
Revenue Service, 1111 Constitution Avenue NW., Washington, DC 20224. In 
determining whether to consent to reelection the Associate Chief Counsel 
or his delegate shall consider any facts and circumstances that may be 
relevant to the determination. Relevant facts and circumstances may 
include the following: a period of United States residence, a move from 
one foreign country to another foreign country with differing tax rates, 
a substantial change in the tax laws of the foreign country of residence 
or physical presence, and a change of employer.
    (c) Returns and extensions--(1) In general. Any return filed before 
completion of the period necessary to qualify an individual for any 
exclusion of deduction provided by section 911 shall be filed without 
regard to any exclusion or deduction provided by that section. A claim 
for a credit or refund of any overpayment of tax may be filed, however, 
if the taxpayer subsequently qualifies for any exclusion or deduction 
under section 911. See section 6012(c) and Sec. 1.6012-1(a)(3), relating 
to returns

[[Page 33]]

to be filed and information to be furnished by individuals who qualify 
for any exclusion or deduction under section 911.
    (2) Extensions. An individual desiring an extension of time (in 
addition to the automatic extension of time granted by Sec. 1.6081-2) 
for filing a return until after the completion of the qualifying period 
described in paragraph (c)(1) of this section for claiming any exclusion 
or deduction under section 911 may apply for an extension. An individual 
whose moving expense deduction is attributable to services performed in 
two years may apply for an extension of time for filing a return until 
after the end of the second year. The individual may make such 
application on Form 2350 or a comparable form. The application must be 
filed with the Director, Internal Revenue Service Center, Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania 19255. The application must set forth the facts relied on 
to justify the extension of time requested and must include a statement 
as to the earliest date the individual expects to become entitled to any 
exclusion or deduction by reason of completion of the qualifying period.
    (d) Declaration of estimated tax. In estimating gross income for the 
purpose of determining whether a declaration of estimated tax must be 
made for any taxable year, an individual is not required to take into 
account income which the individual reasonably believes will be excluded 
from gross income under the provisions of section 911. In computing 
estimated tax, however, the individual must take into account, among 
other things, the denial of the foreign tax credit for foreign taxes 
allocable to the excluded income (see Sec. 1.911-6(c)).

(Sec. 911 (95 Stat. 194; 26 U.S.C. 911) and sec. 7805 (68A Stat. 917; 26 
U.S.C. 7805) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954)

[T.D. 8006, 50 FR 2976, Jan. 23, 1985, as amended by T.D. 8480, 58 FR 
34885, June 30, 1993]


<R05>
Sec. 1.911-8  Former deduction for certain expenses of living abroad.

    For rules relating to the deduction for certain expenses of living 
abroad applicable to taxable years beginning before January 1, 1982, see 
26 CFR 1.913-1 through 1.913-13 as they appeared in the Code of Federal 
Regulations revised as of April 1, 1982.

(Sec. 911 (95 Stat. 194; 26 U.S.C. 911) and sec. 7805 (68A Stat. 917; 26 
U.S.C. 7805) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954)

[T.D. 8006, 50 FR 2977, Jan. 23, 1985]

               earned income of citizens of united states


<R05>
Sec. 1.912-1   Exclusion of certain cost-of-living allowances.

    (a) Amounts received by Government civilian personnel stationed 
outside the continental United States as cost-of-living allowances in 
accordance with regulations approved by the President are, by the 
provisions of section 912(1), excluded from gross income. Such 
allowances shall be considered as retaining their characteristics under 
section 912(1) notwithstanding any combination thereof with any other 
allowance. For example, the cost-of-living portion of a ``living and 
quarters allowance'' would be excluded from gross income whether or not 
any other portion of such allowance is excluded from gross income.
    (b) For purposes of section 912(1), the term ``continental United 
States'' includes only the 48 States existing on February 25, 1944 (the 
date of the enactment of the Revenue Act of 1943 (58 Stat. 21)) and the 
District of Columbia.


<R05>
Sec. 1.912-2  Exclusion of certain allowances of Foreign Service personnel.

    Gross income does not include amounts received by personnel of the 
Foreign Service of the United States as allowances or otherwise under 
the provisions of chapter 9 of title I of the Foreign Service Act of 
1980 or the provisions of section 28 of the State Department Basic 
Authorities Act (formerly section 914 of title IX of the Foreign Service 
Act of 1946).

[T.D. 8256, 54 FR 28620, July 6, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 1.921-1T  Temporary regulations providing transition rules for DISCs and FSCs.

    (a) Termination of a DISC--(1) At end of 1984.
    Q-1: What is the effect of the termination on December 31, 1984, of 
a DISC's taxable year?

[[Page 34]]

    A-1: Without regard to the annual accounting period of the DISC, the 
last taxable year of each DISC beginning during 1984 shall be deemed to 
close on December 31, 1984. The corporation's DISC election also shall 
be deemed revoked at the close of business on December 31, 1984. (A DISC 
that does not elect to be an interest charge DISC as of January 1, 1985, 
in addition to a corporation described in section 992(a)(3), shall be 
referred to as a ``former DISC''.) A corporation which wishes to be 
treated as a FSC, a small FSC, or an interest charge DISC must make an 
election as provided under paragraph (b) (Q & A 1) of this section.
    (2) Deemed distributions for short taxable years.
    Q-2: If the termination of the DISC's taxable year on December 31, 
1984, results in a short taxable year, how are the deemed distributions 
under section 995(b)(1)(E) determined?
    A-2: The deemed distributions are determined on the basis of the 
DISC's taxable income for its short taxable year ending on December 31, 
1984. In computing the incremental distribution under section 
995(b)(1)(E), the export gross receipts for the short taxable year must 
be annualized.
    (3) Qualification as a DISC for 1984.
    Q-3: Must the DISC satisfy all the tests set forth in section 
992(a)(1) for the DISC's taxable year ending December 31, 1984?
    A-3: All of the tests under section 992(a)(1), except the qualified 
assets test under section 992(a)(1)(B), must be satisfied.
    (4) Commissions for 1984.
    Q-4: Must commissions be paid by a related supplier to a DISC with 
respect to the DISC's taxable year ending December 31, 1984?
    A-4: No.
    Q-4A: Must commissions which were earned prior to January 1, 1985, 
be paid by a related supplier if the last date payment is required (as 
set forth in Sec. 1.994-1(e)(3)) is after December 31, 1984?
    A-4A: No.
    (5) Producer's loans of 1984.
    Q-5: Must the producer's loan rules under section 993(d) be 
satisfied with respect to the DISC's taxable year ending December 31, 
1984?
    A-5: Yes.
    (6) Accumulated DISC income.
    Q-6. Under what circumstances is any remaining accumulated DISC 
income treated as previously taxed income (and not taxed)?
    A-6. The accumulated DISC income of a DISC (but not a DISC described 
in section 992(a)(3)) as of December 31, 1984, is treated as previously 
taxed income when actually distributed after December 31, 1984. Any 
amounts distributed by the former DISC (including a DISC which has 
elected to be an interest charge DISC) after December 31, 1984, shall be 
treated as made first out of current earnings and profits and then out 
of previously taxed income to the extent thereof. For purposes of the 
preceding sentence, amounts distributed before July 1, 1985, shall be 
treated as made first out of previously taxed income to the extent 
thereof. If property other than money is distributed and if such 
property was a qualified export asset within the meaning of section 
993(b) on December 31, 1984, then for purposes of section 311, no gain 
or loss will be recognized on the distribution and the distributee will 
have the same basis in the property as the distributor.
    Q-7: May a DISC that was previously disqualified, but has 
requalified as of December 31, 1984, treat any accumulated DISC income 
as previously taxed income?
    A-7: If a DISC was previously disqualified, but has requalified as 
of December 31, 1984, any accumulated DISC income previously required to 
be taken into income upon prior disqualification shall not be treated as 
previously taxed income. All accumulated DISC income derived since 
requalification, however, will be treated as previously taxed income.
    (7) Distribution of previously taxed income.
    Q-8: What effect will the distribution of previously taxed income 
have on the earnings and profits of corporate shareholders of the former 
DISC?
    A-8: The earnings and profits of the corporate shareholders of the 
former DISC will be increased by the amount of money and the adjusted 
basis of any property which is distributed out of previously taxed 
income.

[[Page 35]]

    Q-9: Will the distribution of the former DISC's accumulated DISC 
income as previously taxed income after December 31, 1984, result in a 
reduction in the shareholder's basis of the stock of the former DISC and 
consequent taxation of the excess of the distribution over such basis as 
capital gain under section 996(d)?
    A-9: No. This distribution will be treated both as amounts 
representing deemed distributions under section 995(b)(1) and as 
previously taxed income. Thus, no capital gain will arise.
    (8) Qualifying distributions.
    Q-10: How is a qualifying distribution to satisfy the qualified 
export receipts tests under section 992(c)(1)(A) which is made with 
respect to the DISC's taxable year ending on December 31, 1984, treated?
    A-10: The distribution will not be treated as previously taxed 
income but will be taxed to the shareholder of the former DISC, as 
provided under section 992(c) and 996(a)(2) and the regulations 
thereunder, in the shareholder's taxable year in which the distribution 
is made.
    (9) Deficiency distributions.
    Q-11: With respect to an audit adjustment made after December 31, 
1984, may a deficiency distribution be made, and if so, in what manner 
may it be made?
    A-11: A deficiency distribution may be made notwithstanding the fact 
that after December 31, 1984, the former DISC is a taxable corporation 
under subchapter C, has elected to be treated as an interest charge 
DISC, or has been liquidated, reorganized or is otherwise no longer in 
existence. However, such deficiency distribution shall be treated as 
made out of accumulated DISC income which is not previously taxed income 
because it will be treated as distributed prior to December 31, 1984, to 
the DISC's shareholders.
    Q-11A: Must a former DISC remain in existence in order for a former 
DISC shareholder to take advantage of the spread provided in section 
995(b)(2) with respect to DISC disqualification?
    A-11A: No. With respect to distributions deemed to be received by a 
former DISC shareholder under section 995(b)(2) for taxable years 
beginning after December 31, 1984, if the former DISC shareholder 
elects, the rules of section 995(b)(2)(B) shall apply even though the 
former DISC does not continue in existence. If the former DISC is no 
longer in existence, the former DISC's shareholders will be deemed to 
have received the distribution on the last day of their taxable years 
over the applicable period of time determined under section 995(b)(2) as 
if the former DISC had remained in existence.
    (10) Deemed distribution for 1984.
    Q-12: How is the deemed distribution to a shareholder for the DISC's 
taxable year ending December 31, 1984, taken into account?
    A-12 (i) If the taxable year of the DISC ending on December 31, 
1984, (A) is the first taxable year of the DISC which begins in 1984, 
(B) begins after the date in 1984 on which the taxable year of the 
DISC's shareholder begins, and (C) if the DISC's shareholder makes an 
election under section 805(b)(3) of the Tax Reform Act of 1984, the 
deemed distribution under section 995(b) with respect to income derived 
by the DISC for such taxable year of the DISC shall be treated as 
received by the shareholder in 10 equal installments (unless the 
shareholder elects to be treated as receiving the deemed distribution in 
income over a smaller number of equal installments). The first 
installment shall be treated as received by the shareholder on the last 
day of the shareholder's second taxable year beginning in 1984 (if any), 
or if the shareholder had only one taxable year which began in 1984, on 
the last day of the shareholder's first taxable year beginning in 1985. 
One installment shall be treated as received by the shareholder on the 
last day of each succeeding taxable year of the shareholder until the 
entire amount of the DISC's 1984 deemed distribution has been included 
in the shareholder's taxable income. To make the election under section 
805(b)(3) of the Tax Reform Act of 1984, the DISC shareholder must 
attach a statement to its timely filed tax return (including extensions) 
for its taxable year which includes December 31, 1984, indicating the 
total amount of the shareholder's pro rata share of the DISC's deemed 
distribution for 1984 (determined under section 995(b) of the Code 
without regard to the election

[[Page 36]]

under section 805(b)(3) of the Tax Reform Act of 1984), and the number 
of equal installments, if less than 10, over which the shareholder 
wishes to spread its pro rata share of the deemed distribution for 1984. 
If the election under section 805(b)(3) of the Tax Reform Act of 1984 is 
made, it may not be changed or revoked. In determining estimated tax 
payments, the portion of the deemed distribution includible in the 
shareholder's taxable income for any taxable year under this subdivision 
(i) shall be treated as received by the shareholder on the last day of 
such taxable year.
    (ii) Except as provided in subdivision (i), the deemed distribution 
under section 995(b) with respect to income derived by the DISC for its 
taxable year ending on December 31, 1984, shall be included in the 
shareholder's taxable income for its taxable year which includes 
December 31, 1984. Thus, if the taxable year of the DISC and the DISC's 
shareholder both begin on January 1, 1984, and end on December 31, 1984 
(or, if the taxable year of the DISC beginning in 1984 begins before the 
taxable year of the DISC's shareholder), the deemed distribution with 
respect to the DISC's taxable year ending on December 31, 1984, will be 
included in the DISC shareholder's taxable year ending on (or including) 
December 31, 1984, and the election described in subdivision (i) may not 
be made.
    (iii) The provisions of this Question and Answer-12 apply without 
regard to any existence of the DISC after December 31, 1984, as an 
interest charge DISC.
    Q-12A: If under section 805(b)(3) of the Tax Reform Act of 1984 the 
shareholders of the DISC are permitted to make an election to treat the 
DISC's 1984 deemed distribution as received over a 10-year period, must 
the DISC distribute that amount to its shareholders ratably over the 10-
year period?
    A-12A: No. Under section 805(b)(3) of the Tax Reform Act of 1984, if 
the DISC's deemed distribution for its taxable year which ended on 
December 31, 1984, is a qualified distribution, the shareholders of the 
DISC are permitted to make an election to treat the distribution as 
received over a 10-year period. The 10-year treatment applies even 
though the amount of the deemed distribution is distributed to the 
DISC's shareholders prior to the period in which the distribution is 
taken into income by the shareholders. In addition, under section 996(e) 
of the Code, the shareholder's basis in the stock of the DISC will be 
considered as increased, as of the date of liquidation, by the 
shareholder's pro rata share of the amount of the undistributed 
qualified distribution even though that amount is treated as received by 
the shareholder in later years. Further, the actual distribution in 
liquidation of the former DISC after 1984 will increase the earnings and 
profits of a corporate distributee, and the amount actually distributed 
shall be treated under the rules of section 996.
    (11) Conformity of accounting period.
    Q-13: May a DISC be established or change its annual accounting 
period for taxable years beginning after March 21, 1984, and before 
January 1, 1985?
    A-13: A DISC that is established or that changes its annual 
accounting period after March 21, 1984, must conform its annual 
accounting period to that of its principal shareholder (the shareholder 
with the highest percentage of voting power as defined in section 
441(h)).
    (12) DISC gains and distributions from U.S. sources.
    Q-14: What is the effective date of the amendment to section 996(g), 
made by section 801(d)(10) of the Tax Reform Act of 1984, which treats 
certain DISC gains and distributions as derived from sources within the 
United States?
    A-14: Under section 805(a)(3) of the Act, the amendment to section 
996(g) shall apply to all gains referred to in section 995(c) and all 
distributions out of accumulated DISC income including deemed 
distributions made on or after June 22, 1984.
    (b) Establishing and electing status as a FSC, small FSC or interest 
charge DISC--(1) Ninety-day period.
    Q-1: How does a corporation elect to be treated as a FSC, a small 
FSC, or an interest charge DISC?
    A-1: A corporation electing FSC or small FSC status must file Form 
8279. A corporation electing interest charge DISC status must file Form 
4876A. A corporation electing to be treated as a

[[Page 37]]

FSC, small FSC, or interest charge DISC for its first taxable year shall 
make its election within 90 days after the beginning of that year. A 
corporation electing to be treated as a FSC, small FSC, or interest 
charge DISC for any taxable year other than its first taxable year shall 
make its election during the 90-day period immediately preceding the 
first day of that taxable year. The election to be a FSC, small FSC, or 
interest charge DISC may be made by the corporation, however, during the 
first 90 days of a taxable year, even if that taxable year is not the 
corporation's first taxable year, if that taxable year begins before 
July 1, 1985. Likewise, the election to be a FSC (or a small FSC) may be 
made during the first 90 days of any taxable year of a corporation if 
the corporation had in a prior taxable year elected small FSC (or FSC) 
status and the corporation revokes the small FSC (or FSC) election 
within the 90 day period. A corporation which was a DISC for its taxable 
year ending December 31, 1984, which wishes to be treated as an interest 
charge DISC beginning with its first taxable year beginning after 
December 31, 1984, may make the election to be treated as an interest 
charge DISC by filing Form 4876A on or before July 1, 1987. Also, if a 
corporation which has elected FSC, small FSC or interest charge DISC 
status, or a shareholder of that corporation, is acquired in a qualified 
stock purchase under section 338(d)(3), and if an election under section 
338(a) is effective with regard to that corporation, the corporation may 
re-elect FSC, small FSC or interest charge DISC status, (whichever is 
applicable) not later than the date of the election under section 
338(a), see section 338(g)(i) and Sec. 1.338-1(d). This re-election is 
necessary because the original elections are deemed terminated if an 
election is made under section 338(a). The rules contained in 
Sec. 1.992-2 (a)(1), (b)(1) and (b)(3) shall apply to the manner of 
making the election and the manner and form of shareholder consent.
    (2) FSC incorporated in a possession.
    Q-2: Where does a FSC which is incorporated in a U.S. possession 
file its election?
    A-2: The election is filed with the Internal Revenue Service Center, 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19255.
    (3) Information returns.
    Q-3: Must Form 5471 be filed with respect to the organization of a 
FSC pursuant to section 6046 or to provide information with respect to a 
FSC pursuant to section 6038?
    A-3: A Form 5471 required under section 6046 need not be filed with 
respect to the organization of a FSC. The requirements of section 6046 
shall be satisfied by the filing of a Form 8279 dealing with the 
election to be treated as a FSC or small FSC. However, a Form 5471 will 
be required with respect to a reorganization of a FSC (or small FSC) or 
an acquisition of stock of a FSC (or small FSC), as required under 
section 6046 and the regulations thereunder. Provided that a Form 1120 
FSC is filed, a Form 5471 need not be filed to satisfy the requirements 
of section 6038.
    (4) Conformity of accounting period.
    Q-4: Since a FSC, small FSC, and interest charge DISC must use the 
same annual accounting period as the principal shareholder, must such 
corporation delay the beginning of its first taxable year beyond January 
1, 1985 if the principal shareholder (the shareholder with the highest 
percentage of voting power as defined in section 441(h)) is not a 
calendar year taxpayer?
    A-4: No. Where the principal shareholder is not a calendar year 
taxpayer, a corporation may elect to be treated as a FFSC, small FSC, or 
interest charge DISC for a taxable year beginning January 1, 1985. 
However, such corporation must close its first taxable year and adopt 
the annual accounting period of its principal shareholder as of the 
first day of the principal shareholder's first taxable year beginning in 
1985. A FSC, small FSC, or interest charge DISC need not obtain the 
consent of the Commissioner under section 442 to conform its annual 
accounting period to the annual accounting period of its principal 
shareholder.
    (5) Dollar limitations for short taxable years.
    Q-5: If a small FSC or an interest charge DISC has a short taxable 
year, how are the dollar limitations on foreign trading export gross 
receipts and

[[Page 38]]

qualified export gross receipts, respectively, determined for small FSCs 
and interest charge DISCs?
    A-5: The dollar limitations are to be prorated on a daily basis. 
Thus, for example, if for its 1985 taxable year a small FSC has a short 
taxable year of 73 days, then in determining exempt foreign trade 
income, any foreign trading gross receipts that exceed $1 million (73/
365  x  $5 million) will not be taken into account.
    (6) Change of accounting period.
    Q-6: If the principal shareholder of a FSC, a small FSC, or an 
interest charge DISC (hereinafter referred to as a ``FSC'') changes its 
annual accounting period or is replaced by a new principal shareholder 
during a taxable year, is it necessary for the FSC to change its annual 
accounting period?
    A-6: If the principal shareholder changes its annual accounting 
period, the FSC must also change its annual accounting period to conform 
to that of its principal shareholder. If the voting power of the 
principal shareholder is reduced by an amount equal to at least 10 
percent of the total shares entitled to vote and such shareholder is no 
longer the principal shareholder, the FSC must conform its accounting 
period to that of its new principal shareholder. However, in determining 
whether a shareholder is a principal shareholder, the voting power of 
the shareholders is determined as of the beginning of the FSC's taxable 
year. Thus, for example, assume that for 1985 a FSC adopts a calendar 
year period as its annual accounting period to conform to that of its 
principal shareholder. Assume further than in March 1985 there is a 10 
percent change in voting power and a different shareholder whose annual 
accounting period begins on July 1 becomes the new principal 
shareholder. The FSC will not be required to adopt the annual accounting 
period of its new principal shareholder until July 1, 1986. The FSC will 
have a short taxable year for the period January 1 to June 30, 1986.
    (7) Transition transfers.
    Q-7. Under what circumstances may a DISC or former DISC transfer its 
assets to a FSC or small FSC without incurring any tax liability on the 
transfer?
    A-7. A DISC or former DISC will recognize no income, gain, or loss 
on a transfer of its qualified assets (as defined in section 993(b)) to 
a FSC or small FSC if all of the following conditions are met:
    (i) The assets transferred were held by the DISC on August 4, 1983, 
and were transferred by the DISC or former DISC to the FSC or small FSC 
in a transfer completed before January 1, 1986; and
    (ii) The assets are transferred in a transaction which would qualify 
for nonrecognition under subchapter C of chapter 1 of the Code, or would 
so qualify but for section 367 of the Code.
    In such case, section 367 shall not apply to the transfer.
    In addition, other provisions of subchapter C will apply to the 
transfer, such as section 358 (basis to shareholders), section 362 
(basis to corporations), and section 381 (carryovers in corporate 
acquisitions). In determining whether a transfer by a DISC to a FSC or 
small FSC qualifies for nonrecognition under subchapter C, a liquidation 
of the assets of the DISC into a parent corporation followed by a 
transfer by the parent of those assets to the FSC or small FSC will be 
treated as a transaction described in section 368(a)(1)(D).
    Notwithstanding the foregoing answer, a taxpayer which transfers a 
right to use its corporate name to a FSC in a transaction described in 
sections 332, 351, 354, 356 and 361 shall not be treated as having sold 
that right under section 367(d) or as having transferred that right to 
an entity that is not a corporation under section 367(a) provided that 
the corporate name is used only by the FSC and is not licensed or 
otherwise made available to others by the FSC.
    (8) Completed contract method.
    Q-8: Under what conditions is a taxpayer using the completed 
contract method of accounting as defined in Sec. 1.451-3(d) exempted 
from satisfying the foreign management and foreign economic process 
requirements of subsections (c) and (d) of section 924?
    A-8: If the taxpayer has entered into a binding contract before 
March 16, 1984, or has on March 15, 1984, and at all times thereafter a 
firm plan, evidenced in writing, to enter the contract and

[[Page 39]]

enters into a binding contract by December 31, 1984, then the taxpayer 
will be treated as having satisfied the foreign management tests of 
section 924(c) for periods before December 31, 1984, and the foreign 
economic process tests of section 924(d) with respect to costs incurred 
before December 31, 1984, with respect to the transaction. The FSC rules 
will apply to the income from the long-term contract if an election is 
made and the general FSC requirements under section 922 are satisfied. 
However, such taxpayer need not satisfy the activities test under 
section 925(c) for activities which occur before January 1, 1985 in 
order to use the transfer pricing rules under section 925.
    (9) Long-term contract--before March 15, 1984.
    Q-9: Under what conditions is a taxpayer who enters into a binding 
long-term contract (i.e., a contract which is not completed in the 
taxable year in which it is entered into) before March 15, 1984, but 
does not use the completed contract method of accounting exempted from 
satisfying the foreign management and economic process requirements of 
subsections (c) and (d) of section 924?
    A-9: If a taxpayer enters into a binding contract before March 15, 
1984, the taxpayer will be treated as having satisfied the foreign 
management tests of section 924(c) for periods before December 31, 1984, 
and the foreign economic process tests of section 924(d) with respect to 
costs incurred before December 31, 1984, but only with respect to income 
attributable to such contracts that is recognized before December 31, 
1986. The FSC rules will apply to the income from the long-term contract 
if an election is made and the general FSC requirements under section 
922 are satisfied. However, such taxpayer need not satisfy the 
activities test under section 925(c) for activities which occur before 
January 1, 1985, in order to use the transfer pricing rules under 
section 925.
    (10) Long-term contract--after March 15, 1984.
    Q-10: Under what conditions is a taxpayer who has a long-term 
contract (i.e., a contract which is not completed in the taxable year in 
which it is entered into) but does not use the completed contract method 
of accounting exempted from satisfying the foreign management and 
economic process requirements of subsections (c) and (d) of section 924 
if such taxpayer enters into a binding contract after March 15, 1984 and 
before January 1, 1985?
    A-10: If a taxpayer enters into a contract after March 15, 1984, and 
before January 1, 1985, the taxpayer will be treated as having satisfied 
the foreign management tests of section 924(c) for periods before 
December 31, 1984, and the foreign economic process tests of section 
924(d) with respect to costs incurred before December 31, 1984, but only 
with respect to income attributable to such contract that is recognized 
before December 31, 1985.
    The FSC rules will apply to the income from the long-term contract 
if an election is made and the general requirements under section 922 
are satisfied. However, such taxpayer need not satisfy the activities 
test under section 925(c) for activities which occur before January 1, 
1985 in order to use the transfer pricing rules under section 925.
    (11) Incomplete transactions.
    Q-11: In computing its foreign trade income, how should a FSC treat 
transfers of export property from a related supplier to a DISC which is 
subsequently resold by a FSC after the DISC's termination?
    A-11: In applying the gross receipts and combined taxable income 
methods under section 925 (a)(1) and (a)(2), the transaction is treated 
as if the transfer of export property were made by the related supplier 
to the FSC except that the foreign management and economic processes 
tests under section 924 and the activities test under section 925(c) 
shall be deemed to be satisfied for purposes of the transaction.
    (12) Pre-effective date costs and activities.
    Q-12: Are costs incurred and activities performed prior to January 
1, 1985 taken into account for purposes of satisfying the foreign 
management and foreign economic processes requirements of subsections 
(c) and (d) of section 924 and the activities test under section 925(c)?
    A-12: For purposes of determining the costs incurred and the 
activities performed to be taken into account with

[[Page 40]]

respect to contracts entered into after December 31, 1984, only those 
costs incurred and activities performed after December 31, 1984, are 
taken into consideration. Costs incurred and activities performed by a 
related supplier prior to January 1, 1985 (or prior to the effective 
date of a corporation's election to be treated as a FSC if other than 
January 1, 1985) with respect to transactions occurring after January 1, 
1985 (or after the effective date of a corporation's election to be 
treated as a FSC) need not be taken into account for purposes of 
computing the FSC's profit under section 925 but are treated for section 
925(c) purposes as if they were performed on behalf of the FSC.
    (13) FSC and interest charge DISC.
    Q-13: Can a FSC and an interest charge DISC be members of the same 
controlled group?
    A-13: A FSC and an interest charge DISC cannot be members of the 
same controlled group. If any controlled group of corporations of which 
an interest charge DISC is a member establishes a FSC, then any interest 
charge DISC which is a member of such group shall be treated as having 
terminated its status as an interest charge DISC.
    (c) Export Trade Corporations--(1) Previously taxed income.
    Q-1: Under what circumstances are earnings of an export trade 
corporation that have not been included in income under section 951 
treated as previously taxed income previously included in the income of 
a U.S. shareholder for purposes of section 959 (and not taxed)?
    A-1: A corporation which qualifies as an export trade corporation 
(ETC) with respect to its last taxable year beginning before January 1, 
1985, and elects to discontinue operations as an ETC for all taxable 
years beginning after December 31, 1984, shall not be required to take 
into income earnings attributable to previously excluded export trade 
income, as defined in Sec. 1.970-1(b), derived with respect to taxable 
years beginning before January 1, 1985. However, any amounts distributed 
by the former ETC (i.e. a corporation which was an ETC for its last 
taxable year beginning before January 1, 1985) shall be treated as being 
made out of current earnings and profits and then out of previously 
taxed income. For purposes of determining the shareholder's basis in the 
ETC stock, distributions of previously excluded export trade income 
shall be treated as if made out of previously taxed income which has 
already been included in gross income under section 951(a)(1)(B). Thus, 
no basis adjustment under section 961 is necessary. In addition, upon 
the sale or exchange of the stock of such corporation in a transaction 
described in section 1248(a), the earnings and profits of the 
corporation attributable to such previously untaxed income shall not be 
subject to section 1248(a).
    (2) Qualification as an ETC for last year.
    Q-2: Must an ETC satisfy all of the tests set forth in section 
971(a)(1) for the ETC's last taxable year beginning before January 1, 
1985?
    A-2: All of the tests in section 971(a)(1) must be satisfied, except 
that for purposes of the working capital requirements set forth in 
section 971(c)(1), the working capital of the ETC at the close of its 
last taxable year beginning before January 1, 1985 shall be deemed 
reasonable.
    (3) Continuation of ETC status.
    Q-3: May a corporation which chooses to remain an ETC after December 
31, 1984, continue to do so?
    A-3: Yes. However, previously untaxed income of such ETC shall not 
be treated as previously taxed income in accordance with Q&A 1 of this 
section.
    (4) Discontinuation of ETC status.
    Q-4: How does an ETC make an election to discontinue its operation 
as an ETC?
    A-4: The United States shareholders (as defined in section 951(b)) 
must file a statement of election on behalf of the ETC indicating the 
intent of the ETC to discontinue operations as an ETC for taxable years 
beginning after December 31, 1984. In addition, the statement of 
election must include the name, address, taxpayer identification number 
and stock interest of each United States shareholder. The statement must 
also indicate that the corporation on behalf of which the shareholders 
are making the election qualified as an ETC for its last taxable year 
beginning before January 1, 1985, and

[[Page 41]]

also the amount of earnings attributable to previously excluded export 
trade income. The statement must be jointly signed by each United States 
shareholder with each shareholder stating under penalties of perjury 
that he or she holds the stock interest specified for such shareholder 
in the statement of election. A copy of the statement of election must 
be attached to Form 5471 (information return with respect to a foreign 
corporation) filed with respect to the ETC's last taxable year beginning 
before January 1, 1985.
    (5) Transition transfers.
    Q-5: Under what circumstances may an electing ETC transfer its 
assets to a FSC without incurring any tax liability on the transfer?
    A-5: An electing ETC will recognize no income, gain, or loss on a 
transfer of its assets to a FSC but only if all of the following 
conditions are met:
    (i) The assets transferred were held by the ETC on August 4, 1983, 
and were transferred by the ETC to the FSC in a transfer completed 
before January 1, 1986; and
    (ii) The assets are transferred in a transaction which would qualify 
for nonrecognition under subchapter C of chapter 1 of the Code, or would 
so qualify but for section 367 of the Code.
    In such case, section 367 shall not apply to the transfer. In 
addition, other provisions of subchapter C will apply to the transfer 
such as section 358 (basis to shareholders), section 362 (basis to 
corporation) and section 381 (carryovers in corporate acquisitions). In 
determining whether a transfer by an ETC to a FSC qualifies for 
nonrecognition under subchapter C, a liquidation of the assets of the 
ETC into a parent corporation followed by a transfer by the parent of 
those assets to the FSC will be treated as a transaction described in 
section 368(a)(1)(D).

(Secs. 803 and 805 of the Tax Reform Act of 1984 (98 Stat. 1001) and 
sec. 7805 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954 (68A Stat. 917; 26 U.S.C. 
7805); sec. 805 (b)(3)(C) and (D) of the Tax Reform Act of 1984 (98 
Stat. 1002), and sec. 7805 of the Code (68A Stat. 917; 26 U.S.C. 7805); 
secs. 367, 927, and 7805 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954 (98 Stat. 
662, 26 U.S.C. 367; 98 Stat. 663, 26 U.S.C. 367; 98 Stat. 993, 26 U.S.C. 
927; 98 Stat. 994, 26 U.S.C. 927; and 68A Stat. 917, 26 U.S.C. 7805); 
sec. 805 of the Tax Reform Act of 1984 (Pub. L. 98-69, 98 Stat. 1000))

[T.D. 7983, 49 FR 40013, Oct. 12, 1984, as amended by T.D. 7992, 49 FR 
48283, Dec. 12, 1984; T.D. 7993, 49 FR 48291, Dec. 12, 1984; T.D. 7992, 
49 FR 49450, Dec. 20, 1984; T.D. 8126, 52 FR 6434, 6435, Mar. 3, 1987; 
T.D. 8515, 59 FR 2984, Jan. 20, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 1.921-2  Foreign Sales Corporation--general rules.

    (a) Definition of a FSC and the Effect of a FSC Election.
    Q-1. What is the definition of a Foreign Sales Corporation 
(hereinafter referred to as a ``FSC'' (All references to FSCs include 
small FSCs unless indicated otherwise))?
    A-1. As defined in section 922(a), an FSC must satisfy the following 
eight requirements.
    (i) The FSC must be a corporation organized or created under the 
laws of a foreign country that meets the requirements of section 
927(e)(3) (a ``qualifying foreign country'') or a U.S. possession other 
than Puerto Rico (an ``eligible possession''). See Q&As 3, 4, and 5 of 
Sec. 1.922-1.
    (ii) A FSC may not have more than 25 shareholders at any time during 
the taxable year. See Q&A 6 of Sec. 1.922-1.
    (iii) A FSC may not have any preferred stock outstanding during the 
taxable year. See Q&As 7 and 8 of Sec. 1.922-1.
    (iv) A FSC must maintain an office outside of the United States in a 
qualifying foreign country or an eligible possession and maintain a set 
of permanent books of account (including invoices or summaries of 
invoices) at

[[Page 42]]

such office. See Q&As 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, and 15 of Sec. 1.922-1.
    (v) A FSC must maintain within the United States the records 
required under section 6001. See Q&A 16 of Sec. 1.922-1.
    (vi) The FSC must have a board of directors which includes at least 
one individual who is not a resident of the United States at all times 
during the taxable year. See Q&As 17, 18, 19, 20, and 21 of Sec. 1.922-
1.
    (vii) A FSC may not be a member, at any time during the taxable 
year, of any controlled group of corporations of which an interest 
charge DISC is a member. See Q&A 2 of this section and Q&A 13, of 
Sec. 1.921-1T(b)(13).
    (viii) A FSC must have made an election under section 927(f)(1) 
which is in effect for the taxable year. See Q&A 1 of Sec. 1.921-
1T(b)(1) and Sec. 1.927(f)-1.

In addition, under section 441(h), the taxable year of a FSC must 
conform to the taxable year of its principal shareholder. See Q&A 4 of 
Sec. 1.921-1T(b)(4).

    Q-2. Does the reference to a DISC under section 922(a)(1)(F) which 
provides that a FSC cannot be a member, at any time during the taxable 
year, of any controlled group of corporations of which a DISC is a 
member refer solely to an interest charge DISC?
    A-2. Yes.
    (b) Small FSC.
    Q-3. What is a small FSC?
    A-3. A small FSC is a Foreign Sales Corporation which meets the 
requirements of section 922(a)(1) enumerated in Q&A 1 of this section as 
well as the requirements of section 922(b). Section 922(b) requires that 
a small FSC make a separate election to be treated as a small FSC. See 
Q&A 1 of Sec. 1.921-1T(b) and Sec. 1.927(f)-1. In addition, section 
922(b) requires that the small FSC not be a member, at any time during 
the taxable year, of a controlled group of corporations which includes a 
FSC unless such FSC is a small FSC.
    Q-4. What is the effect of an election as a small FSC?
    A-4. Under section 924(b)(2), a small FSC need not meet the foreign 
management and economic processes tests of section 924(b)(1) in order to 
have foreign trading gross receipts. However, in determining the exempt 
foreign trade income of a small FSC, any foreign trading gross receipts 
for the taxable year in excess of $5 million are not taken into account. 
If the foreign trading gross receipts of a small FSC for the taxable 
year exceed the $5 million limitation, the FSC may select the gross 
receipts to which the limitation is allocated. In order to use the 
administrative pricing rules under section 925(a), a small FSC must 
satisfy the activities test under section 925(c). In addition, under 
section 441(h), the taxable year of a small FSC must conform to the 
taxable year of its principal shareholder (defined in Q&A 4 of 
Sec. 1.921-1T(b)(4) as the shareholder with the highest percentage of 
its voting power).
    Q-5. What is the effect on a small FSC (or FSC) (``target'') if it 
is acquired, directly or indirectly, by a corporation if that acquiring 
corporation (``acquiring''), or a member of the acquiring corporation's 
controlled group, is a FSC (or small FSC)?
    A-5. Unless the corporations in the controlled group elect to 
terminate the FSC (or small (FSC) election of the acquiring corporation, 
the target's small FSC's (or FSC's) taxable year and election will 
terminate as of the day preceding the date the target small FSC and 
acquiring FSC became members of the same controlled group. The target 
small FSC will receive FSC benefits for the period prior to termination, 
but the $5 million small FSC limitation will be reduced to the amount 
which bears the same ratio to the $5 million as the number of days in 
the short year created by the termination bears to 365. The due date of 
the income tax return for the short taxable year created by this 
provision will be the date prescribed by section 6072(b), including 
extensions, starting with the last day of the short taxable year. If the 
short taxable year created by this provision ends prior to March 3, 
1987, the filing date of the tax return for the short taxable year will 
be automatically extended until the earlier of May 18, 1987 or the date 
under section 6072 (b) assuming a short taxable year had not been 
created by these regulations.
    (c) Comparison of FSC to DISC.
    Q-6. How does a FSC differ from a DISC?

[[Page 43]]

    A-6. A DISC is a domestic corporation which is not itself taxable 
while a FSC must be created or organized under the laws of a 
jurisdiction which is outside of the United States (including certain 
U.S. possessions) and may be taxable on its income except for its exempt 
foreign trade income. The DISC provisions enable a shareholder to obtain 
a partial deferral of tax on income from export sales and certain 
services, if 95 percent of its receipts and assets are export related. 
The FSC provisions contain no assets test, but a portion of income for 
export sales and certain services is exempt from U.S. taxes if the FSC 
satisfies certain foreign presence, foreign management, and foreign 
economic processes tests.

    (d) Organization of a FSC.

    Q-7. Under the laws of what countries may a FSC be organized?
    A-7. A FSC may not be created or organized under the laws of the 
United States, a state, or other political subdivision. However, a FSC 
may be created or organized under the laws of a possession of the United 
States, including Guam. American Samoa, the Commonwealth of the Northern 
Mariana Islands and the Virgin Islands of the United States, but not 
Puerto Rico. These eligible possessions are located outside the U.S. 
customs territory. In addition, a FSC may incorporate under the laws of 
a foreign country that is a party to--
    (i) An exchange of information agreement that meets the standards of 
the Caribbean Basin Economic Recovery Act of 1983 (Code section 
274(h)(6)(C)), or
    (ii) A bilateral income tax treaty with the United States if the 
Secretary certifies that the exchange of information program under the 
treaty carries out the purpose of the exchange of information 
requirements of the FSC legislation as set forth in section 927(e)(3), 
if the company is covered under the exchange of information program 
under subdivision (i) or (ii). The Secretary may terminate the 
certification. Any termination by the Secretary will be effective six 
months after the date of the publication of the notice of such 
termination in the Federal Register.
    (e) Foreign Trade Income.

    Q-8. How is foreign trade income defined?

    A-8. Foreign trade income, defined in section 923(b), is gross 
income of an FSC attributable to foreign trading gross receipts. It 
includes both the profits earned by the FSC itself from exports and 
commissions earned by the FSC from products and services exported by 
others.

    (f) Investment Income and Carrying Charges.

    Q-9. What do the terms ``investment income'' and ``carrying 
charges'' mean?
    A-9.
    (i) Investment income means:
    (A) Dividends,
    (B) Interest,
    (C) Royalties,
    (D) Annuities,
    (E) Rents (other than rents from the lease or rental of export 
property for use by the lessee outside of the United States);
    (F) Gains from the sale of stock or securities,
    (G) Gains from future transactions in any commodity on, or subject 
to the rules of, a board of trade or commodity exchange (other than 
gains which arise out of a bona fide hedging transaction reasonably 
necessary to conduct the business of the FSC in the manner in which such 
business is customarily conducted by others),
    (H) Amounts includable in computing the taxable income of the 
corporation under part I of subchapter J, and
    (I) Gains from the sale or other disposition of any interest in an 
estate or trust.
    (ii) Carrying charges means:
    (A) Charges that are imposed by a FSC or a related supplier and that 
are identified as carrying charges, (``stated carrying charges'') and
    (B)(1) Charges that are considered to be included in the price of 
the property or services sold by an FSC or a related supplier, as 
provided under Q&As 1 and 2 of Sec. 1.927(d)-1, and
    (2) Any other unstated interest.
    Q-10. How are investment income and carrying charges treated?
    A-10. Investment income and carrying charges are not foreign trading 
gross receipts. Investment income and carrying charges are includable in 
the taxable income of an FSC, except in

[[Page 44]]

the case of a commission FSC where carrying charges are treated as 
income of the related supplier, and are treated as income effectively 
connected with a trade or business conducted through a permanent 
establishment within the United States. The source of investment income 
and carrying charges is determined under sections 861, 862, and 863 of 
the Code.
    (g) Small Businesses.
    Q-11. What options are available to small businesses engaged in 
exporting?
    A-11. A small business may elect to be treated as either a small FSC 
or an interest charge DISC. See Q&As 3 & 4 of Sec. 1.921-2 relating to a 
small FSC. Rules with respect to interest charge DISCs are the subject 
of another regulations project.

[T.D. 8127, 52 FR 6469, Mar. 3, 1987]


<R05>
Sec. 1.921-3T  Temporary regulations; Foreign sales corporation general rules.

    (a) Exclusion--(1) Classifications of income. The extent to which 
income of a FSC (any further reference to a FSC in this section shall 
include a small FSC unless indicated otherwise) is subject to the 
corporate income tax of section 11, or, in the alternative, section 
1201(a), is dependent upon the allocation of the FSC's income to the 
following five categories:
    (i) Exempt foreign trade income determined under section 923 and 
Sec. 1.923-1T;
    (ii) Non-exempt foreign trade income determined with regard to the 
administrative pricing rules of section 925(a)(1) or (2);
    (iii) Non-exempt foreign trade income determined without regard to 
the administrative pricing rules of section 925(a)(1) or (2) (section 
923(a)(2) non-exempt income as defined in section 927(d)(6));
    (iv) Investment income and carrying charges; and
    (v) Other non-foreign trade income.
    (2) Source and characterization of FSC income--(i) Exempt foreign 
trade income. The exempt foreign trade income of a FSC determined under 
section 923 and Sec. 1.923-1T is treated as foreign source income which 
is not effectively connected with a United States trade or business. See 
Sec. 1.923-1T(a) for the definition of foreign trade income and 
Sec. 1.923-1T(b) for the definition of exempt foreign trade income.
    (ii) Non-exempt foreign trade income determined with regard to the 
administrative pricing rules. The FSC's non-exempt foreign trade income 
with respect to a transaction or group of transactions will be treated 
as United States source income which is effectively connected with the 
FSC's trade or business which is conducted through its permanent 
establishment within the United States if either of the administrative 
pricing rules of section 925(a)(1) or (2) is used to determine the FSC's 
foreign trade income from a transaction or group of transactions. See 
Sec. 1.923-1T(b) for the definition of non-exempt foreign trade income.
    (iii) Non-exempt foreign trade income determined without regard to 
the administrative pricing rules. The source and taxation of the FSC's 
non-exempt foreign trade income not classified in paragraph (a)(2)(ii) 
of this section will be determined under the appropriate sections of the 
Internal Revenue Code and the regulations under those sections. This 
type of income (section 923(a)(2) non-exempt income) includes both 
income that is not effectively connected with the conduct of a trade or 
business in the United States and income that is effectively connected.
    (iv) Investment income and carrying charges. All of the FSC's 
investment income and carrying charges will be treated as income which 
is effectively connected with the FSC's trade or business which is 
conducted through its permanent establishment within the United States. 
The source of that income will be determined under the appropriate 
sections of the Internal Revenue Code and the regulations under those 
sections. See Sec. 1.921-2(f) (Q & A9) for definition of investment 
income and carrying charges.
    (v) Non-foreign trade income (other than investment income and 
carrying charges). The source and taxation of the FSC's non-foreign 
trade income (other than investment income and carrying charges) will be 
determined under the appropriate sections of the Internal Revenue Code 
and the regulations under those sections.

[[Page 45]]

    (b) Allocation and apportionment of deductions. Expenses, losses and 
deductions incurred by the FSC shall be allocated and apportioned under 
the rules set forth in Sec. 1.861-8 to the FSC's foreign trade income 
and to the FSC's non-foreign trade income. Any deductions incurred by 
the FSC on a transaction, or group of transactions, which are allocated 
and apportioned to the FSC's foreign trade income from that transaction, 
or group of transactions, shall be allocated on a proportionate basis 
between exempt foreign trade income and non-exempt foreign trade income.
    (c) Net operating losses and capital losses--(1) General rule. (i) 
If a FSC for any taxable year incurs a deficit in earnings and profits 
attributable to foreign trade income determined without regard to the 
administrative pricing rules of section 925(a)(1) or (2), that deficit 
shall be applied to reduce current earnings and profits, if any, 
attributable to--
    (A) First, exempt foreign trade income determined with regard to the 
administrative pricing rules,
    (B) Second, non-exempt foreign trade income determined with regard 
to the administrative pricing rules,
    (C) Third, investment income and carrying charges, and
    (D) Fourth, other non-foreign trade income.
    (ii) If a FSC for any taxable year incurs a deficit in earnings and 
profits attributable to non-foreign trade income (other than investment 
income, carrying charges and net capital losses), that deficit shall be 
applied to reduce current earnings and profits, if any, attributable 
to--
    (A) First, investment income and carrying charges,
    (B) Second, exempt foreign trade income determined with regard to 
the administrative pricing rules,
    (C) Third, exempt foreign trade income determined without regard to 
the administrative pricing rules,
    (D) Fourth, non-exempt foreign trade income determined with regard 
to the administrative pricing rules, and
    (E) Fifth, section 923(a)(2) non-exempt income.
    (iii) If a FSC for any taxable year incurs a deficit in earnings and 
profits attributable to investment income and carrying charges, that 
deficit shall be applied to reduce current earnings and profits, if any, 
attributable to--
    (A) First, non-foreign trade income other than capital gains,
    (B) Second, exempt foreign trade income determined with regard to 
the administrative pricing rules,
    (C) Third, exempt foreign trade income determined without regard to 
the administrative pricing rules,
    (D) Fourth, non-exempt foreign trade income determined with regard 
to the administrative pricing rules, and
    (E) Fifth, section 923(a)(2) non-exempt income.
    (iv) Net capital losses will be available for carryback or carryover 
pursuant to paragraph (c)(2) of this section.
    (v) Because the no-loss rules provide that a related supplier may 
always compensate the FSC for its expenses either as part of the 
commission payment or as part of the transfer price if the 
administrative pricing rules are used (see Sec. 1.925(a)-1T(e)(1)(i)), a 
FSC will not have a deficit in its earnings and profits relating to 
foreign trade income determined with regard to the administrative 
pricing rules. To determine the amount of any division of earnings and 
profits for the purpose of determining under Sec. 1.926(a)-1T (a) and 
(b) the treatment and order of distributions, the portion of a deficit 
in earnings and profits chargeable under this paragraph to such division 
prior to such distribution shall be determined in a manner consistent 
with the rules in Sec. 1.316-2(b) for determining the amount of earnings 
and profits available on the date of any distribution.
    (2) Carryback or carryover of net operating losses and capital 
losses to other taxable years of a FSC (or former FSC). (i) The amount 
of the deduction for the taxable year under section 172 for a net 
operating loss carryback or carryover, or under section 1212 for a 
capital loss carryback or carryover, shall be determined in the same 
manner as if the FSC were a foreign corporation which had not elected to 
be treated as a FSC. Thus, the amount of the deduction will be the same 
whether or not the corporation was a FSC in the year of the loss or in 
the year to which the loss is carried.

[[Page 46]]

    (ii) Any carryback or carryover of a FSC's (or former FSC's) net 
operating loss which is attributable to transactions which give rise to 
foreign trade income shall be charged--
    (A) First, to earnings and profits attributable to exempt foreign 
trade income which is determined without regard to the administrative 
pricing rules,
    (B) Second, to earnings and profits attributable to section 
923(a)(2) non-exempt income,
    (C) Third, to earnings and profits attributable to exempt foreign 
trade income determined with regard to the administrative pricing rules,
    (D) Fourth, to earnings and profits attributable to non-exempt 
foreign trade income determined with regard to the administrative 
pricing rules,
    (E) Fifth, to earnings and profits attributable to investment income 
and carrying charges (other than capital gain income), and
    (F) Sixth, to earnings and profits attributable to non-foreign trade 
income (other than investment income, carrying charges and capital gain 
income).
    (iii) Any carryback or carryover of a FSC's (or former FSC's) net 
operating loss which is attributable to non-foreign trade income (other 
than capital gain income) shall be charged--
    (A) First, to earnings and profits attributable to non-foreign trade 
income (other than investment income, carrying charges and capital gain 
income),
    (B) Second, to earnings and profits attributable to investment 
income and carrying charges,
    (C) Third, to earnings and profits attributable to exempt foreign 
trade income determined with regard to the administrative pricing rules,
    (D) Fourth, to earnings and profits attributable to non-exempt 
foreign trade income determined with regard to the administrative 
pricing rules,
    (E) Fifth, to earnings and profits attributable to exempt foreign 
trade income which is determined without regard to the administrative 
pricing rules, and
    (F) Sixth, to earnings and profits attributable to section 923(a)(2) 
non-exempt income.
    (iv) Any carryback or carryover of a net operating loss to a year in 
which the corporation was (or is) a FSC from a taxable year in which the 
corporation was not a FSC shall be applied in a manner consistent with 
subdivision (iii) of this paragraph.
    (d) Credits against tax--(1) General rule. Notwithstanding any other 
provision of chapter 1, subtitle A, a FSC is allowed under section 
921(c) as credits against tax only the following credits:
    (i) The foreign tax credit, section 27(a);
    (ii) The credit for tax withheld at source on foreign corporations, 
section 33; and
    (iii) The certain uses of gasoline and special fuels credit, section 
34.
    (2) Foreign tax credit. (i) The direct foreign tax credit of section 
901(b)(4) as determined under section 906 for income, war profits, and 
excess profits taxes (or taxes in lieu thereof) paid or accrued to any 
foreign country or possession of the United States is allowed a FSC only 
to the extent that those taxes are attributable to the FSC's foreign 
source non-foreign trade income which is effectively connected with its 
conduct of a trade or business within the United States. See section 
906(b)(5).
    (ii) The foreign tax credit for domestic corporate shareholders in 
foreign corporations (the deemed paid credit) provided under section 
901(a) as determined under section 902 is allowed for income, war 
profits, and excess profits taxes deemed paid or accrued by a FSC (or 
former FSC) only to the extent those taxes are deemed paid or accrued 
with respect to the FSC's (or former FSC's) section 923(a)(2) non-exempt 
income and its non-foreign trade income.
    (iii) The foreign tax credit allowed by sections 901 and 903 for tax 
withheld at source is allowed only to the extent the dividends paid to 
the FSC's (or former FSC's) shareholder are attributable to the FSC's 
(or former FSC's) section 923(a)(2) non-exempt income and its non-
foreign trade income.
    (3) Foreign tax credit limitation. (i) For purposes of computation 
of the direct foreign tax credit of section 901(b)(4) as determined 
under section 906, the separate limitation of section 904(d)(1)(C) for 
the FSC's taxable income attributable to its foreign trade income will 
apply. The direct foreign tax credit is not allowed to a FSC with regard 
to

[[Page 47]]

taxes it paid which are attributable to its foreign trade income. Since 
the foreign tax credit is not allowed for that type of income, the 
effect of the separate limitation is to remove the FSC's foreign trade 
income from the numerator of the fraction used to compute the FSC's 
overall foreign tax credit limitation.
    (ii) A separate limitation under section 904(d)(1)(D) is provided 
for distributions from a FSC (or former FSC) that arise through 
operation of the deemed paid credit of section 902 and are attributable 
to foreign trade income earned during the period when the distributing 
corporation was a FSC. This limitation is computed by multiplying the 
FSC's shareholder's tentative United States tax by a fraction the 
numerator of which is the foreign source dividend (determined with 
regard to section 78) attributable to the foreign trade income less 
dividends received deductions and other expenses allocated and 
apportioned under Sec. 1.861-8 allowed to the shareholder and the 
denominator of which is the shareholder's worldwide income. The effect 
of this separate limitation is to remove dividends attributable to the 
FSC's foreign trade income from the numerator of the fraction used to 
compute the overall foreign tax credit limitation of the FSC's 
shareholder.
    (iii) The separate limitation under section 904(d)(1)(D) also 
applies to the foreign tax credit allowed to a FSC shareholder by 
sections 901 and 903 for tax withheld at source on dividends paid by the 
FSC. The numerator of this fraction is the part of the dividend 
attributable to the FSC's foreign trade income and the denominator is 
the shareholder's worldwide income. The effect of this separate 
limitation is to remove dividends attributable to foreign trade income 
of a FSC (or former FSC) from the numerator of the fraction used to 
compute the overall foreign tax credit limitation of the FSC's 
shareholder.
    (e) Deduction for foreign income, war profits and excess profits 
taxes. Under section 275(a)(4)(B), income, war profits and excess 
profits taxes imposed by a foreign country or possession of the United 
States may not be deducted by a FSC to the extent those taxes are paid 
or accrued with respect to its foreign trade income.
    (f) Payment of estimated tax. Every FSC which is subject to tax 
under section 11 or 1201(a) and section 882 must make payment of its 
estimated tax in accordance with section 6154 and the regulations under 
that section. In determining the amount of the estimated tax, the FSC 
must treat the tax imposed by section 881 as though it were a tax 
imposed by section 11. See section 6154(g).
    (g) Accumulated earnings, personal holding company and foreign 
personal holding company. The provisions covering the accumulated 
earnings tax (sections 531 through 537), personal holding companies 
(sections 541 through 547) and foreign personal holding companies 
(sections 551 through 558) apply to FSCs to the extent they would apply 
to foreign corporations that are not FSCs.
    (h) Subpart F income and increase of earnings invested in U.S. 
property. For the mandatory inclusion in the gross income of the U.S. 
shareholders of the subpart F income and of the increase in earnings 
invested in U.S. property of a FSC, see sections 951 through 964 and the 
regulations under those sections. However, the foreign trade income 
(other than section 923(a)(2) non-exempt income) and, generally, the 
investment income and carrying charges of a FSC and any deductions which 
are allocated and apportioned to those classes of income, are not taken 
into account under sections 951 through 964. See sections 951(e) and 
952(b).
    (i) Certain accumulations of earnings and profits. For the inclusion 
in the gross income of U.S. persons as a dividend on the gain recognized 
on certain sales or exchanges of stock in a FSC, to the extent of 
certain earnings and profits attributable to the stock which were 
accumulated while the FSC was a controlled foreign corporation, see 
section 1248 and the regulations under that section. However, section 
1248 and the regulations under that section do not apply to a FSC's 
earnings and profits attributable to foreign trade income, see section 
1248(d)(6).
    (j) Limitations on certain multiple tax benefits. The provisions of 
section 1561, Limitations on Certain Multiple Tax

[[Page 48]]

Benefits in the Case of Certain Controlled Corporations, and section 
1563, Definitions and Special Rules, and the regulations under those 
sections apply to a FSC and its controlled group.

[T.D. 8126, 52 FR 6435, Mar. 3, 1987]


<R05>
Sec. 1.922-1  Requirements that a corporation must satisfy to be a FSC or a small FSC.

    (a) FSC requirements.

    Q-1. What are the requirements that a corporation must satisfy to be 
an FSC?
    A-1. A corporation must satisfy all of the requirements of section 
922(a).
    (b) Small FSC requirements.
    Q-2. What are the requirements that a corporation must satisfy to be 
a small FSC?
    A-2. A corporation must satisfy all of the requirements of sections 
922(a)(1) and (b).
    (c) Definition of corporation.
    Q-3. What type of entity is considered a corporation for purposes of 
qualifying as an FSC or a small FSC under section 922?
    A-3. A foreign entity that is classified as a corporation under 
section 7701(a)(3) (other than an insurance company) is considered a 
corporation for purposes of this requirement.
    (d) Eligible possession.
    Q-4. For purposes of meeting the place of incorporation requirement 
of section 922(a)(1)(A), what is a possession of the United States?
    A-4. For purposes of section 922(a)(1)(A), the possessions of the 
United States are Guam, American Samoa, the Commonwealth of the Northern 
Mariana Islands, and the Virgin Islands of the United States (``eligible 
possessions''). Puerto Rico, although a possession for certain tax 
purposes, does not qualify as a jurisdiction in which a FSC or small FSC 
may be incorporated.
    (e) Qualifying countries.
    Q-5. For purposes of meeting the place of incorporation requirement 
of section 922(a)(1)(A), what is a foreign country and which foreign 
countries meet the requirements of section 927(e)(3)?
    A-5. (i) A foreign country is a jurisdiction outside the 50 states, 
the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, and the 
possessions of the United States. (ii) A list of the foreign countries 
that meet the requirements of section 927(e)(3) (''qualifying 
countries'') will be published from time to time in the Federal Register 
and the Internal Revenue Bulletin. A corporation is considered to be 
created or organized under the laws of a foreign country that meets the 
requirements of section 927(e)(3) only if the foreign country is a party 
to (A) an exchange of information agreement under the Caribbean Basin 
Economic Recovery Act (Code section 274(h)((6)(C)), or (B) a bilateral 
income tax treaty with the United States if the Secretary certifies that 
the exchange of information program under the treaty carries out the 
purposes of the exchange of information requirements of the FSC 
legislation as set forth in Code section 927(e)(3) and if the 
corporation is covered under exchange of information program under 
subdivision (A) or (B).
    (f) Number of shareholders.
    Q-6. Who is counted as a shareholder of a corporation for purposes 
of determining whether a corporation meets the limitation on the number 
of shareholders to no more than 25 under section 922(a)(1)(B)?
    A-6. Solely for purposes of the limitation on the number of 
shareholders, the following rules apply:
    (i) In general, an individual who owns an interest in stock of the 
corporation is counted as a shareholder. In the case of joint owners, 
each joint owner is counted as a shareholder. A member of a 
corporation's board of directors who holds qualifying shares that are 
required to be owned by a resident of the country of incorporation is 
not counted as a shareholder.
    (ii) A corporation that owns an interest in stock of the corporation 
is counted as a single shareholder.
    (iii) An estate that owns an interest in stock of the corporation is 
counted as a single shareholder. If the limitation on number of 
shareholders is not satisfied by reason of the closing of an estate, the 
FSC will continue to qualify for the taxable year of the FSC in which 
the estate is closed.
    (iv) A trust is not counted as a shareholder. In the case of a trust 
all of which is treated as owned by one or

[[Page 49]]

more persons under sections 671 through 679, those persons are counted 
as shareholders. In the case of all other trusts, a beneficiary is 
counted as a shareholder.
    (v) A partnership is not counted as a shareholder. A general or 
limited partner is counted as a shareholder if it is a corporation, an 
individual, or an estate, under the rules contained in subdivisions (i) 
through (iii). A general or limited partner is not counted as a 
shareholder if it is a partnership or a trust; the rules contained in 
subdivision (iv) and this subdivision (v) apply to the determination of 
who is counted as a shareholder.
    (g) Class of stock.
    Q-7. What is preferred stock for purposes of determining whether a 
corporation satisfies the requirement under section 922(a)(1)(C) that no 
preferred stock be outstanding?
    A-7. Preferred stock is stock that is limited and preferred as to 
dividends or distributions in liquidation.
    Q-8. Can a corporation have outstanding more than one class of 
common stock?
    A-8. Yes. However, the rights of a class of stock will be 
disregarded if the right has the effect of avoidance of Federal income 
tax. For instance, dividend rights may not be used to direct dividends 
from exempt foreign trade income to shareholders that have taxable 
income and to direct other dividends to shareholders that have met 
operating loss carryovers.
    (h) Office.
    Q-9. What is an office for purposes of determining whether a 
corporation satisfies the requirement of section 922(a)(1)(D)(i)?
    A-9. An office is a place for the transaction of the business of the 
corporation. To be an office a place must meet all of the following 
requirements;
    (i) It must have a fixed location. A transient location is not a 
fixed location.
    (ii) It must be a building or a portion of a building consisting of 
at least one room. A room is a partitioned part of the inside of a 
building. The building or portion thereof used as the corporation's 
office must be large enough to accommodate the equipment required in 
subdivison (iii) of this answer 9 and the activity required in 
subdivision (iv) of this answer 9. However, an office is not limited to 
a room with communication equipment or an adjacent room. Non-contiguous 
space within the same building will also constitute an office if it is 
equipped for the retention of the documentation required to be stored by 
the FSC and if access to the necessary communication equipment is 
available for use by the FSC.
    (iii) It must be equipped for the performance of the corporation's 
business. An office must be equipped for the communication and retention 
of information and must be supplied with communication services.
    (iv) It must be regularly used for some business activity of the 
corporation. A corporation's business activities must include the 
maintenance of the documentation described in Q&A 12 of this section. 
These documents need not be prepared at the office. Any person, whether 
or not related to the corporation, may perform the business activities 
of the corporation at the office if the activity is performed pursuant 
to a contract, oral or written, for the performance of the activity on 
behalf of the corporation.
    (v) It must be operated, and owned or leased, by the corporation or 
by a person, whether or not related to the corporation, under contract 
to the corporation.
    (vi) It must be maintained by the corporation or by a person, 
whether or not related, to the corporation, under contract to the 
corporation at all times during the taxable year. In the case of a 
corporation newly organized as a FSC, thirty days may elapse between the 
time the corporation is organized as a FSC (i.e., the first day for 
which the FSC election is effective) and the time an office is 
maintained by the corporation or a person under contract with the 
corporation. A place that meets the requirements in subdivision (i) 
through (vi) of this answer 9 can also be used for activities that are 
unrelated to the business activity of the corporation.
    Q-10 Can a corporation locate an office in any foreign country if it 
has at least one office in a U.S. possession or in a foreign country 
that meets the requirements of section 927 (e)(3) as provided Q&A 5 of 
this section?
    A-10. Yes.

[[Page 50]]

    Q-11. Must a corporation locate the office that is required under 
section 922(a)(1)(D)(i) in the country or possession of its 
incorporation?
    A-11. No.
    (i) Documentation.
    Q-12. What documentation must be maintained at the corporation's 
office for purposes of section 922(a)(1)(D)(ii)?
    A-12. At least the following documentation must be maintained at the 
corporation's office under section 922(a)(1)(D)(ii):
    (i) The quarterly income statements, a final year-end income 
statement and a year-end balance sheet of the FSC; and
    (ii) All final invoices (or a summary of them) or statements of 
account with respect to (A) sales by the FSC, and (B) sales by a related 
person if the FSC realizes income with respect to such sales. A final 
invoice is an invoice upon which payment is made by the customer. A 
invoice must contain, at a minimum, the customer's name or idenfitying 
number and, with respect to the transaction or transactions, the date, 
product or product code or service of service code, quantity, price, and 
amount due. In the alternative, a document will be acceptable as a final 
invoice even though it does not include all of the above listed 
information if the FSC establishes that the document is considered to be 
a final invoice under normal commercial practices. An invoice forwarded 
to the customer after payment has been tendered or received pursuant to 
a letter of credit, as a receipt for payment, satisfies this definition. 
A single final invoice may cover more than one transaction with a 
customer.
    (iii) A summary of final invoices may be in any reasonable form 
provided that the summary contains all substantive information from the 
invoices. All substantive information includes the customer's name or 
identifying number, the invoice number, date, product or product code, 
and amount owed. In the alternative, all substantive information 
includes a summary of the information that is included on documents 
considered to be final invoices under normal commercial practice. A 
statement of account is any summary statement forwarded to a customer to 
inform of, or confirm, the status of transactions occurring within an 
accounting period during a taxable year that is not less than one month. 
A statement of account must contain, at a minimum, the customer's name 
or identifying number, date of the statement of account and the balance 
due (even if the balance due is zero) as of the last day of the 
accounting period covered by the statement of account. In the 
alternative, a document will be accepted as a statement of account even 
though it does not include all of the above listed information if the 
FSC establishes that the document is considered a statement of account 
under normal commercial practice. For these purposes, a document will be 
considered to be a statement of account under normal commercial practice 
if it is sent to domestic as well as to export customers in order to 
inform the customers of the status of transactions during an accounting 
period. With regard to quarterly income statements, a reasonable 
estimate of the FSC's income and expense items will be acceptable. If 
the FSC is a commission FSC, 1.83% of the related supplier's gross 
receipts will be considered a reasonable estimate of the FSC's income. 
The documents required by this Q&A 12 need not be prepared by the FSC. 
In addition they need not be prepared at the FSC's office.
    (iv) The FSC will satisfy the requirement that the documents be 
maintained at its office even if not all final invoices (or summaries) 
or statements of account or items to be included on statements of 
account are maintained at its office as long as it makes a good faith 
effort to do so and provided that any failure to maintain the required 
documents is cured within a reasonable time of discovery of the failure.
    Q-13. If the required documents are not prepared at the FSC's 
office, by what date must the documents be maintained at its office?
    A-13. With regard to the applicable quarters of years prior to March 
3, 1987, the quarterly income statements, final invoices (or summaries), 
or statements of account and the year-end balance sheet must be 
maintained at the FSC's

[[Page 51]]

office no later than the due date, including extensions, of the FSC tax 
return for the applicable taxable year in which the period ends. With 
regard to the applicable quarters or years ending after March 3, 1987, 
the quarterly income statements for the first three quarters of the FSC 
year must be maintained at the FSC's office no later than 90 days after 
the end of the quarter. The quarterly income statement for the fourth 
quarter of the FSC year, the final year-end income statement, the year-
end balance sheet, and the final invoices (or summaries) or statements 
of account must be maintained at the FSC's office no later than the due 
date, including extensions, of the FSC tax return for the applicable 
taxable year.
    Q-14. In what form must the documentation required under section 
922(a)(1)(D)(ii) be maintained?
    A-14. The documentation required to be maintained by the office may 
be originals or duplicates and may be in any form that qualifies as a 
record under Rev. Rul. 71-20, 1971-1 C.B. 392. Therefore, documentation 
may be maintained in the form of punch cards, magnetic tapes, disks, and 
other machine-sensible media used for recording, consolidating, and 
summarizing accounting transactions and records within a taxpayer's 
automatic data processing system. The corporation need not maintain at 
its office equipment capable of reading the machine-sensible media. That 
equipment, however, must be situated in a location that is readily 
accessible to the corporation. The equipment need not be owned by the 
corporation.
    Q-15. How long must the documentation required under section 
922(a)(1)(D)(ii) be maintained?
    A-15. The documentation required under section 922(a)(1)(D)(ii) for 
a taxable year must be maintained at the FSC's office described in 
section 922(a)(1)(D)(i) until the period of limitations for assessment 
of tax for the taxable year has expired under section 6501.
    Q-16. Under what circumstances will a coporation be considered to 
satisfy the requirement of section 922(a)(1)(D)(iii) that it maintain 
the records it is required to keep under section 6001 at a location 
within the United States?
    A-16. A corporation will be considered to satify this requirement if 
the records required under section 6001 are kept by any person at any 
location in the United States provided that the records are retained in 
accordance with section 6001 and the regulations thereunder.
    (j) Board of directors.
    Q-17. What is a corporation's ``board of directors'' for purposes of 
the requirement under section 922(a)(1)(E) that, at all times during the 
taxable year, the corporation must have a board of directors which 
includes at least one individual who is not a resident of the United 
States?
    A-17. The ``board of directors'' is the body that manages and 
directs the corporation according to the law of the qualifying country 
or eligible possession under the laws of which the corporation was 
created or organized.
    Q-18. Can the member of the board of directors who is a nonresident 
of the United States be a citizen of the United States?
    A-18. Yes. For purposes of meeting the requirement under section 
922(a)(1)(E), the member of the board who cannot be a United States 
resident can be a United States citizen. The principles of section 
7701(b) shall be used to determine whether a United States citizen is a 
United States resident.
    Q-19. If the only member of the board of directors who is not a 
resident of the United States dies, or resigns, is removed from the 
board or becomes a resident of the United States will the corporation be 
considered to fail the requirement under section 922(a)(1)(E)?
    A-19. If the corporation appoints a new member who is a nonresident 
of the United States to the board within 30 days after the death, 
resignation or removal of the former nonresident member, the corporation 
will be considered to satisfy the requirement under section 
922(a)(1)(E). Also, the corporation will be considered to satisfy the 
requirement under section 922(a)(1)(E) if the corporation appoints a new 
member who is a nonresident of the United States to the board within 30 
days after the corporation has

[[Page 52]]

knowledge, or reason to know, that the board's former nonresident member 
was in fact a resident of the United States.
    Q-20. Is a nonresident alien individual who elects to be treated as 
a resident of the United States for a taxable year under section 6013(g) 
considered a nonresident of the United States for purposes of the 
requirement under section 922(a)(1)(E)?
    A-20. Yes.
    Q-21. Will the requirement that a FSC's board of directors have a 
nonresident member at all times during the taxable year be satisfied if 
the nonresident member is elected or appointed to the board of directors 
no later than 30 days after the first day for which the FSC election is 
effective?
    A-21. Yes.

[T.D. 8127, 52 FR 6470, Mar. 3, 1987]


<R05>
Sec. 1.923-1T  Temporary regulations; exempt foreign trade income.

    (a) Foreign trade income. Foreign trade income of a FSC is the FSC's 
gross income attributable to its foreign trading gross receipts. (Any 
further reference to a FSC in this section shall include a small FSC 
unless indicated otherwise.) If the FSC is the principal on the sale of 
export property which it purchased from a related supplier, the FSC's 
gross income is determined by subtracting from its foreign trading gross 
receipts the transfer price determined under the transfer pricing 
methods of section 925(a). If the FSC is the commission agent on the 
sale of export property by its related supplier, the FSC's gross income 
is the commission paid or payable by the related supplier to the FSC 
with respect to the transactions that would have generated foreign 
trading gross receipts had the FSC been the principal on the 
transaction. See Sec. 1.925(a)-1T(f) Examples 1 and 6 for illustrations 
of the computation of a FSC's foreign trade income, exempt foreign trade 
income and taxable income.
    (b) Exempt foreign trade income--(1) Determination. (i) If a FSC 
uses either of the two administrative pricing rules, provided for by 
sections 925(a)(1) and (2), to determine its income from a transaction, 
or group of transactions, to which section 925 applies (see 
Sec. 1.925(a)-1T(b)(2) (ii) and (iii)), 15/23 of the foreign trade 
income that it earns from the transaction, or group of transactions, 
will be exempt foreign trade income. If a FSC has a non-corporate 
shareholder (shareholders), 16/23 of its foreign trade income 
attributable to the noncorporate shareholder's (shareholders') 
proportionate interest in the FSC will be exempt foreign trade income. 
See section 291(a)(4).
    (ii) If a FSC does not use the administrative pricing rules to 
determine its income from a transaction, or group of transactions, which 
gives rise to foreign trade income, 30 percent of its foreign trade 
income will be exempt foreign trade income. If a FSC has a non-corporate 
shareholder (shareholders), 32 percent of its foreign trade income 
attributable to the non-corporate shareholder's (shareholders') 
proportionate interest in the FSC will be exempt foreign trade income. 
See section 291(a)(4).
    (iii) Exempt foreign trade income so determined under subdivisions 
(1)(i) and (ii) of this paragraph is treated as foreign source income 
which is not effectively connected with the conduct of a trade or 
business within the United States. See section 921(a).
    (2) Special rule for foreign trade income allocable to a qualified 
cooperative. (i) Pursuant to section 923(a)(4), if a qualified 
cooperative is a shareholder of a FSC, the FSC's non-exempt foreign 
trade income determined by use of either of the administrative pricing 
methods of section 925(a)(1) or (2) which is allocable to the marketing 
of agricultural or horticultural products, or the providing of related 
services, for any taxable year will be treated as exempt foreign trade 
income to the extent that it is distributed to the qualified cooperative 
shareholder. A qualified cooperative is defined as any organization to 
which chapter 1, subchapter T, part 1 of the Code applies. See section 
1381(a).
    (ii) This special rule of section 923(a)(4) shall apply only if the 
distribution is made before the due date under section 6072(b), 
including extensions, for filing the FSC's income tax return for that 
year. Any distribution which satisfies this requirement will be treated 
as made on the last day of the

[[Page 53]]

FSC's taxable year. In addition, this special rule shall apply only if 
the income of the cooperative is based on arm's length transactions 
between the cooperative and its members or patrons.
    (iii) Income attributable to the marketing of agricultural or 
horticultural products, or the providing of related services, shall be 
allocated to the FSC shareholders on a per share basis. See 
Sec. 1.926(a)-1T(b) for ordering rules for distributions from a FSC.
    (3) Special rule for military property. (i) Under section 923(a)(5), 
the exempt foreign trade income of a FSC relating to the disposition of, 
or services relating to, military property shall be equal to 50 percent 
of the amount which, but for section 923(a)(5), would be treated as 
exempt foreign trade income under section 923(a)(2) or (3). The foreign 
trade income no longer treated as exempt because of this special rule of 
section 923(a)(5) will remain income of the FSC and will be treated as 
non-exempt foreign trade income.
    (ii) The term ``military property'' is defined in section 
995(b)(3)(B) and includes any property which is an arm, ammunition, or 
implement of war designated in the munitions list published pursuant to 
section 38 of the International Security Assistance and Arms Export 
Control Act of 1976 (22 U.S.C. 2778) (which repealed and replaced the 
Military Security Act of 1954).

[T.D. 8126, 52 FR 6438, Mar. 3, 1987]


<R05>
Sec. 1.924(a)-1T  Temporary regulations; definition of foreign trading gross receipts.

    (a) In general. The term ``foreign trading gross receipts'' means 
any of the five amounts described in paragraphs (b) through (f) of this 
section, except to the extent that any of the five amounts is an 
excluded receipt within the meaning of paragraph (g) of this section. 
These amounts will not be foreign trading gross receipts if the FSC is 
not managed outside the United States, pursuant to section 924(c), or if 
the economic processes with regard to a transaction, or group of 
transactions, that are required of a FSC by section 924(d) do not take 
place outside the United States. The requirement that these activities 
take place outside the United States does not apply to a small FSC. The 
activities required by sections 924 (c) and (d) may be performed either 
by the FSC or by any person (whether or not related to the FSC) acting 
under contract with the FSC for the performance of the required 
activities. Sections 1.924(c)-1 and 1.924(d)-1 provide rules to 
determine whether these requirements have been met. For purposes of this 
section--
    (1) FSC. All references to a FSC in this section mean a FSC, except 
when the context indicates that such term means a corporation in the 
process of meeting the conditions necessary for that corporation to 
become a FSC. All references to a FSC in this section shall include a 
small FSC unless indicated otherwise.
    (2) Sale and lease. The term ``sale'' includes an exchange or other 
disposition and the term ``lease'' includes a rental or a sublease. The 
term ``license'' includes a sublicense. All rules under this section 
applicable to leases of export property apply in the same manner to 
licenses of export property. See Sec. 1.927(a)-1T(f)(3) for a 
description of intangible property which cannot be export property.
    (3) Gross receipts. The term ``gross receipts'' is defined by 
section 927(b) and Sec. 1.927(b)-1T.
    (4) Export property. The term ``export property'' is defined by 
section 927(a) and Sec. 1.927(a)-1T.
    (5) Controlled group. The term ``controlled group'' is defined by 
paragraph (h) of this section.
    (6) Related supplier and related party. The terms related supplier 
and related party are defined by Sec. 1.927(d)-2T.
    (b) Sales of export property. Foreign trading gross receipts of a 
FSC include gross receipts from the sale of export property by the FSC, 
or by any principal for whom the FSC acts as a commission agent (whether 
or not the principal is a related supplier), pursuant to the terms of a 
contract entered into with a purchaser by the FSC or by the principal at 
any time or by any other person and assigned to the FSC or the principal 
at any time prior to the shipment of the property to the purchaser. Any 
agreement, oral or written, which constitutes a contract at law, 
satisfies the contractual requirements of this

[[Page 54]]

paragraph. Gross receipts from the sale of export property, whenever 
received, do not constitute foreign trading gross receipts unless the 
seller (or the corporation acting as commission agent for the seller) is 
a FSC at the time of the shipment of the property to the purchaser. For 
example, if a corporation which sells export property under the 
installment method is not a FSC for the taxable year in which the 
property is shipped to the purchaser, gross receipts from the sale do 
not constitute foreign trading gross receipts for any taxable year of 
the corporation.
    (c) Leases of export property--(1) In general. Foreign trading gross 
receipts of a FSC include gross receipts from the lease of export 
property provided that--
    (i) The property is held by the FSC (or by a principal for whom the 
FSC acts as commission agent with respect to the lease) either as an 
owner or lessee at the beginning of the term of the lease, and
    (ii) The FSC qualified (or was treated) as a FSC for its taxable 
year in which the term of the lease began.
    (2) Prepayment of lease receipts. If the gross receipts from a lease 
of export property are prepaid, then--
    (i) All the prepaid gross receipts are foreign trading gross 
receipts of a FSC if it is reasonably expected at the time of the 
prepayment that, throughout the term of the lease, the lease will meet 
the requirements of this paragraph and the property will be export 
property; or
    (ii) If it is reasonably expected at the time of the prepayment that 
the prepaid receipts would not be foreign trading gross receipts 
throughout the term of the lease if those receipts were not received as 
a prepayment, then only those prepaid receipts, for the taxable years of 
the FSC for which they would be foreign trading gross receipts, are 
foreign trading gross receipts. Thus, for example, if a lessee makes a 
prepayment of the first and last years' rent, and it is reasonably 
expected that the leased property will be export property for the first 
half of the lease period but not the second half of such period, the 
amount of the prepayment which represents the first year's rent will be 
considered foreign trading gross receipts if it would otherwise qualify, 
whereas the amount of the prepayment which represents the last year's 
rent will not be considered foreign trading gross receipts.
    (d) Related and subsidiary services--(1) In general. Foreign trading 
gross receipts of a FSC include gross receipts from services furnished 
by the FSC which are related and subsidiary to any sale or lease (as 
described in paragraph (b) or (c) of this section) of export property by 
the FSC or with respect to which the FSC acts as a commission agent, 
provided that the FSC derives foreign trading gross receipts from the 
sale or lease. The services may be performed within or without the 
United States.
    (2) Services furnished by the FSC. Services are considered to be 
furnished by a FSC for purposes of this paragraph if the services are 
provided by--
    (i) The person who sold or leased the export property to which the 
services are related and subsidiary, provided that the FSC acts as a 
commission agent with respect to the sale or lease of the property and 
with respect to the services,
    (ii) The FSC as principal, or any other person pursuant to a 
contract with the FSC, provided the FSC acted as principal or commission 
agent with respect to the sale or lease of the property, or
    (iii) A member of the same controlled group as the FSC if the sale 
or lease of the export property is made by another member of the 
controlled group provided, however, that the FSC acts as principal or 
commission agent with respect to the sale or lease and as commission 
agent with respect to the services.
    (3) Related services. Services which may be related to a sale or 
lease of export property include but are not limited to warranty 
service, maintenance service, repair service, and installation service. 
Transportation (including insurance related to such transportation) will 
be related to a sale or lease of export property, if the cost of the 
transportation is included in the sale price or rental of the property 
or, if the cost is separately stated, is paid by the FSC (or its 
principal) which sold or leased the property to the person furnishing

[[Page 55]]

the transportation service. Financing or the obtaining of financing for 
a sale or lease is not a related service for purposes of this paragraph. 
A service is related to a sale or lease of export property if--
    (i) The service is of the type customarily and usually furnished 
with the type of transaction in the trade or business in which the sale 
or lease arose, and
    (ii) The contract to furnish the service--
    (A) Is expressly provided for in or is provided for by implied 
warranty under the contract of sale or lease,
    (B) Is entered into on or before the date which is 2 years after the 
date on which the contract under which the sale or lease was entered 
into, provided that the person described in paragraph (d)(2) of this 
section which is to furnish the service delivers to the purchaser or 
lessor a written offer or option to furnish the services on or before 
the date on which the first shipment of goods with respect to which the 
service is to be performed is delivered, or
    (C) Is a renewal of the services contract described in subdivisions 
(ii)(A) and (B) of this paragraph.
    (4) Subsidiary services--(i) In general. Services related to a sale 
or lease of export property are subsidiary to the sale or lease only if 
it is reasonably expected at the time of the sale or lease that the 
gross receipts from all related services furnished by the FSC (as 
defined in this paragraph (d)(2)) will not exceed 50 percent of the sum 
of the gross receipts from the sale or lease and the gross receipts from 
related services furnished by the FSC (as described in this paragraph 
(d)(2)). In the case of a sale, reasonable expectations at the time of 
the sale are based on the gross receipts from all related services which 
may reasonably be performed at any time before the end of the 10-year 
period following the date of the sale. In the case of a lease, 
reasonable expectations at the time of the lease are based on the gross 
receipts from all related services which may reasonably be performed at 
any time before the end of the term of the lease (determined without 
regard to renewal options).
    (ii) Allocation of gross receipts from services. In determining 
whether the services related to a sale or lease of export property are 
subsidiary to the sale or lease, the gross receipts to be treated as 
derived from the furnishing of services may not be less than the amount 
of gross receipts reasonably allocated to the services as determined 
under the facts and circumstances of each case without regard to 
whether--
    (A) The services are furnished under a separate contract or under 
the same contract pursuant to which the sale or lease occurs, or
    (B) The cost of the services is specified in the contract of sale or 
lease.
    (iii) Transactions involving more than one item of export property. 
If more than one item of export property is sold or leased in a single 
transaction pursuant to one contract, the total gross receipts from the 
transaction and the total gross receipts from all services related to 
the transaction are each taken into account in determining whether the 
services are subsidiary to the transaction. However, the provisions of 
this subdivision apply only if the items could be included in the same 
product line, as determined under Sec. 1.925(a)-1T(c)(8).
    (iv) Renewed service contracts. If under the terms of a contract for 
related services, the contract is renewable within 10 years after a sale 
of export property, or during the term of a lease of export property, 
related services to be performed under the renewed contract are 
subsidiary to the sale or lease if it is reasonably expected at the time 
of the renewal that the gross receipts from all related services which 
have been and which are to be furnished by the FSC (as described in 
paragraph (d)(2) of this section) will not exceed 50 percent of the sum 
of the gross receipts from the sale or lease and the gross receipts from 
related services furnished by the FSC (as so described). Reasonable 
expectations are determined as provided in subdivision (i) of this 
paragraph.
    (v) Parts used in services. If a services contract described in 
paragraph (d)(3) of this section provides for the furnishing of parts in 
connection with the furnishing of related services, gross receipts from 
the furnishing of the parts are not taken into account in determining 
whether under this paragraph

[[Page 56]]

(d)(4) the services are subsidiary. See paragraph (b) or (c) of this 
section to determine whether the gross receipts from the furnishing of 
parts constitute foreign trading gross receipts. See Sec. 1.927(a)-1T 
(c)(2) and (e)(3) for rules regarding the treatment of the parts with 
respect to the manufacture of export property and the foreign content of 
the property, respectively.
    (5) Relation to leases. If the gross receipts for services which are 
related and subsidiary to a lease of property have been prepaid at any 
time for all the services which are to be performed before the end of 
the term of the lease, then the rules in paragraph (c)(2) of this 
section (relating to prepayment of lease receipts) will determine 
whether prepaid services under this paragraph (d)(5) are foreign trading 
gross receipts. Thus, for example, if it is reasonably expected that 
leased property will be export property for the first year of the term 
of the lease but will not be export property for the second year of the 
term, prepaid gross receipts for related and subsidiary services to be 
furnished in the first year may be foreign trading gross receipts. 
However, any prepaid gross receipts for the services to be furnished in 
the second year cannot be foreign trading gross receipts.
    (6) Relation with export property determination. The determination 
as to whether gross receipts from the sale or lease of export property 
constitute foreign trading gross receipts does not depend upon whether 
services connected with the sale or lease are related and subsidiary to 
the sale or lease. Thus, for example, assume that a FSC receives gross 
receipts of $1,000 from the sale of export property and gross receipts 
of $1,100 from installation and maintenance services which are to be 
furnished by the FSC within 10 years after the sale and which are 
related to the sale. The $1,100 which the FSC receives for the services 
would not be foreign trading gross receipts since the gross receipts 
from the services exceed 50 percent of the sum of the gross receipts 
from the sale and the gross receipts from the related services furnished 
by the FSC. The $1,000 which the FSC receives from the sale of export 
property would, however, be foreign trading gross receipts if the sale 
met the requirements of paragraph (b) of this section.
    (e) Engineering and architectural services--(1) In general. Foreign 
trading gross receipts of a FSC include gross receipts from engineering 
services (as described in paragraph (e)(5) of this section) or 
architectural services (as described in paragraph (e)(6) of this 
section) furnished by such FSC (as described in paragraph (e)(7) of this 
section) for a construction project (as defined in paragraph (e)(8) of 
this section) located, or proposed for location, outside the United 
States. Such services may be performed within or without the United 
States.
    (2) Services included. Engineering and architectural services 
include feasibility studies for a proposed construction project whether 
or not such project is ultimately initiated.
    (3) Excluded services. Engineering and architectural services do not 
include--
    (i) Services connected with the exploration for oil or gas, or
    (ii) Technical assistance or know-how. For purposes of this 
paragraph, the term ``technical assistance or know-how'' includes 
activities or programs designed to enable business, commerce, industrial 
establishments, and governmental organizations to acquire or use 
scientific, architectural, or engineering information.
    (4) Other services. Receipts from the performance of construction 
activities other than engineering and architectural services constitute 
foreign trading gross receipts to the extent that the activities are 
related and subsidiary services (within the meaning of paragraph (d) of 
this section) with respect to a sale or lease of export property.
    (5) Engineering services. For purposes of this paragraph, 
engineering services in connection with any construction project (within 
the meaning of paragraph (e)(8) of this section) include any 
professional services requiring engineering education, training, and 
experience and the application of special knowledge of the mathematical, 
physical, or engineering sciences to those professional services as 
consultation, investigation, evaluation, planning, design, or 
responsible supervision of construction for the purpose of assuring

[[Page 57]]

compliance with plans, specifications, and design.
    (6) Architectural services. For purposes of this paragraph, 
architectural services include the offering or furnishing of any 
professional services such as consultation, planning, aesthetic and 
structural design, drawings and specifications, or responsible 
supervision of construction (for the purpose of assuring compliance with 
plans, specifications, and design) or erection, in connection with any 
construction project (within the meaning of paragraph (e)(8) of this 
section).
    (7) Definition of ``furnished by the FSC''. For purposes of this 
paragraph, the term ``furnished by the FSC'' means architectural and 
engineering services furnished:
    (i) By the FSC,
    (ii) By another person (whether or not that person is a United 
States person) pursuant to a contract entered into with the FSC at any 
time prior to the furnishing of the services, provided that the FSC acts 
as principal, or
    (iii) By another person (whether or not that person is a United 
States person) pursuant to a contract for the furnishing of the services 
entered into by, or assigned to, the person at any time, provided that 
the FSC acts as a commission agent for the furnishing of the services.
    (8) Definition of ``construction project''. For purposes of this 
paragraph, the term ``construction project'' includes the erection, 
expansion, or repair (but not including minor remodeling or minor 
repairs) of new or existing buildings or other physical facilities 
including, for example, roads, dams, canals, bridges, tunnels, railroad 
tracks, and pipelines. The term also includes site grading and 
improvement and installation of equipment necessary for the 
construction. Gross receipts from the sale or lease of construction 
equipment are not foreign trading gross receipts unless the equipment is 
export property.
    (f) Managerial services--(1) In general. Foreign trading gross 
receipts of a first FSC for its taxable year include gross receipts from 
the furnishing of managerial services provided for an unrelated FSC or 
unrelated interest charge DISC to aid the unrelated FSC or unrelated 
interest charge DISC in deriving foreign trading gross receipts or 
qualified export receipts, as the case may be, provided that at least 50 
percent of the first FSC's gross receipts for such year consists of 
foreign trading gross receipts derived from the sale or lease of export 
property and the furnishing of related and subsidiary services. For 
purposes of this paragraph, managerial services are considered furnished 
by a FSC if the services are provided--
    (i) By the first FSC,
    (ii) By another person (whether or not a United States person) 
pursuant to a contract entered into by that person with the first FSC at 
any time prior to the furnishing of the services, provided that the 
first FSC acts as principal with respect to the furnishing of the 
services, or
    (iii) By another person (whether or not a United States person) 
pursuant to a contract for the furnishing of services entered into at 
any time prior to the furnishing of the services provided that the first 
FSC acts as commission agent with respect to those services.
    (2) Definition of ``managerial services''. The term ``managerial 
services'' as used in this paragraph means activities relating to the 
operation of an unrelated FSC or an unrelated interest charge DISC which 
derives foreign trading gross receipts or qualified export receipts as 
the case may be from the sale or lease of export property and from the 
furnishing of services related and subsidiary to those sales or leases. 
The term includes staffing and operational services necessary to operate 
the unrelated FSC or unrelated interest charge DISC, but does not 
include legal, accounting, scientific, or technical services. Examples 
of managerial services are: conducting export market studies, making 
shipping arrangements, and contacting potential foreign purchasers.
    (3) Status of recipient of managerial services. Foreign trading 
gross receipts of a first FSC include receipts from the furnishing of 
managerial services during any taxable year of a recipient of such 
services if the recipient qualifies as a FSC or interest charge DISC for 
the taxable year. For purposes of this paragraph, a recipient is deemed 
to qualify as a FSC or interest charge

[[Page 58]]

DISC for its taxable year if the first FSC obtains from the recipient a 
copy of the recipient's election to be treated as a FSC or interest 
charge DISC together with the recipient's sworn statement that an 
election has been timely filed with the Internal Revenue Service Center. 
The recipient may mark out the names of its shareholders on a copy of 
its election to be treated as a FSC or interest charge DISC before 
submitting it to the first FSC. The copy of the election and the sworn 
statement of the recipient must be received by the first FSC within six 
months after the first FSC furnishes managerial services for the 
recipient. The copy of the election and the sworn statement of the 
recipient need not be obtained by the first FSC for subsequent taxable 
years of the recipient. A recipient of managerial services is not 
treated as a FSC or interest charge DISC with respect to the services 
performed during a taxable year for which the recipient does not qualify 
as a FSC or interest charge DISC if the first FSC performing such 
services does not believe or if a reasonable person would not believe 
(taking into account the furnishing FSC's managerial relationship with 
such recipient FSC or interest charge DISC) at the beginning of such 
taxable year that the recipient will qualify as a FSC or an interest 
charge DISC for such taxable year.
    (g) Excluded receipts--(1) In general. Notwithstanding the 
provisions of paragraphs (b) through (f) of this section, foreign 
trading gross receipts of a FSC do not include any of the six amounts 
described in paragraphs (g)(2) through (7) of this section.
    (2) Sales and leases of property for ultimate use in the United 
States. Property which is sold or leased for ultimate use in the United 
States does not constitute export property. See Sec. 1.927(a)-1T(d)(4) 
relating to determination of where the ultimate use of the property 
occurs. Thus, foreign trading gross receipts of a FSC described in 
paragraph (b) or (c) of this section do not include gross receipts of 
the FSC from the sale or lease of this property.
    (3) Sales or leases of export property and furnishing of services 
accomplished by subsidy. Foreign trading gross receipts of a FSC do not 
include gross receipts described in paragraphs (b) through (f) of this 
section if the sale or lease of export property or the furnishing of 
services is accomplished by a subsidy granted by the United States or 
any instrumentality thereof, see section 924(f)(1)(B). Subsidies covered 
by section 924(f)(1)(B) are listed in subdivisions (i) through (vi) of 
this paragraph.
    (i) The development loan program, or grants under the technical 
cooperation and development grants program of the Agency for 
International Development, or grants under the military assistance 
program administered by the Department of Defense, pursuant to the 
Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, as amended (22 U.S.C. 2151) unless the 
FSC shows to the satisfaction of the Commissioner that, under the 
conditions existing at the time of the sale (or at the time of lease or 
at the time the services were rendered), the purchaser (or lessor or 
recipient of the services) had a reasonable opportunity to purchase (or 
lease or contract for services) on competitive terms and from a seller 
(or lessor or performer of services) who was not a U.S. person, goods 
(or services) which were substantially identical to such property (or 
services) and which were not manufactured, produced, grown, or extracted 
in the United States (or performed by a U.S. person);
    (ii) The Public Law 480 program authorized under Title I of the 
Agricultural Trade Development and Assistance Act of 1954, as amended (7 
U.S.C. 1691, 1701-1714);
    (iii) The Export Payment program of the Commodity Credit Corporation 
authorized by sections 5 (d) and (f) of the Commodity Credit Corporation 
Charter Act, as amended (15 U.S.C. 714c (d) and (f));
    (iv) The section 32 export payment programs authorized by section 32 
of the Act of August 24, 1935, as amended (7 U.S.C. 612c);
    (v) The Export Sales program of Commodity Credit Corporation 
authorized by sections 5 (d) and (f) of the Commodity Credit Corporation 
Charter Act, as amended (15 U.S.C. 714c (d) and (f)), other than the 
GSM-4 program provided under 7 CFR part 1488, and section 407 of the 
Agricultural Act of 1949, as amended (7 U.S.C. 1427), for the

[[Page 59]]

purpose of disposing of surplus agricultural commodities and exporting 
or causing to be exported agricultural commodities; and
    (vi) The Foreign Military Sales direct credit program (22 U.S.C. 
2763) or the Foreign Military Sales loan guaranty program (22 U.S.C. 
2764) if--
    (A) The borrowing country is released from its contractual liability 
to repay the United States government with respect to those credits or 
guaranteed loans;
    (B) The repayment period exceeds twelve years; or
    (C) The interest rate charged is less than the market rate of 
interest as defined in 22 U.S.C. 2763(c)(2)(B);

unless the FSC shows to the satisfaction of the Commissioner that, under 
the conditions existing at the time of the sale, the purchaser had a 
reasonable opportunity to purchase, on competitive terms from a seller 
who was not a U.S. person, goods which were substantially identical to 
this property and which were not manufactured, produced, grown, or 
extracted in the United States. Information regarding whether an export 
is financed, in whole or in part, with funds derived from the programs 
identified in this subdivision may be obtained from the Comptroller, 
Defense Security Assistance Agency, Department of Defense, Washington, 
DC 20301.
    (4) Sales or leases of export property and furnishing of 
architectural or engineering services for use by the United States--(i) 
In general. Foreign trading gross receipts of a FSC do not include gross 
receipts described in paragraph (b), (c), or (e) of this section if a 
sale or lease of export property, or the furnishing of architectural or 
engineering services, is for use by the United States or an 
instrumentality thereof in any case in which any law or regulation 
requires in any manner the purchase or lease of property manufactured, 
produced, grown, or extracted in the United States or requires the use 
of architectural or engineering services performed by a United States 
person. See section 924(f)(1)(A)(ii). For example, a sale by a FSC of 
export property to the Department of Defense for use outside the United 
States would not produce foreign trading gross receipts for the FSC if 
the Department of Defense purchased the property from appropriated funds 
subject to either any provision of the Department of Defense Federal 
Acquisition Regulations Supplement (48 CFR chapter 2) or any 
appropriations act for the Department of Defense for the applicable year 
if the regulations or appropriations act requires that the items 
purchased must have been grown, reprocessed, reused, or produced in the 
United States. The Department of Defense's regulations do not require 
that items purchased by the Department for resale in post or base 
exchanges and commissary stores located on United States military 
installations in foreign countries be items grown, reprocessed, reused 
or produced in the United States. Therefore, receipts arising from the 
sale by a FSC to those post or base exchanges and commissary stores will 
not be excluded from the definition of foreign trading gross receipts by 
this paragraph (g)(4).
    (ii) Direct or indirect sales or leases. Any sale or lease of export 
property is for use by the United States or an instrumentality thereof 
if such property is sold or leased by a FSC (or by a principal for whom 
the FSC acts as commission agent) to--
    (A) A person who is a related person with respect to the FSC or such 
principal and who sells or leases the property for use by the United 
States or an instrumentality thereof, or
    (B) A person who is not a related person with respect to the FSC or 
such principal if, at the time of the sale or lease, there is an 
agreement or understanding that the property will be sold or leased for 
use by the United States or an instrumentality thereof (or if a 
reasonable person would have known at the time of the sale or lease that 
the property would be sold or leased for use by the United States or an 
instrumentality thereof) within 3 years after the sale or lease.
    (iii) Excluded programs. The provisions of subdivisions (4)(i) and 
(ii) of this paragraph do not apply in the case of a purchase by the 
United States or an instrumentality thereof if the purchase is pursuant 
to--
    (A) The Foreign Military Sales Act, as amended (22 U.S.C. 2751 et 
seq.), or a program under which the United States

[[Page 60]]

government purchases property for resale, on commercial terms, to a 
foreign government or agency or instrumentality thereof, or
    (B) A program (whether bilateral or multilateral) under which sales 
to the United States government are open to international competitive 
bidding.
    (5) Services. Foreign trading gross receipts of a FSC do not include 
gross receipts described in paragraph (d) of this section (concerning 
related and subsidiary services) if the services from which such gross 
receipts are derived are related and subsidiary to the sale or lease of 
property which results in excluded receipts under this paragraph.
    (6) Receipts within controlled group. (i) For purposes of the 
transfer pricing methods of section 925(a), gross receipts of a 
corporation do not constitute foreign trading gross receipts for any 
taxable year of the corporation if at the time of the sale, lease, or 
other transaction resulting in the gross receipts, the corporation and 
the person from whom the gross receipts are directly or indirectly 
derived (whether or not such corporation and such person are the same 
person) are members of the same controlled group, and either
    (A) The corporation and the person each qualifies as a FSC (or if 
related FSCs are commission agents of each party to the transaction) for 
its taxable year in which its receipts arise, or
    (B) With regard to sale transactions, a sale of export property to a 
FSC (or to a related person if the FSC is the commission agent of the 
related person) by a non-FSC within the same controlled group follows 
any sale of the export property to a FSC (or to a related person if the 
FSC is the commission agent of the related person) within the same 
controlled group if foreign trading gross receipts resulted from the 
sale. Thus for example, assume that R, S, X, and Y are members of the 
same controlled group and that X and Y are FSCs. If R sells property to 
S and pays X a commission relating to that sale and if S sells the same 
property to an unrelated foreign party and pays Y a commission relating 
to that sale, the receipts received by X from the sale of such property 
by R to S will be considered to be derived from Y, a FSC which is a 
member of the same controlled group as X, and thus will not result in 
foreign trading gross receipts to X. The receipts received by Y from the 
sale to an unrelated foreign party may, however, result in foreign 
trading gross receipts to Y. For another example, if R and S both assign 
the commissions to X, receipts derived from the sale from R to S will be 
considered to be derived from X acting as commission agent for S and 
will not result in foreign trading gross receipts to X. Receipts derived 
by X from the sale of property by S to an unrelated foreign party may, 
however, constitute foreign trading gross receipts.
    (ii) Section 1.927(a)-1T(f)(2) provides rules regarding property not 
constituting export property in certain cases where such property is 
leased to any corporation which is a member of the same controlled group 
as the lessor.
    (7) Factoring of receivables by a related supplier. If an account 
receivable arising with respect to export property is transferred to any 
person for an amount reflecting a discount from the selling price of the 
export property, then the gross receipts from the sale which are treated 
as foreign trading gross receipts for purposes of computing a FSC's 
profit under the administrative pricing methods of section 925(a)(1) and 
(2) shall be reduced by the amount of the discount. See Sec. 1.925(a)-
1T(f) Example 11 for illustration of how this special rule affects 
computation of combined taxable income of a FSC and its related 
supplier.
    (h) Definition of ``controlled group''. For purposes of sections 921 
through 927 and the regulations under those sections, the term 
``controlled group'' has the same meaning as is assigned to the term 
``controlled group of corporations'' by section 1563(a), except that (1) 
the phrase ``more than 50 percent'' is substituted for the phrase ``at 
least 80 percent'' each place the latter phrase appears in section 
1563(a), and (2) section 1563(b) shall not apply. Thus, for example, a 
foreign corporation subject to tax under section 882 may be a member of 
a controlled group. Furthermore, two or more corporations (including a 
foreign corporation) are members of a controlled group at any time such 
corporations

[[Page 61]]

meet the requirements of section 1563(a) (as modified by this 
paragraph).
    (i) FSC's entitlement to income--(1) Application of administrative 
pricing rules of section 925(a). A corporation which meets the 
requirements of section 922(a) (or section 922(b) if the corporation 
elects small FSC status) and Sec. 1.921-2(a) (Q&A1) to be treated as a 
FSC (or small FSC) for a taxable year is entitled to income, and the 
administrative pricing rules of section 925(a)(1) or (2) apply, in the 
case of any transaction described in Sec. 1.925(a)-1T(b)(iii) between 
the FSC and its related supplier (as defined in Sec. 1.927(d)-2T(a)) as 
long as the FSC, or someone under contract to it, satisfies the 
requirements of section 925(c). The requirements of section 925(c) must 
be met by a commission FSC as well as by a  buy-sell FSC.  See 
Sec. 1.925 (a)-1T(a)(3)(i) and (b)(2)(ii).
    (2) Other transactions. In the case of a transaction to which the 
provisions of paragraph (i)(1) of this section do not apply but from 
which a FSC derives gross receipts, the income to which the FSC is 
entitled as a result of the transaction is determined pursuant to the 
terms of the contract for the transaction and, if applicable, section 
482 and the regulations under that section. For applicability of the 
section 482 transfer pricing method, see Sec. 1.925(a)-1T (a)(3)(ii) and 
(b)(2)(i).
    (j) Small FSC limitation--(1) In general. Under section 
924(b)(2)(B), in determining exempt foreign trade income of a small FSC, 
the foreign trading gross receipts of the small FSC for the taxable year 
which exceed $5 million are not taken into account. The foreign trading 
gross receipts of the small FSC not taken into account for purposes of 
computing the small FSC's exempt foreign trade income shall be taken 
into account in computing the small FSC's non-exempt foreign trade 
income. If the foreign trading gross receipts of the small FSC exceed 
the $5 million limitation, the small FSC may select the gross receipts 
to which the limitation is allocated. See section 922(b) and Sec. 1.921-
2(b) (Q&A3) for a definition of a small FSC.
    (2) Members of a controlled group limited to one $5 million amount--
(i) General rule. All small FSCs which are members of a controlled group 
on a December 31, shall, for their taxable years which include that 
December 31, be limited to one $5 million amount. The $5 million amount 
shall be allocated equally among the member small FSCs of the controlled 
group for their taxable years including that December 31, unless all of 
the member small FSCs consent to an apportionment plan providing for an 
unequal allocation of the $5 million amount. The apportionment plan 
shall provide for the apportionment of a fixed dollar amount to one or 
more of the corporations, and the sum of the amounts so apportioned 
shall not exceed the $5 million amount. If the taxable year including 
the December 31 of any member small FSC is a short period (as defined in 
section 443), the portion of the $5 million amount allocated to that 
member small FSC for that short period under the preceding sentence 
shall be reduced to the amount which bears the same ratio to the amount 
so allocated as the number of days in such short period bears to 365. 
The consent of each member small FSC to the apportionment plan for the 
taxable year shall be signified by a statement which satisfies the 
requirements of and is filed in the manner specified in Sec. 1.1561-
3(b). An apportionment plan may be amended in the manner prescribed in 
Sec. 1.1561-3(c), except that an original or an amended plan may not be 
adopted with respect to a particular December 31 if at the time the 
original or amended plan is sought to be adopted, less than 12 full 
months remain in the statutory period (including extensions) for the 
assessment of a deficiency against any shareholder of a member small FSC 
the tax liability of which would change by the adoption of the original 
or amended plan. If less than 12 full months of the period remain with 
respect to any such shareholder, the director of the service center with 
which the shareholder files its income tax return will, upon request, 
enter into an agreement extending the statutory period for the limited 
purpose of assessing any deficiency against that shareholder 
attributable to the adoption of the original or amended apportionment 
plan.

[[Page 62]]

    (ii) Membership determined under section 1563(b). For purposes of 
this paragraph (j)(2), the determination of whether a small FSC is a 
member of a controlled group of corporations with respect to any taxable 
year shall be made in the manner prescribed in section 1563(b) and the 
regulations under that section.
    (iii) Certain short taxable years--(A) General rule. If a small FSC 
has a short period (as defined in section 443) which does not include a 
December 31, and that small FSC is a member of a controlled group of 
corporations which includes one or more other small FSC's with respect 
to the short period, then the amount described in section 924(b)(2)(B) 
with respect to the short period of that small FSC shall be determined 
by--
    (1) Dividing $5 million by the number of small FSCs which are 
members of that group on the last day of the short period, and
    (2) Multiplying the result by a fraction, the numerator of which is 
the number of days in the short period and the denominator of which is 
365.
For purposes of the preceding sentence, section 1563(b) shall be applied 
as if the last day of the short period were substituted for December 31. 
Except as provided in subdivision (2)(iii)(B) of this paragraph, the 
small FSC having a short period not including a December 31 may not 
enter into an apportionment plan with respect to the short period.
    (B) Exception. If the short period not including a December 31 of 
two or more small FSCs begins on the same date and ends on the same date 
and those small FSCs are members of the same controlled group, those 
small FSCs may enter into an apportionment plan for such short period in 
the manner provided in subdivision (2)(i) of this paragraph with respect 
to the combined amount allowed to each of those small FSCs under 
subdivision (2)(iii)(A) of this paragraph.

[T.D. 8126, 52 FR 6438, Mar. 3, 1987]


<R05>
Sec. 1.924(c)-1  Requirement that a FSC be managed outside the United States.

    (a) In general. Section 924(b)(1)(A) provides that a FSC shall be 
treated as having foreign trading gross receipts for the taxable year 
only if the management of the FSC during the year takes place outside 
the United States, as provided in section 924(c). Section 924(c) and 
this section set forth the management activities that must take place 
outside the United States in order to satisfy the requirement of section 
924(b)(1)(A). Paragraph (b) of this section provides rules for 
determining whether the requirements of section 924(c)(1) have been met. 
Section 924(c)(1) requires that all meetings of the board of directors 
of the FSC during the taxable year and all meetings of the shareholders 
of the FSC during the taxable year take place outside the United States. 
Paragraph (c) of this section provides rules for maintaining the FSC's 
principal bank account outside the United States as provided in section 
924(c)(2). Paragraph (d) of this section provides rules for 
disbursements required by section 924(c)(3) to be made from bank 
accounts of the FSC maintained outside the United States.
    (b) Meetings of board of directors and meetings of shareholders must 
be outside the United States. All meetings of the board of directors of 
the FSC and all meetings of the shareholders of the FSC that take place 
during a taxable year must take place outside the United States to meet 
the requirements of section 924(c)(1). Only meetings that are formally 
convened as meetings of the board of directors or as shareholder 
meetings will be taken into account in determining whether those 
requirements have been met. In addition, all such meetings must comply 
with the local laws of the foreign country or possession of the United 
States in which the FSC was created or organized. The local laws 
determine whether a meeting must be held, when and where it must be held 
(if it is held at all), who must be present, quorum requirements, use of 
proxies, and so on. Where the local law permits action by the board of 
directors or shareholders to be taken by written consent without a 
meeting, use of such procedure will not constitute a meeting for 
purposes of section 924(c)(1). Section 924(c)(1) and this section impose 
no other requirements except the requirement that meetings that are 
actually held

[[Page 63]]

take place outside the United States. If the participants in a meeting 
are not all physically present in the same location, the location of the 
meeting is determined by the location of the persons exercising a 
majority of the voting power (including proxies) participating in the 
meeting. For example, a FSC has five directors, and is organized in 
country A. Country A's law requires that a majority of the directors of 
a corporation must participate in a meeting to constitute a quorum (and, 
thus, a meeting), but there is no requirement that the meeting be held 
in country A or that the directors must be physically present to 
participate. One director is in country A, another director is in 
country B, and a third director is in the United States.
    These three directors convene a meeting by telephone that 
constitutes a meeting under the law of country A. The meeting occurs 
outside the United States because the persons exercising a majority of 
the voting power participating in the meeting are located outside the 
United States.
    (c) Maintenance of the principal bank account outside the United 
States--(1) In general. For purposes of section 924(c), the bank account 
that shall be regarded as the principal bank account of a FSC is the 
bank account from which the disbursements described in paragraph (d) of 
this section are made. A FSC may have more than one principal bank 
account. The bank account that is regarded as the principal bank account 
must be maintained in a foreign country which meets the requirements of 
section 927(e)(3), or in any possession of the United States (as defined 
in section 927(d)(5)), and it must be so maintained at all times during 
the taxable year. For taxable years beginning on or after February 19, 
1987, a principal bank account or accounts must be designated on the 
annual return of the FSC by providing the bank name(s) and account 
number(s).
    (2) Maintenance of the account in a bank. The bank account that is 
regarded as the principal bank account must be maintained in an 
institution that is engaged in the conduct of a banking, financing, or 
similar business, as defined in Sec. 1.954-2(d)(2)(ii) (without regard 
to whether it is a controlled foreign corporation). The institution may 
be a U.S. bank, provided that the account is maintained in a branch 
outside the United States.
    (3) Maintenance of an account outside the United States. Maintenance 
of the principal bank account outside the United States means that the 
account regarded as the principal bank account must be an account 
maintained on the books of the banking institution at an office outside 
the United States, but does not require that access to the account may 
be made only outside the United States. Instructions providing for 
deposits into or disbursements from the account may originate in the 
United States without affecting the status of maintenance of the account 
outside the United States.
    (4) Maintenance of the account at all times during the taxable year. 
The term ``at all times during the taxable year'' generally means for 
each day of the taxable year. In the case of a newly created or 
organized corporation, thirty days may elapse between the effective date 
of the corporation's election to be treated as a FSC and the date a bank 
account is opened without causing the FSC to fail the requirement that 
it maintain its principal bank account outside the United States at all 
times during the taxable year. For example, if a corporation is created 
or organized prior to January 1, 1985, and makes an election to be 
treated as a FSC within the first 90 days of 1985, the election is 
effective as of January 1, 1985. Thus, the FSC must open a bank account 
within 30 days of January 1, or as of January 31, 1985, to satisfy this 
requirement. Also, a FSC shall be treated as satisfying this requirement 
if the account that is regarded as its principal bank account is 
terminated during the taxable year, provided that (i) such termination 
is the result of circumstances beyond the FSC's control, and (ii) the 
FSC establishes a new principal bank account within thirty days after 
such termination. A FSC may close its principal bank account and replace 
it with another account that qualifies under this paragraph (c) as a 
principal bank account at any time provided that no lapse of time occurs 
between the closing of the principal

[[Page 64]]

bank account and the opening of the replacement account.
    (5) Other accounts. The FSC may maintain other bank accounts in 
addition to its principal bank account. Such other accounts may be 
located anywhere, without limitation. The mere existence of such other 
accounts will not cause the FSC to fail to satisfy the requirements of 
section 924(c).
    (d) Disbursement of dividends, legal and accounting fees, and 
salaries of officers and directors out of the principal bank account of 
the FSC--(1) In general. All dividends, legal fees, accounting fees, 
salaries of officers of the FSC, and salaries or fees paid to members of 
the board of directors of the FSC that are disbursed during the taxable 
year must be disbursed out of bank account(s) of the FSC maintained 
outside the United States. Such an account is treated as the principal 
bank account of the FSC for purposes of section 924(c). Dividends, 
however, may be netted against amounts owed to the FSC (e.g., 
commissions) by a related supplier through book entries. If the FSC 
regularly disburses its legal or accounting fees, salaries of officers, 
and salaries or fees of directors out of its principal bank account, the 
occasional, inadvertent payment by mistake of fact or law of such 
amounts out of another bank account will not be considered a 
disbursement by the FSC if, upon determination that such payment was 
made from another account, reimbursement to such other account is made 
from the principal bank account of the FSC within a reasonable period 
from the date of the determination. Disbursement out of the principal 
bank account of the FSC may be made by transferring funds from the 
principal bank account to a U.S. account of the FSC provided that (i) 
the payment of the dividends, salaries or fees to the recipients is made 
within 12 months of the transfer, (ii) the purpose of the expenditures 
is designated and, (iii) the payment of the dividends, salaries or fees 
is actually made out of the same U.S. account that received the 
disbursement from the principal bank account.
    (2) Reimbursement. Legal or accounting fees, salaries of officers, 
and salaries or fees of directors that are paid by a related person 
wholly or partially on behalf of a FSC must be reimbursed by the FSC. 
The amounts paid by the related person are not considered disbursed by 
the FSC until the related person is reimbursed by the FSC. The related 
person must be reimbursed no later than the last date prescribed for 
filing the FSC's tax return (including extensions) for the taxable year 
to which the reimbursement relates. Any reimbursement for amounts paid 
on behalf of the FSC must be disbursed out of the FSC's principal bank 
account (and not netted against any obligation owed by the related 
person to the FSC), as set forth in paragraph (c) of this section. To 
determine the amounts paid on behalf of the FSC, the FSC may rely upon a 
written statement or invoice furnished to it by the related person which 
shows the following:
    (i) The actual fees charged for performing the legal or accounting 
services for the FSC or, if such fees cannot be ascertained by the 
related person, a good faith estimate thereof, and the actual salaries 
or fees paid for services as officers and directors of the FSC, and
    (ii) The person who performed or provided the services.
    (3) Good faith exception. If, after the FSC has filed its tax 
return, a determination is made by the Commissioner that all or a part 
of the legal or accounting fees, salaries of officers, and salaries or 
fees of directors of the FSC were paid by a related person without 
receiving reimbursement, the FSC may, nonetheless, satisfy the 
requirements of section 924(c)(3) if the fees and salaries were paid by 
the related person in good faith, and the FSC reimburses the related 
person for the fees and salaries paid within 90 days after the 
determination. The reimbursement shall be treated as made as of the end 
of the taxable year of the FSC for which the reimbursement is made.
    (4) Dividends--(i) Definition. For purposes of section 924(c) and 
this section only, the term ``dividends'' refers solely to cash 
dividends (including a dividend paid in a foreign functional currency) 
actually paid pursuant to a declaration or authorization by the FSC. 
Accordingly, a ``dividend'' will not include a constructive dividend 
that is deemed to be paid (regardless of the source of such constructive 
dividend)

[[Page 65]]

or a distribution of property that is a dividend under section 316 other 
than a distribution of U.S. dollars or a foreign functional currency.
    (ii) Offset accounting entries. Payment of dividends by the FSC to 
its related supplier may be in the form of an accounting entry 
offsetting an amount payable to the related supplier for the dividend 
against an existing debt owed to the FSC. The offset accounting entries 
must be clearly identified in the books of account of both the related 
supplier and the FSC.
    (5) Legal and accounting fees. For purposes of this section, legal 
and accounting fees do not include salaries paid to legal and accounting 
employees of the FSC (or a related person). Legal and accounting fees 
are limited to fees paid to independent persons performing legal or 
accounting services for or with respect to the FSC.
    (6) Salaries of officers and directors. For purposes of this 
section, salaries of officers and salaries or fees of directors are only 
those salaries or fees paid for services as officers or directors of the 
FSC. Salaries do not include reimbursed travel and entertainment 
expenses. If an individual officer, director, or employee of a related 
person is also an officer or director of a FSC and receives additional 
compensation for services performed for the FSC, the portion of the 
compensation paid to the individual which is for services performed for 
the FSC is required to be disbursed out of the FSC's principal bank 
account. For purposes of this section, the term ``compensation'' is 
defined as set forth in paragraphs (d)(1) and (2) of Sec. 1.415-2.

[T.D. 8125, 52 FR 5089, Feb. 19, 1987]


<R05>
Sec. 1.924(d)-1  Requirement that economic processes take place outside the United States.

    (a) In general. Section 924(b)(1)(B) provides that a FSC has foreign 
trading gross receipts from any transaction only if economic processes 
with respect to such transaction take place outside the United States as 
provided in section 924(d). Section 924(d) and this section set forth 
the rules for determining whether a sufficient amount of the economic 
processes of a transaction take place outside the United States. 
Generally, a transaction will qualify if the FSC satisfies two different 
requirements: Participation outside the United States in the sales 
portion of the transaction, and satisfaction of either the 50-percent or 
the 85-percent foreign direct cost test. The activities comprising these 
economic processes may be performed by the FSC or by any other person 
acting under contract with the FSC. (All references to ``FSC'' in 
Secs. 1.924(d)-1 and 1.924(e)-1 shall mean the FSC or, if applicable, 
the person performing the relevant activity under contract on behalf of 
the FSC.) The FSC may act upon standing instructions from another person 
in the performance of any activity, whether a sales activity under 
paragraph (c) of this section or an activity relating to the disposition 
of export property under paragraph (d) of this section and 
Sec. 1.924(e)-1. The identity of the FSC as a separate entity is not 
required to be disclosed in the performance of any of the activities 
comprising the economic processes. Except as otherwise provided, the 
location of any activity is determined by the place where the activity 
is initiated by the FSC, and not by the location of any person 
transmitting instructions to the FSC.
    (b) Activities performed by another person--(1) In general. Any 
person, whether domestic or foreign, and whether related or unrelated to 
the FSC, may perform any activity required to satisfy this section, 
provided that the activity is performed pursuant to a contract for the 
performance of that activity on behalf of the FSC. Such a contract may 
be any oral or written agreement which constitutes a contract at law. 
The person performing the activity is not required to enter into a 
contract directly with the FSC and, thus, may be a direct or indirect 
subcontractor of a person under contract with the FSC. For example, 
assume that a buy-sell FSC enters into an agreement with its related 
supplier in which the related supplier agrees to perform on behalf of 
the FSC all sales activities with respect to the FSC's transactions with 
its foreign customers. Through its existing agreements with a domestic 
unrelated person, the related supplier subcontracts the performance of 
these activities to the domestic unrelated

[[Page 66]]

person, who, in turn, subcontracts the performance of the sales 
activities to foreign sales agents. The sales activities performed by 
the foreign sales agents are considered to be performed on behalf of the 
FSC for purposes of meeting the requirements of section 924(d)(1)(A).
    (2) Proof of compliance. If the FSC does not perform the activity 
itself, it must maintain records adequate to establish, with respect to 
each transaction or group of transactions, that the activity was 
performed and that the performance of such activity took place outside 
the United States. If the person who performed the activity on behalf of 
the FSC is an independent contractor, the FSC may rely upon a written 
declaration from that person stating that the activities were performed 
by that person on behalf of the FSC, and were performed outside the 
United States. An invoice or a receipt for payment will be considered to 
be such a written declaration if it specifies that the activities were 
performed outside the United States or specifies a particular place 
outside the United States where the activities were performed. If the 
person performing the activities on behalf of the FSC is a related 
person, the FSC must maintain records adequate to establish that the 
activities were actually performed and where the activities were 
performed. Such records may be stored with the related person provided 
that the FSC makes such records available to the Commissioner upon 
request.
    (c) Participation outside the United States in the sales portion of 
the transaction--(1) In general. The requirement of section 924(d)(1)(A) 
is met with respect to the gross receipts of a FSC derived from any 
transaction if the FSC has participated outside the United States in the 
solicitation, the negotiation, or the making of the contract relating to 
such transaction (hereinafter described as ``sales activities''), as 
provided in this paragraph (c). A sale need not occur in order that the 
solicitation or negotiation tests be satisfied. Once the FSC has 
participated outside the United States in an activity that constitutes 
the solicitation, negotiation, or the making of the contract with 
respect to a transaction, any prior or subsequent activity by the FSC 
with respect to such transaction that would otherwise constitute the 
sales activity will be disregarded for purposes of determining whether 
the FSC has met the requirements of section 924(d)(1)(A). For example, 
if a FSC sells a product to a foreign customer by first meeting with the 
customer in New York to discuss the product and then by mailing to it 
from outside the United States a brochure describing the product, the 
prior meeting is disregarded and only the mailing is considered in 
determining whether there was solicitation outside the United States by 
the FSC with respect to the transaction which has occurred.
    (2) Solicitation (other than advertising). For purposes of this 
paragraph (c), ``solicitation'' refers to any communication (by any 
method, including, but not limited to, telephone, telegraph, mail, or in 
person) by the FSC, at any time during the 12 month period (measured 
from the date the communication is mailed or transmitted) immediately 
preceding the execution of a contract relating to the transaction to a 
specific, targeted customer or potential customer, that specifically 
addresses the customer's attention to the product or service which is 
the subject of the transaction. For purposes of paragraph (c)(2) of this 
section, communication by mail means depositing the communication in a 
mailbox. Except as provided in Sec. 1.924(e)-1(a)(1) with respect to 
second mailings, activities that would otherwise constitute advertising 
(such as sending sales literature to a customer or potential customer) 
will be considered solicitation if the activities are directed at a 
specific, targeted customer or potential customer, and the costs of the 
activity are not taken into account as advertising under the foreign 
direct cost tests. Activities that would otherwise constitute sales 
promotion (such as a promotional meeting in person with a customer) will 
be considered to be solicitation if the activities are directed at a 
specific, targeted customer or potential customer, and the costs of the 
activity are not taken into account as sales promotion under the foreign 
direct cost tests. Except as provided in Sec. 1.924(e)-1(a)(1) with 
respect to second

[[Page 67]]

mailings, the same or similar activities cannot be considered both 
solicitation and advertising, or both solicitation and sales promotion, 
with respect to the same customer. Solicitation, however, may take place 
at the same time as, and in conjunction with, another sales activity. 
Additionally, it may take place with respect to any person, whether 
domestic or foreign, and whether or not related to the FSC.
    (3) Negotiation. For purposes of this paragraph (c), ``negotiation'' 
refers to any communication by the FSC to a customer or potential 
customer aimed at an agreement on one or more of the terms of a 
transaction, including, but not limited to, price, credit terms, 
quantity, or time or manner of delivery. For purposes of this paragraph 
(c)(3), communication by mail has the same meaning as provided in 
paragraph (c)(2) of this section. Negotiation does not include the mere 
receipt of a communication from a customer (such as an order) that 
includes terms of a sale. Negotiation may take place at the same time 
as, and in conjunction with, another sales activity. Additionally, it 
may take place with respect to any person, whether domestic or foreign, 
and whether or not related to the FSC.
    (4) Making of a contract. For purposes of this paragraph (c), 
``making of a contract'' refers to performance by the FSC of any of the 
elements necessary to complete a sale, such as making an offer or 
accepting an offer. A requirements contract is considered an open offer 
to be accepted from time to time when the customer submits an order for 
a specified quantity. Thus, the acceptance of such an order will be 
considered the making of a contract. The written confirmation by the FSC 
to the customer of the acceptance of the open order will also be 
considered the making of a contract. Acceptance of an unsolicited bid or 
order is considered the ``making of a contract'' even if no solicitation 
or negotiation occurred with respect to the transaction. The written 
confirmation by the FSC to the customer of an oral or written agreement 
which confirms variable contract terms, such as price, credit terms, 
quantity, or time or manner of delivery, or specifies (directly or by 
cross-reference) additional contract terms will be considered the making 
of a contract. A written confirmation is any confirmation expressed in 
writing, including a telegram, telex, or other similar written 
communication. The making of a contract may take place at the same time 
as, and in conjunction with, another sales activity. Additionally, it 
may take place with respect to any person, whether domestic or foreign, 
and whether or not related to the FSC.
    (5) Grouping transactions. Generally, the sales activities under 
this paragraph (c) are to be applied on a transaction-by-transaction 
basis. By annual election of the FSC, however, any of the sales 
activities may be applied on the basis of a group as set forth in this 
paragraph (c)(5). Any groupings used must be supported by adequate 
documentation of performance of activities relating to the groupings 
used. An election by the FSC to group transactions must be made on its 
annual income tax return. The FSC, however, may amend its tax return to 
group in a manner different from that elected on its original return 
before the expiration of the statute of limitations.
    (i) Standards of groups. A determination by a FSC as to a grouping 
will be accepted by a district director if such determination conforms 
to any of the following standards:
    (A) Product or product line groupings. A product or product line 
grouping may be based upon either a recognized trade or industry usage, 
or upon a two digit major group (or on any inferior classification or 
combination of inferior classifications within a major group) of the 
Standard lndustrial Classification as prepared by the Statistical Policy 
Division of the Office of Management and Budget, Executive Office of the 
President. For taxable years beginning on or before February 19, 1987, 
any sales activity that is performed outside the United States with 
respect to any transaction covered by the product or product line 
grouping during the FSC's taxable year shall apply to all transactions 
covered by the product or product line. However, for taxable years 
beginning after February 19, 1987, the requirement of section 
924(d)(1)(A) is met with respect to all transactions covered by the 
product

[[Page 68]]

or product line grouping only if the sales activities are performed 
outside the United States with respect to customers with sales 
representing either:
    (i) 20 percent or more of the foreign trading gross receipts of the 
product or product line grouping during the current year or
    (ii) 50 percent or more of the foreign trading gross receipts of the 
product or product line grouping for the prior year irrespective of 
whether any sales occurred within the current year to the prior year 
customers.
If during the prior taxable year, the controlled group of which the FSC 
is a member had a DISC or interest charge DISC, the FSC may use the 50 
percent rule with respect to the preceding DISC or interest charge DISC 
year, substituting qualified export receipts for foreign trading gross 
receipts. A corporation which has not been treated in the prior year as 
a FSC, interest charge DISC, or DISC does not have to meet either the 20 
percent test or the 50 percent test for the first year in which it is 
treated as a FSC.
    (B) Customer groupings. A customer grouping includes all 
transactions of the FSC with a particular customer during the FSC's 
taxable year. Thus, any sales activity that is performed outside the 
United States with respect to any transaction with the customer during 
the taxable year shall apply to all transactions within the customer 
grouping.
    (C) Contract groupings. A contract grouping includes all 
transactions of the FSC under a particular contract for a taxable year. 
Thus, any sales activity that is performed outside the United States 
with respect to any transaction under the contract will apply to all 
transactions under the contract for such taxable year. For long-term 
contracts between unrelated parties, the sales activities tests need be 
satisfied only once for the life of the contract. With respect to 
requirements contracts and long-term contracts between related parties, 
the sales activities test must be satisfied annually.
    (D) Product or product line groupings within customer or contract 
groupings. Groupings may be based upon product or product line groupings 
within customer or contract groupings. If, however, the primary grouping 
is a customer or contract grouping, the 20 percent test set forth in 
subdivision (A) of this paragraph relating to product or product line 
grouping will not be applicable.
    (ii) Transactions included in a grouping. A choice by a FSC to group 
transactions shall generally apply to all transactions within the scope 
of that grouping. The choice of a grouping, however, applies only to 
transactions covered by the grouping and, for transactions not 
encompassed by the grouping, the determinations may be made on a 
transaction-by-transaction basis or other grouping basis. For example, a 
FSC may choose a product grouping with respect to one product and use 
the transaction-by-transaction method for another product within the 
same taxable year. In addition, if a FSC applies sales activity rules on 
the basis of other types of groupings, such as all sales to a particular 
customer, transactions included in those other groupings shall be 
excluded from product groupings.
    (iii) Different groupings allowed for different purposes. A choice 
by the FSC to group transactions may be made separately for each of the 
sales activities under section 924(d)(1)(A). Groupings used for purposes 
of section 924(d)(1)(A) will have no relationship to groupings used for 
other purposes, such as satisfying the foreign direct cost tests. This 
paragraph (c)(5) does not apply for purposes of section 925.
    (6) Examples. The provisions of this paragraph (c) may be 
illustrated by the following examples:

    Example 1. In November, a calendar year FSC mailed from its foreign 
office its catalog to a potential foreign customer. The catalog 
displayed numerous products along with a brief description and the price 
of each. In February of the following year, the FSC sold to the customer 
a product displayed in the catalog. Since the FSC communicated with the 
customer during the 12-month period prior to the sale, although during 
the previous taxable year, the FSC participated outside the United 
States in the solicitation relating to the transaction.
    Example 2. A FSC with a taxable year ending April 30, 1986, solicits 
customer X during that taxable year with respect to Product A. In the 
previous taxable year, the FSC sold product A to customers V, W, X, Y, 
Z, none of whom were customers in the taxable year

[[Page 69]]

ending April 30, 1986. The sales proceeds from sales to customer X 
represented 50 percent of the foreign trading gross receipts for the 
previous FSC year. The FSC meets the 50 percent test for product or 
product line grouping for the taxable year ending April 30, 1986. If the 
facts were changed so that there was not a FSC, DISC or interest charge 
DISC in the same controlled group in the previous taxable year, the 
single solicitation directed to any customer would qualify all 
transactions within the product group as meeting the solicitation 
requirement for that taxable year. For subsequent taxable years, the 50 
percent test or the 20 percent test would be applicable.
    Example 3. A FSC earns commissions on the sale of export property by 
its domestic related supplier to United States wholesalers for final 
sale to foreign customers. The related supplier receives an order from 
one of its United States wholesalers. The related supplier telephones 
the United States wholesaler to inform it of the new price and the 
probability of another price increase soon. The United States wholesaler 
orally agrees to the new price and the related supplier instructs the 
FSC to telex the wholesaler from its foreign office a confirmation that 
the product will be sold at the current new price. The written 
confirmation by the FSC of an oral agreement on a variable contract term 
constitutes the making of a contract. Thus, the requirements of section 
924(d)(1)(A) are met with respect to the transaction relating to the 
product.

    (d) Satisfaction of either the 50-percent or the 85-percent foreign 
direct cost test--(1) In general. Section 924(d)(1)(B) requires, in 
order for the gross receipts of a transaction to qualify as foreign 
trading gross receipts, that the foreign direct costs incurred by the 
FSC attributable to the transaction equal or exceed 50 percent of the 
total direct costs incurred by the FSC attributable to the transaction. 
The direct costs are those costs attributable to activities described in 
the five categories of section 924(e). Section 924(d)(2) provides that, 
instead of satisfying the 50-percent foreign direct cost test of section 
924(d)(1)(B), the FSC may incur foreign direct costs attributable to 
activities described in each of two of those categories that equal or 
exceed 85 percent of the total direct costs incurred by the FSC 
attributable to the activity described in each of the two categories. If 
no direct costs are incurred by the FSC in a particular category, that 
category shall not be taken into account for purposes of determining 
satisfaction of either the 50-percent or the 85-percent foreign direct 
cost test. If any amount of direct costs is incurred in a particular 
category, that category shall be taken into account for purposes of the 
foreign direct costs tests.
    (2) Direct costs--(i) Definition of direct costs. For purposes of 
section 924 (d), direct costs are those costs which are incident to and 
necessary for the performance of any activity described in section 
924(e). Direct costs include the cost of materials which are consumed in 
the performance of the activity, and the cost of labor which can be 
identified or associated directly with the performance of the activity 
(but only to the extent of wages, salaries, fees for professional 
services, and other amounts paid for personal services actually 
rendered, such as bonuses or compensation paid for services on the basis 
of a percentage of profits). Direct costs also include the allowable 
depreciation deduction for equipment or facilities (or the rental cost 
for use thereof) that can be specifically identified or associated with 
the activity, as well as the contract price of an activity performed on 
behalf of the FSC by a contractor. If costs of services or the use of 
facilities are only incidentally related to the performance of an 
activity described in section 924(e), only the incremental cost is 
considered to be identified directly with the activity. For example, 
supervisory, administrative, and general overhead expenses, such as 
telephone service, normally are not identified directly with particular 
activities described in section 924(e). The cost of a long distance 
telephone call made to arrange for delivery of export property, however, 
is identified directly with the activities described in section 
924(e)(2). Direct costs for purposes of section 924(d) do not 
necessarily include all of the expenses taken into account for purposes 
of determining the taxable income of the FSC or the combined taxable 
income of the FSC and its related supplier.
    (ii) Allocation of direct costs. For purposes of this section only, 
if costs are identified with more than one activity (whether or not all 
of the activities are described in section 924(e)), the portion of the 
costs attributable to each activity shall be determined by allocating

[[Page 70]]

the costs among the activities in any manner that is consistently 
applied and, if applicable, that reasonably reflects relative costs that 
would be incurred by performing each activity independently. If costs of 
an activity are attributable to more than one transaction or grouping of 
transactions, the portion of the costs attributable to each transaction 
or grouping shall be determined by allocating the costs among the 
transactions or groupings in any manner that is consistently applied 
and, if applicable, that reasonably reflects relative costs that would 
be incurred by performing the activity independently with respect to 
each transaction or grouping.
    (3) Total direct costs. The term ``total direct costs'' means all of 
the direct costs of any transaction attributable to activities described 
in any paragraph of section 924(e). For purposes of the 50-percent 
foreign direct cost test of section 924(d)(1)(B), total direct costs are 
determined based on the direct costs of all activities described in all 
of the paragraphs of section 924(e). For purposes of the 85-percent 
foreign direct cost test of section 924(d)(2), however, the total direct 
costs are determined separately for each paragraph of section 924(e). If 
more than one activity is included within a paragraph of section 924(e), 
direct costs must be incurred with respect to at least one activity 
listed in the paragraph. If costs are incurred with respect to more than 
one activity, all direct costs must be considered for purposes of 
satisfying the direct costs test.
    (4) Foreign direct costs. The term ``foreign direct costs'' means 
the portion of the total direct costs of any transaction which is 
attributable to activities performed outside the United States. For 
purposes of the 50-percent foreign direct cost test, foreign direct 
costs are determined based on the direct costs of all activities 
described in all of the paragraphs of section 924(e). For purposes of 
the 85-percent foreign direct cost test, however, foreign direct costs 
are determined separately for each paragraph of section 924(e).
    (5) Fifty percent foreign direct cost test. To satisfy the 
requirement of section 924(d)(1)(B), the foreign direct costs incurred 
by the FSC attributable to the transaction must equal or exceed 50 
percent of the total direct costs attributable to the transaction. This 
test looks to the cost of the activities described in section 924(e) on 
an aggregate basis; therefore, it is not necessary that the foreign 
direct costs of each activity, or of each paragraph of section 924(e), 
equal or exceed 50 percent of the total direct costs of that activity or 
paragraph.
    (6) Eighty-five percent foreign direct cost test--(i) General rule. 
To satisfy the requirement of section 924(d)(2), the foreign direct 
costs of a transaction incurred by the FSC attributable to activities 
described in each of at least two paragraphs of section 924(e) must 
equal or exceed 85 percent of the total direct costs attributable to 
activities described in that paragraph. This test looks to costs of the 
activities on a paragraph-by-paragraph basis (but not on an activity-by-
activity basis). As an example, the foreign direct costs of advertising 
and sales promotion are aggregated with each other for this purpose, but 
they are not aggregated with the foreign direct costs of transportation.
    (ii) Satisfaction of the 85-percent test. If, after the FSC files 
its tax return indicating that it has satisfied the 85-percent foreign 
direct cost test with respect to each of at least two paragraphs of 
subsection 924(e) and a determination is made by the Commissioner that 
the foreign direct costs attributable to one or both of the two 
paragraphs of section 924(e) specified on the return did not equal or 
exceed 85 percent of the total direct costs attributable to such 
activities, the FSC may, nonetheless, satisfy the 85-percent foreign 
direct cost test if the foreign direct costs attributable to any two 
paragraphs of section 924 (e) equal or exceed 85 percent of the total 
direct costs attributable to those other paragraphs.
    (e) Grouping transactions. Generally, the foreign direct cost tests 
under paragraph (d) of this section are to be applied on a transaction-
by-transaction basis. By annual election of the FSC, however, the 
foreign direct cost tests may be applied on a customer, contract or 
product or product line grouping basis. Any groupings used

[[Page 71]]

must be supported by adequate documentation of performance of activities 
and costs of activities relating to the groupings used. An election by 
the FSC to group transactions must be made on its annual income tax 
return. The FSC may, however, amend its tax return before the expiration 
of the statute of limitations under section 6501 of the Code to group in 
a manner different from that elected on its original return.
    (1) Standards for groupings. A determination by a FSC as to a 
grouping will be accepted by the district director if such determination 
conforms to any of the following standards:
    (i) Product or product line groupings. A product or product line 
grouping may be based either on a recognized trade or industry usage, or 
on a two digit major grouping (or on any inferior classification or 
combination of inferior classifications within a major grouping) of the 
Standard Industrial Classification as prepared by the Statistical Policy 
Division of the Office of Management and Budget, Executive Office of the 
President.
    (ii) Customer groupings. A customer grouping includes all 
transactions of the FSC with a particular customer during the FSC's 
taxable year.
    (iii) Contract groupings. A contract grouping includes all 
transactions of the FSC under a particular contract, including a 
requirements contract. The tests will be applied to all transactions 
within a contract grouping during each taxable year of the FSC; however, 
by election of the FSC, all transactions under a contract that occur in 
the first or the last year of the contract may be included with, 
respectively, the next succeeding or the immediately preceding taxable 
year in applying these tests. For example, if with respect to 
transactions during the first calendar year of a 5-year contract, a 
calendar year FSC incurs direct costs attributable to the transactions 
of $100X for advertising, all of which are foreign direct costs, and 
$10X for processing of customers orders and for arranging for delivery, 
$9X (or 90 percent of the total direct costs) of which are foreign 
direct costs, the FSC has satisfied the 85-percent foreign direct cost 
test with respect to those transactions for the taxable year. If with 
respect to transactions during the second year of the contract, the FSC 
only incurs $18X of direct costs for processing of customer orders and 
arranging for delivery, $15X (83.3 percent of the total direct costs) of 
which are foreign direct costs, the FSC may include the transactions 
from the first year of the contract to meet the 85-percent foreign 
direct cost test in the second taxable year. Thus, with respect to the 
transactions in the second year, the FSC satisfies the foreign direct 
costs test for advertising (because the entire $100X of direct costs are 
foreign direct costs) and for processing of customer orders and 
arranging for delivery (because of the $28X of direct costs, $24X or 
85.7 percent of the total direct costs are foreign direct costs). If, 
however, with respect to transactions in the third year, the FSC 
satisfies the foreign direct costs test, those transactions cannot be 
included with the transactions in the fourth year. The FSC may aggregate 
the direct costs in the fourth and fifth years in the same manner as for 
the first and second years as described above in order to satisfy the 85 
percent foreign direct costs test.
    (iv) Product or product line groupings within customer or contract 
groupings. Groupings may be based on product or product line groupings 
within customer or contract groupings.
    (2) Transactions included in a grouping. An election by the FSC to 
group transactions shall generally apply to all transactions within the 
scope of that grouping. The election of a grouping, however, applies 
only to transactions covered by the grouping and, as to transactions not 
encompassed by the grouping, the determinations may be made on a 
transaction-by-transaction basis or other grouping basis. For example, 
the FSC may elect a product grouping with respect to one product and 
elect the transaction-by-transaction method for another product within 
the same taxable year. In addition, if a FSC is permitted to apply 
either the 50-percent or the 85-percent foreign direct cost test on the 
basis of other types of groupings, such as all transactions with respect 
to a particular customer, transactions included in

[[Page 72]]

those other groupings shall be excluded from product groupings.
    (3) Different groupings allowed for different purposes. An election 
by the FSC to group transactions may be made separately for each of the 
activities relating to disposition of export property under section 
924(d)(1)(B) or section 924(d)(2). Groupings used for purposes of 
section 924 will have no bearing on groupings for other purposes. This 
paragraph (e) does not apply for purposes of section 925.
    (f) Exception for foreign military property--(1) General rule. The 
requirements of this section do not apply to any activities performed in 
connection with foreign military sales except those activities described 
in section 924(e). The FSC is deemed to have satisfied the requirements 
of section 924(d)(1)(A).
    (2) Example. The principles of paragraph (f)(1) of this section may 
be illustrated by the following example:

    Example. A FSC earns commissions on foreign military sales by its 
related supplier. All solicitation, negotiation, and contract making 
activities occur in the United States solely between the related 
supplier and the United States government. The property is delivered, 
title passes, and payment is made in the United States in accordance 
with standard United States government practices. The FSC incurs direct 
costs in the amount of $155X to process the government's orders and 
arrange for delivery of the goods, all of which are foreign direct 
costs. In addition, it incurs foreign direct costs in the amount of 
$250X for assembling and transmitting its final invoice to the 
government from outside the U.S. and foreign direct costs of $200X 
associated with receiving payment from the related supplier in 
accordance with the rules of Sec. 1.924(e)-1(d)(2)(iii). No other 
activities occur with respect to the foreign military sales. The FSC has 
satisfied the 85-percent foreign direct cost test and thus has foreign 
trading gross receipts with respect to the foreign military sales. The 
fact that the FSC did not participate outside the United States in any 
of the sales activities has no bearing on the qualification of the 
receipts since the FSC is deemed to have met the requirements of section 
924(d)(1)(A).

[T.D. 8125, 52 FR 5090, Feb. 19, 1987]


<R05>
Sec. 1.924(e)-1  Activities relating to the disposition of export property.

    (a) Advertising and sales promotion. For purposes of section 924(e), 
advertising and sales promotion are defined as follows.
    (1) Advertising--(i) Advertising defined--(A) General rule. 
Advertising means the announcement or description of property or 
services described in section 924(a), in some medium of mass 
communication (such as radio, television, newspaper, trade journals, 
mass mailings, or billboards), in order to induce multiple customers or 
potential customers to buy or rent the property or services from the FSC 
or related supplier. Advertising is not required to be directed to the 
general public, but may be focused toward any group of export customers 
or potential export customers. Advertising except for the advertising 
described in Sec. 1.924(e)-1(a)(1)(B) must describe one or more specific 
products or product lines (or services) and identify the product as a 
product offered by the FSC or related supplier. Advertising intended 
solely to build a favorable image of a company or group of companies is 
not included in this definition of advertising. Additionally, 
advertising primarily directed at customers or potential customers in 
the United States is not included in this definition of advertising, nor 
is advertising related to property or services not described in section 
924(a).
    (B) Special rules for sales to distributors. If the customer is a 
distributor (whether domestic or foreign, related or unrelated to the 
FSC), an expense that is incurred by the distributor and charged to the 
FSC or related supplier as a reduction in the purchase price or as a 
separate charge for an announcement or description described in 
paragraph (a)(1)(A) of this section to induce the distributor's 
customers, potential customers, or the ultimate users to buy or rent the 
property or services is advertising for these purposes (i) if the FSC 
incurs 20 percent or more of the total advertising costs of the 
distributor or (ii) if the FSC pays the total charge of an advertisement 
either directly or indirectly. For these purposes, a distributor is 
anyone other than an end user or a final consumer. A FSC may incur 
direct advertising costs to a foreign end consumer even though the FSC 
sells to a U.S. distributor.
    (ii) Direct costs of advertising. Direct costs of advertising 
include costs of

[[Page 73]]

transmitting, displaying, or distributing the advertising to customers 
or potential customers and the costs of printing in the case of sales 
literature, but do not include fees paid to an independent advertising 
agency to develop the announcement or description, translation costs, or 
costs of preparing the announcement or description for potential use as 
advertising. Direct costs of sending sales literature to customers or 
potential customers may be taken into account as advertising costs as 
long as the activity is not taken into account for purposes of the sales 
activity requirements of Sec. 1.924(d)-1(c).
    (iii) Location of advertising--(A) General rule. The location of 
advertising activity is the place to which the advertising is 
transmitted, displayed, distributed, mailed, or otherwise conveyed to 
the customers or potential customers (or in the case of advertising 
described in paragraph (a)(i)(B) of this section, the distributor's 
customers, or the ultimate users). For example, a television 
advertisement that is broadcast to a foreign country constitutes 
advertising activity outside the United States even though the broadcast 
signal originates in the United States. Therefore, the cost of that 
advertising activity is a foreign cost. The FSC may rely upon the 
distribution statistics of the publisher of print media or the 
broadcaster of broadcast media through which the advertising is 
distributed. If the distribution statistics show that 85 percent or more 
of the readership, radio listeners, or viewership are outside the United 
States, all direct costs of advertising are considered foreign direct 
costs of advertising.
    (B) Foreign editions of journals, magazines, etc. Costs related to 
advertising in foreign English editions of U.S. publications as well as 
advertising in any publication in a foreign language are foreign direct 
costs.
    (C) United States editions. Costs related to advertising in United 
States publications are not treated as direct costs even if the 
publication also has a foreign edition in English.
    (iv) Second mailings. In general, direct costs of sending sales 
literature to customers may be treated as solicitation or advertising, 
but not both. A distinction may be made, however, between a first and 
second mailing so that one may be treated as advertising and the other 
may be treated as solicitation. To qualify under this second mailing 
rule, the two mailings must be generically different items such as a 
price list and a description of the product itself. An amended price 
list would not be distinguishable from an original price list and would, 
therefore, not constitute a second mailing.
    (v) Examples. The principles of paragraph (a)(1) of this section may 
be illustrated by the following examples:

    Example 1. The related supplier, under contract with a buy-sell FSC 
to advertise export product D on the ``FSC's'' behalf to its foreign 
unrelated customers, engaged a French advertising agency to develop an 
advertising campaign to induce French customers to buy the product. As a 
part of the advertising campaign, the agency places a one-page 
advertisement in a relevant French trade journal. The advertisement 
constitutes advertising within the meaning of paragraph (a)(1) of this 
section.
    Example 2. A United States weekly magazine publishes, in addition to 
its United States edition, a Canadian edition in English and a Mexican 
edition in Spanish. A FSC incurs costs of $200 X for a one-page display 
in each of the three editions for a total advertising cost of $600 X. 
The $200 X cost relating to the advertising in the United States edition 
is not a direct cost because it relates to United States sales. The 
total costs of $400 X relating to advertising in the English language 
Canadian edition and the Spanish language Mexican edition are foreign 
direct costs.
    Example 3. A FSC earns commissions on the sale of export product E 
by its domestic related supplier to United States distributors for 
resale to Canadian retail customers. The related supplier, under 
contract with the FSC to advertise product E, pays an amount equal to 1 
percent of its annual gross receipts with respect to product E under a 
cooperative advertising arrangement with the distributor. The amount, 
which represents 20 percent of the total advertising costs for product 
E, is reimbursed by the FSC. The 20-percent amount represents a 
significant portion of the total advertising costs and thus constitutes 
advertising within the meaning of paragraph (a)(1)(i) of this section.
    Example 4. A FSC mails two items to each customer on its customer 
list within one taxable year. The first mailing consists of a price list 
which merely lists the various products by name and provides a price 
next to each product name. The second mailing consists of a brochure 
which fully describes

[[Page 74]]

and illustrates each product. The two mailings are generically 
different. Therefore, one mailing may be counted as advertising while 
the other mailing may be counted as solicitation.

    (2) Sales promotion--(i) Sales promotion defined. Sales promotion 
means an appeal made in person to an export customer or potential export 
customer for the sale or rental of property or services described in 
section 924(a), made in the context of a trade show or customer meeting. 
A customer meeting means a periodic meeting (e.g., quarterly, semi-
annual, or annual) in which 10 or more customers or potential customers 
are reasonably expected to attend. However, for taxable years beginning 
before February 19, 1987, a customer meeting may, at the option of the 
taxpayer, mean any meeting with a customer or potential customer 
regardless of the frequency of the meetings or the number of customers 
or potential customers in attendance. A meeting, show or event in the 
United States that is primarily aimed at the export of goods or services 
described in section 924(a) constitutes sales promotion. Sales promotion 
does not include an appeal made in the context of any meeting, show or 
event primarily aimed at U.S. customers or an appeal for the sale or 
rental of property or services not described in section 924(a). Whether 
any meeting, show or event is primarily aimed at U.S. customers or at 
the export of goods or services described in section 924(a) shall be 
determined by all of the facts and circumstances including the announced 
objective of the meeting, show or event; the attendees; the location of 
the meeting, show or event; and the product or special feature of the 
product.
    (ii) Direct costs of sales promotion. Direct costs of sales 
promotion include costs such as rental of space at trade shows, payments 
to organizers or other persons hired for the event, rental of display 
equipment and decorations for the event, and costs of maintaining a 
showroom. Direct costs of sales promotion also include costs for travel, 
meals, and lodging for direct sales people attending the event if these 
costs are paid by the FSC or related supplier. In the case of a customer 
meeting, direct costs of sales promotion include the costs of materials 
printed specifically for the meeting and the costs of travel, lodging, 
and food for both the direct sales people and customers or potential 
customers attending the meeting. Direct costs of sales promotion do not 
include the cost of salaries and commissions of direct sales people or 
the cost of discount coupons, samples of the product, or printed 
advertising materials that are used for general advertising as well as 
sales promotion.
    (iii) Location of sales promotion. The location of sales promotion 
activity is the place where the trade show or customer meeting is held.
    (iv) Examples. The principles of paragraph (a)(2)(i) of this section 
may be illustrated by the following examples:

    Example 1. The related supplier sells various export products 
described in section 924(a) to its foreign customers. As a commission 
agent for the related supplier with respect to such sales, the FSC 
performs sales promotion. It contracts with the related supplier to 
serve as its agent for such purposes. To stimulate the sale of its 
export products, the related supplier conducts semi-annual meetings with 
the purchasing agents of its customers at its Kansas City headquarters. 
Ten or more purchasing agents are reasonably expected to attend each 
meeting. At such meetings, the purchasing agents see the related 
supplier's manufacturing facilities, visit with its executives, attend 
technical updates, and see new export products. These semi-annual 
customer meetings constitute sales promotion within the meaning of 
paragraph (a)(2)(i) of this section. Direct costs incurred with respect 
to the customer meetings are U.S. direct costs because the sales 
promotion activities occur within the United States.
    Example 2. Assume the same facts as in Example 1, except that the 
related supplier exhibits products that only operate on 220 volts at a 
trade show in the United States. According to the trade show sponsors, 
the purpose of the show is to increase sales abroad of United States-
manufactured products. Since the products exhibited are designed for 
operation in foreign countries and the purpose of the trade show is to 
boost sales in those countries, the trade show held in the United States 
is primarily aimed at the export products described in section 924(a) 
and not at United States customers. Thus, the trade show constitutes 
sales promotion within the meaning of paragraph (a)(2)(i) of this 
section and the direct costs incurred in connection

[[Page 75]]

with the trade show are treated as United States direct costs.

    (b) Processing of customer orders and arranging for delivery of the 
export property. For purposes of section 924(e), the processing of 
customer orders and the arranging for delivery of the export property 
are defined in paragraph (b)(1) and paragraph (b)(2), respectively, of 
this section. For taxable years beginning after February 19, 1987, if 
the FSC performs the activities of processing of customer orders and 
arranging for delivery of the export property and elects to group its 
transactions, it is considered to have performed the activities with 
respect to all transactions in the grouping elected by the FSC under 
Sec. 1.924(d)-1(e) during the taxable year if it performs the activities 
of processing of customer orders and arranging for delivery of the 
export property with respect to customers generating 20 percent or more 
of foreign trading gross receipts within the elected grouping.
    (1) Processing of customer orders--(i) Processing of customer orders 
defined. The processing of customer orders means notification by the FSC 
to the related supplier of the order and of the requirements for 
delivery. The related supplier may have independent knowledge of the 
order and requirements for delivery. If the FSC does not have a related 
supplier, the processing of customer orders means communication with the 
customer by any method such as telephone, telegram, or mail to 
acknowledge receipt of the order and requirements for delivery. Once the 
related supplier has been notified by the FSC, or the customer has 
received an acknowledgement from the FSC, of the order and requirements 
for delivery, subsequent or prior communications with respect to an 
order (such as changes in quantity or prospective delivery date) are not 
included in the definition of processing of customer orders.
    (ii) Direct costs of processing customer orders. Direct costs of 
processing of customer orders include salaries of clerical personnel and 
costs of telephone, telegram, mail, or other communication media 
(including the costs of operating transmission equipment).
    (iii) Location of processing of customer orders. The location of 
this activity is the place where the communication is initiated by the 
FSC.
    (iv) Examples. The principles of paragraph (b)(1) of this section 
may be illustrated by the following examples:

    Example 1. A domestic related supplier, using a FSC as its 
commission agent on the sale of export property to foreign customers, 
receives an order from one of its foreign customers. Information 
concerning the receipt of such order and its requirements for delivery 
are transmitted to the FSC. The FSC from its office outside the United 
States notifies the related supplier of the order and the requirements 
for delivery by telex. This notification by the FSC to the related 
supplier constitutes the processing of the customer's order within the 
meaning of paragraph (b)(1)(i) of this section. In addition, its direct 
costs of processing the customer's order are foreign direct costs 
because the communication is initiated by the FSC from outside the 
United States.
    Example 2. A domestic unrelated supplier manufactures a product 
which it sells to a buy-sell FSC located in Germany for resale to the 
FSC's German customers. Upon receiving an order from one of its 
customers, the FSC telephones the customer from its German office to 
acknowledge receipt of the order and the requirements for delivery. The 
acknowledgement constitutes the processing of the customer's order 
within the meaning of paragraph (b)(1)(i) of this section and the direct 
costs attributable thereto are foreign direct costs.

    (2) Arranging for delivery--(i) Arranging for delivery defined. The 
arranging for delivery of export property means the taking of necessary 
steps to have the export property delivered to the customer in 
accordance with the requirements of the order. Arranging for delivery 
does not include preparation of shipping documents (e.g., bill of 
lading) or the property for shipment (i.e., packaging or crating), or 
shipment of property (i.e., transportation). Arranging for delivery does 
include communications with a carrier or freight forwarder to provide 
transportation (as defined in Sec. 1.924(e)-1(c)(1), but without regard 
to when the commission relationship for purposes of transportation 
begins) for the export property from the FSC or related supplier to the 
place where the customer takes possession of the property. Arranging for 
delivery also includes communications with the customer to notify the 
customer of the time and place of delivery. The carrier or freight 
forwarder and the customer

[[Page 76]]

may already have knowledge of the information communicated. If the FSC 
has communicated with the carrier or freight forwarder, where 
applicable, and the customer to notify it of the time and place of 
delivery, prior or subsequent communications to either about delivery 
are not included in the definition of arranging for delivery.
    (ii) Direct costs of arranging for delivery. The direct costs of 
arranging for delivery include salaries of clerical personnel and costs 
of telephone, telegraph, mail, and other communications media, but do 
not include any actual shipping costs.
    (iii) Location of arranging for delivery. The location of arranging 
for delivery activity is the place where the activity is initiated by 
the FSC.
    (iv) Examples. The principles of paragraph (b)(2)(i) of this section 
may be illustrated by the following examples:

    Example 1. A FSC earns commissions on the sale of export property by 
its domestic related supplier to foreign customers. The shipment term of 
all of the related supplier's sales is F.O.B. (Free on Board) its 
manufacturing plant in Gary, Indiana. Thus, there is no transportation 
as defined in Sec. 1.924(e)-1(c)(1) with respect to its sales. From its 
shipping department at the plant, the related supplier telephones 
carriers to arrange for delivery. It also notifies the FSC by mail of 
the time and place of delivery of the customer's orders. The FSC from 
its office outside the United States transmits the received information 
to the customers. Because there is no transportation to be arranged, 
this communication alone by the FSC to the customers to notify them of 
the time and place of delivery constitutes arranging for delivery within 
the meaning of paragraph (b)(2)(i) of this section.
    Example 2. Assume the same facts as in Example 1, except that the 
shipment term of all of the related supplier's sales is C.I.F. (Cost, 
Insurance, Freight) and that the commission relationship for 
transportation begins after the export property leaves the United States 
customs territory. The related supplier telephones a trucking firm and 
an overseas carrier from its plant in Gary, Indiana to ascertain 
information on transporting its property by truck to the docks, and by 
overseas carrier from the docks to the place where the customer takes 
possession. Upon receiving the necessary information, the related 
supplier electronically transmits to the FSC the shipping information 
and the time and place of delivery to the customer. In addition, it 
instructs the FSC to communicate the necessary shipping information to 
the carriers to ensure shipment and to notify the customer of the time 
and place of delivery. The FSC does both from its office located outside 
of the United States. The communications by the FSC to the carriers and 
the customer constitute arranging for delivery within the meaning of 
paragraph (b)(2)(i) of this section.

    (c) Transportation--(1) Transportation defined. For purposes of 
section 924(e), transportation means moving or shipping the export 
property during the period when the FSC owns or is responsible for the 
property, or, if the FSC is acting as a commission agent, during the 
period when the related supplier owns or is responsible for the property 
but after the commission relationship for purposes of transportation 
begins (even if the relationship begins after the property leaves the 
U.S. customs territory). The FSC or related supplier is treated as 
responsible for the property when it either has title, bears the risk of 
loss, or insures the property during shipment. Since a commission FSC 
will not generally have title or bear the risk of loss, it will, 
nevertheless, satisfy the transportation test if the related supplier 
has either title, bears the risk of loss, or insures the property during 
shipment. Examples of methods of shipping which would qualify as 
transportation include F.O.B. (Free on Board) destination, C.I.F. (Cost, 
Insurance, Freight), Ex Ship, and Ex Quay, but do not include C. & F. 
(Cost and Freight) or F.O.B. shipping point.
    (2) Direct costs of transportation. The direct costs of 
transportation include the expenses of shipping, such as fees paid to 
carriers and freight forwarders, costs of freight insurance, and 
documentation fees. With respect to fungible commodities, direct costs 
include only those costs incurred after the goods have been identified 
to a contract. Transportation costs do not include any of the costs of 
arranging for delivery. The FSC is considered to engage in 
transportation activity whenever it pays the costs of shipping the 
export property and the property is shipped during the period when the 
FSC owns or is responsible for the property as provided in paragraph 
(c)(1) of this section. If the customer pays the shipping costs 
directly, the FSC is not considered to engage in transportation 
activity. If, however, the FSC

[[Page 77]]

pays the shipping costs, the ultimate transfer of those costs to the 
customer will not disqualify the FSC from engaging in transportation for 
purposes of section 924(e) regardless of whether the costs are included 
in the sale price of the export property or separately stated.
    (3) Location of transportation. The location of transportation 
activity is the area over which the property is transported. Thus, the 
portion of total direct costs of transportation treated as foreign 
direct costs is the portion attributable to transportation outside the 
United States, determined on the basis of the ratio of mileage outside 
the U.S. customs territory to total mileage. For purposes of determining 
mileage outside U.S. customs territory, goods are treated as leaving 
U.S. customs territory when they have been tendered to an international 
carrier for shipment to a foreign location, as long as they are not 
removed from the custody of the carrier before they reach a point 
outside U.S. customs territory. The same rule for determining mileage 
outside the U.S. customs territory will apply to freight forwarders if 
(i) the forwarder has the risk of loss or is an insurer of the goods, 
and (ii) the property is shipped on a single bill of lading issued to 
the FSC or its agent as the shipper.
    (4) Examples. The principles of paragraph (c) of this section may be 
illustrated by the following examples:

    Example 1. A buy-sell FSC sells export property to a customer 
located in Canada. The contract between the FSC and the customer 
requires that the property be shipped F.O.B. its Canadian destination. 
Under this shipment term, the FSC holds title and bears the risk of loss 
until the property is tendered at its Canadian destination. Thus, it is 
responsible for the property during shipment. The FSC instructs its 
related supplier to ship the property from its manufacturing facilities 
in St. Louis. The related supplier negotiates two contracts, one for 
domestic transportation and the second for foreign transportation. A 
domestic trucking firm transports the property to the Canadian border 
where a Canadian trucking company is used to transport the property to 
its Canadian destination. The documentation fees and the fees for the 
two trucking firms are paid by the FSC. Because the FSC paid the costs 
of shipping and the property was shipped during the period when the FSC 
was responsible for the property, the FSC has engaged in transportation 
activity, the direct costs of which are the fees paid by the FSC. If 70 
percent of the mileage from St. Louis to the Canadian destination is 
associated with the transportation from the Canadian border to the 
Canadian destination, 70 percent of the FSC's direct transportation 
costs are foreign direct costs. If, instead of using two trucking firms, 
the FSC had tendered the goods to a freight forwarder for shipment to a 
foreign location and the freight forwarder assumed the risk of loss for 
the goods and issued a single bill of lading, all of the fees paid by 
the FSC to the freight forwarder would be foreign direct costs.
    Example 2. A related supplier sells export property to its foreign 
customer in Liverpool, England. The contract between the related 
supplier and the customer requires that the property be shipped C.I.F. 
Liverpool. The related supplier engages the FSC as its commission agent 
with respect to its sales to the customer, requiring the FSC to provide 
transportation to the customer. The FSC contracts with the related 
supplier to provide the transportation on behalf of the FSC. The 
commission agreement between the related supplier and the FSC provides 
that the FSC's responsibilities with respect to transportation of the 
export property begins after the property leaves the U.S. customs 
territory. The related supplier hires a domestic trucking firm to 
transport the shipment to a New York City port where it is loaded on a 
cargo ship destined for Liverpool at a total cost of $3,000X, $2,750X of 
which is allocable to mileage from the U.S. customs territory to 
Liverpool, England. Because the related supplier insures the property 
during shipment under C.I.F., the property is shipped during the period 
when the related supplier is treated as responsible for the property. 
Thus, the FSC, as the related supplier's commission agent, has satisfied 
the transportation test. In addition, because the FSC's responsibilities 
with respect to transportation begins when the property leaves U.S. 
customs territory, the FSC's payment of $2,750X is a foreign direct cost 
of transportation. The remaining $250X is not a direct cost of 
transportation to the FSC because the amount was expended before the 
commission relationship between the FSC and related supplier began.
    Example 3. A FSC earns commissions on sales by the related supplier 
of export property, all of which falls within a single two-digit SIC 
group. The related supplier is under contract to the FSC to perform on 
the FSC's behalf all of the section 924(e) activities attributable to 
the sales. Of all of the sales made during the year, the FSC has no 
transportation costs with respect to the sales to customer R because the 
shipment term is F.O.B. the related supplier's Chicago plant. With 
respect to the sales to customer S, the

[[Page 78]]

FSC ships the property F.O.B. its destination and pays 100 percent of 
the transportation costs, all of which are foreign direct costs because 
the commission relationship for transportation begins outside the U.S. 
customs territory. For purposes of determining whether the FSC has 
satisfied the 85-percent foreign direct cost test for transportation, 
the FSC groups the sales by product. Because the transportation costs 
for sales to customer S are 100-percent foreign direct costs and because 
there are no transportation costs on sales to customer R, the FSC is 
considered to have met the 85-percent foreign direct cost test for 
transportation for all the sales in the single two-digit SIC group.

    (d) Determination and transmittal of a final invoice or statement of 
account and receipt of payment. For purposes of section 924(e), the 
determination and transmittal of a final invoice or statement of account 
and the receipt of payment are defined as follows.
    (1) Determination and transmittal of a final invoice or statement of 
account--(i) Definitions--(A) In general. The determination and 
transmittal of a final invoice or statement of account means the 
assembly of either a final invoice or statement of account and the 
forwarding of that document to the customer. A FSC may elect to send 
either final invoices or statements of account and disregard any costs 
of the alternative not elected. For taxable years beginning after 
February 19, 1987, a special grouping rule is provided. If the FSC 
assembles and forwards either a statement of account or a final invoice 
from outside the United States to customers with sales representing 50 
percent of the current year foreign trading gross receipts within a 
product or product line grouping or to customers with sales representing 
50 percent of the prior year foreign trading gross receipts within a 
product or product line grouping utilized for the current year, all 
other U.S. costs will be disregarded and the FSC will be deemed to have 
no U.S. costs with respect to the determination and transmittal of a 
final invoice or statement of account. If, during the prior taxable 
year, the controlled group of which the FSC is a member had a DISC or 
interest charge DISC, the FSC may apply the 50 percent rule by taking 
into account the customers and sales of the DISC or interest charge DISC 
for the preceding taxable year. If no foreign trading gross receipts (or 
qualified export receipts for DISC purposes) were received in the prior 
year either by the FSC or by a DISC or interest charge DISC within the 
controlled group of which the FSC is a member, the FSC must apply the 50 
percent rule taking into account customers and foreign trading gross 
receipts for the current year. In the event that the 50 percent rule is 
not satisfied, all costs associated with assembly and forwarding of the 
selected documents (invoices or statements of account) must be included 
in the costs attributable to activities described in section 924(e)(4).
    (B) Final invoice defined. A final invoice is an invoice upon which 
payment is made by the customer. A final invoice must contain the 
customer's name or identifying number and, with respect to the 
transaction or transactions, the date, product or service, quantity, 
price, and amount due. In the alternative, a document will be acceptable 
as a final invoice even though it does not include all of the above 
listed information if the FSC establishes that the document is 
considered to be a final invoice under normal commercial practices. An 
invoice forwarded to the customer after payment has been tendered or 
received pursuant to a letter of credit as a receipt for payment 
satisfies this definition.
    (C) Statement of account defined. A statement of account is any 
summary statement forwarded to a customer to inform of, or confirm, the 
status of transactions occurring within an accounting period during a 
taxable year that is not less than one month. A statement of account 
must contain, at a minimum, the customer's name or identifying number, 
date of the statement of account as of the last day of the accounting 
period covered by the statement of account and the balance due (even if 
the balance due is zero). A single final invoice or statement of account 
can cover more than one transaction with one customer. In the 
alternative, a document will be accepted as a statement of account even 
though it does not include all of the above listed information if the 
FSC establishes that

[[Page 79]]

the document is considered a statement of account under normal 
commercial practice. For these purposes, a document will be considered 
to be a statement of account under normal commercial practices if it is 
sent to domestic as well as to export customers in order to inform the 
customers of the status of transactions during an accounting period. 
Additional information may be sent separately, such as summary 
statements forwarded to a related party for purposes of reconciling 
intercompany accounts for financial reporting requirements. If the 
information is sent separately, the direct costs associated with the 
assembly and forwarding of that information are not considered for 
purposes of section 924(d).
    (D) Assembly and forwarding defined. Assembly means folding the 
documents (where applicable), filling envelopes, and addressing 
envelopes (if window envelopes are not used). Forwarding means mailing 
or delivery.
    (ii) Direct costs of determination and transmittal of final invoice 
or statement of account. Direct costs of this activity include costs of 
office supplies, office equipment, clerical salaries and costs of 
mailing or other delivery services, if the costs can be identified or 
associated directly with the assembly and transmittal of a final invoice 
or statement of account. Costs of establishing a price, or of 
communicating prices or other billing information between the FSC and a 
related supplier are not direct costs of this activity. In addition, the 
costs of preparing and mailing the final invoices or statements of 
account to the FSC and the costs of accumulating and formatting data for 
invoicing or statements of account on computer discs, tapes, or some 
other storage media along with the costs of transmitting or transporting 
this data to the FSC are not direct costs of this activity.
    (iii) Location of determination and transmittal of a final invoice 
or statement of account. For taxable years beginning before February 19, 
1987, the location of this activity is the place where the final invoice 
or statement of account is assembled for forwarding to the customer or 
the place from which it is forwarded to the customer. Thus, the 
forwarding of the final invoice or statement of account from outside the 
United States is sufficient to source this activity outside the United 
States. For all other taxable years, the location of this activity is 
the place where the final invoice or statement of account is both 
assembled and forwarded to the customer.
    (iv) Examples. The principles of paragraph (d)(1) of this section 
may be illustrated by the following examples, all of which apply to 
taxable years beginning on or after February 19, 1987.

    Example 1. A related supplier sells export property to its foreign 
customers. The related supplier engages the FSC as its commission agent 
with respect to the sales, requiring the FSC to determine and transmit 
final invoices or statements of account to the customers with respect to 
the sales. Annually, the FSC assembles and forwards statements of 
account to customers representing 40 percent of current year export 
sales and 35 percent of prior year sales. The statements are sent from 
its office outside of the United States. The remaining statements of 
account are sent from the Albany, New York office of the related 
supplier. The statements are recognized in its industry as a statement 
of account. Although the statement does not contain all of the 
information described in Sec. 1.924(e)-1(d)(1)(i), it is sent to both 
domestic and foreign customers of the related supplier to inform the 
customer of the status of its transactions with the related supplier. 
The document qualifies as a statement of account under Sec. 1.924(e)-
1(d)(1)(i); however, the 50 percent test set forth in Sec. 1.924(e)-
1(d)-1(d)(1)(i)(A) is not satisfied. Therefore, the FSC must take into 
account all domestic direct costs attributable to assembly and 
forwarding of statements of account from its domestic office in 
determining whether the FSC has satisfied the direct costs test with 
respect to section 924(e)(4) and Sec. 924 (e)-1(d).
    Example 2. Employees of a FSC, in the FSC's foreign office, fold and 
place in envelopes the sheet or sheets that constitute the final 
invoices provided by the related supplier. In addition, the employees 
address, affix postage to, and mail the envelopes. These activities 
constitute the determination and transmittal of the final invoices 
within the meaning of paragraph (d)(1)(i) of this section and, because 
the final invoices are assembled and forwarded to the customers from 
outside the United States, all the direct costs of the activities are 
foreign direct costs.
    Example 3. The related supplier sends to the FSC's foreign office a 
computer tape to be used to prepare a statement of account. A

[[Page 80]]

management company, working under contract with the FSC, transcribes the 
data to a piece of paper which is a statement of account for purposes of 
Sec. 1.924(d)(1)(i), folds the document, and fills, affixes postage to, 
and mails the envelopes. Only the costs performed by the management 
company under contract with the FSC that constitute the assembly and 
forwarding of a statement of account under Sec. 1.924(e)-1(d)(1)(i)(D) 
are direct costs. Therefore, the costs attributable to transcribing the 
data to a piece of paper are not direct costs for purposes of section 
924(e)(4).

    (2) Receipt of payment--(i) Receipt of payment defined. Receipt of 
payment means the crediting of the FSC's bank account by an amount which 
is not less than 1.83 percent of the gross receipts (``gross receipts 
amount'') associated with the transaction. The FSC's bank account is not 
credited unless the FSC has the authority to withdraw the amount 
deposited. Where sales proceeds are factored or where payments from 
related foreign subsidiaries are netted against amounts owed to these 
foreign subsidiaries in an intercompany account, crediting of the FSC's 
bank account with no less than the gross receipts amount of the 
factoring proceeds or the proceeds, net of offsets, respectively, 
qualifies as receipt of payment. In addition, where a FSC is precluded 
from receiving a portion of the proceeds of the export transaction, the 
FSC may satisfy receipt of payment by receiving no less than the gross 
receipts amount of the remaining portion of the proceeds in its bank 
account. In the case of advance or progress payments, each payment 
constitutes a payment for receipt of payment purposes.
    (ii) Direct costs of receipt of payment. Direct costs of receiving 
payment include the expenses of maintaining a bank account of the FSC in 
which payment is deposited, any fees or service charges incurred for 
converting the payment into U.S. currency, and any transfer fees 
incurred with respect to the transfer of funds into and out of the FSC's 
bank account in accordance with the 35 calendar day rule in paragraph 
(d)(2)(iii) of this section. The transfer fees and the fees or service 
charges incurred for currency conversion are considered to be foreign 
direct costs of receiving payment; however, exchange losses are not 
costs of receiving payment.
    (iii) Location of receipt of payment. The location of this activity 
is the office of the banking institution at which the account is 
maintained. If payment is made by the purchaser directly to the FSC or 
the related supplier in the United States, and the FSC or related 
supplier transfers the gross receipts amount associated with the 
transaction to a bank account of the FSC outside the United States after 
receipt of payment (i.e., cash, check, wire transfer, etc.), but no 
later than 35 calendar days after receipt of good funds (i.e., the 
clearance of the check) the FSC is considered to have received payment 
outside the United States. Therefore, all transfer fees and the costs of 
the foreign bank account are treated as foreign direct costs. The United 
States bank costs are disregarded. If, however, the related supplier 
does not transfer the gross receipts amount within 35 calendar days, 
United States bank costs are not disregarded and are domestic direct 
costs. In either case, the transfer costs, currency conversion charges, 
and foreign bank costs remain foreign direct costs. The preceding rules 
apply both to commission FSCs and buy-sell FSCs.
    (iv) Examples. The principles of paragraph (d)(2) of this section 
may be illustrated by the following examples:

    Example 1. A FSC earns commissions on sales of export property by 
its related supplier. The related supplier manufactures and sells its 
export property to its foreign subsidiaries for resale in their 
respective countries. From time to time, the foreign subsidiaries will 
return products to the related supplier for credit and, from time to 
time, the foreign subsidiaries purchase products in their respective 
countries and sell such products to the related supplier. These 
transactions result in various amounts being owed to the foreign 
subsidiaries. Each month the various inter-company obligations are 
reviewed. The result of such review of inter-company indebtedness is a 
netting out of the various intercompany liabilities on the books, to the 
extent possible, and a flow of funds for the net obligation. Due to the 
nature of these transactions, the amounts owed by the foreign 
subsidiaries exceed the amounts which the related supplier owes to the 
foreign subsidiaries. The gross receipts amount (i.e., 1.83 percent of 
this net amount) is credited to the FSC's bank account. This

[[Page 81]]

constitutes receipt of payment for purposes of paragraph (d)(2)(i) of 
this section.
    Example 2. In a leveraged lease transaction, a FSC-lessor obtains 
purchase financing from a lending institution. The lending institution 
retains a security interest in the proceeds and requires that a portion 
of each rental payment be paid by the lessee directly to the lending 
institution. Since the FSC is precluded from receiving a portion of the 
proceeds of the export transaction, the FSC may satisfy the receipt of 
payment requirement by receiving the gross receipts amount with respect 
to the remaining proceeds.
    Example 3. A buy-sell FSC sells its export property to a foreign 
customer and is paid by means of a ``draw-down'' letter of credit. Over 
a substantial period of time prior to delivery of the export property, 
amounts are advanced to the FSC under the letter of credit. At delivery, 
the remaining amount available is paid. Each payment made to the FSC 
constitutes a payment for receipt of payment purposes and thus the gross 
receipts amount related to each payment must be credited to the FSC's 
bank account.
    Example 4. An FSC earns commissions on sales of export property by 
its related supplier. The related supplier regularly collects payments 
from its foreign customers in a San Francisco bank account and, after 
the San Francisco bank has collected on the checks, transfers, within 35 
calendar days, the gross receipts amounts from its New York bank account 
to the FSC's bank account located outside the United States. The FSC 
incurred transfer fees of $160X in addition to a fee of $35X for the 
maintenance of the FSC's bank account outside the United States during 
the 35 calendar day period. The maintenance fee relating to the United 
States bank account for the 35 calendar day period is $45X. The receipt 
of payment test is met because the gross receipts amounts are 
transferred after payment but within 35 calendar days to the FSC's bank 
account located outside the United States. The transfer fees of $160X 
and the maintenance fee of $35X relating to the FSC's foreign bank 
account are foreign direct costs. The $45X maintenance fee related to 
the United States bank account is not a direct cost. If the gross 
receipts amounts had not been transferred to the FSC's foreign bank 
account within 35 calendar days, the $45X maintenance fee related to the 
United States bank account would be considered a United States direct 
cost. The transfer fee of $160X and the maintenance fee of $35X relating 
to the FSC's foreign bank account, however, would, nonetheless, be 
considered as foreign direct costs. The same funds received in San 
Francisco need not be transferred to the FSC's foreign bank account 
because money is fungible. For the same reason, the gross receipts 
amounts need not be transferred from the same bank account in which the 
payments are received.

    (e) Assumption of credit risk--(1) Assumption of credit risk 
defined. For purposes of section 924(e), the assumption of credit risk 
means bearing the economic risk of nonpayment with respect to a 
transaction. If the FSC is acting as a commission agent for the related 
supplier, this risk is borne by the FSC if the commission contract 
transfers the costs of the economic risk of nonpayment with respect to 
the transaction from the related supplier to the FSC. The FSC may elect 
on its annual return to bear the economic risk of nonpayment with 
respect to its transactions during a taxable year by either--
    (i) Assuming the risk of a bad debt in accordance with the rules of 
paragraph (e)(4)(i) of this section,
    (ii) Obtaining insurance to cover nonpayment,
    (iii) Investigating credit of a customer or a potential customer,
    (iv) Factoring trade receivables, or
    (v) Selling by means of letters of credit or banker's acceptances.

Only the alternative elected to be performed by the FSC during a taxable 
year is relevant for purposes of section 924(d). For example, if a buy-
sell FSC elects to bear the economic risk of nonpayment with respect to 
its transaction during a taxable year by assuming the risk of a bad debt 
in accordance with the rules of paragraph (e)(4)(i) of this section, and 
also factors the transaction's trade receivables, only the direct costs 
of assuming the risk of a bad debt are relevant for purposes of section 
924(d). For purposes of this paragraph, a potential customer is an 
unrelated person who is engaged in the purchase or sale of export 
property on whom an investigation is performed, but with whom no export 
sales contract is executed.
    (2) Direct costs of assumption of credit risk. (i) With respect to 
assuming the risk of a bad debt, the direct costs of the assumption of 
credit risk in the case of a buy-sell FSC include debts that become 
uncollectible and charges taken into account in determining additions to 
bad debt reserves of the FSC. In the case of a commission FSC, the 
direct costs of the assumption of credit risk include the assumption of 
the

[[Page 82]]

debts and charges of the related supplier attributable to export sales 
that are allowed as deductions under section 166.
    (ii) With respect to insurance, the direct costs of the assumption 
of credit risk are the costs of obtaining insurance against the risk of 
nonpayment. Qualifying insurance must be obtained from an unrelated 
insurer and must cover the risk of nonpayment due to default and 
bankruptcy by the purchaser. Insurance obtained from a related insurer, 
or insurance that covers default and bankruptcy due to risks of war or 
political unrest without covering ordinary default or bankruptcy is not 
sufficient.
    (iii) With respect to investigating credit, the direct costs of 
assumption of credit risk are the external costs of investigating credit 
for customers or potential customers, including costs of membership in a 
credit agency or association for that purpose (but not the costs of 
approving credit by an internal credit agency).
    (iv) With respect to factoring trade receivables, the direct costs 
of assumption of credit risk are the costs of factoring trade 
receivables of related and unrelated customers (e.g. the amount of the 
discount and the fees relating to factoring).
    (v) With respect to letters of credit or banker's acceptances, the 
direct costs of assumption of credit risk are the costs of letters of 
credit or banker's acceptances and the documentary collection costs.
    (3) Location of assumption of credit risk. The location of the 
activity of assumption of credit risk is the location of the customer or 
obligor whose payment is at risk, except that the location of 
investigating credit is the location of the credit agency or association 
performing the investigation. A foreign branch of a United States 
corporation and a foreign office of the United States government are not 
foreign obligors for purposes of this test. A foreign branch of a United 
States credit investigation agency or association, however, is treated 
as located outside the United States.
    (4) Special rules--(i) Assuming the risk of a bad debt--(A) In 
general. If a FSC chooses to bear the economic risk of nonpayment by 
assuming the risk of a bad debt with respect to a transaction or 
grouping of transactions and an actual bad debt loss on a foreign 
trading gross receipt is not incurred in any three consecutive years, 
the FSC will be deemed to have performed this activity during the first 
two years of the three year period. For the third year, the FSC will not 
be deemed to have performed this activity and must satisfy the 85 
percent foreign direct costs test by satisfying any two paragraphs 
included within section 924(e) other than assumption of credit risk 
activity under section 924(e)(5). An actual bad debt loss will only 
satisfy the activity test with respect to a single three consecutive 
year period.
    (B) Example. The principles of this paragraph may be illustrated by 
the following example:

    Example. In year 1, a related supplier of a commission FSC incurs a 
bad debt with respect to foreign trading gross receipts owed by a 
foreign obligor. This expense is the only bad debt incurred with respect 
to foreign trading gross receipts in year 1. Therefore, the direct costs 
for the bearing of the economic risk of nonpayment for year 1 are all 
foreign direct costs and the 85-percent test is satisfied. In year 2, 
the FSC incurs a bad debt with respect to a U.S. broker/consolidator. 
The direct costs for year 2 are U.S. direct costs and, therefore, the 
85-percent test is not satisfied. No bad debt is incurred in year 3. 
Because a bad debt with respect to a foreign obligor is incurred in year 
1, the FSC is deemed to have satisfied the economic risk of nonpayment 
for each of years 1, 2 and 3.

    (ii) Grouping with respect to other risk activities. For taxable 
years beginning after February 19, 1987, if a FSC elects to bear the 
economic risk of nonpayment by performing one of the activities 
described in paragraph (e) of this section and elects to group 
transactions, it is considered to have performed the elected activity 
with respect to all transactions within the group during the taxable 
year if it performs the activity in accordance with the following rules. 
If a FSC elects to factor trade receivables, at least 20 percent of the 
face amount of a group's receivables must be factored. If a FSC elects 
to sell by means of letters of credit or banker's acceptances, a fee 
must be incurred with respect to 20

[[Page 83]]

percent of the foreign trading gross receipts attributable to sales 
within the group. If the FSC elects to obtain insurance to cover 
nonpayment, 20 percent of the face amount of receivables attributable to 
sales included in the Sec. 1.924(d)-1(e) grouping elected by the FSC 
must be insured. If a FSC elects to investigate credit of customers or 
potential customers, 20 percent of new or potential customers for which 
a credit investigation is performed must be investigated.

[T.D. 8125, 52 FR 5094, Feb. 19, 1987]


<R05>
Sec. 1.925(a)-1T  Temporary regulations; transfer pricing rules for FSCs.

    (a) Scope--(1) Transfer pricing rules. In the case of a transaction 
described in paragraph (b) of this section, section 925 permits a 
related party to a FSC to determine the allowable transfer price charged 
the FSC (or commission paid to the FSC) by its choice of the three 
transfer pricing methods described in paragraphs (c)(2), (3), and (4) of 
this section: The ``1.83 percent'' gross receipts method and the ``23 
percent'' combined taxable income method (the administrative pricing 
rules) of section 925(a)(1) and (2), respectively, and the section 482 
method of section 925(a)(3). (Any further reference to a FSC in this 
section shall include a small FSC unless indicated otherwise.) Subject 
to the special no-loss rule of Sec. 1.925(a)-1T(e)(1)(iii), any, or all, 
of the transfer pricing methods may be used in the same taxable year of 
the FSC for separate transactions (or separate groups of transactions). 
If either of the administrative pricing methods (the gross receipts 
method or combined taxable income method) is applied to a transaction, 
the Commissioner may not make distributions, apportionments, or 
allocations as provided by section 482 and the regulations under that 
section. The transfer price charged the FSC (or the commission paid to 
the FSC) on a transaction with a person that is not a related party to 
the FSC may be determined in any manner agreed to by the FSC and that 
person. However, the Commissioner will use special scrutiny to determine 
whether a person selling export property to a FSC (or paying a 
commission to a FSC) is a related party to the FSC with respect to a 
transaction if the FSC earns a profit on the transaction in excess of 
the profit it would have earned had the administrative pricing rules 
applied to the transaction.
    (2) Special rules. For rules as to certain ``incomplete 
transactions'' and for computing full costing combined taxable income, 
see paragraphs (c)(5) and (6) of this section. For a special rule as to 
cooperatives and computation of their combined taxable incomes, see 
paragraph (c)(7) of this section. Grouping of transactions for purposes 
of applying the administrative pricing method chosen is provided for by 
paragraph (c)(8) of this section.
The rules in paragraph (c) of this section are directly applicable only 
in the case of sales or exchanges of export property to a FSC for 
resale, and are applicable by analogy to leases, commissions, and 
services as provided in paragraph (d) of this section. For a rule 
providing for the recovery of the FSC's costs in an overall loss 
situation, see paragraph (e)(1)(i) of this section. Paragraph (e)(2) of 
this section provides for the applicability of section 482 to resales by 
the FSC to related persons or to sales between related persons prior to 
the sale to the FSC. Paragraph (e)(3) of this section provides for the 
creation of receivables if the transfer price, rental payment, 
commission or payment for services rendered is not paid by the due date 
of the FSC's income tax return for the taxable year under section 
6072(b), including extensions provided for by section 6081. Provisions 
for the subsequent determination and further adjustment to the relevant 
amounts are set forth in paragraphs (e)(4) and (5) of this section. 
Paragraph (f) of this section has several examples illustrating the 
provisions of this section. Section 1.925(b)-1T prescribes the marginal 
costing rules authorized by section 925(b)(2). Section 1.927(d)-2T 
provides definitions of related supplier and related party.
    (3) Performance of substantial economic functions--(i) 
Administrative pricing methods. The application of the administrative 
pricing methods of section 925 (a)(1) and (2) does not depend on the 
extent to which the FSC performs substantial economic functions beyond 
those required by section 925(c). See

[[Page 84]]

paragraph (b)(2)(ii) of this section and Sec. 1.924(a)-1T(i)(1).
    (ii) Section 482 method. In order to apply the section 482 method of 
section 925(a)(3), the arm's length standards of section 482 and the 
regulations under that section must be satisfied. In applying the 
standards of section 482, all of the rules of section 482 will apply. 
Thus, if the FSC would not be recognized as a separate entity, it would 
also not be recognized on application of the section 482 method. 
Similarly, if a FSC performs no substantial economic function with 
respect to a transaction, no income will be allocable to the FSC under 
the section 482 method. See Sec. 1.924(a)-1T(i)(2). If a related 
supplier performs services under contract with a FSC, the FSC will not 
be deemed to have performed substantial economic functions for purposes 
of the section 482 method unless it compensates the related supplier 
under the provisions of Sec. 1.482-2(b)(1) through (7). See 
Sec. 1.925(a)-1T(c)(6)(ii) for the applicability of the regulations 
under section 482 in determination of the FSC's profit under the 
administrative pricing methods.
    (b) Transactions to which section 925 applies--(1) In general. The 
transfer pricing methods of section 925 (the administrative pricing 
methods and the section 482 method) will apply, generally, only if a 
transaction, or group of transactions, gives rise to foreign trading 
gross receipts (within the meaning of section 924(a) and Sec. 1.924(a)-
1T) to the FSC (or small FSC, as defined in section 922(b) and 
Sec. 1.921-2(b) (Q&A3)). However, the transfer pricing methods will 
apply as well if the FSC is acting as commission agent for a related 
supplier with regard to a transaction, or group of transactions, on 
which the related supplier is the principal if the transaction, or group 
of transactions, would have resulted in foreign trading gross receipts 
had the FSC been the principal.
    (2) Application of the transfer pricing rules--(i) Section 482 
method. The section 482 transfer pricing method may be applied to any 
transaction between a related supplier and a FSC if the requirements of 
paragraph (a)(3)(ii) of this section have been met.
    (ii) Administrative pricing methods. The administrative pricing 
methods may be applied in situations in which the FSC is either the 
principal or commission agent on the transaction, or group of 
transactions, only if the requirements of section 925(c) are met. 
Section 925(c) requires that the FSC performs all the activities 
described in subsections (d)(1)(A) and (e) of section 924 that are 
attributable to a particular transaction, or group of transactions. The 
FSC need not perform any activities with respect to a particular 
transaction merely to comply with section 925(c) if that activity would 
not have been performed but for the requirements of that subsection. The 
FSC need not perform all of the activities outside the United States. 
None of the activities need be performed outside the United States by a 
small FSC. Rather than the FSC itself performing the activities required 
by section 925(c), another person under contract, written or oral, 
directly or indirectly, with the FSC may perform the activities (see 
Sec. 1.924(d)-1(b)). If a related supplier is performing the required 
activities on behalf of the FSC with regard to a transaction, or group 
of transactions, the requirements of section 925(c) will be met if the 
FSC pays the related supplier an amount equal to the direct and indirect 
expenses related to the required activities. See paragraph (c)(6)(ii) of 
this section for the amount of compensation due the related supplier. 
The payment made to the related supplier must be reflected on the FSC's 
books and must be taken into account in computing the FSC's and related 
supplier's combined taxable income. If it is determined that the related 
supplier was not compensated for all the expenses related to the 
required activities or if the entire payment is not reflected on the 
FSC's books or in computing combined taxable income, the administrative 
pricing methods may be used but proper adjustments will be made to the 
FSC's and related supplier's books or income. At the election of the FSC 
and related supplier, the requirements of section 925(c) will be deemed 
to have been met if the related supplier is paid by the FSC an amount 
equal to all of the costs under paragraph (c)(6)(iii)(D) of this section 
(limited by paragraph (c)(6)(ii) of this section) related to the

[[Page 85]]

export sale, other than expenses relating to activities performed 
directly by the FSC or by a person other than the related supplier, and 
if that payment is reflected on the FSC's books and in computing the 
FSC's and related supplier's combined taxable income on the transaction, 
or group of transactions. If it is determined that the related supplier 
was not compensated for all its expenses or if the entire payment is not 
reflected on the FSC's books or in computing combined taxable income, 
the administrative pricing methods may be used but proper adjustments 
will be made to the FSC's and related supplier's books or income. All 
activities that are performed in connection with foreign military sales 
are considered to be performed by the FSC, or under contract with the 
FSC, if they are performed by the United States government even though 
the United States government has not contracted for the performance of 
those activities. All actual costs incurred by the FSC and related 
supplier in connection with the performance of those activities must be 
taken into account, however, in determining the combined taxable income 
of the FSC and related supplier.
    (iii) Allowable transactions for purposes of the administrative 
pricing methods. If the required performance of activities has been met, 
the administrative pricing methods may be applied to a transaction 
between a related supplier and a FSC only in the following 
circumstances.
    (A) The related supplier sells export property (as defined in 
section 927(a) and Sec. 1.927(a)-1T) to the FSC for resale or the FSC 
acts as a commission agent for the related supplier on sales by the 
related supplier of export property to third parties, whether or not 
related parties. For purposes of this section, references to sales 
include references to exchanges or other dispositions.
    (B) The related supplier leases export property to the FSC for 
sublease for a comparable period with comparable terms of payment, or 
the FSC acts as commission agent for the related supplier on leases of 
export property by the related supplier, to third parties whether or not 
related parties.
    (C) Services are furnished by a FSC as principal or by a related 
supplier if a FSC is a commission agent for the related supplier which 
are related and subsidiary to any sale or lease by the FSC, acting as 
principal or commission agent, of export property under subdivision 
(iii)(A) and (B) of this paragraph.
    (D) Engineering or architectural services for construction projects 
located (or proposed for location) outside of the United States are 
furnished by the FSC if the FSC is acting as principal, or by the 
related supplier if the FSC is a commission agent for the related 
supplier, with respect to the furnishing of the services to a third 
party whether or not a related party.
    (E) The FSC acting as principal, or the related supplier where the 
FSC is a commission agent, furnishes managerial services in furtherance 
of the production of foreign trading gross receipts of an unrelated FSC 
or the production of qualified export receipts of an unrelated interest 
charge DISC.
This subdivision (iii)(E) shall not apply for any taxable year unless at 
least 50 percent of the gross receipts for such taxable year of the FSC 
or of the related supplier, whichever party furnishes the managerial 
services, is derived from activities described in subdivision (iii)(A), 
(B), or (C) of this paragraph.
    (c) Transfer price for sales of export property--(1) In general. 
Under this paragraph, rules are prescribed for computing the allowable 
price for a transfer from a related supplier to a FSC in the case of a 
sale, described in paragraph (b)(2)(iii)(A) of this section, of export 
property.
    (2) The ``1.83 percent'' gross receipts method. Under the gross 
receipts method of pricing, described in section 925(a)(1), the transfer 
price for a sale by the related supplier to the FSC is the price as a 
result of which the profit derived by the FSC from the sale will not 
exceed 1.83 percent of the foreign trading gross receipts of the FSC 
derived from the sale of the export property. Pursuant to section 
925(d), the amount of profit derived by the FSC under this method may 
not exceed twice the amount of profit determined under, at the related 
supplier's election, either the combined taxable income method of 
Sec. 1.925(a)-1T(c)(3) or the marginal costing rules of Sec. 1.925(b)-
1T. For FSC

[[Page 86]]

taxable years beginning after December 31, 1986, if the related supplier 
elects to determine twice the profit determined under the combined 
taxable income method using the marginal costing rules, because of the 
no-loss rule of Sec. 1.925(a)-1T(e)(1)(i), the profit that may be earned 
by the FSC is limited to 100% of the full costing combined taxable 
income as determined under Sec. 1.925(a)-1T(c)(3) and (6). Interest or 
carrying charges with respect to the sale are not foreign trading gross 
receipts.
    (3) The ``23 percent'' combined taxable income method. Under the 
combined taxable income method of pricing, described in section 
925(a)(2), the transfer price for a sale by the related supplier to the 
FSC is the price as a result of which the profit derived by the FSC from 
the sale will not exceed 23 percent of the full costing combined taxable 
income (as defined in paragraph (c)(6) of this section) of the FSC and 
the related supplier attributable to the foreign trading gross receipts 
from such sale.
    (4) Section 482 method. If the methods of paragraph (c)(2) and (3) 
of this section are inapplicable to a sale or if the related supplier 
does not choose to use them, the transfer price for a sale by the 
related supplier to the FSC is to be determined on the basis of the 
sales price actually charged but subject to the rules provided by 
section 482 and the regulations for that section and by Sec. 1.925(a)-
1T(a)(3)(ii).
    (5) Incomplete transactions. (i) For purposes of the gross receipts 
and combined taxable income methods, if export property which the FSC 
purchased from the related supplier is not resold by the FSC before the 
close of either the FSC's taxable year or the taxable year of the 
related supplier during which the export property was purchased by the 
FSC from the related supplier, then--
    (A) The transfer price of the export property sold by the FSC during 
that year shall be computed separately from the transfer price of the 
export property not sold by the FSC during that year.
    (B) With respect to the export property not sold by the FSC during 
that year, the transfer price paid by the FSC for that year shall be the 
related supplier's cost of goods sold (see paragraph (c)(6)(iii)(C) of 
this section) with respect to the property.
    (C) For the subsequent taxable year during which the export property 
is resold by the FSC, an additional amount shall be paid by the FSC (to 
be treated as income for the later year in which it is received or 
accrued by the related supplier) equal to the excess of the amount which 
would have been the transfer price under this section had the transfer 
to the FSC by the related supplier and the resale by the FSC taken place 
during the taxable year of the FSC during which it resold the property 
over the amount already paid under subdivision (B) of this paragraph.
    (D) The time and manner of payment of transfer prices required by 
subdivisions (i)(B) and (C) of this paragraph shall be determined under 
paragraphs (e)(3), (4) and (5) of this section.
    (ii) For purposes of this paragraph, a FSC may determine the year in 
which it received property from a related supplier and the year in which 
it resells property in accordance with the method of identifying goods 
in its inventory properly used under section 471 or section 472 
(relating respectively to the general rule for inventories and to the 
rule for LIFO inventories). Transportation expense of the related 
supplier in connection with a transaction to which this paragraph 
applies shall be treated as an item of cost of goods sold with respect 
to the property if the related supplier includes the cost of 
intracompany transportation between its branches, divisions, plants, or 
other units in its cost of goods sold (see paragraph (c)(6)(iii)(C) of 
this section).
    (6) Full costing combined taxable income--(i) In general. For 
purposes of section 925 and this section, if a FSC is the principal on 
the sale of export property, the full costing combined taxable income of 
the FSC and its related supplier from the sale is the excess of the 
foreign trading gross receipts of the FSC from the sale over the total 
costs of the FSC and related supplier including the related supplier's 
cost of goods sold and its and the FSC's noninventoriable costs (see 
Sec. 1.471-11(c)(2)(ii)) which relate to the foreign trading gross 
receipts. Interest or carrying charges with respect to the

[[Page 87]]

sale are not foreign trading gross receipts.
    (ii) Section 482 applicability. Combined taxable income under this 
paragraph shall be determined after taking into account under paragraph 
(e)(2) of this section all adjustments required by section 482 with 
respect to transactions to which the section is applicable. If a related 
supplier performs services under contract with a FSC, the FSC shall 
compensate the related supplier an arm's length amount under the 
provisions of Sec. 1.482-2(b) (1) through (6). Section 1.482-2(b)(7), 
which provides that an arm's length charge shall not be deemed equal to 
costs or deductions with respect to services which are an integral part 
of the business activity of either the member rendering the services 
(i.e., the related supplier) or the member receiving the benefit of the 
services (i.e., the FSC), shall not apply if the administrative pricing 
methods of section 925(a)(1) and (2) are used to compute the FSC's 
profit and if the related supplier is the person rendering the services. 
Section 1.482-2(b)(7) shall apply, however, if a related person other 
than the related supplier is the person rendering the services or if the 
section 482 method of section 925(a)(3) is used to compute the FSC's 
profit. See Sec. 1.925(a)-1T(a)(3)(ii). For a special rule for 
computation of combined taxable income where the related supplier is a 
qualified cooperative shareholder of the FSC, see paragraph (c)(7) of 
this section.
    (iii) Rules for determination of gross receipts and total costs. In 
determining the gross receipts of the FSC and the total costs of the FSC 
and related supplier which relate to such gross receipts, the rules set 
forth in subdivisions (iii)(A) through (E) of this paragraph shall 
apply.
    (A) Subject to the provisions of subdivisions (iii)(B) through (E) 
of this paragraph, the methods of accounting used by the FSC and related 
supplier to compute their taxable incomes will be accepted for purposes 
of determining the amounts of items of income and expense (including 
depreciation) and the taxable year for which those items are taken into 
account.
    (B) A FSC may, generally, choose any method of accounting 
permissible under section 446(c) and the regulations under that section. 
However, if a FSC is a member of a controlled group (as defined in 
section 927(d)(4) and Sec. 1.924(a)-1T(h)), the FSC may not choose a 
method of accounting which, when applied to transactions between the FSC 
and other members of the controlled group, will result in a material 
distortion of the income of the FSC or of any other member of the 
controlled group. Changes in the method of accounting of a FSC are 
subject to the requirements of section 446(e) and the regulations under 
that section.
    (C) Cost of goods sold shall be determined in accordance with the 
provisions of Sec. 1.61-3. See sections 471 and 472 and the regulations 
thereunder with respect to inventories. With respect to property to 
which an election under section 631 applies (relating to cutting of 
timber considered as a sale or exchange), cost of goods sold shall be 
determined by applying Sec. 1.631-1 (d)(3) and (e) (relating to fair 
market value as of the beginning of the taxable year of the standing 
timber cut during the year considered as its cost).
    (D) Costs (other than cost of goods sold) which shall be treated as 
relating to gross receipts from sales of export property are the 
expenses, losses, and deductions definitely related, and therefore 
allocated and apportioned thereto, and a ratable part of any other 
expenses, losses, or deductions which are not definitely related to any 
class of gross income, determined in a manner consistent with the rules 
set forth in Sec. 1.861-8. The deduction for depletion allowed by 
section 611 relates to gross receipts from sales of export property and 
shall be taken into account in computing the combined taxable income of 
the FSC and its related supplier.
    (7) Cooperatives and combined taxable income method. If a qualified 
cooperative, as defined in section 1381(a), sells export property to a 
FSC of which it is a shareholder, the combined taxable income of the FSC 
and the cooperative shall be computed without taking into account 
deductions allowed under section 1382 (b) and (c) for patronage 
dividends, per-unit retain allocations and nonpatronage distributions. 
The FSC

[[Page 88]]

and cooperative must take into account, however, when computing combined 
taxable income, the cooperative's cost of goods sold, or cost of 
purchases.
    (8) Grouping transactions. (i) The determinations under this section 
are to be made on a transaction-by-transaction basis. However, at the 
annual choice made by the related supplier if the administrative pricing 
methods are used, some or all of these determinations may be made on the 
basis of groups consisting of products or product lines. The election to 
group transactions shall be evidenced on the FSC income tax return for 
the taxable year.
    (ii) A determination by the related supplier as to a product or a 
product line will be accepted by a district director if such 
determination conforms to either of the following standards: Recognized 
trade or industry usage, or the two-digit major groups (or any inferior 
classifications or combinations thereof, within a major group) of the 
Standard Industrial Classification as prepared by the Statistical Policy 
Division of the Office of Management and Budget, Executive Office of the 
President. A product shall be included in only one product line for 
purposes of this section if a product otherwise falls within more than 
one product line classification.
    (iii) A choice by the related supplier to group transactions for a 
taxable year on a product or product line basis shall apply to all 
transactions with respect to that product or product line consummated 
during the taxable year. However, the choice of a product or product 
line grouping applies only to transactions covered by the grouping and, 
as to transactions not encompassed by the grouping, the determinations 
are to be made on a transaction-by-transaction basis. For example, the 
related supplier may choose a product grouping with respect to one 
product and use the transaction-by-transaction method for another 
product within the same taxable year. Sale transactions may not be 
grouped, however, with lease transactions.
    (iv) For purposes of this section, transactions involving military 
property, as defined in section 923(a)(5) and Sec. 1.923-1T(b)(3)(ii), 
may be grouped only with other military property included within the 
same product or product line grouping determined under the standards of 
subdivision (8)(ii) of this paragraph. Non-military property included 
within a product or product line grouping which includes military 
property may be grouped, at the election of the related supplier, under 
the general grouping rules of subdivisions (i) through (iii) of this 
paragraph.
    (v) A special grouping rule applies to agricultural and 
horticultural products sold to the FSC by a qualified cooperative if the 
FSC satisfies the requirements of section 923(a)(4). Section 923(a)(4) 
increases the amount of the FSC's exempt foreign trade income with 
regard to sales of these products, see Sec. 1.923-1T(b)(2). This special 
grouping rule provides that if the related supplier elects to group 
those products that no other export property may be included within that 
group. Export property which would have been grouped under the general 
grouping rules of subdivisions (i) through (iii) of this paragraph with 
the export property covered by this special grouping rule may be 
grouped, however, at the election of the related supplier, under the 
general grouping rules.
    (vi) For rules as to grouping certain related and subsidiary 
services, see paragraph (d)(3)(ii) of this section.
    (vii) If there is more than one FSC (or more than one small FSC) 
within a controlled group of corporations, the same grouping of 
transactions, if any, must be used by all FSCs (or small FSCs) within 
the controlled group. If the same grouping of transactions is required 
by this subdivision, and if grouping is elected, the same transfer 
pricing method must be used to determine each FSC's (or small FSC's) 
taxable income with respect to that grouping.
    (viii) The product or product line groups that are established for 
purposes of determining combined taxable income may be different from 
the groups that are established with regard to economic processes (see 
Sec. 1.924(d)-1(e)).
    (d) Rules under section 925(a)(1) and (2) for transactions other 
than sales by a FSC. The following rules are prescribed

[[Page 89]]

for purposes of applying the gross receipts method or combined taxable 
income method to transactions other than sales by a FSC.
    (1) Leases. In the case of a lease of export property by a related 
supplier to a FSC for sublease by the FSC, the amount of rent the FSC 
must pay to the related supplier shall be computed in a manner 
consistent with the rules in paragraph (c) of this section for computing 
the transfer price in the case of sales and resales of export property 
under the gross receipts method or combined taxable income method. 
Transactions may not be so grouped on a product or product line basis 
under the rules of paragraph (c)(8) of this section as to combine in any 
one group of transactions both lease transactions and sale transactions.
    (2) Commissions. If any transaction to which section 925 applies is 
handled on a commission basis for a related supplier by a FSC and if 
commissions paid to the FSC give rise to gross receipts to the related 
supplier which would have been foreign trading gross receipts under 
section 924(a) had the FSC made the sale directly then--
    (i) The administrative pricing methods of section 925(a)(1) and (2) 
may be used to determine the FSC's commission income only if the 
requirements of section 925(c) (relating to activities that must be 
performed in order to use the administrative pricing methods) are met, 
see Sec. 1.925(a)-1T(b)(2)(ii).
    (ii) The amount of the income that may be earned by the FSC in any 
year is the amount, computed in a manner consistent with paragraph (c) 
of this section, which the FSC would have been permitted to earn under 
the gross receipts method, the combined taxable income method, or the 
section 482 method if the related supplier had sold (or leased) the 
property or service to the FSC and the FSC had in turn sold (or 
subleased) to a third party, whether or not a related party.
    (iii) The combined taxable income of a FSC and the related supplier 
from the transaction is the excess of the related supplier's gross 
receipts from the transaction which would have been foreign trading 
gross receipts had the sale been made by the FSC directly over the 
related supplier's and the FSC's total costs, excluding the commission 
paid or payable to the FSC, but including the related supplier's cost of 
goods sold and its and the FSC's noninventoriable costs (see Sec. 1.471-
11(c)(2)(ii)) which relate to the gross receipts from the transaction. 
The related supplier's gross receipts for purposes of the administrative 
pricing methods shall be reduced by carrying charges, if any, as 
computed under Sec. 1.927(d)-1(a)(Q&A2). These carrying charges shall 
remain income of the related supplier.
    (iv) The maximum commission the FSC may charge the related supplier 
is the amount of income determined under subdivisions (ii) and (iii) of 
this paragraph plus the FSC's total costs for the transaction as 
determined under paragraph (c)(6) of this section.
    (3) Receipts from services--(i) Related and subsidiary services 
attributable to the year of the export transaction. The gross receipts 
for related and subsidiary services described in paragraph 
(b)(2)(iii)(C) of this section shall be treated as part of the receipts 
from the export transaction to which such services are related and 
subsidiary, but only if, under the arrangement between the FSC and its 
related supplier and the accounting method otherwise employed by the 
FSC, the income from such services is includible for the same taxable 
year as income from such export transaction.
    (ii) Other services. Income from the performance of related and 
subsidiary services will be treated as a separate type of income if 
subdivision (i) of this paragraph does not apply. Income from the 
performance of engineering and architectural services and certain 
managerial services, as defined in paragraphs (b)(2)(iii)(D) and (E), 
respectively, of this section, will in all situations be treated as 
separate types of income. If this subdivision (ii) applies, the amount 
of taxable income which the FSC may derive for any taxable year shall be 
determined under the arrangement between the FSC and its related 
supplier and shall be computed in a manner consistent with the rules in 
paragraph (c) of this section for computing the transfer price in the 
case of sales for resale of export property

[[Page 90]]

under the transfer pricing rules of section 925. Related and subsidiary 
services to which the above subdivision (i) of this paragraph does not 
apply may be grouped, under the rules for grouping of transactions in 
paragraph (c)(8) of this section, with the products or product lines to 
which they are related and subsidiary, so long as the grouping of 
services chosen is consistent with the grouping of products or product 
lines chosen for the taxable year in which either the products or 
product lines were sold or in which payment for the services is received 
or accrued. Grouping of transactions shall not be allowed with respect 
to the determination of taxable income which the FSC may derive from 
services described in paragraph (b)(2)(iii)(D) or (E) of this section 
whether performed by the FSC or by the related supplier. Those 
determinations shall be made only on a transaction-by-transaction basis.
    (e) Special rules for applying paragraphs (c) and (d) of this 
section--(1) Limitation on FSC income (``no loss'' rules). (i) If there 
is a combined loss on a transaction or group of transactions, a FSC may 
not earn a profit under either the combined taxable income method or the 
gross receipts method. Also, for FSC taxable years beginning after 
December 31, 1986, in applying the gross receipts method, the FSC's 
profit may not exceed 100% of full costing combined taxable income 
determined under the full costing method of Sec. 1.925(a)-1T(c)(3) and 
(6). This rule prevents pricing at a loss to the related supplier. The 
related supplier may in all situations set a transfer price or rental 
payment or pay a commission in an amount that will allow the FSC to 
recover an amount not in excess of its costs, if any, even if to do so 
would create, or increase, a loss in the related supplier.
    (ii) For purposes of determining whether a combined loss exists, the 
basis for grouping transactions chosen by the related supplier under 
paragraph (c)(8) of this section for the taxable year shall apply.
    (iii) If a FSC recognizes income while the related supplier 
recognizes a loss on a sale transaction under the section 482 method, 
neither the combined taxable income method nor the gross receipts method 
may be used by the FSC and related supplier (or by a FSC in the same 
controlled group and the related supplier) for any other sale 
transaction, or group of sale transactions, during a year which fall 
within the same three digit Standard Industrial Classification as the 
subject sale transaction. The reason for this rule is to prevent the 
segregation of transactions for the purposes of allowing the related 
supplier to recognize a loss on the subject transactions, while allowing 
the FSC to earn a profit under the administrative pricing methods on 
other transactions within the same three digit Standard Industrial 
Classification.
    (2) Relationship to section 482. In applying the administrative 
pricing methods, it may be necessary to first take into account the 
price of a transfer (or other transaction) between the related supplier 
(or FSC) and a related party which is subject to the arm's length 
standard of section 482. Thus, for example, if a related supplier sells 
to a FSC export property which the related supplier purchased from 
related parties, the costs taken into account in computing the combined 
taxable income of the FSC and the related supplier are determined after 
any necessary adjustment under section 482 of the price paid by the 
related supplier to the related parties. In applying section 482 to a 
transfer by a FSC to a related party, the parties are treated as if they 
were a single entity carrying on all the functions performed by the FSC 
and the related supplier with respect to the transaction. The FSC shall 
be allowed to receive under the section 482 standard the amount the 
related supplier would have received had there been no FSC.
    (3) Creation of receivables. (i) If the amount of the transfer price 
or rental payment actually charged by a related supplier to a FSC or the 
sales commission actually charged by a FSC to a related supplier has not 
been paid, an account receivable and payable will be deemed created as 
of the due date under section 6072(b), including extensions provided for 
under section 6081, of the FSC's tax return for the taxable year of the 
FSC during which a transaction to which section 925 is applicable 
occurs. The receivable and payable

[[Page 91]]

will be in an amount equal to the difference between the amount of the 
transfer price or rental payment or commission determined under section 
925 and this section and the amount (if any) actually paid or received. 
For example, a calendar year FSC's related supplier paid the FSC on July 
1, 1985, a commission of $50 on the sale of export property. On 
September 15, 1986, the extended due date of the FSC's income tax return 
for taxable year 1985, the related supplier determined that the 
commission should have been $60. The additional $10 of commission had 
not been paid. Accordingly, an interest-bearing payable to the FSC from 
the related supplier in the amount of $10 was created as of September 
15, 1986. A $10 interest bearing receivable was also created on the 
FSC's books.
    (ii) An indebtedness arising under the above subdivision (i) shall 
bear interest at an arm's length rate, computed in the manner provided 
by Sec. 1.482-2(a)(2), from the due date under section 6072(b), 
including extensions provided for under section 6081, of the FSC's tax 
return for the taxable year of the FSC in which the transaction occurred 
which gave rise to the indebtedness to the date of payment of the 
indebtedness. The interest so computed shall be accrued and included in 
the taxable income of the person to whom the indebtedness is owed for 
each taxable year during which the indebtedness is unpaid if that person 
is an accrual basis taxpayer or when the interest is paid if a cash 
basis taxpayer. Because the transactions covered by this subdivision are 
between the related supplier and FSC, the carrying charges provisions of 
Sec. 1.927(d)-1(a) do not apply.
    (iii) Payment of dividends, transfer prices, rents, commissions, 
service fees, receivables, or payables may be in the form of money, 
property, sales discount, or an accounting entry offsetting the amount 
due the related supplier, or FSC, whichever applies, against an existing 
debt of the other party to the transaction. This provision does not 
eliminate the requirement that actual cash payments be made by the 
related supplier to a commission FSC if the receipt of payment test of 
section 924(e)(4) is used to meet the foreign economic process 
requirements of section 924(d). The offset accounting entries must be 
clearly identified in both the related supplier's and FSC's books of 
account.
    (4) Subsequent determination of transfer price, rental income or 
commission. The FSC and its related supplier would ordinarily determine 
under section 925 and this section the transfer price or rental payment 
payable by the FSC or the commission payable to the FSC for a 
transaction before the FSC files its return for the taxable year of the 
transaction. After the FSC has filed its return, a redetermination of 
those amounts by the Commissioner may only be made if specifically 
permitted by a Code provision or regulations under the Code. Such a 
redetermination would include a redetermination by reason of an 
adjustment under section 482 and the regulations under that section or 
section 861 and Sec. 1.861-8 which affects the amounts which entered 
into the determination. In addition, a redetermination may be made by 
the FSC and related supplier if their taxable years are still open under 
the statute of limitations for making claims for refund under section 
6511 if they determine that a different transfer pricing method or 
grouping of transactions may be more beneficial. Also, the FSC and 
related supplier may redetermine the amount of foreign trading gross 
receipts and the amount of the costs and expenses that are used to 
determine the FSC's and related supplier's profits under the transfer 
pricing methods. Any redetermination shall affect both the FSC and the 
related supplier. The FSC and the related suppler may not redetermine 
that the FSC was operating as a commission FSC rather than a buy-sell 
FSC, and vice versa.
    (5) Procedure for adjustments to redeterminations. (i) If a 
redetermination under paragraph (e)(4) of this section is made of the 
transfer price, rental payment or commission for a transaction, or group 
of transactions, the person who was underpaid under this redetermination 
shall establish (or be deemed to have established), at the date of the 
redetermination, an account receivable from the person with whom it 
engaged

[[Page 92]]

in the transaction equal to the difference between the amounts as 
redetermined and the amounts (if any) previously paid and received, plus 
the amount (if any) of the account receivable determined under paragraph 
(e)(3) of this section that remains unpaid. A corresponding account 
payable will be established by the person who underpaid the amount due.
    (ii) An account receivable established in accordance with the above 
subdivision (5)(i) of this paragraph shall bear interest at an arm's 
length rate, computed in the manner provided by Sec. 1.482-2(a)(2), from 
the day after the date the account receivable is deemed established to 
the date of payment. The interest so computed shall be accrued and 
included in the taxable income for each taxable year during which the 
account receivable is outstanding of an accrual basis taxpayer or when 
paid if a cash basis taxpayer.
    (iii) In lieu of establishing an account receivable in accordance 
with the above subdivision (5)(i) of this paragraph for all or part of 
an amount due a related supplier, the related supplier and FSC are 
permitted to treat all or part of any current or prior distribution 
which was made by the FSC as an additional payment of transfer price or 
rental payment or repayment of commission (and not as a distribution) 
made as of the date the distribution was made. Any additional amount 
arising on the redetermination due the related supplier after this 
treatment shall be represented by an account receivable established 
under the above subdivision (5)(i) of this paragraph. To the extent that 
a distribution is so treated under this subdivision (5)(iii), it shall 
cease to qualify as a distribution for any Federal income tax purpose. 
If all or part of any distribution made to a shareholder other than the 
related supplier is recharacterized under this subdivision (5)(iii), the 
related supplier shall establish an account receivable from that 
shareholder for the amount so recharacterized. The Commissioner may 
prescribe by Revenue Procedure conditions and procedures that must be 
met in order to obtain the relief provided by this subdivision (5)(iii).
    (iv) The procedure for adjustments to transfer price provided by 
this paragraph does not apply to incomplete transactions described in 
paragraph (c)(5) of this section. Such procedure will, however, be 
applied to any such transaction with respect to the taxable year in 
which the transaction is completed.
    (f) Examples. The provisions of this section may be illustrated by 
the following examples:

    Example 1. In 1985, F, a FSC, purchases export property from R, a 
domestic manufacturer of export property A. R is F's related supplier. 
The sale from R to F is made under a written agreement which provides 
that the transfer price between R and F shall be that price which 
allocates to F the maximum amount permitted to be received under the 
transfer pricing rules of section 925. F resells property A in 1985 to 
an unrelated purchaser for $1,000. The terms of the sales contract 
between F and the unrelated purchaser provide that payment of the $1,000 
sales price will be made within 90 days after sale. The purchaser pays 
the entire sales price within 60 days. F incurs indirect and direct 
expenses in the amount of $260 attributable to the sale which relate to 
the activities and functions referred to in section 924 (c), (d) and 
(e). In addition, F incurs additional expenses attributable to the sale 
in the amount of $35. R's cost of goods sold attributable to the export 
property is $550. R incurred direct selling expenses in connection with 
the sale of $50. R's deductible general and administrative expenses 
allocable to all gross income are $200. Apportionment of those 
supportive expenses on the basis of gross income does not result in a 
material distortion of income and is a reasonable method of 
apportionment. R's direct selling expenses and its general and 
administrative expenses were not required to be incurred by F. R's gross 
income from sources other than the transaction is $17,550 resulting in 
total gross income of R and F (excluding the transfer price paid by F) 
of $18,000 ($450 plus $17,550). For purposes of this example, it is 
assumed that if R sold the export property to F for $690, the price 
could be justified as satisfying the standards of section 482. Under 
these facts, F may earn, under the combined taxable income method, the 
more favorable of the three transfer pricing rules, a profit of $23 on 
the sale. (Unless otherwise indicated, all examples in this section 
assume that the marginal costing method of Sec. 1.925(b)-1T does not 
result in a higher profit than the profit under the full costing 
combined taxable income method of paragraphs (c)(3) and (6) of this 
section.) F's profit and the transfer price to F from the transaction, 
using the administrative pricing methods, and F's profit if the transfer 
price

[[Page 93]]

is determined under section 482, would be as follows:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
Combined taxable income:                                                
  F's foreign trading gross receipts.......................   $1,000.00 
  R's cost of goods sold...................................     (550.00)
                                                            ------------
      Combined gross income................................      450.00 
                                                            ------------
  Less:                                                                 
    R's direct selling expenses............................       50.00 
    F's expenses...........................................      295.00 
                                                                        
  Apportionment of R's general and administrative expenses:             
    R's total G/A expenses.................................      200.00 
    Combined gross income..................................      450.00 
    R's and F's total gross income (foreign and domestic)..   18,000.00 
                                                                        
  Apportionment of G/A expenses:                                        
    $200 x $450/$18,000....................................        5.00 
                                                            ------------
      Total................................................     (350.00)
                                                            ------------
  Combined taxable income..................................      100.00 
                                                            ============
                                                                        


                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
The section 482 method--Transfer price to F and F's profit:             
  Transfer price to F......................................     $690.00 
                                                            ============
  F's profit:                                                           
    F's foreign trading gross receipts.....................    1,000.00 
                                                            ------------
    Less:                                                               
      F's cost of goods sold...............................      690.00 
      F's expenses.........................................      295.00 
                                                            ------------
          Total............................................     (985.00)
                                                            ------------
    F's profit.............................................       15.00 
                                                            ============
The gross receipts method--                                             
F's profit and transfer price to F:                                     
  F's profit--lesser of 1.83% of F's foreign trading gross              
   receipts ($18.30) or two times F's profit under the                  
   combined taxable income method ($46.00) (See below)                  
   (Unless otherwise indicated, all examples in this                    
   section assume that the marginal costing method of Sec.              
   1.925(b)-1T does not result in a higher profit than the              
   profit under the full costing combined taxable income                
   method).................................................       18.30 
                                                            ============
  Transfer price to F:                                                  
    F's foreign trading gross receipts.....................    1,000.00 
                                                            ------------
    Less:                                                               
      F's expenses.........................................      295.00 
      F's profit...........................................       18.30 
                                                            ------------
          Total............................................     (313.30)
                                                            ------------
    Transfer price.........................................      686.70 
                                                            ============
                                                                        


                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
The combined taxable income method-- F's profit and                     
 transfer price to F:                                                   
  F's profit--23% of combined taxable income ($100)........      $23.00 
                                                            ============
  Transfer price to F:                                                  
    F's foreign trading gross receipts.....................    1,000.00 
                                                            ------------
    Less:                                                               
      F's expenses.........................................      295.00 
      F's profit...........................................       23.00 
                                                            ------------
        Total..............................................     (318.00)
                                                            ------------
  Transfer price...........................................      682.00 
                                                            ============
                                                                        

With a profit of $23 under the most favorable of the transfer pricing 
methods, F's exempt foreign trade income under section 923 would be 
$207.39, computed as follows:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
  F's foreign trading gross receipts.......................   $1,000.00 
  F's costs of purchases (transfer price)..................     (682.00)
                                                            ------------
  F's foreign trade income.................................      318.00 
                                                            ============
  F's exempt foreign trade income $318 x 15/23.............      207.39 
                                                            ============
F's taxable income would be $8.00, computed as follows:                 
  F's foreign trade income.................................     $318.00 
  F's exempt foreign trade income..........................     (207.39)
                                                            ------------
    F's non-exempt foreign trade income....................      110.61 
                                                                        
  Less:                                                                 
    F's expenses allocable to non-exempt foreign trade                  
     income $295 x $110.61/$318............................     (102.61)
                                                            ------------
    F's taxable income.....................................        8.00 
                                                            ============
                                                                        

Of F's total expenses, $192.39 ($295 x $207.39/$318) are allocated to 
F's exempt foreign trade income and are disallowed for purposes of 
computing F's taxable income.

[[Page 94]]

    Example 2. Assume the same facts as in Example 1 except that the 
purchaser pays the entire sales price 96 days after delivery, well 
beyond the 60 day period in which payment must be made to avoid 
recharacterization of part of the contract price as carrying charges. 
Therefore, the contract price of $1,000 includes $10 of carrying 
charges, assuming a discount rate of 10%. See Sec. 1.927(d)-1(a) (Q & 
A2) for computation method for determining amount of carrying charges. 
Under these facts, F may earn, under the combined taxable income method, 
the most favorable of the three transfer pricing rules, a profit of 
$20.73 on the sale. F's profit and the transfer price to F under the 
transfer pricing rules, assuming that a carrying charge is incurred, 
would be as follows:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
Combined taxable income:                                                
  F's foreign trading gross receipts.......................     $990.00 
  R's cost of goods sold...................................     (550.00)
                                                            ------------
      Combined gross income................................      440.00 
                                                            ------------
Less:                                                                   
  R's direct selling expenses..............................       50.00 
R's apportioned G/A expenses:                                           
  $200 x $440/$18,000......................................        4.89 
  F's expenses.............................................      295.00 
                                                            ------------
      Total................................................     (349.89)
                                                            ------------
      Combined taxable income..............................       90.11 
                                                            ============
The combined taxable income method--F's profit and transfer             
 price to F:                                                            
  F's profit--23% of combined taxable income ($90.11)......      $20.73 
                                                            ============
Transfer price to F:                                                    
  F's foreign trading gross receipts.......................      990.00 
                                                            ------------
Less:                                                                   
  F's expenses.............................................      295.00 
  F's profit...............................................       20.73 
                                                            ------------
      Total................................................     (315.73)
                                                            ------------
      Transfer price.......................................      674.27 
                                                            ============
                                                                        


                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
The gross receipts method--F's profit and transfer price to             
 F:                                                                     
  F's profit--lesser of 1.83% of F's foreign trading gross              
   receipts ($18.12) or two times F's profit under the                  
   combined taxable income method ($41.46).................      $18.12 
                                                            ============
  Transfer price to F: F's foreign trading gross receipts..      990.00 
                                                            ------------
    Less:                                                               
      F's expenses.........................................      295.00 
      F's profit...........................................       18.12 
                                                            ------------
        Total..............................................     (313.12)
                                                            ------------
  Transfer price...........................................      676.88 
                                                            ============
The section 482 method--Transfer price to F and F's profit:             
  Transfer price to F......................................      690.00 
                                                            ============
  F's profit:                                                           
    F's foreign trading gross receipts.....................      990.00 
                                                            ------------
    Less:                                                               
      F's cost of goods sold...............................      690.00 
      F's expenses.........................................      295.00 
                                                            ------------
        Total..............................................     (985.00)
                                                            ------------
  F's profit...............................................        5.00 
                                                            ============
                                                                        

    Example 3. R and F are calendar year taxpayers. R, a domestic 
manufacturing company, owns all the stock of F, a FSC for the taxable 
year. During 1985, R produces and sells a product line of export 
property to F for $157, a price which can be justified as satisfying the 
arm's length price standard of section 482. The sale from R to F is made 
under a written agreement which provides that the transfer price between 
R and F shall be that price which allocates to F the maximum amount 
permitted to be received under the transfer pricing rules of section 
925. F resells the export property for $200. R's cost of goods sold 
attributable to the export property is $115 so that the combined gross 
income from the sale of the export property is $85 (i.e., $200 minus 
$115). R incurs $18 in direct selling expenses in connection with the 
sale of the property. R's deductible general and administrative expenses 
allocable to all gross income are $120. R's direct selling and its 
general and administrative expenses were not required to be incurred by 
F. R's gross income from sources other than the transaction is $5,015 
resulting in total gross income of R and F (excluding the transfer price 
paid by F) of $5,100 (i.e., $85 plus $5,015). F incurs $50 in direct and 
indirect expenses attributable to resale of the export property. Of 
those expenses, $45 relate to activities and functions referred to in 
section 924 (c), (d) and (e). The maximum profit which F may earn with 
respect to the product line is $3.66, computed as follows:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
Combined taxable income:                                                
  F's foreign trading gross receipts.......................     $200.00 
  R's cost of goods sold...................................     (115.00)
                                                            ------------

[[Page 95]]

                                                                        
    Combined gross income..................................       85.00 
                                                            ------------
  Less:                                                                 
    R's direct selling expenses............................       18.00 
    R's apportioned G/A expenses: $120 x $85/$5,100........        2.00 
    F's expenses...........................................       50.00 
                                                            ------------
      Total................................................      (70.00)
                                                            ------------
  Combined taxable income..................................       15.00 
                                                            ============
                                                                        


                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
The combined taxable income method--F's profit:                         
  F's profit--23% of combined taxable income ($15).........     $  3.45 
                                                            ============
The gross receipts method--F's profit:                                  
  F's profit--lesser of 1.83% of F's foreign trading gross              
   receipts ($3.66) or two times F's profit under the                   
   combined taxable income method ($6.90)..................       $3.66 
                                                            ============
The section 482 method--F's profit:                                     
  F's foreign trading gross receipts.......................      200.00 
                                                            ------------
  Less:                                                                 
    F's cost of goods sold.................................      157.00 
    F's expenses...........................................       50.00 
                                                            ------------
        Total..............................................     (207.00)
                                                            ------------
  F's profit (loss)........................................       (7.00)
                                                            ============
                                                                        

Since the gross receipts method results in a greater profit to F ($3.66) 
than does either the combined taxable income method ($3.45) or the 
section 482 method (a loss of $7), and does not exceed twice the profit 
under the combined taxable income method, F may earn a maximum profit of 
$3.66. Accordingly, the transfer price from R to F may be readjusted as 
long as the transfer price is not readjusted below $146.34, computed as 
follows:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
Transfer price to F:                                                    
  F's foreign trading gross receipts.......................    $ 200.00 
  Less:                                                                 
    F's expenses...........................................       50.00 
    F's profit.............................................        3.66 
                                                            ------------
        Total..............................................      (53.66)
                                                            ------------
  Transfer price...........................................      146.34 
                                                            ============
                                                                        

    Example 4. R and F are fiscal year May 31 year-end taxpayers. R, a 
domestic manufacturing company, owns all the stock of F, a FSC for the 
taxable year. During August of 1987, R produces and sells 100 units of 
export property A to F under a written agreement which provides that the 
transfer price between R and F shall be that price which allocates to F 
the maximum profit permitted to be received under the transfer pricing 
rules of section 925. Thereafter, the 100 units are resold for export by 
F for $950. R's cost of goods sold attributable to the 100 units is 
$650. R incurs costs, both direct and indirect, in the amount of $270 
with regard to activities and functions referred to in section 924 (c), 
(d) and (e) which it was under contract with F to perform for F. R's 
direct selling expenses are $40. Those expenses were not required to be 
incurred by F. For purposes of this example, assume that R has no 
general and administrative expenses other than those relating to the 
section 924 (c), (d) and (e) activities and functions. F incurs expenses 
in the amount of $290 attributable to the resale which relate to the 
activities and functions referred to in section 924 (c), (d) and (e). Of 
that amount, $270 was paid to R under contract to perform the activities 
in section 924. The remaining $20 was paid to independent contractors. R 
chooses not to apply the section 482 transfer pricing method to 
determine F's profit on the transaction. F may not earn any income under 
either the gross receipts (see the special no-loss rule of paragraph 
(e)(1)(i) of this section) or the combined taxable income administrative 
pricing methods with respect to resale of the 100 units because there is 
a combined loss of $(30) on the transaction, computed as follows:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
Combined taxable income:                                                
   F's foreign trading gross receipts......................    $ 950.00 
  R's cost of goods sold...................................     (650.00)
                                                            ------------
      Combined gross income................................      300.00 
                                                            ------------
  Less:                                                                 
    R's direct selling expenses............................       40.00 
    F's expenses...........................................      290.00 
                                                            ------------
        Total..............................................     (330.00)
                                                            ------------
  Combined taxable income (loss)...........................      (30.00)
                                                            ============
                                                                        

Under paragraph (e)(1)(i) of this section, F is permitted to recover its 
expenses attributable to the sale ($290) even though such recovery 
results in a loss or increased loss to the related supplier. 
Accordingly, the transfer price from R to F may be readjusted as long as 
the transfer price is not readjusted below $660, computed as follows:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
Transfer price to F:                                                    
  F's foreign trading gross receipts.......................     $950.00 

[[Page 96]]

                                                                        
  Less:                                                                 
    F's expenses...........................................     (290.00)
                                                            ------------
      Transfer price.......................................      660.00 
                                                            ============
                                                                        

    Example 5. Assume the same facts as in Example 4 except that F 
performs the section 924 (c), (d) and (e) activities and functions and 
that R chooses to apply the section 482 transfer pricing method. Under 
the standards of section 482, a transfer price from R to F of $650 is an 
arm's length price. Accordingly, the transfer price to F and F's profit 
on the subsequent resale of product A ($10) are as follows:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
The section 482 method--Transfer price to F and F's profit:             
  Transfer price to F......................................     $650.00 
                                                            ============
F's profit:                                                             
    F's foreign trading gross receipts.....................      950.00 
    F's cost of purchases..................................     (650.00)
                                                            ------------
    F's gross income.......................................      300.00 
                                                            ------------
  Less:                                                                 
    F's expenses...........................................     (290.00)
                                                            ------------
  F's profit...............................................       10.00 
                                                            ============
                                                                        

This sale of product A results in a loss to R of $40 (transfer price of 
$650 less R's cost of goods sold of $650 and direct selling expenses of 
$40). Since R chose to use the section 482 transfer pricing method on 
this loss transaction, under the special no loss rule of paragraph 
(e)(1)(iii) of this section, the administrative pricing methods of 
section 925(a)(1) and (2) may not be used for any other sale 
transactions, or group of sale transactions, during the same year of 
other products which fall within the same three digit Standard 
Industrial Classification as product A. F's profit, if any, on these 
sales must be computed under the section 482 transfer pricing method.
    Example 6. R and F are calendar year taxpayers. R, a domestic 
manufacturing company, owns all the stock of F, a FSC for the taxable 
year. During 1985, R manufactures 100 units of export property A. R 
enters into a written agreement with F whereby F is granted a sales 
franchise with respect to export property A and F will receive 
commissions with respect to these exports equal to the maximum amount 
permitted to be received under the administrative pricing rules of 
section 925 (a)(1) and (2). Thereafter, the 100 units are sold for 
export by R for $1,000. The total sales price of $1,000 was paid by the 
purchaser to R within 60 days of the sales transaction. The entire 
$1,000 would have been foreign trading gross receipts had F been the 
principal on the sale. R's cost of goods sold attributable to the 100 
units is $650. R's direct selling expenses so attributable are $50. R's 
deductible general and administrative expenses, other than those 
attributable to the section 924 (c), (d) and (e) activities and 
functions, allocable to all gross income are $200. Apportionment of 
those supportive expenses on the basis of gross income does not result 
in a material distortion of income and is a reasonable method of 
apportionment. R's direct selling expenses and the portion of the 
general and administrative expenses not relating to the activities and 
functions referred to in section 924 (c), (d) and (e) were not required 
to be incurred by F. R's gross income from sources other than the 
transaction is $17,650 resulting in total gross income of $18,000 ($350 
plus $17,650). R and a related person perform on F's behalf the 
activities and functions referred to in section 924 (c), (d) and (e). In 
performing these activities, R and the related person incurred expenses, 
both direct and indirect, of $200 and $45, respectively. F pays $200 to 
R under contract and $50 to the related person. The maximum profit which 
F may earn under the franchise pursuant to the administrative pricing 
rules is $18.30, computed as follows:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
Combined taxable income:                                                
  R's gross receipts from the sale.........................   $1,000.00 
  R's cost of goods sold...................................     (650.00)
                                                            ------------
    Combined gross income..................................      350.00 
                                                            ------------
  Less:                                                                 
    R's direct selling expenses............................       50.00 
    F's expenses...........................................      250.00 
                                                                        
    Apportionment of R's general and administrative                     
     expenses:                                                          
      R's total G/A expenses...............................      200.00 
      Combined gross income................................      350.00 
      R's and F's total gross income (foreign and domestic)   18,000.00 
                                                            ============
      Apportionment of G/A expenses:                                    
        $200 x $350/$18,000................................        3.89 
                                                                        
          Total............................................     (303.89)
                                                            ------------
  Combined taxable income..................................       46.11 
                                                            ============
                                                                        


[[Page 97]]

As reflected in the above computation, F included on its books $200 of 
expenses related to the section 924 activities and performed by R on 
behalf of F. R incurred $253.89 of expenses. These expenses were 
reflected on its books. Under paragraph (b)(2)(ii) of this section, R 
and F may elect to include all of the expenses related to the export 
sales on F's books. This will satisfy the requirements of section 925(c) 
without requiring an allocation of the expenses between R and F. Under 
this election, as reflected in the following computation, combined 
taxable income will still be $46.11 but, as reflected in a later part of 
this example, the commission due F will be increased by $253.89:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
Combined taxable income:                                                
  R's gross receipts from the sale.........................   $1,000.00 
  R's cost of goods sold...................................     (650.00)
                                                            ------------
      Combined gross income................................      350.00 
                                                            ------------
Less:                                                                   
  F's expenses.............................................     (303.89)
                                                            ------------
      Combined taxable income..............................       46.11 
                                                            ============
                                                                        


                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
The combined taxable income method--F's profit:                         
  F's profit--23% of combined taxable income ($46.11)......      $10.61 
                                                            ============
The gross receipts method--F's profit:                                  
  F's profit--lesser of 1.83% of R's gross receipts                     
   ($18.30) or two times F's profit under the combined                  
   taxable income method ($21.22)..........................      $18.30 
                                                            ============
                                                                        
 If the election provided for in paragraph (b)(2)(ii) of this section is
 not made, F may receive a commission from R in the amount of $268.30,  
 computed as follows:                                                   
                                                                        
  F's expenses.............................................     $250.00 
  F's profit...............................................       18.30 
                                                            ------------
      F's commission.......................................      268.30 
                                                            ============
                                                                        
 This $268.30 is F's foreign trade income. F's exempt foreign trade     
 income is $174.98 ($268.30 x 15/23). F's taxable income is $6.37,      
 computed as follows:                                                   
                                                                        
  F's foreign trade income.................................     $268.30 
  F's exempt foreign trade income..........................     (174.98)
                                                            ------------
      F's non-exempt foreign trade income..................       93.32 
                                                            ------------
Less:                                                                   
  F's expenses allocable to non-exempt foreign trade income             
   $250 x $93.32/$268.30...................................      (86.95)
                                                            ------------
      F's taxable income...................................        6.37 
                                                            ============
                                                                        

Of F's total expenses, $163.05 ($250 x $174.98/$268.30) are allocated to 
F's exempt foreign trade income and are disallowed for purposes of 
computing F's taxable income.
If R and F make the election provided for in paragraph (b)(2)(ii) of 
this section, F may receive a commission from R in the amount of 
$322.19, computed as follows:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
  F's expenses.............................................     $303.89 
  F's profit...............................................       18.30 
                                                            ------------
    F's commission.........................................      322.19 
                                                            ============
                                                                        
 With this election, this $322.19 is F's foreign trade income. F's      
 exempt foreign trade income is $210.12 ($322.19 x 15/23). F's taxable  
 income is still $6.37, computed as follows:                            
                                                                        
  F's foreign trade income.................................     $322.19 
  F's exempt foreign trade income..........................     (210.12)
                                                            ------------
    F's non-exempt foreign trade income....................      112.07 
                                                            ------------
  Less:                                                                 
    F's expenses allocable to non-exempt foreign trade                  
     income $303.89 x $112.07/$322.19......................     (105.70)
                                                            ------------
    F's taxable income.....................................        6.37 
                                                            ============
                                                                        
 Of F's total expenses, $198.19 ($303.89 x $210.12/$322.19) are         
 allocated to F's exempt foreign trade income and are disallowed for    
 purposes of computing F's taxable income.                              
                                                                        

    Example 7. Assume the same facts as in Example 6 except that R's 
direct selling expenses are $60. The profit which F may earn under the 
franchise pursuant to the administrative pricing rules is $16.62, 
computed as follows:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
Combined taxable income:                                                
  R's gross receipts from the sale.........................   $1,000.00 
  R's cost of goods sold...................................     (650.00)
                                                            ------------
    Combined gross income..................................      350.00 
                                                            ------------
  Less:                                                                 
    R's direct selling expenses............................       60.00 
    R's apportioned G/A expenses...........................        3.89 
    F's expenses...........................................      250.00 
                                                            ------------
                                                                (313.89)
                                                                        
  Combined taxable income..................................       36.11 
                                                            ============
The combined taxable income method--F's profit:                         
  F's profit--23% of combined taxable income ($36.11)......        8.31 
                                                            ============

[[Page 98]]

                                                                        
The gross receipts method--F's profit:                                  
  F's profit--lesser of 1.83% of R's gross receipts ($                  
   18.30) or two times F's profit under the combined                    
   taxable income method ($16.62)..........................       16.62 
                                                            ============
                                                                        
 F may receive a commission from R in the amount of $266.62, computed as
 follows:                                                               
                                                                        
  F's expenses.............................................     $250.00 
  F's profit...............................................       16.62 
                                                            ------------
    F's commission.........................................      266.62 
                                                            ============
                                                                        

If the election provided for in paragraph (b)(2)(ii) of this section is 
made by R and F, the profit which F may earn under the franchise 
pursuant to the administrative pricing rules will remain at $16.62 but 
will be computed as follows:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
Combined taxable income:                                                
  R's gross receipts from the sale.........................   $1,000.00 
  R's cost of goods sold...................................     (650.00)
                                                            ------------
    Combined gross income..................................      350.00 
                                                            ------------
  Less: F's expenses.......................................     (313.89)
                                                            ------------
  Combined taxable income..................................       36.11 
                                                            ============
The combined taxable income method--F's profit:                         
  F's profit--23% of combined taxable income ($36.11)......        8.31 
                                                            ============
The gross receipts method--F's profit:                                  
  F's profit--lesser of 1.83% of R's gross receipts                     
   ($18.30) or two times F's profit under the combined                  
   taxable income method ($16.62)..........................       16.62 
                                                            ============
F may receive a commission from R in the amount of $330.51,             
 computed as follows:                                                   
  F's expenses.............................................      313.89 
  F's profit...............................................       16.62 
                                                            ------------
    F's commission.........................................      330.51 
                                                            ============
                                                                        

As illustrated by Example 6, F's exempt taxable income and taxable 
income will be the same regardless of which method is used to compute 
F's commission.
    Example 8. Assume the same facts as in Example 6 except that F's 
expenses are $300. With this assumption, there is a combined loss of 
$(3.89) on the transaction under the full costing combined taxable 
income method, computed as follows:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
Combined taxable income:                                                
  R's gross receipts from the sale.........................   $1,000.00 
  R's cost of goods sold...................................     (650.00)
                                                            ------------
    Combined gross income..................................      350.00 
                                                            ------------
  Less:                                                                 
    R's direct selling expenses............................       50.00 
    R's apportioned G/A expenses...........................        3.89 
    F's expenses...........................................      300.00 
                                                            ------------
                                                                (353.89)
                                                            ------------
  Combined taxable income (loss)...........................       (3.89)
                                                            ============
                                                                        

Since there is a combined loss, F will not have a profit under the full 
costing combined taxable income method. However, for purposes of this 
example, it is assumed that under the marginal costing rules of 
Sec. 1.925(b)-1T the maximum combined taxable income is $75 and the 
overall profit percentage limitation is $30. Accordingly, F's profit 
would be $6.90 (23% of $30) under the marginal costing rules. F's profit 
under the gross receipts method will be $13.80 (1.83% of $1,000 limited 
by section 925(d) to two times the profit determined under marginal 
costing). The commission F may receive from R is $313.80. Had all of the 
expenses been reflected on F's books pursuant to the election of 
paragraph (b)(2)(ii) of this section, F's commission would have been 
$367.69.
    Example 9. Assume the same facts as in Example 6 except that F's 
expenses are $300 and that the transaction occurred in 1987. F will not 
earn a profit under the sales franchise pursuant to the administrative 
pricing rules. This is shown by the following computation:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
Combined taxable income:                                                
  R's gross receipts from the sale................             $1,000.00
  R's cost of goods sold..........................              (650.00)
                                                   ---------------------
    Combined gross income.........................                350.00
                                                   ---------------------
  Less:                                                                 
    R's direct selling expenses...................                 50.00
    R's apportioned G/A expenses..................                  3.89
    F's expenses..................................                300.00
                                                   ---------------------
                                                                (353.89)
                                                   ---------------------
  Combined taxable income (loss)..................                (3.89)
                                                   =====================
                                                                        

F will not have a profit under the full costing combined taxable income 
method since there is a combined loss of $(3.89). Also, F will not have 
a profit under the gross receipts method due to section 925(d) and the 
special no loss rule of paragraph (e)(1)(i) of this section. In 
addition, F will not have a profit under the marginal costing rules 
because the profit may not exceed full costing combined taxable income, 
see Sec. 1.925 (b)-1T(b)(4). Although F may not earn a profit, it is 
entitled to recoup its expenses. Therefore, the commission F may receive 
from R is $300.00. R will bear the entire loss. Had all of the expenses 
been reflected on F's books pursuant to the election of paragraph 
(b)(2)(ii) of this section, F's commission would have been $353.89.
    Example 10. Assume the same facts as in Example 6 except that R 
receives total payment of the sale price of $1,000 on the 96th day after 
delivery, well beyond the 60 day period in which payment must be made to

[[Page 99]]

avoid recharacterization of part of the contract price as carrying 
charges. Therefore, the contract price of $1,000 includes $10 of 
carrying charges, assuming a discount rate of 10%. See Sec. 1.927(d)-1 
(a) (Q & A2) for computation method for determining amount of carrying 
charges. This $10 of carrying charges is R's income. The profit which F 
may earn under the franchise pursuant to the administrative pricing 
rules is $16.66, computed as follows (the election of paragraph 
(b)(2)(ii) of this section is not made by R and F):

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
Combined taxable income:                                                
  R's gross receipts from the sale..........................    $990.00 
  R's cost of goods sold....................................    (650.00)
                                                             -----------
    Combined gross income...................................     340.00 
                                                             -----------
  Less:                                                                 
    R's direct selling expenses.............................      50.00 
    R's apportioned G/A expenses: $200 x $340/$18,000.......       3.78 
    F's expenses............................................     250.00 
                                                             -----------
      Total.................................................    (303.78)
                                                             -----------
  Combined taxable income...................................      36.22 
                                                             ===========
The combined taxable income method-- F's profit: F's profit--           
 23% of combined taxable income ($36.22)                          $8.33 
                                                             ===========
The gross receipts method--F's profit:                                  
  F's profit--lesser of 1.83% of R's gross receipts ($18.12)            
   or two times F's profit under the combined taxable income            
   method ($16.66)..........................................     $16.66 
                                                             ===========
F may receive a commission from R in the amount of $266.66,             
 computed as follows:                                                   
  F's expenses..............................................    $250.00 
  F's profit................................................      16.66 
                                                             -----------
    F's commission..........................................     266.66 
                                                             ===========
                                                                        

    Example 11. Assume the same facts as in Example 6. In addition, 
assume that R also manufactures products K, L, M, N, and P all of which 
are export property as defined in section 927(a). Product K is military 
property as defined in section 923(a)(5) and Sec. 1.923-1T(b)(3)(ii). 
Assume further that products A, L, and P are included within product 
line X and that products K, L, M, and N are included within product line 
W. R has entered into a written agreement with F under which F is 
granted a sales franchise with respect to exporting the products. Under 
this agreement, F will receive commissions with respect to those exports 
equal to the maximum amount permitted to be received under the 
administrative pricing rules. The table set forth below details F's 
foreign trading gross receipts, R's cost of goods sold and R's and F's 
expenses allocable and apportioned under Sec. 1.861-8 to the sale of 
products A, L, M, N, and P. For purposes of this example, it is assumed 
that R does not incur any general and administrative expenses. Because 
of the special grouping rule of paragraph (c)(8)(ii) of this section, 
product L may be included for purposes of the administrative pricing 
rules in only one product line, at the option of R. Also for these 
purposes, product K, which is military property, may not be grouped with 
products L, M, and N. See paragraph (c)(8)(iv) of this section. Under 
these facts, F will have profits under the franchise agreement from the 
sale of products A, L, M, N, and P and may receive commissions from R 
relating to the sale of those products, assuming the election of 
paragraph (b)(2)(ii) of this section is not made, in the following 
amounts:

                                                                        
                                                      F's               
                                          Profit   Expenses  Commissions
                                                                        
Product Line X (products A and P)......    $36.34   $490.00     $526.34 
Product Line W (products L, M, and N)..    $40.48   $421.00     $461.48 
                                                                        

On the sale of product K, R received gross receipts of $150. R's cost of 
goods sold was $130. R's and F's expenses allocable to product K totaled 
$10 ($7 of R's expenses and $3 of F's). Under the gross receipts method, 
F earned a profit of $2.75 (1.83% of $150) and $2.30 under the combined 
taxable income method. F may receive a commission, assuming the election 
of paragraph (b)(2)(ii) of this section is made by R and F, from R in 
the amount of $12.75, computed as follows:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
F's expenses..................................................    $10.00
F's profit....................................................      2.75
                                                               ---------
    F's commission............................................    $12.75
                                                               =========
                                                                        

      

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                           Product A   Product L   Product M   Product N   Product P     Total  
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product Line X                                                                                                  
  Combined Taxable Income                                                                                       
    R's GR From sale....................    $1,000    ..........  ..........  ..........    $1,000      $2,000  
    R's cost of goods sold..............      (650)   ..........  ..........  ..........      (650)     (1,300) 
                                         -----------------------------------------------------------------------
      Combined gross income.............       350    ..........  ..........  ..........       350         700  
                                         -----------------------------------------------------------------------
    Less:                                                                                                       
      R's expenses......................        50    ..........  ..........  ..........        81         131  

[[Page 100]]

                                                                                                                
      F's expenses......................       250    ..........  ..........  ..........       240         490  
                                         -------------                                                          
        Total...........................      (300)   ..........  ..........  ..........      (321)       (621) 
                                         -------------                                                          
    Combined taxable income (loss)......       $50    ..........  ..........  ..........       $29         $79  
                                         =============                                                          
  23% of CTI............................    $11.50    ..........  ..........  ..........     $6.67      $18.17  
                                         =============                                                          
  1.83% of GR from sale.................    $18.30    ..........  ..........  ..........    $13.34      $36.34  
                                         =============                                                          
Product Line W                                                                                                  
  Combined Taxable Income                                                                                       
    R's GR from sale....................  ..........    $1,000        $625      $1,800    ..........    $3,425  
    R's cost of goods sold..............  ..........      (650)       (445)     (1,600)   ..........    (2,695) 
                                         -------------                                                          
      Combined gross income.............  ..........       350         180         200    ..........       730  
                                         -------------                                                          
    Less:                                                                                                       
      R's expenses......................  ..........        81          70          70    ..........       221  
      F's expenses......................  ..........       230          60         131    ..........       421  
                                         -------------                                                          
        Total...........................  ..........      (311)       (130)       (201)   ..........      (642) 
                                         -------------                                                          
    Combined taxable income (loss)......  ..........       $39         $50         $(1)   ..........       $88  
                                         =============                                                          
  23% of CTI............................  ..........     $8.97      $11.50          $0    ..........    $20.24  
                                         =============                                                          
  1.83% of GR From sale.................  ..........    $17.94      $11.44          $0    ..........    $40.48  
                                         =============                                                          
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    Example 12. R and F are calendar year taxpayers. R owns all the 
stock of F, an FSC for the taxable year. During 1985, R purchases 100 
units of export property A from B, an unrelated domestic manufacturing 
company for $850. R's direct selling expenses so attributable are $20. R 
enters into a written agreement with F whereby F is granted a sales 
franchise with respect to export product A and F will receive 
commissions with respect to these exports equal to the maximum amount 
permitted to be received under the administrative pricing rules of 
section 925. Thereafter, the 100 units are sold for export by R for 
$1,050. R factors the trade receivable to unrelated person X for $1,000. 
Under Sec. 1.924(a)-1T(g)(7), total gross receipts for purposes of 
computing R's and F's combined taxable income is $1,000 (total receipts 
($1,050) less the discount ($50)). This $1,000 would have been foreign 
trading gross receipts had F been the principal on the sale. For 
purposes of this example, it is assumed that R did not incur any general 
and administrative expenses. F incurs expenses in the amount of $110, 
all of which were performed by R under contract to F. The profit which F 
may earn under the franchise pursuant to the administrative pricing 
rules is $9.20 computed as follows:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
Combined taxable income:                                                
  R's gross receipts from the sale.........................   $1,000.00 
  R's cost of goods sold...................................     (850.00)
                                                            ------------
                                                                 150.00 
                                                            ------------
  Less:                                                                 
    R's direct selling expenses............................       20.00 
    F's expenses...........................................      110.00 
                                                            ------------
      Total................................................      130.00 
                                                            ------------
  Combined taxable income..................................      $20.00 
                                                            ============
The combined taxable income method--F's profit:                         
  F's profit--23% of combined taxable income ($20).........       $4.60 
                                                            ============
The gross receipts method--F's profit:                                  
  F's profit--lesser of 1.83% of R's gross receipts                     
   ($18.30) or two times F's profit under the combined                  
   taxable income, method ($9.20)..........................       $9.20 
                                                            ============
F may receive a commission from R in the amount of $119.20,             
 computed as follows (the election of Sec.  1.925(a)-                   
 1T(b)(2)(ii) has not been made):                                       
  F's expenses.............................................     $110.00 
  F's profit...............................................        9.20 
                                                            ------------
    F's commission.........................................     $119.20 
                                                            ============
                                                                        


[[Page 101]]

    Example 13. R and F are calendar year taxpayers. R, a domestic 
manufacturing company, owns all the stock of F, an FSC for the taxable 
year. During March 1985, R manufactures office equipment, export 
property within the definition of section 927(a)(1), which it leases on 
April 1, 1985, to F for a term of 1 year at a monthly rental of $1,000, 
a rent which satisfies the standard of arm's length rental under section 
482. F subleases the product on April 1, 1985, for a term of 1 year at a 
monthly rental of $1,200. R's cost for the product leased is $40,000. 
R's other deductible expenses attributable to the product are $200, all 
of which are incurred in 1985. Those expenses were not incurred under 
contract to F. F's expenses attributable to sublease of the export 
property are $1,150, all of which are incurred in 1985 directly by F. R 
depreciates the property on a straight line basis, using a half-year 
convention, assuming a 10 year recovery period (see section 
168(f)(2)(C), Sec. 1.48-1(g)). The profit which F may earn with respect 
to the transaction is $1,483.50 for 1985 and $600 for 1986, computed as 
follows:

                          Computation for 1985

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
Combined taxable income:                                                
  F's sublease rental receipts for year ($1,200  x  9                   
   months)................................................   $10,800.00 
                                                           -------------
Less:                                                                   
  R's depreciation (($40,000  x 1/10) x 9/12).............     3,000.00 
  R's expenses............................................       200.00 
  F's expense.............................................     1,150.00 
                                                           -------------
      Total...............................................    (4,350.00)
                                                           -------------
Combined taxable income...................................     6,450.00 
                                                           =============
The combined taxable income method--F's profit:                         
  F's profit--23% of combined taxable income ($6,450).....    $1,483.50 
                                                           =============
The gross receipts method--F's profit:                                  
  F's profit--lesser of 1.83% of F's foreign trading gross              
   receipts ($197.64) or two times F's profit under the                 
   combined taxable income method ($2,967)................      $197.64 
                                                           =============
The section 482 method--F's profit:                                     
  F's sublease rental receipts for year...................   $10,800.00 
                                                           -------------
Less:                                                                   
  F's lease rental payments for year......................     9,000.00 
  F's expenses............................................     1,150.00 
                                                           -------------
      Total...............................................   (10,150.00)
                                                           -------------
      F's profit..........................................       650.00 
                                                           =============
                                                                        

Since the combined taxable income method results in greater profit to F 
($1,483.50) than does either the gross receipts method ($197.64) or the 
section 482 method ($650), F may earn a profit of $1,483.50 for 1985. 
Accordingly, the monthly rental payable by F to R for 1985 may be 
readjusted as long as the monthly rental payable is not readjusted below 
$907.39, computed as follows:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
Monthly rental payable by F to R for 1985:                              
  F's sublease rental receipts for year...................   $10,800.00 
                                                           -------------
Less:                                                                   
  F's expenses............................................     1,150.00 
  F's profit..............................................     1,483.50 
                                                           -------------
      Total...............................................    (2,633.50)
                                                           -------------
      Rental payable for 1985.............................     8,166.50 
                                                           =============
      Rental payable each month ($8,166.50/9 months)......      $907.39 
                                                           =============
                                                                        

                          Computation for 1986

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
Combined taxable income:                                                
  F's sublease rental receipts for year ($1,200 x 3 months)   $3,600.00 
                                                            ------------
Less:                                                                   
  R's depreciation (($40,000 x \1/10\) x \3/12\)...........   (1,000.00)
                                                            ------------
      Combined taxable income..............................    2,600.00 
                                                            ============
The combined taxable income method--F's profit:                         
  F's profit--23% of combined taxable income ($2,600)......      598.00 
                                                            ============
The gross receipts method--F's profit:                                  
  F's profit--lesser of 1.83% of F's foreign trading gross              
   receipts ($3,600) or two times F's profit under the                  
   combined taxable income method ($1,196).................       65.88 
                                                            ============
The section 482 method--F's profit:                                     
  F's sublease rental receipts for year....................   $3,600.00 
                                                            ------------
Less:                                                                   
  F's lease rental payments for year.......................   (3,000.00)
                                                            ------------

[[Page 102]]

                                                                        
      F's profit...........................................      600.00 
                                                            ============
                                                                        

Since the section 482 method results in a greater profit to F ($600) 
than does either the combined taxable income method ($598) or the gross 
receipts method ($65.88), F may earn a profit of $600 for 1986. 
Accordingly, the monthly rental payable by F to R for 1986 may be 
readjusted as long as the monthly rental payable is not readjusted below 
$1,000, computed as follows:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
Monthly rental payable by F to R for 1986:                              
  F's sublease rental receipts for year....................   $3,600.00 
                                                            ------------
Less:                                                                   
  F's profit...............................................     (600.00)
                                                            ------------
  Rental payable for 1986..................................    3,000.00 
                                                            ============
  Rental payable for each month ($3,000/3 months)..........    1,000.00 
                                                            ============
                                                                        

    (g) Effective date. The provisions of this section and 
Sec. 1.925(b)-1T apply with respect to taxable year ending after 
December 31, 1984, except that a corporation may not be a FSC for any 
taxable year beginning before January 1, 1985.

[T.D. 8126, 52 FR 6443, Mar. 3, 1987]


<R05>
Sec. 1.925(b)-1T  Temporary regulations; marginal costing rules.

    (a) In general. This section prescribes the marginal costing rules 
authorized by section 925(b)(2). If under paragraph (c)(1) of this 
section a FSC is treated for its taxable year as seeking to establish or 
maintain a foreign market for sales of an item, product, or product line 
of export property (as defined in Sec. 1.927(a)-1T) from which foreign 
trading gross receipts (as defined in Sec. 1.924(a)-1T) are derived, the 
marginal costing rules prescribed in paragraph (b) of this section may 
be applied at the related supplier's election to compute combined 
taxable income of the FSC and related supplier derived from those sales. 
(Any further reference to a FSC in this section shall include a small 
FSC unless indicated otherwise.) The combined taxable income determined 
under these marginal costing rules may be used to determine whether the 
``twice the amount determined under the combined taxable income method'' 
limitation for the 1.83% of gross receipts test of section 925(d) has 
been met.
For FSC taxable years beginning after December 31, 1986, if the marginal 
costing rules are used to determine the section 925(d) limitation, the 
FSC may not earn more than 100% of full costing combined taxable income 
determined under the full costing combined taxable income method of 
Sec. 1.925(a)-1T(c)(3) and (6). The marginal costing rules may be 
applied even if the related supplier does not manufacture, produce, 
grow, or extract the export property sold. The marginal costing rules do 
not apply to sales of export property which in the hands of a purchaser 
related under section 954(d)(3) to the seller give rise to foreign base 
company sales income as described in section 954(d) unless, for the 
purchaser's year in which it resells the export property, section 
954(b)(3)(A) is applicable or that income is under the exceptions in 
section 954(b)(4). In addition, the marginal costing rules do not apply 
to leases of property or to the performances of any services even if 
they are related and subsidiary services (as defined in Sec. 1.924(a)-
1T(d) and Sec. 1.925(a)-1T(b)(2)(iii)(C)).
    (b) Marginal costing rules--(1) In general. Marginal costing is a 
method under which only direct production costs of producing a 
particular item, product, or product line are taken into account for 
purposes of computing the combined taxable income of the FSC and its 
related supplier under section 925(a)(2). The costs to be taken into 
account are the related supplier's direct material and labor costs (as 
defined in Sec. 1.471-11(b)(2)(i)). Costs which are incurred by the FSC 
and which are not taken into account in computing combined taxable 
income are deductible by the FSC only to the extent of the FSC's non-
foreign trade income. If the related supplier is not the manufacturer or 
producer of the export property that is sold, the related supplier's 
purchase price shall be taken into account.
    (2) Overall profit percentage limitation. Under marginal costing, 
the combined taxable income of the FSC and its related supplier may not 
exceed the overall profit percentage (determined under

[[Page 103]]

paragraph (c)(2) of this section) multiplied by the FSC's foreign 
trading gross receipts if the FSC is the principal on the sale (or the 
related supplier's gross receipts if the FSC is a commission agent) from 
the sale of export property.
    (3) Grouping of transactions. (i) In general, for purposes of this 
section, an item, product, or product line is the item or group 
consisting of the product or product line pursuant to Sec. 1.925(a)-
1T(c)(8) used by the taxpayer for purposes of applying the full costing 
combined taxable income method of Sec. 1.925(a)-1T(c)(3) and (6).
    (ii) However, for purposes of determining the overall profit 
percentage under paragraph (c)(2) of this section, any product or 
product line grouping permissible under Sec. 1.925(a)-1T(c)(8) may be 
used at the annual choice of the FSC even though it may not be the same 
item or grouping referred to in subdivision (i) of this paragraph as 
long as the grouping chosen for determining the overall profit 
percentage is at least as broad as the grouping referred to in the above 
subdivision (i) of this paragraph. A product may be included for this 
purpose, however, in only one product group even though under the 
grouping rules it would otherwise fall in more than one group. Thus, the 
marginal costing rules will not apply with respect to any regrouping if 
the regrouping does not include any product (or products) that was 
included in the group for purposes of the full costing method.
    (4) Application of limitation on FSC income (``no loss'' rules). The 
marginal costing rules of this section will not apply if there is a 
combined loss of the related supplier and the FSC determined in 
accordance with paragraph (b)(1) of this section. In addition, for FSC 
taxable years beginning after December 31, 1986, the profit determined 
under the marginal costing method may be allowed to the FSC only to the 
extent it does not exceed the FSC's and the related supplier's full 
costing combined taxable income determined under the full costing 
combined taxable income method of Sec. 1.925(a)-1T(c)(3) and (6). This 
rule prevents pricing at a loss to the related supplier. If either of 
these ``no loss'' rules apply, the related supplier may nonetheless 
charge a transfer price or pay a commission in an amount that will allow 
the FSC to recover an amount not in excess of its full costs, if any, 
even if to do so would create or increase a loss in the related 
supplier. The effect of these no-loss rules and of the overall profit 
percentage limitation of paragraph (c)(2) of this section is that the 
FSC's profit under these marginal costing rules is limited to the lesser 
of the following:
    (i) 23% of maximum combined taxable income determined under the 
marginal costing rules,
    (ii) 23% of the overall profit percentage limitation, or
    (iii) For FSC taxable years beginning after December 31, 1986, 100% 
of the full costing combined taxable income determined under the full 
costing combined taxable income method of Sec. 1.925(a)-1T(c)(3) and 
(6).
    (c) Definitions--(1) Establishing or maintaining a foreign market. A 
FSC shall be treated for its taxable year as seeking to establish or 
maintain a foreign market with respect to sales of an item, product, or 
product line of export property from which foreign trading gross 
receipts are derived if the combined taxable income computed under 
paragraph (b) of this section is greater than the full costing combined 
taxable income computed under the full costing combined taxable income 
method of Sec. 1.925(a)-1T(c)(3) and (6).
    (2) Overall profit percentage. (i) For purposes of this section, the 
overall profit percentage for a taxable year of the FSC for a product or 
product line is the percentage which--
    (A) The combined taxable income of the FSC and its related supplier 
from the sale of export property plus all other taxable income of its 
related supplier from all sales (domestic and foreign) of such product 
or product line during the FSC's taxable year, computed under the full 
costing method, is of
    (B) The total gross receipts (determined under Sec. 1.927(b)-1T) of 
the FSC and related supplier from all sales of the product or product 
line.
    (ii) At the annual option of the related supplier, the overall 
profit percentage for the FSC's taxable year for all

[[Page 104]]

products and product lines may be determined by aggregating the amounts 
described in subdivisions (i)(A) and (B) of this paragraph of the FSC, 
and all domestic members of the controlled group (as defined in section 
927(d)(4) and Sec. 1.924(a)-1T(h)) of which the FSC is a member, for the 
FSC's taxable year and for taxable years of the members ending with or 
within the FSC's taxable year.
    (iii) For purposes of determining the amounts in subdivisions (i) 
and (ii) of this paragraph, a sale of property between a FSC and its 
related supplier or between domestic members of the controlled group 
shall be taken into account only during the FSC's taxable year (or 
taxable year of the member ending within the FSC's taxable year) during 
which the property is ultimately sold to a person which is not related 
to the FSC or if related, is a foreign person that is not a FSC.
    (3) Full costing method. For purposes of section 925 and this 
section, the term ``full costing combined taxable income method'' is the 
method for determining full costing combined taxable income set forth in 
Sec.  1.925(a)-1T(c)(3) and (6).
    (d) Examples. The provisions of this section may be illustrated by 
the following examples:
    Example 1. R and F are calendar year taxpayers. R, a domestic 
manufacturing company, owns all the stock of F, a FSC for the taxable 
year. During 1985, R produces and sells 100 units of export property A 
to F under a written agreement which provides that the transfer price 
between R and F shall be that price which allocates to F the maximum 
profit permitted to be received under the administrative pricing rules 
of section 925(a)(1) and (2). Thereafter, the 100 units are resold for 
export by F for $950. R's cost of goods sold attributable to the 100 
units is $650 consisting in part of $400 of direct materials and $200 of 
direct labor. R incurs selling expenses directly attributable to the 
sale in the amount of $100. Those expenses were not required to be 
incurred by F. For purposes of this example, it is assumed that R does 
not have general and administrative expenses that are not definitely 
allocable to any item of gross income. F's expenses attributable to the 
resale of the 100 units are $120. For purposes of this example, R and F 
have gross receipts of $4,000 from all domestic and foreign sales. R's 
total cost of goods sold and total expenses relating to its foreign and 
domestic sales are $2,730 and $450, respectively. Under full costing, 
the combined taxable income will be $80, computed as follows:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
Combined taxable income--full costing:                                  
  F's foreign trading gross receipts........................    $950.00 
  R's cost of goods sold....................................    (650.00)
                                                             -----------
    Combined gross income...................................     300.00 
                                                             -----------
  Less:                                                                 
    R's direct selling expenses.............................     100.00 
    F's expenses............................................     120.00 
                                                             -----------
      Total.................................................    (220.00)
                                                             -----------
  Combined taxable income (loss)............................      80.00 
                                                             ===========
                                                                        

F's profit under the full costing combined taxable income method is 
$18.40, i.e., 23% of full costing combined taxable income ($80). F's 
profit under the gross receipts method will be $17.39, i.e., 1.83% of 
F's foreign trading gross receipts ($950). However, under the marginal 
costing rules, F would have a profit attributable to the export sale in 
the amount of $38.24, i.e., 23% of combined taxable income as determined 
under the marginal costing rules (23% of $166.25). As shown by the 
computation below, the combined taxable income under marginal costing is 
limited to the overall profit percentage limitation ($166.25) since that 
amount is less than the maximum combined taxable income amount ($350):

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
Maximum combined taxable income (determined under paragraph             
 (b)(1) of this section):                                               
                                                                        
  F's foreign trading gross receipts........................    $950.00 
                                                             -----------
  Less:                                                                 
    R's direct materials....................................     400.00 
    R's direct labor........................................     200.00 
                                                             -----------
      Total.................................................    (600.00)
                                                             -----------
  Maximum combined total income.............................     350.00 
                                                             ===========
                                                                        


                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
Overall profit percentage limitation calculation                        
 (determined under paragraph (c)(2) of this section):                   
  Gross receipts of R and F from all domestic and foreign               
   sales...................................................   $4,000.00 
  R's cost of goods sold...................................   (2,730.00)
                                                            ------------
      Combined gross income................................    1,270.00 
                                                            ------------
  Less:                                                                 
    R's expenses...........................................      450.00 

[[Page 105]]

                                                                        
    F's expenses...........................................      120.00 
                                                            ------------
      Total................................................     (570.00)
                                                            ------------
      Total taxable income from all sales computed on a                 
       full costing method.................................      700.00 
                                                            ============
  Overall profit percentage (total taxable income ($700)                
   divided by total gross receipts ($4,000)................       17.5% 
                                                            ============
  Overall profit percentage limitation Overall profit                   
   percentage times F's foreign trading gross receipts                  
   (17.5% times $950.00)...................................     $166.25 
                                                            ============
                                                                        

The transfer price from R to F may be set at $791.76, computed as 
follows:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
Transfer price to F:                                                    
  F's foreign trading gross receipts.......................     $950.00 
                                                            ------------
Less:                                                                   
  F's expenses.............................................      120.00 
  F's profit...............................................       38.24 
                                                            ------------
      Total................................................     (158.24)
                                                            ------------
  Transfer price...........................................      791.76 
                                                            ============
                                                                        

    Example 2. Assume the same facts as in Example 1 except that F's 
expenses are $170. Under full costing, the combined taxable income will 
be $30, computed as follows:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
Combined taxable income--full costing:                                  
  F's foreign trading gross receipts.........................   $950.00 
  R's cost of goods sold.....................................   (650.00)
                                                              ----------
      Combined gross income..................................    300.00 
                                                              ----------
Less:                                                                   
  R's expenses...............................................    100.00 
  F's expenses...............................................    170.00 
                                                              ==========
      Total..................................................   (270.00)
                                                              ----------
      Combined taxable income (loss).........................     30.00 
                                                              ----------
                                                                        

F's profit under the full costing combined taxable income method is 
$6.90, i.e., 23% of combined taxable income, $30. Under the marginal 
costing rules, F may earn a profit attributable to the export sale in 
the amount of $35.51, i.e., 23% of combined taxable income as determined 
under the marginal costing rules (23% of $154.38). Had the transaction 
occurred in 1987, F would have had a profit attributable to the export 
sale under these marginal costing rules of only $30, i.e., 23% of 
combined taxable income as determined under the marginal costing rules 
(23% of $154.38) limited, for FSC taxable years beginning after December 
31, 1986, to combined taxable income determined under full costing 
($30), see paragraph (b)(4) of this section. F's profit under the gross 
receipts method will be $17.39 i.e., 1.83% of F's foreign trading gross 
receipts ($950). The computations are as follows:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
Maximum combined taxable income (determined under paragraph             
 (b)(1) of this section):                                               
  F's foreign trading gross receipts.......................     $950.00 
                                                            ------------
  Less:                                                                 
    R's direct materials...................................      400.00 
    R's direct labor.......................................      200.00 
                                                            ------------
      Total................................................     (600.00)
                                                            ------------
  Maximum combined taxable income                                350.00 
                                                            ============
Overall profit percentage limitation calculation                        
 (determined under paragraph (c)(2) of this section):                   
  Gross receipts of R and F from all domestic and foreign               
   sales...................................................    4,000.00 
  R's cost of goods sold...................................   (2,730.00)
                                                            ------------
  Combined gross income....................................    1,270.00 
                                                            ------------
  Less:                                                                 
    R's expenses...........................................      450.00 
    F's expenses...........................................      170.00 
                                                            ------------
      Total................................................     (620.00)
                                                            ------------
  Total taxable income from all sales computed on a full                
   costing method..........................................      650.00 
                                                            ============
Overall profit percentage (total taxable income ($650)                  
 divided by total gross receipts ($4,000)).................      16.25% 
                                                            ============

[[Page 106]]

                                                                        
Overall profit percentage limitation Overall profit                     
 percentage times F's foreign trading gross receipts                    
 (16.25% times $950.00)....................................      154.38 
                                                            ============
The transfer price from R to F may be set at $744.49,                   
 computed as follows:                                                   
                                                                        
  Transfer price to F:                                                  
    F's foreign trading gross receipts.....................      950.00 
                                                            ------------
    Less:                                                               
      F's expenses.........................................      170.00 
      F's profit...........................................       35.51 
                                                            ------------
        Total..............................................     (205.51)
                                                            ------------
    Transfer price.........................................      744.49 
                                                            ============
                                                                        

    Example 3. Assume the same facts as in Example 1 except that the 
transaction occurs in 1987 and that F incurs expenses in the amount of 
$250. Since a $50 combined loss, as computed below, is incurred, F will 
not have any profit under either the full costing combined taxable 
income method, the gross receipts method or the marginal costing rules:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
  Combined taxable income--full costing:                                
    F's foreign trading gross receipts.....................     $950.00 
    R's cost of goods sold.................................     (650.00)
                                                            ------------
      Combined gross income................................      300.00 
                                                            ------------
    Less:                                                               
      R's expenses.........................................      100.00 
      F's expenses.........................................      250.00 
                                                            ------------
        Total..............................................     (350.00)
                                                            ------------
    Combined taxable income (loss).........................      (50.00)
                                                            ============
                                                                        

The transfer price to R may be set at $700 so that F may recover its 
expenses.
    Example 4. R and F are calendar year taxpayers. R, a domestic 
manufacturing company, owns all the stock of F, a FSC for the taxable 
year. During 1985, R manufactures export property A. R enters into a 
written agreement with F whereby F will receive a commission with 
respect to sales of export property A by R which result in gross 
receipts to R which would have been foreign trading gross receipts had F 
and not R been the principal on the sale. F will receive commissions 
with respect to such export sales equal to the maximum amount permitted 
to be received under the transfer pricing rules of section 925. The 
maximum commission may be earned by F under these marginal costing 
rules. In this example, R received $950 from the sale of export property 
A. R's cost of goods sold for that property was $620. R incurred direct 
selling expenses of $20. Also, it is assumed that R incurred total 
general and administrative expenses, in addition to those incurred 
relating to its contract to perform on behalf of F the functions and 
activities of section 924 (c), (d) and (e), of $50. R incurred direct 
and indirect expenses of $130 in performing those functions and 
activities on behalf of F. During 1985, R had gross receipts from all 
domestic and foreign sales of $3,500, total cost of goods sold and total 
expenses relating to the domestic and foreign sales of $1,600 and $259, 
respectively. The election provided for in Sec. 1.925(a)-1T(b)(2)(ii) 
was not made by R and F.

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
  Combined taxable income--full costing:                                
    R's gross receipts from the sale of the export                      
     property.....................................  .......     $950.00 
    R's cost of goods sold........................  .......     (620.00)
                                                   ---------------------
      Combined gross income.......................  .......      330.00 
                                                   ---------------------
    Less:                                                               
      R's direct selling expenses.................  .......       20.00 
      F's expenses................................  .......      130.00 
    Apportionment of R's general and                                    
     administrative expenses:                                           
      R's total G/A expenses......................      $50  ...........
      Combined gross income.......................      330  ...........
      R's total gross income......................    1,900  ...........
      Apportionment of G/A expenses $50 x $330/                         
       $1,900.....................................  .......        8.68 
                                                            ------------
        Total.....................................  .......     (158.68)
                                                            ------------
    Combined taxable income (loss)................  .......      171.32 
                                                            ============
                                                                        

      

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
Maximum combined taxable income (determined under paragraph             
 (b)(1) of this section):                                               
  R's gross receipts from the sale of the export property..     $950.00 
                                                            ------------
  Less:                                                                 
    R's direct materials...................................      450.00 
    R's direct labor.......................................      100.00 
                                                            ------------

[[Page 107]]

                                                                        
      Total................................................     (550.00)
                                                            ------------
  Maximum combined taxable income..........................      400.00 
                                                            ============
Overall profit percentage limitation calculation                        
 (determined under paragraph (c)(2) of this section):                   
  Gross receipts of R from all domestic and foreign sales..    3,500.00 
  R's cost of goods sold...................................   (1,600.00)
                                                            ------------
    Combined gross income..................................    1,900.00 
                                                            ------------
  Less:                                                                 
    R's total expenses.....................................      259.00 
    F's total expenses.....................................      130.00 
                                                            ------------
      Total................................................     (450.00)
                                                            ------------
  Total taxable income from all sales computed on a full                
   costing method..........................................    1,511.00 
                                                            ============
Overall profit percentage (total taxable income ($1,511)                
 divided by total gross receipts ($3,500)).................      43.17% 
                                                            ============
Overall profit percentage limitation Overall profit                     
 percentage times R's gross receipts from the sale of                   
 export property (i.e., 43.17% times $950.00)..............      410.12 
                                                            ============
                                                                        

Since the overall profit percentage limitation ($410.12) is greater than 
the maximum combined taxable income ($400), combined taxable income 
under marginal costing and for purposes of computing F's commission is 
limited to $400. Under these marginal costing rules, F will have a 
profit attributable to the sale of $92, i.e., 23% of combined taxable 
income as determined under the marginal costing rules (23% of $400). 
Accordingly, the commission F receives from R is $222, i.e., F's 
expenses ($130) plus F's profit ($92).
    Example 5. Assume the same facts as in Example 4, except that R's 
gross receipts from the sale of export property which would have been 
foreign trading gross receipts had F been the principal on the sale are 
$1,050 and gross receipts from all sales, domestic and foreign, remain 
at $3,500. For purposes of applying the combined taxable income method, 
R and F may compute their combined taxable income attributable to the 
product line of export property under the marginal costing rules as 
follows:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
  Combined taxable income--full costing:                                
  R's gross receipts from the sale of the export property..   $1,050.00 
  R's cost of goods sold...................................     (620.00)
                                                            ------------
    Combined gross income..................................      430.00 
                                                            ------------
  Less:                                                                 
    R's direct selling expenses............................       20.00 
    F's expenses...........................................      130.00 
    Apportionment of R's G/A expenses $50 x $430/$1,900....       11.32 
                                                            ------------
      Total................................................     (161.32)
                                                            ------------
  Combined taxable income (loss)...........................      268.68 
                                                            ============
                                                                        


                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
Maximum combined taxable income (determined under                       
 paragraph (b)(1) of this section):                                     
  R's gross receipts from the sale of export property...   $1,050.00    
                                                         ---------------
Less:                                                                   
  R's direct materials..................................      450.00    
  R's direct labor......................................      100.00    
                                                         ---------------
      Total.............................................     (550.00)   
                                                         ---------------
  Maximum combined taxable income.......................      500.00    
                                                         ===============
  Overall profit percentage (see example 4).............       43.17%   
                                                         ===============
  Overall profit percentage limitation (determined under                
   paragraph (c)(2) of this section) (R's gross receipts                
   from sale ($1,050.00) times the overall profit                       
   percentage (43.17%)).................................      453.29    
                                                         ===============
                                                                        

Since maximum combined taxable income ($500) is greater than the overall 
profit percentage limitation ($453.29), combined taxable income under 
marginal costing and for purposes of computing F's commission is limited 
to $453.29. Under these marginal costing rules, F will have a profit 
attributable to the sales of $104.26, i.e., 23% of combined taxable 
income (23% of $453.29). Accordingly, the commission F receives from R 
is $234.26, i.e., F's expenses ($130) plus F's profit ($104.26).
    Example 6. Assume the same facts as in Example 5, except that F has 
expenses of $140 and R's cost of goods sold for the export sale was 
$900. R does not incur any direct selling expenses. Since cost of goods 
sold has increased by $280, R's total gross income has been reduced from 
$1,900 to $1,620. For purposes of applying the combined taxable income 
method, R and F may compute their combined taxable income under the 
marginal costing rules as follows:

[[Page 108]]



                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
Combined taxable income--full costing:                                  
  R's gross receipts from the sale of export property.....   $1,050.00  
  R's cost of goods sold..................................     (900.00) 
                                                           -------------
    Combined gross income.................................      150.00  
                                                           -------------
Less:                                                                   
  F's expenses............................................      140.00  
  Apportionment of R's G/A expenses $50 x $150/$1,620.....        4.63  
                                                           -------------
      Total...............................................     (144.63) 
                                                           -------------
  Combined taxable income (loss)..........................        5.37  
                                                           =============
Maximum combined taxable income (determined under                       
 paragraph (b)(1) of this section):                                     
  R's gross receipts from the sale of export property.....   $1,050.00  
                                                           -------------
Less:                                                                   
  R's direct materials....................................      630.00  
  R's direct labor........................................      200.00  
                                                           -------------
      Total...............................................     (830.00) 
                                                           -------------
  Maximum combined taxable income.........................      220.00  
                                                           =============
                                                                        


                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
Overall profit percentage limitation calculation                        
 (determined under paragraph (c)(2) of this section):                   
  Gross receipts of R and F from all domestic and foreign               
   sales..................................................   $3,500.00  
  R's cost of goods sold..................................   (1,880.00) 
                                                           -------------
      Combined gross income...............................    1,620.000 
                                                           -------------
Less:                                                                   
  R's total expenses......................................      259.00  
  F's total expenses......................................      140.00  
                                                           -------------
      Total...............................................     (399.00) 
                                                           -------------
  Total taxable income from all sales computed on a full                
   costing method.........................................   $1,221.00  
                                                           -------------
  Overall profit percentage (total taxable income ($1,221)              
   divided by total gross receipts ($3,500))..............       34.89% 
                                                           =============
  Overall profit percentage limitation--overall profit                  
   percentage times R's gross receipts from the sale of                 
   export property (i.e., 34.89% times $1,050)............     $366.35  
                                                           =============
                                                                        

Since the overall profit percentage limitation ($366.35) is greater than 
the maximum combined taxable income ($220), combined taxable income 
under marginal costing and for purposes of computing F's commission is 
limited to $220. Under these marginal costing rules, F will have a 
profit attributable to the sale of $50.60, i.e., 23% of combined taxable 
income as determined under the marginal costing rules (23% of $220). If 
the transaction occurred in 1987, F's profit would be limited, however, 
by paragraph (b)(4) of this section to the full costing combined taxable 
income of $5.37.

[T.D. 8126, 52 FR 6455, Mar. 3, 1987]


<R05>
Sec. 1.926(a)-1  Distributions to shareholders.

    (a) Treatment of distributions. [Reserved] For guidance, see 
Sec. 1.926(a)-1T(a).
    (b) Order of distribution--(1) In general--(i) Distributions by a 
FSC received by a shareholder in a taxable year of the shareholder 
beginning before January 1, 1990. Any actual distribution to a 
shareholder by a FSC (all references to a FSC in this section shall 
include a small FSC and a former FSC) that is received by the 
shareholder in a taxable year of the shareholder beginning before 
January 1, 1990, and made out of earnings and profits shall be treated 
as made in the following order, to the extent thereof--
    (A) Out of earnings and profits attributable to exempt foreign trade 
income determined solely because of operation of section 923(a)(4),
    (B) Out of earnings and profits attributable to other exempt foreign 
trade income,
    (C) Out of earnings and profits attributable to non-exempt foreign 
trade income determined under either of the administrative pricing 
methods of section 925(a)(1) or (2),
    (D) Out of earnings and profits attributable to section 923(a)(2) 
non-exempt income, and
    (E) Out of other earnings and profits.
    (ii) Distributions by a FSC received by a shareholder in a taxable 
year of the shareholder beginning after December 31, 1989. Any actual 
distribution to a shareholder by a FSC that is received by the 
shareholder in a taxable year beginning after December 31, 1989, and

[[Page 109]]

that is made out of earnings and profits shall be treated as made in the 
following order, to the extent thereof--
    (A) Out of earnings and profits attributable to exempt foreign trade 
income determined solely because of the operation of section 923(a)(4),
    (B) Out of earnings and profits attributable to foreign trade income 
(other than exempt foreign trade income determined solely because of the 
operation of section 923(a)(4)) allocable to the marketing of 
agricultural or horticultural products (or the providing of related 
services) by a qualified cooperative which is a shareholder of the FSC,
    (C) Out of earnings and profits attributable to non-exempt foreign 
trade income and other exempt foreign trade income determined under 
either of the administrative pricing methods of section 925(a)(1) and 
(2). Distributions out of this classification will be made on a pro rata 
basis so that 15/23 (16/23 with regard to distribution to a non-
corporate shareholder) of each distribution will be out of earnings and 
profits attributable to exempt foreign trade income and the remainder 
will be out of earnings and profits attributable to non-exempt foreign 
trade income. To the extent the distributions are out of earnings and 
profits attributable to the disposition of, or services related to, 
military property, 7.5/23 (8/23 with regard to distributions to a non-
corporate shareholder) of each distribution will be out of earnings and 
profits attributable to exempt foreign trade income and the remainder 
will be out of earnings and profits attributable to non-exempt foreign 
trade income,
    (D) Out of earnings and profits attributable to other exempt foreign 
trade income determined under the transfer pricing method of section 
925(a)(3),
    (E) Out of earnings and profits attributable to section 923(a)(2) 
non-exempt income,
    (F) Out of earnings and profits attributable to effectively 
connected income, as defined in section 245(c)(4)(B), and
    (G) Out of other earnings and profits.
    (2) Determination of earnings and profits. [Reserved] For guidance, 
see Sec. 1.926(a)-1T(b)(1).
    (c) Definition of ``former FSC''. [Reserved] For guidance, see 
Sec. 1.926(a)-1T(c).
    (d) Personal holding company income. [Reserved] For guidance, see 
Sec. 1.926(a)-1T(d).
    (e) Sale of stock if section 1248 applies. [Reserved] For guidance, 
see Sec. 1.926(a)-1T(e).

[T.D. 8340, 56 FR 11093, Mar. 15, 1991]


<R05>
Sec. 1.926(a)-1T  Temporary regulations; distributions to shareholders.

    (a) Treatment of distributions. Any distribution by a FSC (or former 
FSC) to its shareholder with respect to its stock will be includible in 
the shareholder's gross income in accordance with the provisions of 
section 301. (Any further reference to a FSC in this section shall 
include a small FSC unless indicated otherwise.) See section 245(c) for 
treatment of distributions to domestic corporate shareholders of the 
FSC. If earnings and profits of a FSC (or former FSC) attributable to 
foreign trade income are distributed to a shareholder which is a foreign 
person (or a nonresident alien individual), that distribution shall be 
treated as United States source income which is effectively connected 
with the conduct of a trade or business conducted through a permanent 
establishment of such shareholder within the United States. For this 
purpose, distributions to a foreign partnership, foreign trust, foreign 
estate or other foreign entities that would be treated as pass-through 
entities under U.S. law shall be treated as made directly to the 
partners of beneficiaries in proportion to their respective interest in 
the entity.
    (b) Order of distributions--(1) In general. For guidance, see 
Sec. 1.926(a)-1(b)(1).
    (2) Determination of earnings and profits. For purposes of this 
section, the earnings and profits of a FSC (or former FSC) shall be the 
earnings and profits computed in accordance with the rules, where 
applicable, prescribed in Sec. 1.964-1 (relating to determination of the 
earnings and profits of a foreign corporation) other than subsections 
(d) and (e) of that section.
    (c) Definition of ``former FSC''. Under section 926(c), the term 
``former FSC'' refers to a corporation which is not a FSC for a taxable 
year but which was a

[[Page 110]]

FSC for a prior taxable year. However, a corporation is not a former FSC 
for a taxable year unless such corporation has, at the beginning of such 
taxable year, earnings and profits attributable to foreign trade income. 
A corporation which is a former FSC for a taxable year is a former FSC 
for all purposes of the Code.
    (d) Personal holding company income--(1) Treatment of dividends. Any 
amount includible in a shareholder's gross income as a dividend with 
respect to the stock of a FSC (or former FSC) under paragraph (a) of 
this section shall be treated as a dividend for all purposes of the 
Code, except that that part of the dividend attributable to foreign 
trade income, other than an amount attributable to section 923(a)(2) 
non-exempt income, shall not be considered in applying the personal 
holding company and foreign personal holding company provisions 
(sections 541 through 547 and 551 through 558, respectively).
    (2) Look through option. With regard to distributions from a FSC (or 
former FSC) which are not treated as personal holding company income 
under paragraph (d)(1) of this section, the shareholder may, however, 
treat any amount of that distribution as an item of income described 
under section 543 (or section 553) (for example, rents) if it 
establishes to the satisfaction of the Commissioner that such amount is 
attributable to earnings and profits of the FSC derived from such item 
of income. For example, distributions from a FSC relating to section 
923(a)(2) non-exempt income will be treated as dividends for purposes of 
the personal holding company provisions of sections 541 through 547 
unless the look through option is elected. Under this option, if 
earnings and profits out of which those distributions are made are 
attributable to the lease of export property, the FSC shareholder may 
treat the distribution for purposes of the personal holding company 
provisions as rents rather than as dividends. This may be beneficial to 
the shareholder because rents are not considered under section 543(a)(2) 
as personal holding company income, if in general, rents constitute 50% 
or more of the shareholder's adjusted ordinary gross income.
    (e) Sale of stock if section 1248 applies. For purposes of section 
1248, the earnings and profits of a FSC (or former FSC) shall not 
include earnings and profits attributable to foreign trade income.

[T.D. 8126, 52 FR 6458, Mar. 3, 1987, as amended by T.D. 8340, 56 FR 
11093, Mar. 15, 1991]


<R05>
Sec. 1.927(a)-1T  Temporary regulations; definition of export property.

    (a) General rule. Under section 927 (a), except as otherwise 
provided with respect to excluded property in paragraphs (f), (g) and 
(h) of this section and with respect to certain short supply property in 
paragraph (i) of this section, export property is property in the hands 
of any person (whether or not a FSC) (any further reference to a FSC in 
this section shall include a small FSC unless indicated otherwise)--
    (1) U.S. manufactured, produced, grown or extracted. Manufactured, 
produced, grown, or extracted in the United States by any person or 
persons other than a FSC (see paragraph (c) of this section),
    (2) Foreign use, consumption or disposition. Held primarily for 
sale, lease or rental in the ordinary course of a trade or business by a 
FSC to a FSC or to any other person for direct use, consumption, or 
disposition outside the United States (see paragraph (d) of this 
section),
    (3) Foreign content. Not more than 50 percent of the fair market 
value of which is attributable to articles imported into the United 
States (see paragraph (e) of this section), and
    (4) Non-related FSC purchaser or user. Which is not sold, leased or 
rented by a FSC, or with a FSC as commission agent, to another FSC which 
is a member of the same controlled group (as defined in section 
927(d)(4) and Sec. 1.924(a)-1T(h)) as the FSC.
    (b) Services. For purposes of this section, services (including the 
written communication of services in any form) are not export property. 
Whether an item is property or services shall be determined on the basis 
of the facts and circumstances attending the development and disposition 
of the item. Thus, for example, the preparation of a map of a particular 
construction site

[[Page 111]]

would constitute services and not export property, but standard maps 
prepared for sale to customers generally would not constitute services 
and would be export property if the requirements of this section were 
otherwise met.
    (c) Manufacture, production, growth, or extraction of property--(1) 
By a person other than a FSC. Export property may be manufactured, 
produced, grown, or extracted in the United States by any person, 
provided that that person does not qualify as a FSC. Property held by a 
FSC which was manufactured, produced, grown or extracted by it at a time 
when it did not qualify as a FSC is not export property of the FSC. 
Property which sustains further manufacture, production or processing 
outside the United States prior to sale or lease by a person but after 
manufacture, production, processing or extraction in the United States 
will be considered as manufactured, produced, grown or extracted in the 
United States by that person only if the property is reimported into the 
United States for further manufacturing, production or processing prior 
to final export sale. In order to be considered export property, the 
property manufactured, produced, grown or extracted in the United States 
must satisfy all of the provisions of section 927(a) and this section.
    (2) Manufactured, produced or processed. For purposes of this 
section, property which is sold or leased by a person is considered to 
be manufactured, produced or processed by that person or by another 
person pursuant to a contract with that person if the property is 
manufactured or produced, as defined in Sec. 1.954-3(a)(4). For purposes 
of this section, however, in determining if the 20% conversion test of 
Sec. 1.954-3(a)(4)(iii) has been met, conversion costs include assembly 
and packaging costs but do not include the value of parts provided 
pursuant to a services contract as described in Sec. 1.924(a)-1T(d)(3). 
In addition, for purposes of this section, the 20% conversion test is 
extended and applied to the export property's adjusted basis rather than 
to its cost of goods sold if it is leased or held for lease.
    (d) Foreign use, consumption or disposition--(1) In general. (i) 
Under paragraph (a)(2) of this section, export property must be held 
primarily for the purpose of sale, lease or rental in the ordinary 
course of a trade or business, by a FSC to a FSC or to any other person, 
and the sale or lease must be for direct use, consumption, or 
disposition outside the United States. Thus, property cannot qualify as 
export property unless it is sold or leased for direct use, consumption, 
or disposition outside the United States. Property is sold or leased for 
direct use, consumption, or disposition outside the United States if the 
sale or lease satisfies the destination test described in subdivision 
(2) of this paragraph, the proof of compliance requirements described in 
subdivision (3) of this paragraph, and the use outside the United States 
test described in subdivision (4) of this paragraph.
    (ii) Factors not taken into account. In determining whether property 
which is sold or leased to a FSC is sold or leased for direct use, 
consumption, or disposition outside the United States, the fact that the 
acquiring FSC holds the property in inventory or for lease prior to the 
time it sells or leases it for direct use, consumption, or disposition 
outside the United States will not affect the characterization of the 
property as export property. Fungible export property must be physically 
segregated from non-export property at all times after purchase by or 
rental by a FSC or after the start of the commission relationship 
between the FSC and related supplier with regard to the export property. 
Non-fungible export property need not be physically segregated from non-
export property.
    (2) Destination test. (i) For purposes of paragraph (d)(1) of this 
section, the destination test of this paragraph is satisfied with 
respect to property sold or leased by a seller or lessor only if it is 
delivered by the seller or lessor (or an agent of the seller or lessor) 
regardless of the F.O.B. point or the place at which title passes or 
risk of loss shifts from the seller or lessor--
    (A) Within the United States to a carrier or freight forwarder for 
ultimate delivery outside the United States to a purchaser or lessee (or 
to a subsequent purchaser or sublessee),

[[Page 112]]

    (B) Within the United States to a purchaser or lessee, if the 
property is ultimately delivered outside the United States (including 
delivery to a carrier or freight forwarder for delivery outside the 
United States) by the purchaser or lessee (or a subsequent purchaser or 
sublessee) within 1 year after the sale or lease,
    (C) Within or outside the United States to a purchaser or lessee 
which, at the time of the sale or lease, is a FSC or an interest charge 
DISC and is not a member of the same controlled group as the seller or 
lessor,
    (D) From the United States to the purchaser or lessee (or a 
subsequent purchaser or sublessee) at a point outside the United States 
by means of the seller's or lessor's own ship, aircraft, or other 
delivery vehicle, owned, leased, or chartered by the seller or lessor,
    (E) Outside the United States to a purchaser or lessee from a 
warehouse, storage facility, or assembly site located outside the United 
States, if the property was previously shipped by the seller or lessor 
from the United States, or
    (F) Outside the United States to a purchaser or lessee if the 
property was previously shipped by the seller or lessor from the United 
States and if the property is located outside the United States pursuant 
to a prior lease by the seller or lessor, and either (1) the prior lease 
terminated at the expiration of its term (or by the action of the prior 
lessee acting alone), (2) the sale occurred or the term of the 
subsequent lease began after the time at which the term of the prior 
lease would have expired, or (3) the lessee under the subsequent lease 
is not a related person with respect to the lessor and the prior lease 
was terminated by the action of the lessor (acting alone or together 
with the lessee).
    (ii) For purposes of this paragraph (d)(2) (other than paragraphs 
(d)(2)(i)(C) and (F)(3)), any relationship between the seller or lessor 
and any purchaser, subsequent purchaser, lessee, or sublessee is 
immaterial.
    (iii) In no event is the destination test of this paragraph (d)(2) 
satisfied with respect to property which is subject to any use (other 
than a resale or sublease), manufacture, assembly, or other processing 
(other than packaging) by any person between the time of the sale or 
lease by such seller or lessor and the delivery or ultimate delivery 
outside the United States described in this paragraph (d)(2).
    (iv) If property is located outside the United States at the time it 
is purchased by a person or leased by a person as lessee, such property 
may be export property in the hands of such purchaser or lessee only if 
it is imported into the United States prior to its further sale or lease 
(including a sublease) outside the United States. Paragraphs (a)(3) and 
(e) of this section (relating to the 50 percent foreign content test) 
are applicable in determining whether such property is export property. 
Thus, for example, if such property is not subjected to manufacturing or 
production (as defined in paragraph (c) of this section) within the 
United States after such importation, it does not qualify as export 
property.
    (3) Proof of compliance with destination test--(i) Delivery outside 
the United States. For purposes of paragraph (d)(2) of this section 
(other than subdivision (i)(C) thereof), a seller or lessor shall 
establish ultimate delivery, use, or consumption of property outside the 
United States by providing--
    (A) A facsimile or carbon copy of the export bill of lading issued 
by the carrier who delivers the property,
    (B) A certificate of an agent or representative of the carrier 
disclosing delivery of the property outside the United States,
    (C) A facsimile or carbon copy of the certificate of lading for the 
property executed by a customs officer of the country to which the 
property is delivered,
    (D) If that country has no customs administration, a written 
statement by the person to whom delivery outside the United States was 
made,
    (E) A facsimile or carbon copy of the Shipper's Export Declaration, 
a monthly shipper's summary declaration filed with the Bureau of 
Customs, or a magnetic tape filed in lieu of the Shipper's Export 
Declaration, covering the property, or
    (F) Any other proof (including evidence as to the nature of the 
property

[[Page 113]]

or the nature of the property or the nature of the transaction) which 
establishes to the satisfaction of the Commissioner that the property 
was ultimately delivered, or directly sold, or directly consumed outside 
the United States within 1 year after the sale or lease.
    (ii) The requirements of subdivision (i)(A), (B), (C), or (E) of 
this paragraph will be considered satisfied even though the name of the 
ultimate consignee and the price paid for the goods is marked out 
provided that, in the case of a Shipper's Export Declaration or other 
document listed in subdivision (i)(E) of this paragraph or a document 
such as an export bill of lading, such document still indicates the 
country in which delivery to the ultimate consignee is to be made and, 
in the case of a certificate of an agent or representative of the 
carrier, that the document indicates that the property was delivered 
outside the United States.
    (iii) A seller or lessor shall also establish the meeting of the 
requirement of paragraph (d)(2)(i) of this section (other than 
subdivision (i)(C) thereof), that the property was delivered outside the 
United States without further use, manufacture, assembly, or other 
processing within the United States.
    (iv) For purposes of paragraph (d)(2)(i)(C) of this section, a 
purchaser or lessee of property is deemed to qualify as a FSC or an 
interest charge DISC for its taxable year if the seller or lessor 
obtains from the purchaser or lessee a copy of the purchaser's or 
lessee's election to be treated as a FSC or interest charge DISC 
together with the purchaser's or lessee's sworn statement that the 
election has been timely filed with the Internal Revenue Service Center. 
The copy of the election and the sworn statement of the purchaser or 
lessee must be received by the seller or lessor within 6 months after 
the sale or lease. A purchaser or lessee is not treated as a FSC or 
interest charge DISC with respect to a sale or lease during a taxable 
year for which the purchaser or lessee does not qualify as a FSC or 
interest charge DISC if the seller or lessor does not believe or if a 
reasonable person would not believe at the time the sale or lease is 
made that the purchaser or lessee will qualify as a FSC or interest 
charge DISC for the taxable year.
    (v) If a seller or lessor fails to provide proof of compliance with 
the destination test as required by this paragraph (d)(3), the property 
sold or leased is not export property.
    (4) Sales and leases of property for ultimate use in the United 
States--(i) In general. For purposes of paragraph (d)(1) of this 
section, the use test in this paragraph (d)(4) is satisfied with respect 
to property which--
    (A) Under subdivision (4)(ii) through (iv) of this paragraph is not 
sold for ultimate use in the United States, or
    (B) Under subdivision (4)(v) of this paragraph is leased for 
ultimate use outside the United States.
    (ii) Sales of property for ultimate use in the United States. For 
purposes of subdivision (4)(i) of this paragraph, a purchaser of 
property (including components, as defined in subdivision (4)(vii) of 
this paragraph) is deemed to use the property ultimately in the United 
States if any of the following conditions exist:
    (A) The purchaser is a related party with respect to the seller and 
the purchaser ultimately uses the property, or a second product into 
which the property is incorporated as a component, in the United States.
    (B) At the time of the sale, there is an agreement or understanding 
that the property, or a second product into which the property is 
incorporated as a component, will be ultimately used by the purchaser in 
the United States.
    (C) At the time of the sale, a reasonable person would have believed 
that the property or the second product would be ultimately used by the 
purchaser in the United States unless, in the case of a sale of 
components, the fair market value of the components at the time of 
delivery to the purchaser constitutes less than 20 percent of the fair 
market value of the second product into which the components are 
incorporated (determined at the time of completion of the production, 
manufacture, or assembly of the second product).
For purposes of subdivision (4)(ii)(B) of this paragraph, there is an 
agreement or understanding that property will ultimately be used in the 
United States

[[Page 114]]

if, for example, a component is sold abroad under an express agreement 
with the foreign purchaser that the component is to be incorporated into 
a product to be sold back to the United States. As a further example, 
there would also be such an agreement or understanding if the foreign 
purchaser indicated at the time of the sale or previously that the 
component is to be incorporated into a product which is designed 
principally for the United States market. However, such an agreement or 
understanding does not result from the mere fact that a second product, 
into which components exported from the United States have been 
incorporated and which is sold on the world market, is sold in 
substantial quantities in the United States.
    (iii) Use in the United States. For purposes of subdivision (4)(ii) 
of this paragraph, property (including components incorporated into a 
second product) is or would be ultimately used in the United States by 
the purchaser if, at any time within 3 years after the purchase of such 
property or components, either the property is or the components (or the 
second product into which the components are incorporated) are resold by 
the purchaser for use by a subsequent purchaser within the United States 
or the purchaser or subsequent purchaser fails, for any period of 365 
consecutive days, to use the property or second product predominantly 
outside the United States (as defined in subdivision (4)(vi) of this 
paragraph).
    (iv) Sales to retailers. For purposes of subdivision (4)(ii)(C) of 
this paragraph, property sold to any person whose principal business 
consists of selling from inventory to retail customers at retail outlets 
outside the United States will be considered to be used predominantly 
outside the United States.
    (v) Leases of property for ultimate use outside the United States. 
For purposes of subdivision (4)(i) of this paragraph, a lessee of 
property is deemed to use property ultimately outside the United States 
during a taxable year of the lessor if the property is used 
predominantly outside the United States (as defined in subdivision 
(4)(vi) of this paragraph) by the lessee during the portion of the 
lessor's taxable year which is included within the term of the lease. A 
determination as to whether the ultimate use of leased property 
satisfies the requirements of this subdivision is made for each taxable 
year of the lessor. Thus, leased property may be used predominantly 
outside the United States for a taxable year of the lessor (and thus, 
constitute export property if the remaining requirements of this section 
are met) even if the property is not used predominantly outside the 
United States in earlier taxable years or later taxable years of the 
lessor.
    (vi) Predominant use outside the United States. For purposes of this 
paragraph (d)(4), property is used predominantly outside the United 
States for any period if, during that period, the property is located 
outside the United States more than 50 percent of the time. An aircraft, 
railroad rolling stock, vessel, motor vehicle, container, or other 
property used for transportation purposes is deemed to be used 
predominantly outside the United States for any period if, during that 
period, either the property is located outside the United States more 
than 50 percent of the time or more than 50 percent of the miles 
traversed in the use of the property are traversed outside the United 
States. However, property is deemed to be within the United States at 
all times during which it is engaged in transport between any two points 
within the United States, except where the transport constitutes 
uninterrupted international air transportation within the meaning of 
section 4262(c)(3) and the regulations under that section (relating to 
tax on air transportation of persons). An orbiting satellite is deemed 
to be located outside the United States. For purposes of applying 
section 4262(c)(3) to this subdivision, the term ``United States'' 
includes the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico.
    (vii) Component. For purposes of this paragraph (d)(4), a component 
is property which is (or is reasonably expected to be) incorporated into 
a second product by the purchaser of such component by means of 
production, manufacture, or assembly.
    (e) Foreign content of property--(1) The 50 percent test. Under 
paragraph (a)(3) of this section, no more than 50 percent of

[[Page 115]]

the fair market value of export property may be attributable to the fair 
market value of articles which were imported into the United States. For 
purposes of this paragraph (e), articles imported into the United States 
are referred to as ``foreign content.'' The fair market value of the 
foreign content of export property is computed in accordance with 
paragraph (e)(4) of this section. The fair market value of export 
property which is sold to a person who is not a related person with 
respect to the seller is the sale price for such property (not including 
interest, finance or carrying charges, or similar charges.)
    (2) Application of 50 percent test. The 50 percent test is applied 
on an item-by-item basis. If, however, a person sells or leases a large 
volume of substantially identical export property in a taxable year and 
if all of that property contains substantially identical foreign content 
in substantially the same proportion, the person may determine the 
portion of foreign content contained in that property on an aggregate 
basis.
    (3) Parts and services. If, at the time property is sold or leased 
the seller or lessor agrees to furnish parts pursuant to a services 
contract (as provided in Sec. 1.924(a)-1T(d)(3)) and the price for the 
parts is not separately stated, the 50 percent test is applied on an 
aggregate basis to the property and parts. If the price for the parts is 
separately stated, the 50 percent test is applied separately to the 
property and to the parts.
    (4) Computation of foreign content--(i) Valuation. For purposes of 
applying the 50 percent test, it is necessary to determine the fair 
market value of all articles which constitutes foreign content of the 
property being tested to determine if it is export property. The fair 
market value of the imported articles is determined as of the time the 
articles are imported into the United States.
    (A) General rule. Except as provided in paragraph (e)(4)(i)(B), the 
fair market value of the imported articles which constitutes foreign 
content is their appraised value, as determined under section 403 of the 
Tariff Act of 1930 (19 U.S.C. 1401a) in connection with their 
importation. The appraised value of the articles is the full dutiable 
value of the articles, determined, however, without regard to any 
special provision in the United States tariff laws which would result in 
a lower dutiable value.
    (B) Special election. If all or a portion of the imported article 
was originally manufactured, produced, grown, or extracted in the United 
States, the taxpayer may elect to determine the fair market value of the 
imported articles which constitutes foreign content under the provisions 
of this paragraph (e)(4)(i)(B) if the property is subjected to 
manufacturing or production (as defined in paragraph (c) of this 
section) within the United States after importation. A taxpayer making 
the election under this paragraph may determine the fair market value of 
the imported articles which constitutes foreign content to be the fair 
market value of the imported articles reduced by the fair market value 
at the time of the initial export of the portion of the property that 
was manufactured, produced, grown, or extracted in the United States. 
The taxpayer must establish the fair market value of the imported 
articles and of the portion of the property manufactured, produced, 
grown, or extracted in the United States at the time of the initial 
export in accordance with subdivision (4)(ii)(B) of this paragraph.
    (ii) Evidence of fair market value-- (A) General rule. For purposes 
of subdivision (4)(i)(A) of this paragraph, the fair market value of the 
imported articles is their appraised value, which may be evidenced by 
the customs invoice issued on the importation of such articles into the 
United States. If the holder of the articles is not the importer (or a 
related person with respect to the importer), the appraised value of the 
articles may be evidenced by a certificate based upon information 
contained in the customs invoice and furnished to the holder by the 
person from whom the articles (or property incorporating the articles) 
were purchased. If a customs invoice or certificate described in the 
preceding sentences is not available to a person purchasing property, 
the person shall establish that no more than 50 percent of the fair 
market value of such property is attributable to the fair market value 
of articles

[[Page 116]]

which were imported into the United States.
    (B) Special election. For purposes of the special election set forth 
in subdivision (4)(i)(B) of this paragraph, if the initial export is 
made to a controlled person within the meaning of section 482, the fair 
market value of the imported articles and of the portion of the articles 
that are manufactured, produced, grown, or extracted within the United 
States shall be established by the taxpayer in accordance with the rules 
under section 482 and the regulations under that section. If the initial 
export is not made to a controlled person, the fair market value must be 
established by the taxpayer under the facts and circumstances.
    (iii) Interchangeable component articles. (A) If identical or 
similar component articles can be incorporated interchangeably into 
property and a person acquires component articles that are imported into 
the United States and other component articles that are not imported 
into the United States, the determination whether imported component 
articles were incorporated in the property that is exported from the 
United States shall be made on a substitution basis as in the case of 
the rules relating to drawback accounts under the customs laws. See 
section 313(b) of the Tariff Act of 1930, as amended (19 U.S.C. 
1313(b)).
    (B) The provisions of subdivision (4)(iii)(A) of this paragraph may 
be illustrated by the following example:

    Example. Assume that a manufacturer produces a total of 20,000 
electronic devices. The manufacturer exports 5,000 of the devices and 
subsequently sells 11,000 of the devices to a FSC which exports the 
11,000 devices. The major single component article in each device is a 
tube which represents 60 percent of the fair market value of the device 
at the time the device is sold by the manufacturer. The manufacturer 
imports 8,000 of the tubes and produces the remaining 12,000 tubes. For 
purposes of this subdivision, in accordance with the substitution 
principle used in the customs drawback laws, the 5,000 devices exported 
by the manufacturer are each treated as containing an imported tube 
because the devices were exported prior to the sale to the FSC. The 
remaining 3,000 imported tubes are treated as being contained in the 
first 3,000 devices purchased and exported by the FSC. Thus, since the 
50 percent test is not met with respect to the first 3,000 devices 
purchased and exported by the FSC, those devices are not export 
property. The remaining 8,000 devices purchased and exported by the FSC 
are treated as containing tubes produced in the United States, and those 
devices are export property (if they otherwise meet the requirements of 
this section).

    (f) Excluded property--(1) In general. Notwithstanding any other 
provision of this section, the following property is not export 
property--
    (i) Property described in subdivision (2) of this paragraph 
(relating to property leased to a member of controlled group),
    (ii) Property described in subdivision (3) of this paragraph 
(relating to certain types of intangible property),
    (iii) Products described in paragraph (g) of this section (relating 
to oil and gas products), and
    (iv) Products described in paragraph (h) of this section (relating 
to certain export controlled products).
    (2) Property leased to member of controlled group--(i) In general. 
Property leased to a person (whether or not a FSC) which is a member of 
the same controlled group as the lessor constitutes export property for 
any period of time only if during the period--
    (A) The property is held for sublease, or is subleased, by the 
person to a third person for the ultimate use of the third person;
    (B) The third person is not a member of the same controlled group; 
and
    (C) The property is used predominantly outside the United States by 
the third person.
    (ii) Predominant use. The provisions of paragraph (d)(4)(vi) of this 
section apply in determining under subdivision (2)(i)(C) of this 
paragraph whether the property is used predominantly outside the United 
States by the third person.
    (iii) Leasing rule. For purposes of this paragraph (f)(2), leased 
property is deemed to be ultimately used by a member of the same 
controlled group as the lessor if such property is leased to a person 
which is not a member of the controlled group but which subleases the 
property to a person which is a member of the controlled group. Thus, 
for example, if X, a FSC for the taxable year, leases a movie film to Y, 
a foreign corporation which is not a member of the same controlled group

[[Page 117]]

as X, and Y then subleases the film to persons which are members of the 
controlled group for showing to the general public, the film is not 
export property. On the other hand, if X, a FSC for the taxable year, 
leases a movie film to Z, a foreign corporation which is a member of the 
same controlled group as X, and Z then subleases the film to Y, another 
foreign corporation, which is not a member of the same controlled group 
for showing to the general public, the film is not disqualified from 
being export property.
    (iv) Certain copyrights. With respect to a copyright which is not 
excluded by subdivision (3) of this paragraph from being export 
property, the ultimate use of the property is the sale or exhibition of 
the property to the general public. Thus, if A, a FSC for the taxable 
year, leases recording tapes to B, a foreign corporation which is a 
member of the same controlled group as A, and if B makes records from 
the recording tape and sells the records to C, another foreign 
corporation, which is not a member of the same controlled group, for 
sale by C to the general public, the recording tape is not disqualified 
under this paragraph from being export property, notwithstanding the 
leasing of the recording tape by A to a member of the same controlled 
group, since the ultimate use of the tape is the sale of the records 
(i.e., property produced from the recording tape).
    (3) Intangible property. Export property does not include any 
patent, invention, model, design, formula, or process, whether or not 
patented, or any copyright (other than films, tapes, records, or similar 
reproductions, for commercial or home use), goodwill, trademark, 
tradebrand, franchise, or other like property. Although a copyright such 
as a copyright on a book or computer software does not constitute export 
property, a copyrighted article (such as a book or standardized, mass 
marketed computer software) if not accompanied by a right to reproduce 
for external use is export property if the requirements of this section 
are otherwise satisfied. Computer software referred to in the preceding 
sentence may be on any medium, including, but not limited to, magnetic 
tape, punched cards, disks, semi-conductor chips and circuit boards. A 
license of a master recording tape for reproduction outside the United 
States is not disqualified under this paragraph from being export 
property.
    (g) Oil and gas--(1) In general. Under section 927(a)(2)(C), export 
property does not include oil or gas (or any primary product thereof).
    (2) Primary product from oil or gas. A primary product from oil or 
gas is not export property. For purposes of this paragraph--
    (i) Primary product from oil. The term ``primary product from oil'' 
means crude oil and all products derived from the destructive 
distillation of crude oil, including--
    (A) Volatile products,
    (B) Light oils such as motor fuel and kerosene,
    (C) Distillates such as naphtha,
    (D) Lubricating oils,
    (E) Greases and waxes, and
    (F) Residues such as fuel oil.
For purposes of this paragraph, a product or commodity derived from 
shale oil which would be a primary product from oil if derived from 
crude oil is considered a primary product from oil.
    (ii) Primary product from gas. The term ``primary product from gas'' 
means all gas and associated hydrocarbon components from gas wells or 
oil wells, whether recovered at the lease or upon further processing, 
including--
    (A) Natural gas,
    (B) Condensates,
    (C) Liquefied petroleum gases such as ethane, propane, and butane, 
and
    (D) Liquid products such as natural gasoline.
    (iii) Primary products and changing technology. The primary products 
from oil or gas described in subdivisions (2)(i) and (ii) of this 
paragraph and the processes described in those subdivisions are not 
intended to represent either the only primary products from oil or gas, 
or the only processes from which primary products may be derived under 
existing and future technologies. For example, petroleum coke, although 
not derived from the destructive distillation of crude oil, is a primary 
product from oil derived from an existing technology.

[[Page 118]]

    (iv) Non-primary products. For purposes of this paragraph, 
petrochemicals, medicinal products, insecticides and alcohols are not 
considered primary products from oil or gas.
    (h) Export controlled products--(1) In general. Section 927(a)(2)(D) 
provides that an export controlled product is not export property. A 
product or commodity may be an export controlled product at one time but 
not an export controlled product at another time. For purposes of this 
paragraph, a product or commodity is an ``export controlled product'' at 
a particular time if at that time the export of such product or 
commodity is prohibited or curtailed under section 7(a) of the Export 
Administration Act of 1979, to effectuate the policy relating to the 
protection of the domestic economy set forth in paragraph (2)(C) of 
section 3 of the Export Administration Act of 1979. That policy is to 
use export controls to the extent necessary to protect the domestic 
economy from the excessive drain of scarce materials and to reduce the 
serious inflationary impact of foreign demand.
    (2) Products considered export controlled products--(i) In general. 
For purposes of this paragraph, an export controlled product is a 
product or commodity, which is subject to short supply export controls 
under 15 CFR part 377. A product or commodity is considered an export 
controlled product for the duration of each control period which applies 
to such product or commodity. A control period of a product or commodity 
begins on and includes the initial control date (as defined in 
subdivision (2)(ii) of this paragraph) and ends on and includes the 
final control date (as defined in subdivision (2)(iii) of this 
paragraph).
    (ii) Initial control date. The initial control date of a product or 
commodity which is subject to short supply export controls is the 
effective date stated in the regulations to 15 CFR part 377 which 
subjects the product or commodity to short supply export controls. If 
there is no effective date stated in these regulations, the initial 
control date of the product or commodity will be thirty days after the 
effective date of the regulations which subject the product or commodity 
to short supply export controls.
    (iii) Final control date. The final control date of a product or 
commodity is the effective date stated in the regulations to 15 CFR part 
377 which removes the product or commodity from short supply export 
controls. If there is no effective date stated in those regulations, the 
final control date of the product or commodity is the date which is 
thirty days after the effective date of the regulations which remove the 
product or commodity from short supply export control.
    (iv) Expiration of Export Administration Act. An initial control 
date and final control date cannot occur after the expiration date of 
the Export Administration Act under the authority of which the short 
supply export controls were issued.
    (3) Effective dates--(i) Products controlled on January 1, 1985. If 
a product or commodity was subject to short supply export controls on 
January 1, 1985, this paragraph shall apply to all sales, exchanges, 
other dispositions, or leases of the product or commodity made after 
January 1, 1985, by the FSC or by the FSC's related supplier if the FSC 
is the commission agent on the transaction.
    (ii) Products first controlled after January 1, 1985. If a product 
or commodity becomes subject to short supply export controls after 
January 1, 1985, this paragraph applies to sales, exchanges, other 
dispositions, or leases of such product or commodity made on or after 
the initial control date of such product or commodity, and to owning 
such product or commodity on or after such date.
    (iii) Date of sales, exchange, lease, or other disposition. For 
purposes of this paragraph (h)(3), the date of sale, exchange, or other 
disposition of a product or commodity is the date as of which title to 
such product or commodity passes. The date of a lease is the date as of 
which the lessee takes possession of a product or commodity. The 
accounting method of a person is not determinative of the date of sale, 
exchange, other disposition, or lease.
    (i) Property in short supply. If the President determines that the 
supply of any property which is otherwise export property as defined in 
this section

[[Page 119]]

is insufficient to meet the requirements of the domestic economy, he may 
by Executive Order designate such property as in short supply. Any 
property so designated will be treated under section 927(a)(3) as 
property which is not export property during the period beginning with 
the date specified in such Executive Order and ending with the date 
specified in an Executive Order setting forth the President's 
determination that such property is no longer in short supply.

[T.D. 8126, 52 FR 6459, Mar. 3, 1987]


<R05>
Sec. 1.927(b)-1T  Temporary regulations; Definition of gross receipts.

    (a) General rule. Under section 927(b), for purposes of sections 921 
through 927, the gross receipts of a person for a taxable year are--
    (1) Business income. The total amounts received or accrued by the 
person from the sale or lease of property held primarily for sale or 
lease in the ordinary course of a trade or business, and
    (2) Other income. Gross income recognized from whatever source 
derived, such as, for example, from--
    (i) The furnishing of services (whether or not related to the sale 
or lease of property described in subdivision (1) of this paragraph),
    (ii) Dividends and interest (including tax exempt interest),
    (iii) The sale at a gain of any property not described in 
subdivision (1) of this paragraph, and
    (iv) Commission transactions to the extent described in paragraph 
(e) of this section.
    (b) Non-gross receipts items. For purposes of paragraph (a) of this 
section, gross receipts do not include amounts received or accrued by a 
person from--
    (1) Loan transactions. The proceeds of a loan or of the repayment of 
a loan, or
    (2) Non-taxable transactions. A receipt of property in a transaction 
to which section 118 (relating to contribution to capital) or section 
1032 (relating to exchange of stock for property) applies.
    (c) Non-reduction of total amounts. For purposes of paragraph (a) of 
this section, the total amounts received or accrued by a person are not 
reduced by costs of goods sold, expenses, losses, a deduction for 
dividends received, or any other deductible amounts. The total amounts 
received or accrued by a person are reduced by returns and allowances.
    (d) Method of accounting. For purposes of paragraph (a) of this 
section, the total amounts received or accrued by a person shall be 
determined under the method of accounting used in computing its taxable 
income. If, for example, a FSC receives advance or installment payments 
for the sale or lease of property described in paragraph (a)(1) of this 
section, for the furnishing of services, or which represent recognized 
gain from the sale of property not described in paragraph (a)(1) of this 
section, any amount of such advance payments is considered to be gross 
receipts of the FSC for the taxable year for which such amount is 
included in the gross income of the FSC.
    (e) Commission transactions--(1) In general--(i) With a related 
supplier. In the case of transactions which give rise to a commission 
from the FSC's related supplier on the sale or lease of property or the 
furnishing of services by a principal, the FSC's gross income from all 
such transactions is the commission paid or payable to the FSC by the 
related supplier. The FSC's gross receipts for purposes of computing its 
profit under the administrative pricing methods of section 925(a)(1) and 
(2) shall be the gross receipts (other than gross receipts which would 
not be foreign trading gross receipts had they been received by the FSC) 
derived by the related supplier from the sale or lease of the property 
or from the furnishing of services, with respect to which the 
commissions are derived. Also, in determining whether the 50% test in 
section 924(a) has been met, the relevant gross receipts are the gross 
receipts of the related supplier.
    (ii) With an unrelated principal. In the case of transactions which 
give rise to a commission from an unrelated principal to a FSC on the 
sale or lease of property or the furnishing of services by a principal, 
the amount recognized by the FSC as gross income from all such 
transactions shall be the commission received from the principal.
    (2) Selective commission arrangements--(i) In general. A commission 
arrangement between the FSC and its related

[[Page 120]]

supplier may provide that the FSC will not be the related supplier's 
commission agent with respect to sales or leases of export property, or 
the furnishing of services, which do not result in foreign trading gross 
receipts. In addition, the commission agreement may provide that the FSC 
will not be the related supplier's commission agent on transactions 
which would result in a loss to the related supplier under the transfer 
pricing rules of section 925(a). In a buy-sell FSC situation, selective 
commission arrangements are not applicable. Determination of which 
transactions fall within the selective commission arrangement may be 
made up to the due date under section 6072(b), including extensions 
provided for under section 6081, of the FSC's income tax return for the 
taxable year of the FSC during which a transaction occurs.
    (ii) Example. The treatment of a selective commission arrangement 
may be illustrated by the following example:

    Example. A calendar year commission FSC (``F'') entered into a 
selective commission arrangement with related supplier RS which provided 
that F will not be RS's commission agent on transactions which would 
result in a loss to RS under the transfer pricing rules of section 
925(a). During 1987, RS sold three different articles of export property 
A, B and C, all of which fall within the same three digit Standard 
Industrial Classification. In July of 1988, while preparing the FSC's 
1987 income tax return, RS determined that the sale of export property A 
resulted in a loss to RS under the section 482 method of section 
925(a)(3) and that applying that method to the sales of export property 
B and C resulted in only a small amount of income to both RS and F. In 
addition, RS determined that grouping export property B and C, while 
excluding export property A from the grouping, resulted in the highest 
profit to F under the combined taxable income administrative pricing 
method of section 925(a)(2). Using the same grouping, the gross receipts 
method of section 925(a)(1) would result in a lower profit to F. Under 
the special no-loss rule of Sec. 1.925(a)-1T(e)(1)(iii), RS would be 
prohibited from using the combined taxable income administrative pricing 
method to determine F's profit for the grouping of export property B and 
C if it used the section 482 method on the sale of export property A. 
This results because there was a loss to RS on the sale of export 
property A. Under the selective commission arrangement, RS could 
exercise its option and exclude the sale of export property A. Since F 
is no longer deemed to have been operating as RS's commission agent on 
that sale, the combined taxable income method may be used to compute F's 
profit on the grouping of the sales of export property B and C.

    (f) Example. The definition of gross receipts under this section may 
be illustrated by the following example:

    Example. During 1985, M, a related supplier of N, is engaged in the 
manufacture of machines in the United States. N, a calendar year FSC, is 
engaged in the sale and lease of such machines in foreign countries. N 
furnishes services which are related and subsidiary to its sale and 
lease of those machines. N also acts as a commission agent in foreign 
countries for Z, an unrelated supplier, with respect to Z's sale of 
products. N receives dividends on stock owned by it, interest on loans, 
and proceeds from sales of business assets located outside the United 
States resulting in recognized gains and losses. N's gross receipts for 
1985 are $3,550, computed on the basis of the additional facts assumed 
in the table below:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
N's sales receipts for machines manufactured by M (without              
 reduction for cost of goods sold and selling expenses).......    $1,500
N's lease receipts for machines manufactured by M (without              
 reduction for depreciation and leasing expenses).............       500
N's gross income from related and subsidiary services for               
 machines manufactured by M (without reduction for service              
 expenses)....................................................       400
N's sales receipts for products manufactured by Z (without              
 reduction for Z's cost of goods sold, commissions on sales             
 and commission sales expenses)...............................       550
Dividends received by N.......................................       150
Interest received by N........................................       200
Proceeds received by N representing recognized gain (but not            
 losses) for sales of business assets located outside the               
 United States................................................       250
                                                               ---------
N's gross receipts............................................     3,550
                                                               =========
                                                                        


[T.D. 8126, 52 FR 6464, Mar. 3, 1987]


<R05>
Sec. 1.927(d)-1  Other definitions.

    (a) Carrying Charges.
    Q-1. Under what circumstances is the sales price of property or 
services sold by a FSC or a related supplier considered to include 
carrying charges as defined in subdivision (ii)(B)(1) of Q&A-9 of 
Sec. 1.921-2?

[[Page 121]]

    A-1. (i) The proceeds received from a sale of export property by a 
FSC or a related supplier (or the amount paid for services rendered or 
from rental of export property) may include carrying charges if any part 
of the sale proceeds (or service or rental payment) is paid after the 
end of the normal payment period. If the export property is sold or 
leased by, or if the services are rendered by, the FSC, the entire 
carrying charges amount as determined in Q&A-2 of this section will be 
the income of the FSC. If, however, the FSC is the commission agent of a 
related supplier on these transactions, the carrying charges amount so 
determined is income of the related supplier. The commission payable to 
the FSC will be computed by reducing the related supplier's gross 
receipts from the transaction by the amount of the carrying charges. No 
carrying charges will be assessed on the commissions paid by the related 
supplier to the FSC. The carrying charges provisions, likewise, do not 
apply to any other transaction that does not give rise to foreign 
trading gross receipts.
    (ii) The normal payment period for a sale transaction is 60 days 
from the earlier of date of sale or date of exchange of property under 
the contract. For this purpose, the date of sale will be the date the 
sale is recorded on the seller's books of account under its normal 
accounting method. The date the transaction was recorded on the seller's 
books of account shall be disregarded if recording is delayed in order 
to delay the start of the normal payment period. In these circumstances, 
the earlier of the date of the contract or date of exchange of property 
will be deemed the date of sale. For related and subsidiary services 
that are not separately stated from the sale or lease transaction, the 
earlier of the date of the sale or date the export property is delivered 
to the purchaser is the applicable date. For related and subsidiary 
services which are separately stated from the sale or lease transaction 
and for other services, such as engineering and architectural services, 
the normal payment period is 60 days from the earlier of the date 
payment is due for the services or the date services under the contract 
are completed. The date of completion of a services contract is the date 
of final approval of the services by the recipient. With regard to 
transactions involving the lease or rental of export property, the 
normal payment period will begin on the date the rental payment is due 
under the lease. The date the normal payment period begins under this 
subdivision (ii) will be the same whether or not the transaction is with 
a related person.
    (iii) The carrying charges are computed for the period beginning 
with the first day after the end of the normal payment period and ending 
with the date of payment. A FSC may elect at any time prior to the close 
of the statute of limitations of section 6501(a) for the FSC taxable 
year to treat the final date of payment stated in the contract as the 
date of payment if--
    (A) The contracts for all transactions completed during the taxable 
year require that payment be received within the normal payment period,
    (B) No more than 20% of transactions for which final payment is 
received in the taxable year involve payment after the end of the normal 
payment period. For FSC taxable years beginning after March 3, 1987, the 
20% test will apply only to the dollar value of the transactions and not 
to the number of transactions. For prior taxable years, the 20% test 
will apply to either the dollar value of the transactions or to the 
number of transactions. The special grouping rules applicable to 
determination of the FSC's profit under the administrative pricing rules 
of section 925 may be applied to this elective provision. Accordingly, 
transactions may be grouped into product or product-line groupings to 
determine whether 20% or less of the dollar value (or number of 
transactions, if applicable) of the grouped transactions involve payment 
after the end of the normal payment period.
    Q-2. How are carrying charges as defined in subdivision (ii)(B)(1) 
of Q&A 9 of Sec. 1.921-9 computed?
    A-2. If carrying charges as defined in subdivision (ii)(B)(1) of Q&A 
9 of Sec. 1.921-9 are considered to be included in the sale price of 
property income or rental payment services, the amount of the carrying 
charges is equal to the

[[Page 122]]

amount in subdivision (i) of this answer if the contract provides for 
stated interest or the amount in subdivisions (ii) or (iii) of this 
answer, whichever is applicable, if the contract does not so provide.
    (i) If a contract provides for stated interest beginning on the day 
after the end of the normal payment period, carrying charges will accrue 
only if the stated interest rate is less than the short-term, monthly 
Federal rate as of the day after the end of normal payment period and 
then only to the extent the stated interest is less than the short-term, 
monthly Federal rate. The short-term, monthly Federal rate is that rate 
as determined for purposes of section 1274(d) and which is published in 
the Internal Revenue Bulletin. Carrying charges will not accrue, 
however, unless payments are made after the end of the normal payment 
period.
    (ii) If a contract for a transaction does not provide for stated 
interest, and if the taxpayer does not elect the method described in 
subdivision (iii) of this answer, the amount of carrying charges is 
equal to the excess of--
    (A) The amount of the sales price of property, services income or 
rental payment that is unpaid on the day after the end of the normal 
payment period, over
    (B) The present value, as of the day after the end of the normal 
payment period, of all payments that are required to be made under the 
contract and that are unpaid on the day after the end of the normal 
payment period. The amount of the sales price of property, service 
income or rental payment is the amount under the contract whether it be 
the sales price, amount paid for services or the rental amount 
determined as of the actual payment date unless a FSC makes the election 
provided under subdivision (iii) of Q&A 1. If a FSC makes the election 
provided under subdivision (III) of Q&A 1, the amount of the sales price 
is the sales price, services income or rental payment under the contract 
determined as of the final payment date stated in the contract. All 
payments that are required to be made under the contract include the 
stated sales price, services income or rental payment as well as stated 
amounts of interest and carrying charges. The discount rate for the 
present value computation is simple interest at the short-term monthly 
Federal rate published in the Internal Revenue Bulletin, determined as 
of the day after the end of the normal payment period. The present value 
of a payment is calculated as follows:

                                                                        
                                              1                         
                                  P  =S -------------                   
                                         (1+(i x t))                    
                                                                        

P=present value of a payment that is required and unpaid after the end 
          of the normal payment period
S=amount of a payment that is required and unpaid after the end of the 
          normal payment period
i=the short-term monthly Federal rate
t=the number of days after the end of the normal payment period and 
          before date of payment divided by 365.

If a sale is made, or if services are completed, or if rent is due under 
a lease in a taxable year and the required date of payment is in a later 
taxable year, carrying charges for the first taxable year are computed 
for the number of days after the end of the normal payment period and 
before the end of the taxable year. For the following taxable year, 
carrying charges are computed for the number of days after the beginning 
of the taxable year and before the date of payment.
    (iii) At the election of the taxpayer, the amount of carrying 
charges may be determined under the method described in this subdivision 
(iii). If the taxpayer elects this method, it must be used for all 
applicable transactions within the taxable year of the FSC. If this 
optional method is used, the computation of carrying charges must be 
made separately for transactions involving related persons and for those 
transactions involving unrelated persons. In addition, the computation 
of carrying charges must be made separately for each of the five types 
of income of the FSC (or of the related supplier if the related supplier 
is the principal on the transaction) listed in subparagraph (1) through 
(5) of section 924(a). These groupings are separate and distinct from 
the groupings that are established for purposes of determining the FSC's 
profit on the export transactions. The

[[Page 123]]

optional method allowed in this subdivision provides that the amount of 
carrying charges for a taxable year of a FSC (or related supplier if the 
related supplier is the principal on the export transaction) is computed 
using the average of receivables of unrelated persons (or of related 
persons) and the average time those receivables are outstanding. 
Receivables are included in this computation only if they are from 
transactions on which foreign trading gross receipts, as defined in 
section 924(a), are received by the FSC (or which are received by a 
related supplier of a FSC and which would have been foreign trading 
gross receipts had they been received by the FSC). Carrying charges are 
calculated under this method as follows:

CC=(AR) (I/365) (X) (Y)
CC=Carrying charges
AR=Average monthly receivables balance for the taxable year
I=The average short-term, monthly Federal rate for the year
X=The number of times receivables turn over in the year
Y=The number of days the average receivables are outstanding over 60 
          days.

This optional method is illustrated in Example 5 in subdivision (v) of 
this answer.
    (iv) The computation of carrying charges under this answer 2 applies 
only to the determination of carrying charges under subdivision 
(ii)(B)(1) of Q&A 9 of Sec. 1.921-2 and does not apply to the 
determination of any other unstated interest or for any other purpose.
    (v) The following examples illustrate the computation of carrying 
charges under this section:

    Example 1. On January 1, 1985, a FSC sells export property for 
$10,000. The export property is delivered to the purchaser on January 
10, 1985. The terms of the contract require payment within 90 days after 
sale. The normal payment period is 60 days. The FSC does not make an 
election under subdivision (iii) of Q&A. The contract does not require 
the payment of any interest or carrying charges. The purchaser pays the 
entire sales price on March 1, 1985. The sales price is not considered 
to include any carrying charges because the purchase paid the entire 
sales price within the normal payment period.
    Example 2. The facts are the same as in example 1 except that the 
purchaser pays the entire sales price on April 6, 1985, 96 days after 
the earlier of the date of sale or date of delivery (i.e., January 1, 
1985). Therefore, the sales price is considered to include carrying 
charges computed as follows:
    Step 1: Determines the short-term monthly Federal rate as of the 
earlier of date of sale or date of delivery. For purposes of this 
example, the rate is 10%.
    Step 2: Determine the fraction of the year represented by the number 
of days after 60 days and before date of payment. In this example, the 
number of days beyond 60 is 96-60=36, which is divided by 365
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC09OC91.001

    Step. 3: Using the short-term monthly Federal rate and the fraction 
of the year, compute the present value of the payment.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC09OC91.002


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC09OC91.003

P=$10,000 (.99)
P=$9,900
    Step 4: Using the present value of all payments, compute the 
carrying charges.
    Carrying Charges=Sales Price less Present Value.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC09OC91.004
    
    Example 3. On October 15, 1985, F, a FSC, leases export property to 
X for one month with a total rental due of $20,000. Under the terms of 
the lease, A agreed to pay F $10,000 on October 15, 1985, and the 
remaining $10,000 on January 15, 1986. The contract does not require the 
payment of any interest or carrying charges. The second $10,000 payment 
is made on January 3, 1986. This payment does not include any carrying 
charges because X paid the $10,000 before the start of the normal 
payment period.
    Example 4. On October 15, 1985, F, a FSC, leases export property to 
X, for one month with a total amount due under the lease of $10,000, 
payable on October 15, 1985. X delays payment until January 19, 1986, 
which was 96 days after the start of the normal payment period. The 60 
day normal payment period terminated on December 14, 1985. Therefore, 
the lease payment is considered to include carrying charges of $100 
computed in the same manner as in Example 2. Of this $100, 17/36, or 
$47.22, is carrying charges for 1985 (i.e.,

[[Page 124]]

17 days in December), and 19/36, or $52.78, is carrying charges for 
1986.
    Example 5. During 1986, F, a FSC, sold on account export properties 
A and B to related and unrelated persons.
    (A) Unrelated persons. During 1986, the sales on account to 
unrelated persons totaled $6,000. On the last day of each of the months 
of 1986, F had total receivables from unrelated persons from sales of 
export properties A and B, as follows:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
January 31.....................................................   $1,400
February 28....................................................    1,400
March 31.......................................................    1,000
April 30.......................................................    1,000
May 31.........................................................    1,200
June 30........................................................    1,300
July 31........................................................    1,000
August 31......................................................    1,300
September 30...................................................    1,500
October 31.....................................................    1,100
November 30....................................................    1,200
December 31....................................................    1,000
                                                                --------
                                                                  14,400
                                                                ========
                                                                        

Carrying charges for 1986 with unrelated persons under the optional 
method of subdivision (iii) of this answer will be $19.23, computed as 
follows:
    Step 1: Determine the average short-term, monthly Federal rate for 
the year. For purposes of this example, the rate is assumed to be 9%.
    Step 2: Determine the average receivables for the year. This average 
is calculated by totaling the end of the month receivables balance of 
each month of the year and dividing by twelve. In this example, the 
average monthly receivables balance is $1,200, calculated as follows:

                $1,200=$14,400/12

    Step 3: Determine the number of times the receivables turn over 
during the year. This is calculated by dividing the sales on account for 
the year by the average monthly receivables balance for the year. For 
purposes of this example, receivables turned over 5 times for 1986, 
computed as follows:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC09OC91.005

    Step 4: Determine the number of days the average receivables are 
outstanding in excess of 60 days. In this example, there are 13 
receivable days in excess of 60 days, computed as follows:

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC09OC91.071


    Step 5: The amount of carrying charges, $19.23, is calculated by 
using the following equation:
CC=(AR) (I/365) (X)(Y)
CC=Carrying charges
AR=Average monthly receivables balance for the taxable year (step 2)
I=The average short-term monthly Federal rate for the year (step 1)
X=The number of times receivables turn over in the year (step 3)
Y=The number of days the average receivables are outstanding over 60 
days (step 4).
CC=$19.23=($1,200) (.09/365) (5) (13)
    (B) Related persons. Carrying charges, if any, on the sales on 
account to related persons must be computed separately using this 
optional method.

    Q-3. Is a discount from the sales price of property or services for 
prompt payment considered to be stated carrying charges as defined in 
subdivision (ii)(A) of Q&A 9 of Sec. 1.921-2?
    A-3. No.
    Q-4. Is the receipt of an arm's length factoring payment from an 
unrelated person considered a payment of the sales proceeds for purposes 
of determining whether payment is made within the normal payment period 
and the possible imposition of carrying charges?
    A-4. Yes.

[T.D. 8127, 52 FR 6473, Mar. 3, 1987]


<R05>
Sec. 1.927(d)-2T  Temporary regulations; definitions and special rules relating to Foreign Sales Corporation.

    (a) Definition of related supplier. For purposes of sections 921 
through 927 and the regulations under those sections, the term ``related 
supplier'' means a related party which directly supplies to a FSC any 
property or services which the FSC disposes of in a transaction 
producing foreign trading gross receipts, or a related party which uses 
the FSC as a commission agent in the disposition of any property or 
services producing foreign trading gross receipts. A FSC may have 
different related suppliers with respect to different transactions. If, 
for example, X owns all the stock of Y, a corporation, and of F, a FSC, 
and X sells a product to Y which is resold to F, only Y is the related 
supplier of F. If, however, X sells directly to F and Y also sells 
directly to F, then, as to the transactions involving direct sales to F, 
each of X and Y is a related supplier of F.

[[Page 125]]

    (b) Definition of related party. The term ``related party'' means a 
person which is owned or controlled directly or indirectly by the same 
interests as the FSC within the meaning of section 482 and Sec. 1.482-
1(a).

[T.D. 8126, 52 FR 6465, Mar. 3, 1987]


<R05>
Sec. 1.927(e)-1T  Temporary regulations; special sourcing rule.

    (a) Source rules for related persons--(1) In general. If a FSC 
receives foreign trading gross receipts on the sale of export property 
which it purchased from a related supplier, the related supplier's 
foreign source income, if any, resulting from the initial sale of the 
export property to the FSC may not exceed the amount of income which 
would have been treated as foreign source income earned by the related 
person had the analogous DISC pricing rules of section 994 applied to 
the initial sale. This special rule also applies if the FSC is acting as 
a commission agent for the related supplier on the sale of export 
property and the transfer pricing rules are used to determine the 
commission payable to the FSC.
    (2) Grouping of transactions. If, for purposes of determining the 
FSC's profits under the administrative pricing rules, grouping of 
transactions under Sec. 1.925(a)-1T(c)(8) was elected, the same grouping 
shall be used for making the determinations under this special sourcing 
rule.
    (3) Analogous DISC pricing rules. For purposes of this section--
    (i) The DISC gross receipts pricing rule of section 994 (a)(1) is 
analogous to the gross receipts pricing rule of section 925(a)(1);
    (ii) The DISC combined taxable income pricing rule of section 994 
(a)(2) is analogous to the combined taxable income pricing rule of 
section 925 (a)(2); and
    (iii) The DISC section 482 pricing rule of section 994 (a)(3) is 
analogous to the section 482 pricing rule of section 925 (a)(3).

[T.D. 8126, 52 FR 6465, Mar. 3, 1987]


<R05>
Sec. 1.927(e)-2T  Temporary regulations; effect of boycott participation on FSC and small FSC benefits.

    (a) International boycott factor. If the FSC (or small FSC) or any 
member of the FSC's (or small FSC's) controlled group participates in or 
cooperates with an international boycott within the meaning of section 
999, the FSC's (or small FSC's) exempt foreign trade income as 
determined under section 923 (a) shall be reduced by an amount equal to 
the product of the FSC's (or small FSC's) exempt foreign trade income 
multiplied by the international boycott factor determined under section 
999. The amount of the reduction will be considered as non-exempt 
foreign trade income.
    (b) Specifically attributable taxes and income method. If the 
taxpayer clearly demonstrates that the income earned for the taxable 
year is attributable to specific operations, then in lieu of applying 
the international boycott factor for such taxable year, the amount of 
the exempt foreign trade income as determined under section 923(a) that 
will be reduced by this section shall be the amount specifically 
attributable to the operations in which there was participation in or 
cooperation with an international boycott under section 999(b)(1). The 
amount of the reduction will be considered as non-exempt foreign trade 
income.

[T.D. 8126, 52 FR 6465, Mar. 3, 1987]


<R05>
Sec. 1.927(f)-1  Election and termination of status as a Foreign Sales Corporation.

    (a) Election of status as a FSC or a small FSC.
    Q-1. What is the effect of an election by a corporation to be 
treated as a FSC or small FSC?
    A-1. A valid election to be treated as a FSC or a small FSC applies 
to the taxable year of the corporation for which made and remains in 
effect for all succeeding taxable years in which the corporation 
qualifies to be a FSC unless revoked by the corporation or unless the 
corporation fails for five consecutive years to qualify as a FSC

[[Page 126]]

(in case of a FSC election) or as a small FSC (in case of a small FSC 
election).
    Q-2. Can a corporation established prior to January 1, 1985 be 
treated as a FSC or a small FSC prior to making a FSC or a small FSC 
election?
    A-2. A corporation cannot be treated as a FSC or a small FSC until 
it has made a FSC or a small FSC election. An election made within the 
first 90 days of 1985 relates back to January 1, 1985 unless the 
taxpayer indicates otherwise.
    Q-3. If a shareholder who has not consented to a FSC or small FSC 
election transfers some or all of its shares before or during the first 
taxable year for which the election is made, may the holder of the 
transferred shares consent to the election?
    A-3. A holder of the transferred shares may consent to a FSC or 
small FSC elction under the circumstances described in Sec. 1.922-
2(c)(1). The rules contained in Sec. 1.992-(c) shall apply to the 
consent by a holder of transferred shares.
    Q-4. If a shareholder who has consented to a FSC or a small FSC 
election transfers some or all of its shares before the first taxable 
year for which the election is made, must the holder of the transferred 
shares consent to the election?
    A-4. Yes. Consent must be made by any recipient of such shares on or 
before the 90th day after the first day of such first taxable year. If 
such recipient fails to file his consent on or before such 90th day, and 
extension of time for filing such consent may be granted in the manner, 
and subject to the conditions, described in paragraph (b)(3) of 
Sec. 1.992-2.
    Q-5. May an election of a corporation to be a FSC or a small FSC be 
effective as of a time other than the start of the corporation's taxable 
year?
    A-5. No.
    Q-6. If a fiscal year foreign corporation was in existence on 
December 31, 1984, must it wait until the first day of its taxable year 
beginning after January 1, 1985, to elect FSC status?
    A-6. No. If a fiscal year foreign corporation was in existence on 
December 31, 1984, its taxable year will be deemed to have terminated on 
that date if the foreign corporation elects FSC status to be effective 
January 1, 1985. An income tax return will be required for any short 
years created by the deemed closing of the taxable year unless the 
corporation is relieved from the necessity of making a return by section 
6012 and the regulations under that section. If the corporation's 
taxable year is deemed closed by operation of this regulation, the 
filing date of tax returns for the short taxable year ended on December 
31, 1984, will be automatically extended until May 18, 1987.
    Q-7. What is the effect of an election to be treated as a FSC or as 
a small FSC if the corporation or any other member of the controlled 
group has in effect an election to be treated as an interest charge 
DISC?
    A-7. The interest charge DISC election shall be treated as revoked 
for all purposes under the Code as of the date the FSC election is 
effective. An affirmative revocation of the DISC election is 
unnecessary. The FSC election shall take effect. As long as the FSC 
election remains in effect, neither the corporation nor any other member 
of the controlled group is permitted to elect to be treated as an 
interest charge DISC for any taxable year including any part of a 
taxable year during which the corporation's FSC election continues to be 
effective.
    Q-8. What is the effect of an election to be treated as a small FSC 
if the corporation or any other member of the controlled group has in 
effect an election to be treated as a FSC?
    A-8. As long as a FSC election remains in effect, neither the 
corporation nor any other member of the controlled group is permitted to 
elect to be treated as a small FSC for any taxable year including any 
part of a taxable year during which a FSC election continues to be 
effective. Any FSC within the controlled group must affirmatively revoke 
its FSC election for a taxable year including any part of a taxable year 
for which small FSC status is elected.
    Q-9. What is the effect of an election to be treated as a FSC if the 
corporation or any other member of the controlled group has in effect an 
election to be treated as a small FSC?

[[Page 127]]

    A-9. As long as a small FSC election remains in effect, neither the 
corporation nor any other member of the controlled group is permitted to 
elect to be treated as a FSC for any taxable year including any part of 
the taxable year during which a small FSC election continues to be 
effective. Any small FSC within the controlled group must affirmatively 
revoke its small FSC election for a taxable year including any part of a 
taxable year for which FSC status is elected. An election to be treated 
as a small FSC is permitted if the corporation or any other member of 
the controlled group has in effect an election to be treated as a small 
FSC. For a special rule providing for conversion of a small FSC to a FSC 
within one taxable year, see Sec. 1.921-1T(b)(1) (Q&A-1).
    (b) Termination of election of status as a FSC or a small FSC.
    Q-10. How is the status of a corporation as a FSC or as a small FSC 
terminated?
    A-10. The status of a corporation as a FSC or as a small FSC is 
terminated through revocation or by its continued failure to be a FSC.
    Q-11. For what taxable year may a corporation revoke its election to 
be treated as a FSC or as a small FSC?
    A-11. A corporation may revoke its election to be treated as a FSC 
or as a small FSC for any taxable year of the corporation after the 
first taxable year for which the election is effective.
    Q-12. When must a corporation revoke a FSC or a small FSC election 
if revocation is to be effective for the taxable year in which 
revocation takes place?
    A-12. If a corporation files a statement revoking its election to be 
treated as a FSC or as a small FSC during the first 90 days of a taxable 
year (other than the first taxable year for which such election is 
effective), such revocation will be effective for such taxable year and 
all taxable years thereafter. If the corporation files a statement 
revoking its election to be treated as a FSC or a small FSC after the 
firs 90 days of a taxable year, the revocation will be effective for all 
taxable years following such taxable year.
    Q-13. Can a FSC change its status to a small FSC, or can a small FSC 
change its status to a FSC as of a date other than the first day of a 
taxable year?
    A-13. No. Since a revocation of an election to be a FSC or a small 
FSC is effective only for entire taxable year, a corporation's change 
between FSC and small FSC status is effective as of the first day of a 
taxable year.
    Q-14. How may a corporation revoke an election by a corporation to 
be treated as a FSC or a small FSC?
    A-14. A corporation may revoke its election by filing a statement 
that the corporation revokes its election under section 922(a) to be 
treated as a FSC or under section 922(b) to be treated as a small FSC. 
Such statement shall indicate the corporation's name, address, employer 
identification number, and the first taxable year of the corporation for 
which the revocation is to be effective. The statement shall be signed 
by any person authorized to sign a corporate return under section 6062. 
Such revocation shall be filed with the Service Center with which the 
corporation filed its return.
    Q-15. What if the effect is a corporation that has elected to be 
treated as a FSC or a small FSC fails to qualify as a FSC because it 
does not meet the requirements of section 922 for a taxable year?
    A-15. If a corporation that has elected to be treated as a FSC or a 
small FSC does not qualify as a FSC or a small FSC for a taxable year, 
the corporation will not be treated as a FSC or a small FSC for the 
taxable year. However, the failure of a corporation to qualify to be 
treated as a FSC or a small FSC for a taxable year does not terminate 
the election of the corporation to be treated as FSC or a small FSC 
unless the corporation does not qualify under section 922 for each of 5 
consecutive taxable years, as provided in Q&A 16 of this section.
    Q-16. Under what circumstances is the FSC or small FSC election 
terminated for continued failure to be a FSC?
    A-16. If a corporation that has elected to be treated as a FSC or a 
small FSC does not qualify under section 922 to be treated as a FSC or 
small FSC for each of 5 consecutive taxable years, such election 
terminates and will not

[[Page 128]]

be effective for any taxable year after such fifth taxable year. Such 
termination will be effective automatically without notice to such 
corporation or to the Internal Revenue Service.

[T.D. 8127, 52 FR 6475, Mar. 3, 1987]

                    possessions of the united states


<R05>
Sec. 1.931-1   Citizens of the United States and domestic corporations deriving income from sources within a certain possession of the United States.

    (a) Definitions. (1) As used in section 931 and this section, the 
term ``possession of the United States'' includes American Samoa, Guam, 
Johnston Island, Midway Islands, the Panama Canal Zone, Puerto Rico, and 
Wake Island. However, the term does not include (i) the Virgin Islands 
and (ii), when used with respect to citizens of the United States, the 
term does not include Puerto Rico or, in the case of taxable years 
beginning after December 31, 1972, Guam.
    (2) As used in section 931 and this section, the term ``United 
States'' includes only the States, the Territories of Alaska and Hawaii, 
and the District of Columbia.
    (b) General rule--(1) Qualifications. In the case of a citizen of 
the United States or a domestic corporation satisfying the following 
conditions, gross income means only gross income from sources within the 
United States--
    (i) If 80 percent or more of the gross income of such citizen or 
domestic corporation (computed without the benefit of section 931) for 
the 3-year period immediately preceding the close of the taxable year 
(or for such part of such period immediately preceding the close of such 
taxable year as may be applicable) was derived from sources within a 
possession of the United States, and
    (ii) If 50 percent or more of the gross income of such citizen or 
domestic corporation (computed without the benefit of section 931) for 
such period or such part thereof was derived from the active conduct of 
a trade or business within a possession of the United States. In the 
case of a citizen, the trade or business may be conducted on his own 
account or as an employee or agent of another. The salary or other 
compensation paid by the United States to the members of its civil, 
military, or naval personnel for services rendered within a possession 
of the United States represents income derived from the active conduct 
of a trade or business within a possession of the United States. The 
salary or other compensation paid for services performed by a citizen of 
the United States as an employee of the United States or any agency 
thereof shall, for the purposes of section 931 and this section, be 
deemed to be derived from sources within the United States. Dividends 
received by a citizen from a corporation whose income was derived from 
the active conduct of a business within a possession of the United 
States, does not represent income derived from the active conduct of a 
trade or business within the possession of the United States even though 
such citizen was actively engaged in the management of such corporation. 
For a determination of income from sources within the United States, see 
part I (section 861 and following), subchapter N, chapter 1 of the Code, 
and section 931(i), and the regulations thereunder.
    (2) Relationship of sections 931 and 911. A citizen of the United 
States who cannot meet the 80-percent and the 50-percent requirements of 
section 931 but who receives earned income from sources within a 
possession of the United States, is not deprived of the benefits of the 
provisions of section 911 (relating to the exemption of earned income 
from sources outside the United States), provided he meets the 
requirements thereof. In such a case none of the provisions of section 
931 is applicable in determining the citizen's tax liability. For what 
constitutes earned income, see section 911(b).
    (3) Meaning of ``gross income'' on joint return. In the case of a 
husband and wife making a joint return, the term ``gross income,'' as 
used in this section, means the combined gross income of the spouses.
    (4) Returns. A citizen entitled to the benefits of section 931 is 
required to file with his individual return Form 1040 the schedule on 
Form 1040E. If a citizen entitled to the benefits of section 931 has no 
income from sources within the United States and does not receive within 
the United States any income

[[Page 129]]

derived from sources without the United States he is not required to 
file a return or the schedule on Form 1040E.
    (5) Illustration of the operation of section 931. This section may 
be illustrated by the following example:

    Example. On July 1, 1954, A, who is a citizen of the United States, 
went to a possession of the United States and established a business 
there which he actively conducted during the remainder of that year. His 
gross income from the business during such period was $20,000. In 
addition, he made a profit of $12,000 from the sale during the latter 
part of 1954 of some real estate located in such possession and not 
connected with his trade or business. In the first six months of 1954 he 
also derived $8,000 gross income from rental property located in the 
United States. He derived a like amount of gross income from such 
property during the last six months of 1954. On these facts, A may 
exclude the $32,000 derived from sources within the possession of the 
United States, since he qualified under section 931 with respect to that 
amount. The period of July 1, 1954, through December 31, 1954, 
constitutes the applicable part of the 3-year period immediately 
preceding the close of the taxable year (the calendar year 1954), and 
for that period, 80 percent of A's gross income was derived from sources 
within a possession of the United States ($32,000, or 80 percent of 
$40,000) and 50 percent or more of A's gross income was derived from the 
active conduct of a trade or business within a possession of the United 
States ($20,000, or 50 percent of $40,000). A is required to report on 
his return for 1954 only the gross income derived by him from sources 
within the United States ($16,000 from the rental property located in 
the United States).

    (c) Amounts received in the United States. Notwithstanding the 
provisions of section 931(a), there shall be included in the gross 
income of citizens and domestic corporations therein specified all 
amounts, whether derived from sources within or without the United 
States, which are received by such citizens or corporations within the 
United States. From the amounts so included in gross income there shall 
be deducted only the expenses properly apportioned or allocated thereto. 
For instance, if in the example set forth in paragraph (b)(5) of this 
section, the taxpayer during the latter part of 1954 returned to the 
United States for a few weeks and while there received the proceeds 
resulting from the sale of the real estate located in the possession, 
the profits derived from such transaction should be reported in gross 
income. Such receipt in the United States, however, would not deprive 
the taxpayer of the benefits of section 931 with respect to other items 
of gross income excluded by that section.
    (d) Deductions--(1) Individuals. In the case of a citizen entitled 
to the benefits of section 931, the deductions allowed in computing 
taxable income, except the standard deduction and a deduction for one 
personal exemption (see sections 142(b)(2) and 931(e), respectively), 
are allowed only if and to the extent that they are connected with 
income from sources within the United States. The provisions of section 
873 and the regulations thereunder, relating to the allowance to 
nonresident alien individuals, who at any time within the taxable year 
were engaged in trade or business within the United States, of the 
deductions provided in section 165(c)(2) and (3) for losses not 
connected with the trade or business, are applicable in the case of 
citizens entitled to the benefits of section 931. The provisions of 
section 873 (c) and the regulations thereunder pertaining to the 
allowance to such nonresident alien individuals of deductions for 
contributions provided in section 170 are also applied in the case of 
such citizens.
    (2) Corporations. Corporations entitled to the benefits of section 
931 are allowed the same deductions from their gross income arising from 
sources within the United States as are allowed to domestic corporations 
to the extent that such deductions are connected with such gross income, 
except that the so-called charitable contribution deduction provided by 
section 170 to corporations is allowed whether or not connected with 
income from sources within the United States. The proper apportionment 
and allocation of the deductions with respect to sources within and 
without the United States shall be determined as provided in part I 
(section 861 and following), subchapter N, chapter 1 of the Code, and 
the regulations thereunder.
    (e) Deduction for personal exemption. A citizen of the United States 
entitled to the benefits of section 931 is allowed a

[[Page 130]]

deduction for only one exemption under section 151.
    (f) Allowance of deductions and credits. Unless a citizen of the 
United States or a domestic corporation entitled to the benefits of 
section 931 shall file or cause to be filed with the district director a 
true and accurate return of total income from all sources within the 
United States, in the manner prescribed in subtitle F of the Code, the 
tax shall be collected on the basis of the gross income (not the taxable 
income) from sources within the United States. If such citizen or 
corporation fails to file a necessary income tax return, the 
Commissioner will cause a return to be made, including therein all 
income from sources within the United States and allowing no deductions 
or credits (except credit for tax withheld at source).
    (g) Foreign tax credit. Persons entitled to the benefits of section 
931 are not allowed the credits provided for in section 901 (relating to 
credits for taxes of foreign countries and possessions).
    (h) Internees. If a citizen of the United States--
    (1) Was interned by the enemy while serving as an employee within a 
possession of the United States; and
    (2) Was confined in any place not within a possession of the United 
States, then
    (i) Such place of confinement shall be considered as within a 
possession of the United States for the purposes of section 931; and
    (ii) Section 931 (b) shall not apply to any compensation received 
within the United States by such citizen attributable to the period of 
time during which such citizen was interned by the enemy.
    (i) Employees of the United States. For the purposes of section 931, 
amounts paid for services performed by a citizen of the United States as 
an employee of the United States or any agency thereof shall be deemed 
to be derived from sources within the United States.
    (j) Nonapplication to a DISC or shareholder thereof. Section 931 
does not apply to a corporation for a taxable year (1) for which it 
qualifies (or is treated) as a DISC or (2) during which it owns directly 
or indirectly at any time stock in a corporation which, at such time, is 
(or is treated as) a DISC or former DISC. (See section 992(a)(1) and 
(3), respectively, for the definitions of the terms ``DISC'' and 
``former DISC''.) For example, assume X Corporation and Y Corporation 
have the same taxable years. On the first day of its taxable year, X 
owns and sells all of the stock in Y, Y on such day owns and sells all 
of the stock in Z Corporation, and Z qualifies as a DISC as of such day. 
Section 931 will not apply to X and Y for their taxable years. Section 
931 will likewise not apply to Z for the taxable year for which it 
qualifies as a DISC.

(Secs. 7805 (68A Stat. 917; 26 U.S.C. 7805) and 7654(e) (86 Stat. 1496; 
26 U.S.C. 7654 (c)) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954)

[T.D. 6500, 25 FR 11910, Nov. 26, 1960, as amended by T.D. 7283, 38 FR 
20825, Aug. 3, 1973; T.D. 7385, 40 FR 50260, Oct. 29, 1975]


<R05>
Sec. 1.932-1   Status of citizens of U.S. possessions.

    (a) General rule--(1) Definition and treatment. A citizen of a 
possession of the United States (except Puerto Rico and, for taxable 
years beginning after December 31, 1972, Guam), who is not otherwise a 
citizen or resident of the United States, including only the States and 
the District of Columbia, is treated for the purpose of the taxes 
imposed by subtitle A of the Code (relating to income taxes) as if he 
were a nonresident alien individual. However, for purposes of the tax 
imposed on self-employment income by chapter 2 of the Code, the term 
``possession of the United States'' as used in section 932 and the 
preceding sentence does not include American Samoa, Guam, or the Virgin 
Islands. See section 1402(a)(9). See subpart A (section 871 and 
following), part II, subchapter N, chapter 1 of the Code, and the 
regulations thereunder, for rules relating to imposition of tax on 
nonresident alien individuals. For Federal income tax purposes, a 
citizen of a possession of the United States who is not otherwise a 
citizen of the United States is a citizen of a possession of the United 
States who has not become a citizen of the United States by 
naturalization in a State, Territory, or the District of Columbia. The 
fixed or determinable annual or periodical income from sources within 
the United States

[[Page 131]]

of a citizen of a possession of the United States who is treated as if 
he were a nonresident alien individual is subject to withholding. See 
section 1441.
    (2) Classification of citizens of United States possessions. For the 
purpose of this section citizens of the possessions of the United States 
who are not otherwise citizens of the United States are divided into two 
classes:
    (i) Citizens of possessions of the United States who at any time 
within the taxable year are not engaged in trade or business within the 
United States, and
    (ii) Citizens of possessions of the United States who at any time 
within the taxable year are engaged in trade or business within the 
United States.
The provisions of subpart A (section 871 and following) and the 
regulations thereunder, applicable to nonresident alien individuals not 
engaged in trade or business within the United States are applicable to 
the citizens of possessions falling within the first class, while the 
provisions of such sections applicable to nonresident alien individuals 
who at any time within the taxable year are engaged in trade or business 
within the United States are applicable to citizens of possessions 
falling within the second class.
    (b) Nonapplication to citizen of Puerto Rico or Guam. The provisions 
of section 932(a) and paragraph (a) of this section do not apply in the 
case of a citizen of Puerto Rico or, for taxable years beginning after 
December 31, 1972, a citizen of Guam. Thus, for example, any such 
citizen who is not a resident of the United States will not be treated 
by the United States as a nonresident alien individual for purposes of 
section 2 (b)(3)(A) or (d), relating to definitions and special rules; 
section 4(d)(1), relating to taxpayers not eligible to use the optional 
tax tables; section 37(h), relating to denial of retirement income 
credit; section 116(d), relating to taxpayers ineligible for dividend 
exclusion; section 142(b)(1), relating to taxpayers ineligible for 
standard deduction; section 152(b)(3), relating to definition of 
``dependent''; section 402(a)(4), relating to distributions by the 
United States to nonresident aliens; section 545(d), relating to certain 
foreign corporations; section 565(e), relating to certain consent 
dividends; section 861(a)(1), relating to interest from sources within 
the United States; sections 871 to 877, relating to nonresident alien 
individuals; section 1303(b), relating to individuals not eligible for 
income averaging; section 1371(a)(3), relating to definition of small 
business corporation; section 1402(b), relating to definition of ``self-
employment income''; section 1441, relating to withholding of tax on 
nonresident aliens; section 3401(a), relating to definition of wages; 
section 6013(a)(1), relating to inability to make a joint return; 
section 6015 (b) and (i), relating to declaration of estimated income 
tax by nonresident alien individuals; section 6017, relating to self-
employment tax returns; section 6042(b)(2), relating to returns 
regarding payments of dividends; section 6049(b)(2), relating to returns 
regarding payments of interest; section 6072 (c), relating to time for 
filing returns of nonresident alien individuals; section 6091(b), 
relating to place for filing returns of nonresident aliens; and section 
6096(a), relating to designation of tax payments to Presidential 
Election Campaign Fund. For other rules applicable to citizens of Puerto 
Rico, see Secs. 1.1-1(b) and 1.933-1. For other rules applicable to 
citizens of Guam, see Secs. 1.1-1(b) and 1.935-1 of this chapter (Income 
Tax Regulations) and Sec. 301.7654-1 of this chapter (Regulations on 
Procedure and Administration).

(Secs. 7805 (68A Stat. 917; 26 U.S.C. 7805) and 7654(e) (86 Stat. 1496; 
26 U.S.C. 7654 (e)) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954)

[T.D. 6500, 25 FR 11910, Nov. 26, 1960, as amended by T.D. 7385, 40 FR 
50260, Oct. 29, 1975]


<R05>
Sec. 1.933-1   Exclusion of certain income from sources within Puerto Rico.

    (a) General rule. An individual (whether a United States citizen or 
an alien), who is a bona fide resident of Puerto Rico during the entire 
taxable year, shall exclude from his gross income the income derived 
from sources within Puerto Rico, except amounts received for services 
performed as an employee of the United States or any agency thereof. 
Whether the individual is a bona fide resident of Puerto Rico shall be 
determined in general by applying to the facts and circumstances

[[Page 132]]

in each case the principles of Secs. 1.871-2, 1.871-3, 1.871-4, and 
1.871-5, relating to what constitutes residence or nonresidence, as the 
case may be in the United States in the case of an alien individual. 
Once bona fide residence in Puerto Rico has been established, temporary 
absence therefrom in the United States or elsewhere on vacation or 
business trips will not necessarily deprive an individual of his status 
as a bona fide resident of Puerto Rico. An individual taking up 
residence in Puerto Rico during the course of the taxable year is not 
entitled for such year to the exclusion provided in section 933.
    (b) Taxable year of change of residence from Puerto Rico. A citizen 
of the United States who changes his residence from Puerto Rico after 
having been a bona fide resident thereof for a period of at least two 
years immediately preceding the date of such change in residence shall 
exclude from his gross income the income derived from sources within 
Puerto Rico which is attributable to that part of such period of Puerto 
Rican residence which preceded the date of such change in residence, 
except amounts received for services performed as an employee of the 
United States or any agency thereof.
    (c) Deductions. In any case in which any amount otherwise 
constituting gross income is excluded from gross income under the 
provisions of section 933, there shall not be allowed as a deduction 
from gross income any items of expenses or losses or other deductions 
(except the deduction under section 151, relating to personal 
exemptions) properly allocable to, or chargeable against, the amounts so 
excluded from gross income.


<R05>
Sec. 1.934-1   Limitation on reduction in income tax liability incurred to the Virgin Islands.

    (a) General rule. Section 934(a) provides that tax liability 
incurred to the Virgin Islands shall not be reduced or remitted in any 
way, directly or indirectly, whether by grant, subsidy, or other similar 
payment, by any law enacted in the Virgin Islands, except to the extent 
provided in section 934 (b) or (c). For purposes of the preceding 
sentence, the term ``tax liability'' means the liability incurred to the 
Virgin Islands pursuant to subtitle A of the Code, as made applicable in 
the Virgin Islands by the Act of July 12, 1921 (48 U.S.C. 1397), or 
pursuant to section 28(a) of the Revised Organic Act of the Virgin 
Islands (48 U.S.C. 1642).
    (b) Exception for certain domestic and Virgin Islands corporations--
(1) General rule. Section 934(b) provides an exception to the 
application of section 934(a). Under this exception, section 934(a) does 
not apply with respect to tax liability incurred to the Virgin Islands 
by a domestic or Virgin Islands corporation for any taxable year (or for 
such part of such year as may be applicable) to the extent that such tax 
liability is attributable to income derived from sources without the 
United States, if such corporation satisfies the conditions provided in 
section 934(b)(1) and (2), and if the information required by section 
934(d) is supplied. These conditions are enumerated in the remainder of 
this paragraph, and the information requirement is set forth in 
paragraph (d) of this section.
    (2) Conditions to be satisfied for exception. A domestic or Virgin 
Islands corporation satisfies the conditions of section 934(b)(1) and 
(2) if--
    (i) Eighty percent or more of the gross income of such corporation 
for the 3-year period immediately preceding the close of the taxable 
year (or for such part of such period immediately preceding the close of 
such taxable year as may be applicable) was derived from sources within 
the Virgin Islands; and
    (ii) Fifty percent or more of the gross income of such corporation 
for such period (or such part thereof) was derived from the active 
conduct of a trade or business within the Virgin Islands.
    (3) Computation rule. Except as provided in subparagraph (5) of this 
paragraph, tax liability incurred to the Virgin Islands by a domestic or 
Virgin Islands corporation for the taxable year (or such part of such 
year as may be applicable) attributable to income derived from sources 
without the United States shall be computed as follows:
    (i) Add to the income tax liability incurred to the Virgin Islands 
any credit against the tax allowed under section 901(a);

[[Page 133]]

    (ii) Multiply by taxable income from sources without the United 
States for the applicable period;
    (iii) Divide by total taxable income for the period;
    (iv) Subtract any credit against the tax allowed under section 
901(a). Tax liability incurred to the Virgin Islands attributable to 
income derived from sources without the United States, as computed in 
this subparagraph, however, shall not exceed the total amount of income 
tax liability actually incurred.
    (4) Examples. The rule of the preceding subparagraph may be 
illustrated by the following examples:

    Example 1. Corporation X, which satisfies the requirements of 
section 934(b), incurs an income tax liability to the Virgin Islands for 
taxable year 1963 of $290, as follows:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
Taxable income from sources within the U.S....         $200             
Taxable income from sources without the U.S...          800             
                                               -------------            
Total taxable income.......................................       $1,000
Credit allowed under section 901(a)........................           10
Tax liability incurred to the Virgin Islands...............          290
The income tax liability incurred to the Virgin Islands                 
 attributable to income derived from sources without the                
 United States is $230, computed as follows:                            
  (i) Tax liability incurred to the Virgin                              
   Islands....................................          290             
  Plus credit allowed under section 901(a)....           10             
                                               -------------            
                                                                     300
  (ii) Multiply by taxable income from sources                          
   without the U.S............................          800             
                                               -------------            
                                                                 240,000
  (iii) Divide by total taxable income........        1,000             
                                               -------------            
                                                                     240
  (iv) Subtract credit allowed under section                            
   901(a).....................................           10             
                                               -------------            
                                                                     230
                                                                        

    Example 2. Corporation Y, which satisfies the requirements of 
section 934(b), incurs an income tax liability to the Virgin Islands for 
taxable year 1963 of $140, as follows:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
Taxable income from sources within the U.S....    ($300 net             
                                                      loss)             
Taxable income from sources without the U.S...          800             
                                               -------------            
Total taxable income.......................................         $500
Credit allowed under section 901(a)........................           10
Tax liability incurred to the Virgin Islands...............          140
The income tax liability incurred to the Virgin Islands                 
 attributable to income derived from sources without the                
 United States is 140, computed as follows:                             
  (i) Tax liability incurred to the Virgin                              
   Islands....................................          140             
  Plus credit allowed under section 901(a)....           10             
                                               -------------            
                                                                     150
  (ii) Multiply by taxable income from sources                          
   without the U.S............................          800             
                                               -------------            
                                                                 120,000
  (iii) Divide by total taxable income........          500             
                                               -------------            
                                                                     240
  (iv) Subtract credit allowed under section                            
   901(a).....................................           10             
                                               -------------            
                                                                     230
                                                                        

Since the $230 derived from the computation is in excess of the actual 
tax liability incurred, the income tax liability incurred to the Virgin 
Islands attributable to income derived from sources without the United 
States is limited to $140, the actual liability incurred.

    (5) Special computation rule for certain domestic corporations. For 
purposes of section 934(b) and this paragraph, tax liability incurred to 
the Virgin Islands by a domestic corporation which is required to file 
an income tax return with the United States for the taxable year (or 
such part of such year as may be applicable) attributable to income 
derived from sources without the United States shall be the actual 
income tax liability incurred to the Virgin Islands for such year.
    (6) Source of income. For purposes of section 934(b) and this 
paragraph, the income of a Virgin Islands corporation, and the sources 
from which the income of such corporation is derived, shall be 
determined as if such corporation were a domestic corporation. However, 
all amounts received by a corporation within the United States, whether 
derived from sources within or without the United States, shall be 
considered as being derived from sources within the United States. In 
determining the sources from which the income of a domestic or Virgin 
Islands corporation is derived, the principles of part 1 (section 861 
and following), subchapter N, chapter 1 of the Code, and the regulations 
thereunder shall apply.
    (c) Exception for certain residents of the Virgin Islands--(1) 
General rule. Section

[[Page 134]]

934(c) provides another exception to the application of section 934(a). 
Under this exception, section 934(a) does not apply with respect to the 
tax liability incurred by an individual citizen of the United States to 
the Virgin Islands for any taxable year to the extent that such tax 
liability is attributable to income derived from sources within the 
Virgin Islands, if such individual is a bona fide resident of the Virgin 
Islands during the entire taxable year and if he supplies the 
information required under section 934(d).
    (2) Definition--bona fide resident and United States citizen. In 
determining whether a United States citizen is a bona fide resident of 
the Virgin Islands, the principles of Secs. 1.871-2, 1.871-3, 1.871-4, 
and 1.871-5, relating to the determination of residence and nonresidence 
in the United States, shall apply. Once a bona fide residence in the 
Virgin Islands is established by an individual, temporary absence 
therefrom will not necessarily deprive such individual of his status as 
a bona fide resident of the Virgin Islands. For purposes of section 
934(c), a citizen of the United States includes any individual who is a 
citizen of the United States by reason of being a citizen of any 
possession of the United States.
    (3) Computation rule. For purposes of section 934(c) and this 
paragraph, tax liability incurred to the Virgin Islands for the taxable 
year attributable to income derived from sources within the Virgin 
Islands shall be computed as follows:
    (i) Add to the income tax liability incurred to the Virgin Islands 
any credit against the tax allowed under section 901(a);
    (ii) Multiply by taxable income from sources within the Virgin 
Islands;
    (iii) Divide by total taxable income. Tax liability incurred to the 
Virgin Islands attributable to income derived from sources within the 
Virgin Islands, as computed in this subparagraph, however, shall not 
exceed the total amount of income tax liability actually incurred.
    (4) Examples. The rule of the preceding subparagraph may be 
illustrated by the following examples:

    Example 1. A, an individual who satisfies the requirements of 
section 934(c), incurs an income tax liability to the Virgin Islands for 
taxable year 1963 of $380, as follows:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
Taxable income from sources within the Virgin                           
 Islands..........................................     $1,200           
Taxable income from sources without the Virgin                          
 Islands..........................................        800           
                                                   -----------          
Total taxable income.........................................     $2,000
Credit allowed under section 901(a)..........................         20
Tax liability incurred to the Virgin Islands.................        380
The income tax liability incurred to the Virgin Islands                 
 attributable to income derived from sources within the                 
 Virgin Islands is $240, computed as follows:                           
  (i) Tax liability incurred to the Virgin Islands        380           
  Plus credit allowed under section 901(a)........         20           
                                                   -----------          
                                                                     400
  (ii) Multiply by taxable income from sources                          
   within the Virgin Islands......................      1,200           
                                                   -----------          
                                                                 480,000
  (iii) Divide by total taxable income.......................     $2,000
                                                              ----------
                                                                     240
                                                                        

    Example 2. B, an individual who satisfies the requirements of 
section 934(c), incurs an income tax liability to the Virgin Islands for 
taxable year 1963 of $100, as follows:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
Taxable income from sources within the Virgin                           
 Islands......................................         $800             
Taxable income from sources without the Virgin                          
 Islands......................................     (200 net             
                                                      loss)             
                                               --------------           
Total taxable income.......................................         $600
Credit allowed under section 901(a)........................           20
Tax liability incurred to the Virgin Islands...............          100
The income tax liability incurred to the Virgin Islands                 
 attributable to income derived from sources within the                 
 Virgin Islands is $100, computed as follows:                           
  (i) Tax liability incurred to the Virgin                              
   Islands....................................          100             
  Plus credit allowed under section 901(a)....           20             
                                               -------------            
                                                                     120
  (ii) Multiply by taxable income from sources                          
   within the Virgin Islands..................          800             
                                               -------------            
                                                                  96,000
  (iii) Divide by total taxable income........          600             
                                               -------------            
                                                                     160
                                                                        

Since the $160 derived from the computation is in excess of the actual 
tax liability incurred, the income tax liability incurred to the Virgin 
Islands attributable to income derived from sources within the Virgin 
Islands is limited to $100, the actual liability incurred.

    (5) Source of income. For purposes of section 934(c) and this 
paragraph, in determining taxable income from sources

[[Page 135]]

within and without the Virgin Islands the principles of part 1 (section 
861 and following), subchapter N, chapter 1 of the Code, and the 
regulations thereunder shall apply, except that--
    (i) Any deductions for personal exemptions allowable under section 
151 shall be deducted in computing taxable income from sources within 
the Virgin Islands but shall not be deducted in computing taxable income 
from sources without the Virgin Islands;
    (ii) Amounts received for services performed as an employee of the 
United States or any agency thereof shall not be considered as income 
derived from sources within the Virgin Islands;
    (iii) Gain or loss from the sale or exchange of any security (as 
defined in section 165(g)(2)) shall not be treated as derived from 
sources within the Virgin Islands.
    (6) Definition--``taxable income'' on a joint return. In the case of 
a husband and wife making a joint return, the term ``taxable income'', 
as used in this paragraph, means the combined taxable income of both 
spouses.
    (d) Information required. Section 934(d) provides that the 
exceptions in section 934 (b) and (c) shall apply only in the case of 
persons who supply such information as the Secretary or his delegate may 
by regulations prescribe for purposes of determining the applicability 
of such exceptions. The following portions of this paragraph, together 
with paragraphs (e) and (f) of this section, prescribe the information 
which must be filed. Any person seeking to come within an exception must 
provide the following information:
    (1) The name and address of such person;
    (2) If such person is one of two or more organizations, trades, or 
businesses (whether or not incorporated, whether or not organized in the 
United States, and whether or not affiliated) owned or controlled 
directly or indirectly by the same interests within the meaning of 
section 482 and the regulations thereunder--
    (i) The name and address of each such organization, trade, or 
business;
    (ii) The relationship which each such organization, trade, or 
business bears to the other organizations, trades, or businesses in such 
group;
    (iii) The nature of the activity or activities conducted by each 
such organization, trade, or business.
    (3) Any person seeking to come within an exception must make 
available for inspection by the Director of International Operations 
such records, and underlying contracts and documents, as are necessary 
to determine the applicability of section 934(b) or (c).
    (e) Information required--corporations. Corporations seeking to come 
within the exception provided in section 934(b) shall, in addition to 
the information required by paragraph (d) of this section, submit the 
following information with respect to each taxable year:
    (1) The date and place of incorporation;
    (2) The name and address of any shareholder of record owning at any 
time during the taxable year 5 percent or more of the voting stock of 
any class or 5 percent or more of the value of any class of outstanding 
stock, and the nature and amount of the stock owned;
    (3) For the 3-year period immediately preceding the close of the 
corporation's taxable year (or for such part of such period immediately 
preceding the close of such taxable year as may be applicable)--
    (i) The total amount of its gross income;
    (ii) The amount of such gross income derived from the active conduct 
of a trade or business within the Virgin Islands;
    (iii) The amount of such gross income from sources within (a) the 
Virgin Islands, (b) the United States (including therein and 
specifically itemizing all amounts received within the United States), 
and (c) all other countries as a group;
    (iv) The ratio which gross income derived from sources within the 
Virgin Islands bears to total gross income;
    (v) The ratio which gross income derived from the active conduct of 
a trade or business within the Virgin Islands bears to total gross 
income.
    (f) Information required--individuals. Individuals seeking to come 
within the exception provided in section 934(c) shall, in addition to 
the information

[[Page 136]]

required by paragraph (d) of this section, submit the following 
information with respect to each taxable year:
    (1) The date on which such individual became a bona fide resident of 
the Virgin Islands;
    (2) If such individual maintains a place of abode for himself or his 
family in the United States or elsewhere outside the Virgin Islands, the 
location of such place of abode and the purpose for which such place is 
maintained;
    (3) The beginning and the ending dates of each period of absence 
from the Virgin Islands during such taxable year;
    (4) The amount of gross income for such taxable year from sources 
within the Virgin Islands, excluding--
    (i) The amount of gain or loss from the sale or exchange of any 
security, as defined in section 165(g)(2);
    (ii) The amount of gross income received for services performed as 
an employee of the United States or any agency thereof.
    (5) Any amounts excluded from gross income from sources within the 
Virgin Islands under subparagraph (4)(i) and (ii) of this paragraph.
    (g) Time and place for filing statement. The statement, in 
duplicate, providing the information required under section 934(d) and 
paragraphs (d), (e), and (f) of this section shall be attached to the 
income tax return filed with the Government of the Virgin Islands for 
the taxable year with respect to which an exception is claimed under 
section 934 (b) or (c). If an exception is claimed with respect to any 
taxable year for which the time prescribed by law for filing the return 
expires prior to 30 days from the publication of these regulations, the 
required statement must be filed in duplicate on or before 90 days from 
the publication of these regulations. The return and statement must be 
available for examination by the Director of International Operations.
    (h) Effective date. The provisions of this section shall apply to 
taxable years beginning after December 31, 1959.

[T.D. 6629, 27 FR 12791, Dec. 28, 1962]


<R05>
Sec. 1.935-1   Coordination of U.S. and Guam individual income taxes.

    (a) Application of section--(1) Scope. Section 935 and this section 
set forth the special rules relating to the filing of income tax 
returns, income tax liabilities, and estimated income tax of individuals 
described in subparagraph (2) of this paragraph. For additional rules 
relating to the collection of income tax at source on the wages of 
certain individuals, the furnishing of certain information with the 
returns of certain individuals, and the covering over to the treasury of 
Guam of net collections of income taxes imposed on certain individuals, 
see section 7654 and Sec. 301.7654-1 of this chapter (Regulations on 
Procedure and Administration).
    (2) Individuals covered. This section shall apply for a taxable year 
to any individual who--
    (i) Is a resident of Guam, whether or not he is a citizen of the 
United States,
    (ii) Is a citizen of Guam but not otherwise a citizen of the United 
States,
    (iii) Has income derived from Guam for the taxable year and is a 
citizen or resident of the United States, or
    (iv) Files a joint return for the taxable year with any individual 
described in subdivision (i), (ii), or (iii) of this subparagraph.
    (3) Determination of residence and citizenship. For purposes of this 
section, determinations of residence and citizenship for a taxable year 
shall be made (except as provided to the contrary in paragraphs (d)(1) 
and (2) of this section) as of the close of the taxable year. A citizen 
of the United States is any individual who is a citizen within the 
meaning of paragraph (c) of Sec. 1.1-1, except that the term does not 
include an individual who is a citizen of Guam but not otherwise a 
citizen of the United States. An individual who is a citizen of Guam but 
not otherwise a citizen of the United States is any individual who has 
become a citizen of the United States by birth or naturalization in 
Guam. Whether an individual is a resident of Guam or a resident of the 
United States shall generally be determined by applying to the facts and 
circumstances in each case the principles of Secs. 1.871-2 through 
1.871-5 relating to

[[Page 137]]

what constitutes residence or nonresidence, as the case may be, in the 
United States in the case of an alien individual. However, for special 
rules for determining the residence for tax purposes of individuals 
under military or naval orders, see section 514 of the Soldiers' and 
Sailors' Civil Relief Act of 1940, 50 App. U.S.C. 574. The residence of 
an individual, and, therefore, the jurisdiction with which he is 
required to file an income tax return under paragraph (b) of this 
section, may change from year to year.
    (b) Filing requirement--(1) Tax jurisdiction. An individual 
described in paragraph (a)(2) of this section shall file his return of 
income tax for the taxable year--
    (i) With the United States if he is a resident of the United States, 
whether or not he is a citizen of the United States,
    (ii) With Guam if he is a resident of Guam, whether or not he is a 
citizen of Guam, or
    (iii) If neither subdivision (i) nor (ii) of this subparagraph 
applies,
    (A) With Guam if he is a citizen of Guam but not otherwise a citizen 
of the United States, as defined in paragraph (a)(3) of this section, or
    (B) With the United States if he is a citizen of the United States, 
as defined in paragraph (a)(3) of this section. Thus, for example, if a 
U.S. citizen employed by the United States in Guam becomes a resident of 
Guam for the taxable year, he must file his return of income tax for 
such year with Guam. The tax shown on the return shall be paid to the 
jurisdiction with which such return is required to be filed and shall be 
determined by taking into account any credit under section 31 for tax 
withheld by Guam or the United States on wages, any credit under section 
6402(b) for an overpayment of income tax to Guam or the United States, 
and any payments under section 6315 of estimated income tax paid to Guam 
or the United States. See paragraph (a)(3) of this section for the rule 
that determinations of residence and citizenship are to be made as of 
the close of the taxable year.
    (2) Joint returns. In the case of married persons, if one or both 
spouses is an individual described in paragraph (a)(2) of this section 
and they file a joint return of income tax, the spouses shall file their 
joint return with, and pay the tax due on such return to, the 
jurisdiction where the spouse who has the greater adjusted gross income 
for the taxable year would be required under subparagraph (1) of this 
paragraph to file his return if separate returns were filed. For this 
purpose, adjusted gross income of each spouse is determined under 
section 62 and the regulations thereunder but without regard to 
community property laws; and, if one of the spouses dies, the taxable 
year of the surviving spouse shall be treated as ending on the date of 
such death.
    (3) Place for filing returns--(i) U.S. returns. A return required 
under this paragraph to be filed with the United States shall be filed 
in accordance with Sec. 1.6091-2, except that such return of a citizen 
or resident of the United States who is described in Sec. 301.7654-
1(a)(2) of this chapter (Regulations on Procedure and Administration) 
shall be filed with the Internal Revenue Service Center, 11601 Roosevelt 
Boulevard, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19155.
    (ii) Guam returns. A return required under this paragraph to be 
filed with Guam shall be filed with the Commissioner of Revenue and 
Taxation, Agana, Guam 96910.
    (4) Tax accounting standards. A taxpayer who has filed his return 
with one of the jurisdictions named in subparagraph (1) of this 
paragraph for a prior taxable year and is required to file his return 
for a later taxable year with the other such jurisdiction may not, for 
such later taxable year, change his accounting period, method of 
accounting, or any election to which he is bound with respect to his 
reporting of taxable income to the first jurisdiction unless he obtains 
the consent of the second jurisdiction to make such change. However, 
such change will not be effective for returns filed thereafter with the 
first jurisdiction unless before such later date of filing he also 
obtains the consent of the first jurisdiction to make such change. Any 
request for consent to make a change pursuant to this subparagraph must 
be made to the office where the return is required to be filed under 
subparagraph (3) of this

[[Page 138]]

paragraph and in sufficient time to permit a copy of the consent to be 
attached to the return for the taxable year.
    (c) Extent of liability for income tax--(1) Extension of territory--
(i) General rule. With respect to an individual who, for a taxable year, 
is described in paragraph (a)(2) of this section--
    (A) For purposes of so much of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954 as 
relates to the normal taxes and the surtaxes imposed by chapter 1 
thereof, the United States shall be treated, in a geographical and 
governmental sense, as including Guam, and
    (B) For purposes of the Guam Territorial income tax (48 U.S.C. 
1421i), Guam shall be treated, in a geographical and governmental sense, 
as including the United States except that this subdivision shall not 
apply for purposes of this section, section 7651, and section 7654.
    (ii) Application of general rule. (A) The significance of the 
application of the rule of subdivision (i) of this subparagraph will 
depend upon the facts and circumstances of the particular case. The rule 
will not be applied where its application would be manifestly 
inapplicable or incompatible with the intent thereof. Thus, the rule 
will not be applied for purposes of section 3401, relating to definition 
of wages. Also, the rule will not be applied in determining the sources 
of dividends and interest from a domestic corporation. For example, if 
less than 20 percent of a domestic corporation's gross income is from 
U.S. sources for the period described in section 861(a)(1)(B) and 
(2)(A), but more than 20 percent of its gross income is from U.S. and 
Guam sources taken together for such period, the dividends and interest 
derived from it will be treated as derived from sources without the 
United States. In addition, for purposes of section 1372(e)(4), relating 
to whether an election of a small business corporation has been 
terminated because it derived more than 80 percent of its gross receipts 
from sources outside the United States, gross receipts from sources 
within Guam will be treated as gross receipts from sources outside the 
United States. On the other hand, some of the conclusions which may be 
reached as a result of the application of subdivision (i) of this 
subparagraph to a U.S. taxpayer (that is, an individual described in 
paragraph (b)(1)(i) or (iii)(B) of this section) are as follows. A U.S. 
taxpayer may not claim a foreign tax credit based upon his income from 
sources within Guam. Income tax paid to Guam may be taken into account 
under sections 31, 6315, and 6402(b) as payments to the United States. 
For purposes of section 116(a), relating to the partial exclusion of 
dividends received by individuals, dividends paid to a U.S. taxpayer by 
a corporation created or organized in Guam or under the law of Guam will 
be treated as dividends paid by a domestic corporation. Taxes paid to 
Guam and otherwise satisfying the requirements of section 164(a) will be 
allowed as a deduction under that section, but income taxes paid to Guam 
will be disallowed as a deduction under section 275(a).
    (B) If a U.S. taxpayer has a net operating loss carryback or 
carryover under section 172, a foreign tax credit carryback or carryover 
under section 904, an investment credit carryback or carryover under 
section 46, a capital loss carryover under section 1212, or a charitable 
contributions carryover under section 170, the United States will take 
such carryback or carryover into account for a taxable year for which 
the taxpayer's return is required to be filed with the United States, 
and make a refund to the extent required under section 6402, even though 
the return of the taxpayer for the taxable year (whether beginning on, 
before, or after December 31, 1972) giving rise to the carryback or 
carryover was required to be filed with Guam.
    (C) For purposes of income averaging of a U.S. taxpayer under 
sections 1301 through 1305, the taxpayer will not be denied status as an 
``eligible individual'' merely because he was during the base period 
defined in section 1302(c)(2) treated under section 932 as a nonresident 
alien individual because he was a citizen of Guam but not otherwise a 
citizen of the United States. See section 1303(b). Furthermore, in 
determining the base period of such a U.S.

[[Page 139]]

taxpayer under section 1302(c)(2), taxable years for which a return was 
required to be filed with Guam shall be taken into account.
    (D) In applying the Guam Territorial income tax the converse of the 
preceding rules under this subdivision will apply. Thus, for example, 
income tax paid to the United States may be taken into account under 
sections 31, 6315, and 6402(b) as payments to Guam. Moreover, a citizen 
of the United States (as defined in paragraph (a)(3) of this section) 
not a resident of Guam will not be treated as a nonresident alien 
individual for purposes of the Guam Territorial income tax. Thus, for 
example, a citizen of the United States (as so defined), or a resident 
of the United States, will not be treated as a nonresident alien 
individual for purposes of section 1371(a)(3) of the Guamanian 
Territorial income tax.
    (2) Liability to other jurisdiction--(i) Filing with Guam. If for a 
taxable year an individual is required under paragraph (b)(1) of this 
section to file a return with Guam, he is relieved of liability to file 
an income tax return with, and to pay an income tax to, the United 
States for the taxable year.
    (ii) Filing with the United States. If for a taxable year an 
individual is required under paragraph (b)(1) of this section to file a 
return with the United States, he is relieved of liability to file an 
income tax return with, and to pay an income tax to, Guam for the 
taxable year.
    (d) Special rules for estimated income tax--(1) Declaration of 
estimated income tax. If, under all the facts and circumstances existing 
at the date an individual is required to file a declaration of estimated 
income tax, there is reason to believe that he will, for the taxable 
year, be an individual described in paragraph (a)(2) of this section, he 
must file his declaration of estimated income tax (and all amendments 
thereof) with the jurisdiction with which he would be required to file a 
return under paragraph (b)(1) of this section if his taxable year had 
closed on the date he is first required to file a declaration of 
estimated income tax for the taxable year. Except as provided in 
paragraph (6) of this section (relating to underpayments of estimated 
income tax), payments of estimated income tax shall be made to the 
jurisdiction with which he is required to file the declaration even 
though for the taxable year he is required under paragraph (b)(1) of 
this section to file his return with the other jurisdiction. In 
determining the amount of such estimated income tax, income tax paid to 
Guam may be taken into account under sections 31 and 6402(b) as payments 
to the United States, and vice versa. For rules relating to the 
determination of, and time for filing, declarations of estimated tax, 
see sections 6015 and 6073; for rules relating to the time for paying 
installments of the tax, see section 6153.
    (2) Joint declaration of estimated income tax. In the case of 
married persons, if, under all the facts and circumstances existing at 
the date a spouse is required to file a declaration of estimated income 
tax, there is reason to believe that he will, for the taxable year, be 
an individual described in paragraph (a)(2) of this section and the 
spouses file a joint declaration of estimated income tax, the spouses 
must file their joint declaration of estimated income tax (and all 
amendments thereof) with the jurisdiction where the spouse who has the 
greater estimated adjusted gross income for the taxable year would be 
required under subparagraph (1) of this paragraph to file his 
declaration of estimated income tax if separate declarations were filed. 
For this purpose, estimated adjusted gross income of each spouse for the 
taxable year is determined without regard to community property laws. 
Except as provided in paragraph (6) of this section, payments of 
estimated income tax shall be made to the jurisdiction with which the 
spouses are required to file the joint declaration.
    (3) Early filing of declarations. If the individual or spouses have 
in fact filed a declaration or joint declaration of estimated income tax 
earlier than the time he or they are first required to file the 
declaration and such declaration was not filed where it is required to 
be filed under paragraph (d)(1) or (2) of this section, as the case may 
be, of this paragraph, only subsequent amendments of the declaration are 
required to be filed pursuant to such

[[Page 140]]

paragraph (d)(1) or (2) of this section with the other jurisdiction and 
only subsequent installments of the estimated income tax are required to 
be paid to the other jurisdiction.
    (4) Place for filing declarations. A declaration of estimated income 
tax required under subparagraph (1) of this paragraph to be filed with 
Guam, shall be filed as prescribed in paragraph (b)(3)(ii) of this 
section. A declaration of estimated income tax required under 
subparagraph (1) of this paragraph to be filed with the United States 
shall be filed at the place prescribed by Sec. 1.6073-1(c).
    (5) Liability to other jurisdiction--(i) Filing with Guam. If, for a 
taxable year, an individual is required under this paragraph to file a 
declaration of estimated income tax with Guam, he is relieved of 
liability to file a declaration of estimated income tax (and any 
amendments thereof) with, and to make payments of estimated income tax 
to, the United States for the taxable year.
    (ii) Filing with the United States. If, for a taxable year, an 
individual is required under this paragraph to file a declaration of 
estimated income tax with the United States, he is relieved of liability 
to file a declaration of estimated income tax (and any amendments 
thereof) with, and to make payments of estimated income tax to, Guam for 
the taxable year.
    (6) Underpayments. The liability of an individual described in 
paragraph (a)(2) of this section for underpayments of estimated income 
tax for a taxable year, as determined under section 6654 and the 
regulations thereunder, shall be to the jurisdiction with which he is 
required under paragraph (b) of this section to file his return for the 
taxable year.
    (e) Illustration. The application of this section may be illustrated 
by the following examples:

    Example 1. B, and individual, files returns on a calendar year 
basis. B is a resident of the United States at the time he is required 
to file his declaration of estimated income tax for 1974. If, under the 
facts and circumstances, B does not reasonably expect at the time he 
files his declaration of estimated income tax that he will be a resident 
of Guam at the close of 1974, he will not be subject to this section at 
the time of such filing. However, B subsequently receives Guam source 
income which necessitates an amendment of his declaration, and some time 
later in 1974 he becomes a resident of Guam for the remainder of the 
year. B is required under paragraph (d)(1) of this section to file his 
amended declaration with the United States and to make payments of the 
estimated tax to the United States. However, B is required to file his 
income tax return for 1974 with Guam and to make any underpayments of 
estimated tax to Guam, pursuant to paragraphs (b)(1) and (d)(6) of this 
section.
    Example 2. C, an individual, files returns on a calendar year basis. 
On March 1, 1974, C is a resident of the United States, files his 
declaration of estimated income tax for 1974 with the United States, and 
pays his first installment of estimated tax to the United States. Prior 
to the date C would otherwise be required to file his declaration of 
estimated income tax for 1974 (April 15, 1974), C becomes a resident of 
Guam for the remainder of the year. C is required under paragraph (d)(1) 
of this section to make only his remaining payments of installments of 
estimated tax to Guam. C is also required to file his income tax return 
for 1974 with Guam and to make any underpayments of estimated tax to 
Guam, pursuant to paragraphs (b)(1) and (d)(6) of this section.
    Example 3. D, an individual, files returns on a calendar year basis. 
On August 1, 1974, D ceases to be a resident of the United States for 
the year and becomes a resident of Guam for the remainder of the year. D 
is first required to file a declaration of estimated income tax for 1974 
on September 15, 1974, because of his receipt of an extraordinary item 
of income after June 15, 1974. D is required under paragraph (d)(1) of 
this section to file his declaration with Guam and to make payments of 
the estimated tax to Guam. D is also required to file his income tax 
return for 1974 with Guam and to make any underpayments of estimated tax 
to Guam, pursuant to paragraphs (b)(1) and (d)(6) of this section.

    (f) Effective date. This section shall apply for taxable years 
beginning after December 31, 1972.

(Secs. 7805 (68A Stat. 917; 26 U.S.C. 7805) and 7654(e) (86 Stat. 1496; 
26 U.S.C. 7654 (e)) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954)

[T.D. 7385, 40 FR 50261, Oct. 29, 1975]


<R05>
Sec. 1.936-1  Elections.

    (a) Making an election. A domestic corporation shall make an 
election under section 936(e), for any taxable year beginning after 
December 31, 1975, by filing Form 5712 on or before the later of--

[[Page 141]]

    (1) The date on which such corporation is required, pursuant to 
sections 6072(b) and 6081, to file its Federal income tax return for the 
first taxable year for which the election is made; or
    (2) April 8, 1980.
Form 5712 shall be filed with the Internal Revenue Service Center, 11601 
Roosevelt Boulevard, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19155 (Philadelphia 
Center).
    (b) Revoking an election. Any corporation to which an election under 
section 936 (e) applies on February 8, 1980 is hereby granted the 
consent of the Secretary to revoke that election for the first taxable 
year to which the election applied. (The corporation may make a new 
election under Sec. 1.936-1 (a) for any subsequent taxable year.) The 
corporation shall make this revocation by sending to the Philadelphia 
Center a written statement of revocation on or before April 8, 1980.

(Secs. 7805 and 936(e) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954 (68A Stat. 
917 and 90 Stat. 1644; 26 U.S.C. 7805 and 936(e)))

[T.D. 7673, 45 FR 8588, Feb. 8, 1980; T.D. 7673, 45 FR 16174, Mar. 13, 
1980]


<R05>
Sec. 1.936-4  Intangible property income in the absence of an election out.

    The rules in this section apply for purposes of section 936(h) and 
also for purposes of section 934(e), where applicable.
    Q. 1: If a possessions corporation and its affiliates do not make an 
election under either the cost sharing or 50/50 profit split option, 
what rules will govern the treatment of income attributable to 
intangible property owned or leased by the possessions corporation?
    A. 1: Intangible property income will be allocated to the 
possessions corporation's U.S. shareholders with the proration of income 
based on shareholdings. If a shareholder of the possessions corporation 
is a foreign person or a tax-exempt person, the possessions corporation 
will be taxable on that shareholder's pro rata amount of the intangible 
property income. If any class of the stock of a possessions corporation 
is regularly traded on an established securities market, then the 
intangible property income will be taxable to the possessions 
corporation rather than the corporation's U.S. shareholders. For these 
purposes, a United States shareholder includes any shareholder who is a 
United States person as described under section 7701(a)(30). The term 
``intangible property income'' means the gross income of a possessions 
corporation attributable to any intangible property other than 
intangible property which has been licensed to such corporation since 
prior to 1948 and which was in use by such corporation on September 3, 
1982.
    Q. 2: What is the source of the intangible property income described 
in question 1?
    A. 2: The intangible property income is U.S. source, whether taxed 
to U.S. shareholders or taxed to the possessions corporation. Such 
intangible property income, if treated as income of the possessions 
corporation, does not enter into the calculation of the 80-percent 
possessions source test or the 65-percent active trade or business test 
of section 936(a)(2)(A) and (B).
    Q. 3: How will the amount of income attributable to intangible 
property be measured?
    A. 3: Income attributable to intangible property includes the amount 
received by a possessions corporation from the sale, exchange, or other 
disposition of any product or from the rendering of a service which is 
in excess of the reasonable costs it incurs in manufacturing the product 
or rendering the service (other than costs incurred in connection with 
intangibles) plus a reasonable profit margin. A reasonable profit margin 
shall be computed with respect to direct and indirect costs other than 
(i) costs incurred in connection with intangibles, (ii) interest 
expense, and (iii) the cost of materials which are subject to processing 
or which are components in a product manufactured by the possessions 
corporation. Notwithstanding the above, certain taxpayers who have been 
permitted by the Internal Revenue Service in taxable years beginning 
before January 1, 1983, to use the cost-plus method of pricing without 
reflecting a return from intangibles, but including the cost of 
materials in the cost base, will not be precluded from doing so. (Sec. 
3.02(3), Rev. Proc. 63-10, 1963-1 C.B. 490.) Thus, the Internal Revenue 
Service may continue in appropriate cases to permit such taxpayers to 
continue to

[[Page 142]]

report their income as they have been under existing procedures 
described in the previous sentence if it is appropriate under all the 
facts and circumstances and does not distort the income of the taxpayer.
    Q. 4: If there is no intangible property related to a product 
produced in whole or in part by a possessions corporation, what method 
may the possessions corporation use to compute its income?
    A. 4: The taxpayer may compute its income using the appropriate 
method as provided under section 482 and the regulations thereunder. The 
taxpayer may also elect the cost sharing or profit split method.

[T.D. 8090, 51 FR 21524, June 13, 1986]


<R05>
Sec. 1.936-5  Intangible property income when an election out is made: Product, business presence, and contract manufacturing.

    The rules in this section apply for purposes of section 936(h) and 
also for purposes of section 934(e), where applicable.
    (a) Definition of product.

    Q. 1: What does the term ``product'' mean?
    A. 1: The term ``product'' means an item of property which is the 
result of a production process. The term ``product'' includes component 
products, integrated products, and end-product forms. A component 
product is a product which is subject to further processing before sale 
to an unrelated party. A component product may be produced from other 
items of property, and if it is so produced, may be treated as including 
or not including (at the choice of the possessions corporation) one or 
more of such other items of property for all purposes of section 
936(h)(5). An integrated product is a product which is not subject to 
any further processing before sale to an unrelated party and which 
includes all component products from which it is produced. An end-
product form is a product which--
    (1) Is not subject to any further processing before sale to an 
unrelated party;
    (2) Is produced from a component product or products; and
    (3) Is treated as not including certain component products for all 
purposes of section 936(h)(5).

A possessions corporation may treat a component product, integrated 
product, or end-product form as its possession product even though the 
final stage or stages of production occur outside the possession. 
Further processing includes transformation, incorporation, assembly, or 
packaging.
    Q. 2: If a possessions corporation produces both a component product 
and an integrated product (which by definition includes the end-product 
form), may the possessions corporation use the options under section 
936(h)(5) to compute its income with respect to either the component 
product, the integrated product or the end-product form?
    A. 2: Yes. The possessions corporation may choose to treat the 
component product, the integrated product, or the end-product form as 
the product for purposes of determining whether the possessions 
corporation satisfies the significant business presence test. The 
possessions corporation must treat the same item of property as its 
product (the possession product) for all purposes of section 936(h)(5) 
for that taxable year, including the significant business presence test 
under section 936(h)(5)(B)(ii), the possessions sales calculation under 
section 936(h)(5)(C)(i)(I), the determination of income under section 
936(h)(5)(C)(i)(II), and the combined taxable income computations under 
section 936(h)(5)(C)(ii). Although the possessions corporation must 
treat the same item of property as its product for all purposes of 
section 936(h)(5) in a particular taxable year, its choice of the 
component product, integrated product or end-product form may be 
different from year to year. The possessions corporation must specify 
the possession product on a statement attached to its return (Schedule P 
of Form 5735). The possessions corporation may specify its choice by 
either listing the components that are included in the possession 
product or the components that are excluded from the possession product. 
The possessions corporation must file a separate Schedule P with respect 
to each possession product. The possessions corporation must attach to 
each

[[Page 143]]

Schedule P detailed computations indicating how the significant business 
presence test is satisfied with respect to the possession product 
identified in that Schedule P.
    Q. 3: A possessions corporation produces a product that is sometimes 
sold to unrelated parties without further processing and is sometimes 
sold to unrelated parties after further processing. May the possessions 
corporation choose to treat the same item of property as the possession 
product even though in some cases it is an integrated product and in 
some cases it is a component product?
    A. 3: Yes. Except as provided in questions and answers 4 and 5, the 
possessions corporation must designate a single possession product even 
though it is sometimes a component product and sometimes an integrated 
product.
    Q. 4: A possessions corporation produces a product that is sometimes 
sold without further processing by any member of the affiliated group to 
unrelated parties or to related parties for their own consumption and is 
sometimes sold after further processing by any member of the affiliated 
group to unrelated parties or to related parties for their own 
consumption. May the possessions corporation designate two products as 
possession products?
    A. 4: The possessions corporation may designate two or more 
possession products. The possessions corporation must use a consistent 
definition of the possession product for all items of property that are 
sold to unrelated parties or consumed by related parties at the same 
stage in the production process. The significant business presence test 
shall apply separately to each product designated by the possessions 
corporation. The possessions corporation shall compute its income 
separately with respect to each product.
    Q. 5: A possessions corporation produces a product in one taxable 
year and does not sell all of the units that it produced. In the next 
taxable year the possessions corporation produces a product which 
includes the product produced in the prior year. The possessions 
corporation could not have satisfied the significant business presence 
test with respect to the units produced the first taxable year if the 
larger possession product had been designated. May the possessions 
corporation designate two possession products in the second year?
    A. 5: Yes. The possessions corporation may designate two possession 
products. However, once a product has been designated for a particular 
year all sales of units produced in that year must be defined in the 
same manner. In addition, the taxpayer must maintain a significant 
business presence in a possession with respect to that product. Sales 
shall be deemed made first out of the current year's production. If all 
of the current year's production is sold and some inventory is 
liquidated, then the taxpayer's method of inventory accounting shall be 
applied to determine what year's layer of inventory is liquidated.

    Example 1. A possessions corporation S, manufactures a bulk 
pharmaceutical in a possession. S transfers the bulk pharmaceutical to 
its U.S. parent, P, for encapsulation and sale by P to customers. S 
satisifes the significant business presence test with respect to the 
bulk pharmaceutical (the component product) and the combination of the 
bulk pharmaceutical and the capsule (the integrated product). S may use 
the cost sharing or profit split method to compute its income with 
respect to either the component product or the integrated product.
    Example 2. The facts are the same as in example 1 except that S does 
not satisfy the significant business presence test with respect to the 
integrated product. S may use the cost sharing or profit split method to 
compute its income only with respect to the component product. However, 
if in a later taxable year S satisfies the significant business presence 
test with respect to the integrated product, then S may use the cost 
sharing or profit split method to compute its income with respect to 
that integrated product for that later taxable year.
    Example 3. P, a domestic corporation, produces in bulk form in the 
United States the active ingredient for a pharmaceutical product, P 
transfers the bulk form to S, a wholly owned possessions corporation. S 
uses the bulk form to produce in Puerto Rico the finished dosage form 
drug. S transfers the drug in finished dosage form to P, which sells the 
drug to unrelated customers in the U.S. The direct labor costs incurred 
in Puerto Rico by S during its taxable year in formulating, filling and 
finishing the dosage form are at least 65 percent of the total direct 
labor costs incurred by the affiliated group in producing the bulk and 
finished forms during that period. S manufactures (within the

[[Page 144]]

meaning of section 954(d)(1)(A)) the finished dosage form. S has elected 
out under section 936(h)(5) under the profit split option for the drug 
product area (SIC 283). P and S may treat the bulk and finished dosage 
forms as parts of an integrated product. Since S satisfies the 
significant business presence requirement with respect to the integrated 
product, it is entitled to 50 percent of the combined taxable income on 
the integrated product.
    Example 4. A possessions corporation, S. produces the keyboard of an 
electric typewriter and incorporates the keyboard with components 
acquired from a related corporation into finished typewriters. S does 
not satisfy the significant business presence test with respect to the 
typewriters (the integrated product). Therefore, S may use the cost 
sharing or profit split method to compute its income only with respect 
to a component product or end-product form. For taxable year 1983, S 
specifies on a statement attached to its return (Schedule P of Form 
5735) that the possession product is the end-product form. The statement 
indentifies the components--for example, the keyboard structure and 
frame--which are included in the possession product. S's definition of 
the possession product will apply to all units of the electric 
typewriters which S produces in whole or in part in the possession and 
which are sold in 1983. Thus, all units of a given component 
incorporated into such typewriters will be treated in the same way. For 
example, all keyboards and all frames will be included in the possession 
product, and all electric drive mechanisms and rollers will be excluded 
from the possession product.
    Example 5. Possessions corporation A produces printed circuit boards 
in a possession. The printed circuit boards are sold to unrelated 
parties. A also uses the boards to produce personal computers in the 
possession. A may designate two possession products: printed circuit 
boards and personal computers. The significant business presence test 
applies separately with respect to each of these products. Thus, for 
those printed circuit boards that are sold to unrelated parties, only 
the costs of the possessions corporation and the other members of the 
affiliated group that are incurred with respect to units of the printed 
circuit boards which are produced in whole or in part in the possessions 
and sold to third parties shall be taken into account. Conversely, with 
respect to personal computers, only the costs incurred with respect to 
the personal computers shall be taken into account. This would include 
the costs with respect to printed circuit boards that are incorporated 
into personal computers but not the costs incurred with respect to 
printed circuit boards that are sold without further processing to 
unrelated parties.
    Example 6. Possessions corporation S produces integrated circuits in 
a possession. P, an affilate of S, produces circuit boards in the United 
States. P transfers the circuit boards to S. S assembles the integrated 
circuits and the circuit boards. S sells some of the loaded circuit 
boards to third parties. S retains some of the loaded circuit boards and 
incorporates them into central processing units. The central processing 
units are then sold to third parties. S may designate two possession 
products. S must use a consistent definition of the possession product 
for all units that are sold at the same stage in the production process. 
Thus, with respect to those units sold after assembly of the integrated 
circuits and the printed circuits boards, if S cannot satisfy the 
significant business presence test with respect to all the loaded 
circuit boards (the integrated product), then S must designate a lesser 
product, either the integrated circuit (the component product) or the 
loaded circuit board less the printed circuit board (the end-product 
form) as its possession product. With respect to the central processing 
units sold the same rule would apply. Thus, if S cannot satisfy the 
significant business presence test with respect to the entire central 
processing unit for all of the central processing units sold, S must 
designate some lesser product as its possession product.
    Example 7. S is a possession corporation. In 1985, S produced 100 
units of product X. Those units were finished into product Y in 1985 by 
affiliates of S. Product X is a component of product Y. In 1985, S 
satisfies the direct labor test with respect to product X but not with 
respect to product Y. S designates the component product X as its 
possession product. In 1986 S produces 100 units of product X and 
finishes those units into product Y. S would have satisfied the 
significant business presence test with respect to product X if S had 
designated product X as its possession product in 1986. In addition, in 
1986 S satisfies the significant business presence test with respect to 
the integrated product Y. In 1986, S sells 150 units of Y. One hundred 
of those units would be deemed to be produced in 1986. With respect to 
those units S may designate the integrated product Y as its possession 
product. Under S's method of inventory accounting the remaining 50 units 
were determined to have been produced in 1985. With respect to those 
units S must define its possession product as it did for the taxable 
year in which those units were produced. Thus, S's possession product 
would be the component product X.

    Q. 6: May an affiliated group establish groupings of possession 
products and treat the groupings as single products?

[[Page 145]]

    A. 6: An affiliated group may establish reasonable groupings of 
possession products based on similarities in the production processes of 
the possession products. Possession products that are grouped shall be 
treated as a single product. The determination of whether the production 
processes involved in producing the products that are to be grouped are 
similar is based on the production processes of the components that are 
included in the possession product. The affiliated group may establish 
new groupings each year. Any grouping which materially distorts a 
taxpayer's income or the application of the significant business 
presence test may be disallowed by the Commissioner. The mere fact that 
a grouping results in an increased allocation of income to the 
possessions corporation does not, of itself, create a material 
distortion of income. If the Commissioner determines that the taxpayer's 
grouping is improper with respect to one or more products in a group, 
then those products shall be excluded from the group. The effect of 
excluding a product or products from the group is that the taxpayer must 
demonstrate that the group without the excluded products (and each 
excluded product itself) satisfies the significant business presence 
test. If the group without the excluded products, or any of the excluded 
products themselves, fails to satisfy the significant business presence 
test, then the possessions corporation's income from those products 
shall be determined under section 936(h)(1) through (4) and the 
regulations thereunder.

    Example 1. The following are examples of possession products the 
processes of production of which are sufficiently similar that they may 
be grouped and treated as a single product:
    (A) Beverage bases or concentrates for different soft drinks or soft 
drink syrups, regardless of whether some include sweeteners and some do 
not:
    (B) Different styles of clothing;
    (C) Different styles of shoes;
    (D) Equipment which relies on gravity to deliver solutions to 
patients intravenously;
    (E) Equipment which relies on machines to deliver solutions to 
patients intravenously;
    (F) Video game cartridges, even though the concept and design of 
each game title is, in part, protected against infringement by separate 
copyrights;
    (G) All integrated circuits;
    (H) All printed circuit boards; and
    (I) Hardware and software if the software is one of several 
alternative types of software offered by the manufacturer and sold only 
with the hardware, and a purchaser of the hardware would ordinarily 
purchase one or more of the manufacturer-provided alternative types of 
software. In all other cases, hardware and software may not be grouped 
and treated as a single product.

Groupings (D) and (E) do not include any solutions which are delivered 
through the equipment described therein.
    Example 2. A possessions corporation produces in Puerto Rico non-
programmable, interactive cathode ray tube computer terminals that vary 
in price. These terminals all interact with a computer or controller to 
perform their functions of data entry, graphics word processing, and 
program development. The terminals can be purchased with options that 
include a built-in printer, different language keyboards, specialized 
cathode ray tubes, and different power supply features. All terminals 
are produced in one integrated process requiring the same skills and 
operations. The differences in the production of the terminals include 
differences in the number of printed circuit boards incorporated in each 
terminal, the use of unique keyboards, and the installation and testing 
of the built-in printer. Some difference in direct labor time to 
manufacture the terminals occurs, primarily due to the differing number 
and complexity of printed circuit boards incorporated into each 
terminal. Different model numbers are assigned to various computer 
terminals. A grouping by the taxpayer of all of the terminals as one 
product will be respected by the Service, unless the Service establishes 
that substantial distortion results. This grouping is proper because the 
processes of producing each of the terminals are similar.
    Example 3. A possessions corporation, S produces several models of 
serial matrix impact printers and teleprinters. These products have 
differing performance standards based on such factors as speed (in 
characters per second), numbers of columns, and cost. The production 
process for all types of printers involves production of three basic 
elements: electronic circuitry, the printing head, and the mechanical 
parts. The process of producing all the printers is similar. Thus, all 
printers could be grouped and treated as a single product. S purchases 
electronic circuitry and mechanical parts from a U.S. affiliate. S 
performs manufacturing functions relative to the printing head and 
assembles and tests the finished printers. S does not satisfy the 
significant business presence test with respect to the integrated 
products. S therefore specifies on a statement attached to its return 
(Schedule P of Form 5735) that the possession product for both the 
serial

[[Page 146]]

matrix printers and the teleprinters is the end-product form. The 
statement identifies the components which are included in each 
possession product. S may group and treat as a single product the serial 
matrix printers and the teleprinters if both end-product forms include 
and exclude similar components. Thus, if the end-product form for both 
the serial matrix printers and the teleprinters includes the mechanical 
parts and excludes the electronic circuitry, then S may group and treat 
as a single product the two end-product forms. If, however, the end-
product forms for the two items of property contain components that are 
not similar and as a result of this definition of the end-product forms 
the production processes involved in producing the two end-product forms 
are not similar, then S may not group the end-product forms.

    Q. 7: Is the affiliated group permitted to include in a group an 
item of property that is not produced in whole or in part in a 
possession?
    A. 7: No.

    Example 1. Possessions corporation S produces 70 units of product A 
in a possession. P, an affiliate of S, produces 30 units of product A 
entirely in the United States. All of the units are sold to unrelated 
parties. The affiliated group is not permitted to group the 30 units of 
product A produced in the United States with the 70 units produced in 
the possession because those units are not produced in whole or in part 
in a possession.
    Example 2. The facts are the same as in example 1 except that the 30 
units of product A are transferred to possessions corporation S. S 
incorporates the 100 units of product A into product B. This 
incorporation takes place in the possession. S may group and treat as a 
single product all of the units of product B even though some of those 
units contain units of product A that were produced in the possession 
and some that were produced in the United States.

    Q. 8: What factors should be disregarded in determining whether a 
particular grouping of similar items of property is reasonable?
    A. 8: In general, differences in the following factors will be 
disregarded in determining whether a particular grouping of items of 
property is reasonable:
    (1) Differences in testing requirements (e.g., some products sold 
for military use may require more extensive or different testing than 
products sold for commercial use);
    (2) Differences in the product specifications that are designed to 
accommodate the product to its area of use or for conditions under which 
used (e.g., electrical products designed for ultimate use in the United 
States differ from electrical products designed for ultimate use in 
Europe);
    (3) Differences in packaging or labeling (e.g., differences in the 
number of units of the items shipped in one package); and
    (4) Minor differences in the operations of the items of property.
    Q. 9: What rules apply for purposes of determining whether 
pharmaceutical products are properly grouped and treated as a single 
product?
    A. 9: The rules contained in questions and answers 6 through 8 of 
this section shall apply. Thus, an affiliated group may establish 
reasonable groupings based on similarities in the production processes 
of two or more possession products. In establishing a group the 
affiliated group may only compare the production processes involved in 
producing the possession products. The fact that two pharmaceutical 
products contain different active or inert ingredients is not relevant 
to the determination of whether the pharmaceutical products may be 
grouped. For example, if the possession products are bulk chemicals and 
the production processes involved in producing the bulk chemicals are 
similar, those bulk chemicals may be grouped and treated as a single 
product even though they contain different active or inert ingredients. 
The affiliated group may also group and treat as a single product the 
finished dosage form drug as long as the production processes involved 
in producing the finished dosage forms are similar. For these purposes, 
the production processes involved in producing the following classes of 
items shall be considered to be sufficiently similar that possession 
products delivered in a form described in one of the categories may be 
grouped with other possession products delivered in a form described in 
the same category.
    The categories are:
    (1) Capsules, tablets, and pills;
    (2) Liquids, ointments, and creams; or
    (3) Injectable and intravenous preparations.


[[Page 147]]


No distinctions should be based on packaging, list numbers, or size of 
dosage. The affiliated group may group and treat as a single product the 
integrated product (combination of the bulk and the delivery form) only 
if all the production processes involved in producing the integrated 
products are similar. The rules of this question and answer are 
illustrated by the following examples.

    Example 1. Possessions corporation S produces two chemical active 
ingredients X and Y. Both chemical ingredients are produced through the 
process of fermentation. The affiliated group is permitted to group and 
treat as a single product the two chemical ingredients.
    Example 2. The facts are the same as in example 1 and possessions 
corporation S finishes chemical ingredient X into tablets and chemical 
ingredient Y into capsules. The affiliated group is permitted to group 
and treat as a single product the combination of the bulk pharmaceutical 
and the finishing because the production processes involved in producing 
the integrated products are similar.
    Example 3. Possessions corporation S produces in a possession a bulk 
chemical X by fermentation. A United States affiliate, P, produces in 
the United States a bulk chemical, Y, by fermentation. Both bulk 
chemicals are finished by S in the possession. The finished dosage form 
of X is in pill form. The finished dosage form of Y is in injectable 
form. If S's possession product is the integrated product or the end-
product form then S may not group X and Y because the production 
processes involved in producing the finished dosage form of X and Y are 
not similar. If S's possession product is the component then S may not 
group X and Y because the bulk chemical Y is not produced in whole or in 
part in a possession.

    Q. 10: Will the fact that a manufacturer of a drug must submit a New 
Drug Application (``NDA'') or a supplemental NDA to the Food and Drug 
Administration have any effect on the definition or grouping of a 
product?
    A. 10: No.
    Q. 11: A possessions corporation which produced a product or 
rendered a type of service in a possession on or before September 3, 
1982, is not required to meet the significant business presence test in 
a possession with respect to such product or type of service for its 
taxable years beginning before January 1, 1986 (the interim period). 
During such interim period, how will the term ``product'' be defined for 
purposes of allocating income under the cost sharing or profit split 
methods?
    A. 11: During the interim period the product will be determined 
based on the activities performed by the possessions corporation within 
a possession on September 3, 1982. During the interim period the 
possessions corporation may compute its income under the cost sharing or 
profit split method only with respect to the product that is produced or 
manufactured within the meaning of section 954(d)(1)(A) within the 
possession. If the product is manufactured from a component or 
components produced by an affiliated corporation or a contract 
manufacturer, then the product will not be treated as including such 
component or components for purposes of the computation of income under 
the cost sharing or profit split methods. Thus, the possessions 
corporation is not entitled to any return on the intangibles associated 
with the component or components. Notwithstanding the preceding 
sentences, for taxable years beginning before January 1, 1986, a 
possessions corporation may compute its income under the cost sharing or 
profit split method with respect to a product which includes a component 
or components produced by an affiliated corporation or contract 
manufacturer if the possessions corporation satisfies with respect to 
such product the significant business presence test described in section 
936(h)(5)(B)(ii) and the regulations thereunder.

    Example 1. A possessions corporation, S, was manufacturing (within 
the meaning of section 954(d)(1)(A)) integrated circuits in a possession 
on September 3, 1982. S transferred those integrated circuits to related 
corporation P. P incorporated the integrated circuits into central 
processing units (CPUs in the United States) and sold the CPUs to 
unrelated parties. S continued to manufacture integrated circuits in the 
possession through Juanuary 1, 1986. For taxable years beginning before 
January 1, 1986, S may compute its income under the cost sharing or 
profit split method with respect to the integrated circuits regardless 
of whether S satisfies the significant business presence test. However, 
unless S satisfies the significant business presence test with respect 
to the central processing units, S may not compute its income under the 
cost sharing or profit split methods with respect to the CPUs, and

[[Page 148]]

thus, S is not entitled to any return on manufacturing intangibles 
associated with CPUs to the extent that they are not related to the 
integrated circuits produced by S, nor (except as provided in the profit 
split methods) to any return on marketing intangibles.
    Example 2. A possessions corporation, S, was engaged on September 3, 
1982, in the manufacture (within the meaning of section 954(d)(1)(A)) of 
a bulk pharmaceutical in Puerto Rico from raw materials. S sold the bulk 
pharmaceutical to its U.S. parent, P, for encapsulation and sale by P to 
customers as the product X. Because S was not engaged in the 
encapsulation of X, S is not considered to have manufactured the 
integrated product, X, in Puerto Rico. During the interim period, S may 
compute its income under the cost sharing or profit split methods with 
respect to the integrated product, X, only if S satisfies the 
significant business presence test with respect to X. S may compute its 
income under the cost sharing or profit split methods with respect to 
the component product (the bulk pharmaceutical).
    Example 3. P is a domestic corporation that is not a possessions 
corporation. P manufactures a bulk pharmaceutical in the United States. 
P transfers the bulk pharmaceutical to its wholly owned subsidiary, S, a 
possessions corporation. On September 3, 1982, S was engaged in the 
encapsulation of the bulk pharmaceutical in Puerto Rico in a manner 
which satisfies the test of section 954(d)(1)(A). For taxable years 
beginning before January 1, 1986, S may compute its income under the 
cost sharing or profit split methods with respect to the end-product 
form the (the encapsulated drug) regardless of whether S meets the 
significant business presence test. However, unless S satisfies the 
significant business presence test with respect to the integrated 
product, S may not compute its income under the cost sharing or profit 
split methods with respect to the integrated product, and thus, S is not 
entitled to any return on the intangibles associated with the bulk 
pharmaceutical.

    Q. 12: On September 3, 1982, a possessions corporation, S was 
engaged in the manufacture (within the meaning of section 954(d)(1)(A)) 
of X in a possession. During the interim period, after September 3, 
1982, but before January 1, 1986, S produced Y, which differs from X in 
terms of minor design features. S did not produce Y in a possession on 
September 3, 1982. Will S be considered to have commenced production of 
a new product after September 3, 1982, for purposes of the application 
of the significant business presence test for the interim period?
    A. 12: No. X and Y will be considered to be a single product, and 
therefore S will not be required to satisfy the business presence test 
separately with respect to Y during the interim period. In all cases in 
which the items of property produced on or before September 3, 1982 and 
the items of property produced after that date could have been grouped 
together under the guidelines provided in Sec. 1.936-5(a) questions and 
answers 6 through 10, the possessions corporation will not be considered 
to manufacture a new product after September 3, 1982.
    Q. 13: May the term ``product'' be defined differently for export 
sales than for domestic sales?
    A. 13: Yes. For rules concerning the application of the separate 
election for export sales see Sec. 1.936-7(b).
    (b) Requirement of significant business presence--(1) General rules. 


    Q. 1: In general, a possessions corporation may compute its income 
under the cost sharing or profit split methods with respect to a product 
only if the possessions corporation has a significant business presence 
in a possession with respect to that product. When will a possession 
corporation be considered to have a significant business presence in a 
possession?
    A. 1: For purposes of the cost sharing method, the significant 
business presence test is met if the possessions corporation satisfies 
either a value added test or a direct labor test. For purposes of the 
profit split method, the significant business presence test is met if 
the possessions corporation satisfies either a value added test or a 
direct labor test and also manufactures the product in the possession 
within the meaning of section 954(d)(1)(A).
    Q. 2: How may a possessions corporation satisfy the direct labor 
test with respect to a product?
    A. 2: The possessions corporation will satisfy the direct labor test 
with respect to a product if the direct labor costs incurred by the 
possessions corporation as compensation for services performed in a 
possession are greater than or equal to 65 percent of the direct labor 
costs of the affiliated group for units of the possession product 
produced during the taxable year in whole

[[Page 149]]

or in part by the possessions corporation.
    Q. 3: How may a possessions corporation satisfy the value added 
test?
    A. 3: In order to satisfy the value added test, the production costs 
of the possessions corporation incurred in the possession with respect 
to units of the possession product produced in whole or in part by the 
possessions corporation in the possession and sold or otherwise disposed 
of during the taxable year by the affiliated group to unrelated parties 
must be greater than or equal to twenty-five percent of the difference 
between gross receipts from such sales or other dispositions and the 
direct material costs of the affilated group for materials purchased for 
such units from unrelated parties.
    Q. 4: Must the significant business presence test be met with 
respect to all units of the product produced during the taxable year by 
the affiliated group?
    A. 4: No. The significant business presence test must be met with 
respect to only those units of the product produced during the taxable 
year in whole or in part by the possessions corporation in a possession.
    Q. 5: For purposes of determining whether a possessions corporation 
satisfies the significant business presence test, how shall the 
possessions corporation treat the cost of components transferred to the 
possessions corporation by a member of the affiliated group?
    A. 5: The treatment of the cost of components transferred from an 
affiliate depends on whether the possession product is treated as 
including the components for purposes of section 936(h). If it is, then 
for purposes of the value added test, the production costs associated 
with the component shall be treated as production costs of the 
affiliated group that are not incurred by the possessions corporation. 
Those production costs, other than the cost of materials, shall not be 
treated as a cost of materials. For purposes of the direct labor test 
and the alternative significant business presence test, the direct labor 
costs associated with such components shall be treated as direct labor 
costs of the affiliated group that are not incurred by the possessions 
corporation. If the possession product is treated as not including such 
component for purposes of section 936(h), then, solely for purposes of 
determining whether the possessions corporation satisfies the value 
added test, the cost of the component shall not be treated as either a 
cost of materials or as a production cost. For purposes of the direct 
labor test and the alternative significant business presence test, the 
direct labor costs associated with such component shall not be treated 
as direct labor costs of the affiliated group. If the possession product 
is treated as not including such component, then the possessions 
corporation shall not be entitled to any return on the intangibles 
associated with the manufacturing or marketing of the component.
    Q. 6: May two or more related possessions corporations aggregate 
their production or direct labor costs for purposes of determining 
whether they satisfy the significant business presence test with respect 
to a single product?
    A. 6: No.
    Q. 7: A possessions corporation, S, purchases raw materials and 
components from an unrelated corporation which conducts business outside 
of a possession. The unrelated corporation is not a contract 
manufacturer. What is the treatment of such raw materials and components 
for purposes of the significant business presence test?
    A. 7: Where Company S purchases raw materials or components from an 
unrelated corporation which is not a contract manufacturer, the raw 
materials and components are treated as materials, and the costs related 
thereto are treated as a cost of materials.
    (2) Direct labor costs.

    Q. 1: How is the term ``direct labor costs'' to be defined?
    A. 1: The term ``direct labor costs'' has the same meaning which it 
has for purposes of Sec. 1.471-11(b)(2)(i). Thus, direct labor costs 
include the cost of labor which can be identified or associated with 
particular units or groups of units of a specific product. The elements 
of direct labor include such items as basic compensation, overtime pay, 
vacation and holiday pay, sick leave pay (other than payments pursuant 
to a wage continuation plan under

[[Page 150]]

section 105(d)), shift differential, payroll taxes, and payments to a 
supplemental unemployment benefit plan paid or incurred on behalf of 
employees engaged in direct labor.
    Q. 2: May a taxpayer treat a cost as a direct labor cost if it is 
not included in inventoriable costs under section 471 and the 
regulations thereunder?
    A. 2: No. A cost may be treated as a direct labor cost only if it is 
included in inventoriable costs. However, a cost may be considered a 
direct labor cost even though the activity to which it relates would not 
constitute manufacturing under section 954(d)(1)(A) as long as the cost 
is included in inventoriable costs.
    Q. 3: May the members of the affiliated group include as direct 
labor costs the labor element in indirect production costs?
    A. 3: No. The labor element of indirect production costs may not be 
considered as part of direct labor costs.
    Q. 4: Do direct labor costs include the costs which can be 
identified or associated with particular units or groups of units of a 
specific product if those costs could also be described as quality 
control and inspection?
    A. 4: Yes. Direct labor costs include costs which can be identified 
or associated with particular units or groups of units of a specific 
product. Thus, if quality control and inspection is an integral part of 
the production process, then the labor associated with that quality 
control and inspection shall be considered direct labor. For example, 
integrated circuits are soldered to printed circuit boards by passing 
the boards over liquid solder. Employees inspect each of the boards and 
repair any imperfectly soldered joints discovered on that inspection. 
The labor associated with this process is direct labor. However, if a 
person performs random inspections on limited numbers of products, then 
that labor associated with those inspections shall be considered quality 
control and therefore indirect labor.
    Q. 5: Do direct labor costs of the possessions corporation include 
only the costs which were actually incurred or do they take into 
account, in addition, any labor savings which result because the 
activities were performed in a possession rather than in the United 
States?
    A. 5: Direct labor costs include only the costs which were actually 
incurred.
    Q. 6: For purposes of determining whether a possessions corporation 
satisfies the significant business presence test for a taxable year with 
respect to a product, how shall the possessions corporation compute its 
direct labor costs of units of the product?
    A. 6: The direct labor test shall be applied separately to products 
produced in whole or in part by the possessions corporation in the 
possession during each taxable year. Sales shall be deemed to be made 
first out of the current year's production. If sales are made only out 
of the current year's production, then the direct labor costs of 
producing those units that are sold shall be the pro rata portion of the 
total direct labor costs of producing all the units that are produced in 
whole or in part in the possession by the possessions corporation during 
the current year. If all of the current year's production is sold and 
some inventory is liquidated, then the direct labor test shall be 
applied separately to the current year's production and the liquidated 
inventory. The direct labor costs of producing the liquidated inventory 
shall be the pro rata portion of the total direct labor costs that were 
incurred in producing all the units that were produced in whole or in 
part by the possessions corporation in the possessions in the layer of 
liquidated inventory determined under the member's method of inventory 
accounting.

    Example. S is a cash basis calendar year taxpayer that has made an 
election under section 936(a). In 1985 S produced 100 units of product 
X. Fifty percent of the direct labor costs of the affiliated group were 
incurred by S and were compensation for services performed in the 
possession. Thus, S did not satisfy the significant business presence 
test with respect to product X in taxable year 1985. During 1986 S 
produced 100 units of product X. One hundred percent of the direct labor 
costs of the affiliated group were incurred by S and were compensation 
for services performed in the possession. In 1986 S sells 150 units of 
product X. One hundred of those units are deemed to be from the units 
produced in 1986. With respect to those units S satisfies the 
significant business presence test. Under S's method of inventory 
accounting the remaining 50 units were determined

[[Page 151]]

to be produced in 1985. With respect to those units S does not satisfy 
the significant business presence test because only 50% of the direct 
labor costs incurred in producing those units were incurred by S and 
were compensation for services performed in the possession.

    Q. 7: What is the result if in a particular taxable year the 
possessions corporation satisfies the significant business presence test 
with respect to units of the product produced in one year and fails the 
significant business with respect to units produced in another year?
    A. 7: For those units of the product with respect to which the 
possession corporation satisfies the significant business presence test, 
the possessions corporation may compute its income under the provisions 
of section 936(h)(5). For those units of the product with respect to 
which the possessions corporations fails the significant business 
presence test, the possessions corporation must compute its income under 
section 936(h)(1) through (4).
    Q. 8: Do direct labor costs include costs incurred in a prior 
taxable year with respect to units of the possession product that are 
finished in a later taxable year?
    A. 8: Yes.
    (3) Direct material costs.

    Q. 1: How is the term ``direct material costs'' to be defined?
    A. 1: Direct material costs include the cost of those materials 
which become an integral part of the specific product and those 
materials which are consumed in the ordinary course of manufacturing and 
can be identified or associated with particular units or groups of units 
of that product. See Sec. 1.471-3 for the elements of direct material 
costs.
    Q. 2: May a taxpayer treat a cost as a direct material cost if it is 
not included in inventoriable costs under section 471 and the 
regulations thereunder?
    A. 2: A taxpayer may not treat such costs as direct material costs.
    (4) Production costs.

    Q. 1: How is the term ``production costs'' defined?
    A. 1: The term ``production costs'' has the same meaning which it 
has for purposes of Sec. 1.471-11(b) except that the term does not 
include direct material costs and interest. Thus, production costs 
include direct labor costs and fixed and variable indirect production 
costs (other than interest).
    Q. 2: With respect to indirect production costs described in 
Sec. 1.471-11(c)(2) (ii) and (iii), may a possessions corporation 
include these costs in production costs for purposes of section 936, if 
they are not included in inventoriable costs under section 471 and the 
regulations thereunder?
    A. 2: No. A possessions corporation may include these costs only if 
they are included for purposes of section 471 and the regulations 
thereunder. If a possessions corporation and the other members of the 
affiliated group include and exclude different indirect production costs 
in their inventoriable costs, then, for purposes of the significant 
business presence test, the possessions corporation shall compute its 
production costs and the production costs of the other members of the 
affiliated group by subtracting from the production costs of each member 
all indirect costs included by that member that are not included in 
production costs by all other members of the affiliated group.
    Q. 3: Does a change in a taxpayer's method of accounting for 
purposes of section 471 affect the taxpayer's computation of production 
costs for purposes of section 936?
    A. 3: Yes. If a taxpayer changes its method of accounting for 
purposes of section 471, then the same change shall apply for purposes 
of section 936.
    Q. 4: For purposes of determining whether a possessions corporation 
satisfies the significant business presence test for a taxable year with 
respect to a product, how shall the possessions corporation compute its 
costs of producing units of the product sold or otherwise disposed to 
unrelated parties during the taxable year?
    A. 4: All members of the affiliated group may elect to use their 
current year production costs regardless of whether the members use the 
FIFO or LIFO method of inventory accounting. If some or all of the 
current year's production of a product is sold, then the production 
costs of producing those units sold shall be the pro rata portion

[[Page 152]]

of the total production costs of producing all the units produced in the 
current year. If all of the current year's production of a product is 
sold and some inventory is liquidated, then the production costs of 
producing the liquidated inventory shall be the pro rata portion of the 
production costs incurred in producing the layer of liquidated inventory 
as determined under the member's method of inventory accounting.
    Q. 5: How should the members of the affiliated group determine the 
portion of their production costs that is allocable to units of the 
product sold or otherwise disposed of during the taxable year?
    A. 5: The members of the affiliated group may use either standard 
production costs (so long as variances are not material), average 
production costs, or FIFO production costs to determine the production 
costs that will be considered to be attributable to units of the product 
sold or otherwise disposed of during the taxable year. However, all 
members of the affiliated group must use the same method.
    Q. 6: When is the quality control and inspection of a product 
considered to be part of the production activity for that product?
    A. 6: Quality control and inspection of a manufactured product 
before its sale or other disposition by the manufacturer, or before its 
incorporation into other products, is considered to be part of the 
indirect production activity for that initial product. Subsequent 
testing of a product to ensure that the product is compatible with other 
products is not a part of the production activity for the initial 
product.

When a component is incorporated into an end-product form and the end-
product form is then tested, the latter testing will be considered to be 
a part of the indirect production activity for the end-product form and 
will not be considered to be a part of the production activity for the 
component.
    Q. 7: For purposes of the significant business presence test and the 
allocation of income to a possessions corporation, what is the treatment 
of the cost of installation of a product?
    A. 7: For purposes of the significant business presence test and the 
allocation of income to a possessions corporation, product installation 
costs need not be taken into account as costs incurred in the 
manufacture of that product, if the taxpayer keeps such permanent books 
of account or records as are sufficient to establish the fair market 
price of the uninstalled product. In such a case, the cost of 
installation materials, the cost of the labor for installation, and a 
reasonable profit for installation will not be included in the costs and 
income associated with the possession product. If the taxpayer does not 
keep such permanent books of account or records, then the cost of 
installation materials and the cost of labor for installation shall be 
treated as costs associated with the possession product and income will 
be allocated to the possessions corporation and its affiliates under the 
rules provided in these regulations.
    Q. 8: For purposes of the significant business presence test and the 
allocation of income to a product or service, what is the treatment of 
the cost of servicing and maintaining a possession product that is sold 
to an unrelated party?
    A. 8: The cost of servicing and maintaining a possession product 
after it is sold is not associated with the production of that product.
    Q. 9: For purposes of the significant business presence test and the 
allocation of income to a possessions corporation, what is the treatment 
of the cost of samples?
    A. 9: The cost of producing samples will be treated as a marketing 
expense and not as inventoriable costs for these purposes. However, for 
taxable years beginning prior to January 1, 1986, the cost of producing 
samples may be treated as either a marketing expense or as inventoriable 
costs.

    (5) Gross receipts.

    Q. 1: How shall the affiliated group determine gross receipts from 
sales or other dispositions by the affiliated group to unrelated parties 
of the possession product?
    A. 1: Gross receipts shall be determined in the same manner as 
possession sales under the rules contained in Sec. 1.936-6(a)(2).

    (6) Manufacturing within the meaning of section 954(d)(1)(A).


[[Page 153]]


    Q. 1: What is the test for determining, within the meaning of 
section 954(d)(1)(A), whether a product is manufactured or produced by a 
possessions corporation in a possession?
    A. 1: A product is considered to have been manufactured or produced 
by a possessions corporation in a possession within the meaning of 
section 954(d)(1)(A) and Sec. 1.954-3(a)(4) if--
    (i) The property has been substantially transformed by the 
possessions corporation in the possession;
    (ii) The operations conducted by the possessions corporation in the 
possession in connection with the property are substantial in nature and 
are generally considered to constitute the manufacture or production of 
property; or
    (iii) The conversion costs sustained by the possessions corporation 
in the possession, including direct labor, factory burden, testing of 
components before incorporation into an end product and testing of the 
manufactured product before sales account for 20 percent or more of the 
total cost of goods sold of the possessions corporation.

In no event, however, will packaging, repackaging, labeling, or minor 
assembly operations constitute manufacture or production of property. 
See particularly examples 2 and 3 of Sec. 1.954-3(a)(4)(iii).
    Q. 2: Does the requirement that a possession product be produced or 
manufactured in a possession within the meaning of section 954(d)(1)(A) 
apply to taxable years beginning before January 1, 1986?
    A. 2: A possessions corporation must satisfy this requirement for 
taxable years beginning before January 1, 1986, in the following cases:
    (i) If the possessions corporation makes a separate election under 
section 936(h)(5)(F)(iv)(II) with respect to export sales;
    (ii) If the possessions corporation is electing as its possession 
product a product that is subject to the interim period rules of 
Sec. 1.936-5(a) question and answer (10); or
    (iii) If the possessions corporation is electing as its possession 
product a product that is not subject to the interim period rules of 
Sec. 1.936-5 (a) question and answer (10) and the possessions 
corporation computes its income under the profit split method with 
respect to that product.

For rules concerning products first produced in a possession after 
September 3, 1982, see Sec. 1.936-5(b)(7) question and answer (2).

    (7) Start-up operations. 

    Q. 1: With respect to products not produced (and types of services 
not rendered) in the possession on or before September 3, 1982, when 
must a possessions corporation first satisfy the 25 percent value added 
test or the 65 percent direct labor test?
    A. 1: A transitional period is established such that a possessions 
corporation engaged in start-up operations with respect to a product or 
service need not satisfy the 25 percent value added test or the 65 
percent labor test until the third taxable year following the taxable 
year in which such product is first sold by the possessions corporation 
or such service is first rendered by the possessions corporation. During 
the transitional period, the applicable percentages for these tests will 
be as follows:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                  Any year after 1982   
                                              --------------------------
                                                  1        2        3   
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Value added test.............................       10       15       20
Labor test...................................       35       45       55
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    Q. 2: Does the requirement that a possession product be produced or 
manufactured in a possessions within the meaning of section 954(d)(1)(A) 
apply to a product if the possessions corporation is engaged in start-up 
operations with respect to that product?
    A. 2: The possessions corporation must produce or manufacture the 
possessions product within the meaning of section 954(d)(1)(A) if the 
possessions corporation computes its income with respect to that product 
under the profit split method.
    Q. 3: When will a possessions corporation be considered to be 
engaged in start-up operations?
    A. 3: A possessions corporation is engaged in start-up operations if 
it begins operations in a possession with respect to a product or type 
of service after

[[Page 154]]

September 3, 1982. Subject to the further provisions of this answer, a 
possessions corporation will be considered to begin operations with 
respect to a product if, under the rules of Sec. 1.936-5(a) questions 
and answers (6) through (10), such product could not be grouped with any 
other item of property manufactured in whole or in part in the 
possessions by any member of the affiliated group in any preceding 
taxable year. Any improvement or other change in a possession product 
which does not substantially change the production process would not be 
deemed to create a new product. A change in the division of 
manufacturing activity between the possessions corporation and its 
affiliates with respect to an item of property will not give rise to a 
new product. If a possessions corporation was producing a possession 
product that was either a component product or an end-product form and 
the possessions corporation expands its operations in the same 
possession so that it is now producing a product that includes the 
earlier possession product, the possessions corporation will not be 
entitled to use the start-up significant business presence test unless 
the production costs incurred by the possessions corporation in the 
possession in producing a unit of its new possession product are at 
least double the production costs incurred by the possessions 
corporation in the possession in producing a unit of the earlier 
possession product. If any member of an affiliated group actually groups 
two or more items of property then, solely for the purposes of 
determining whether any item of property in that group is a new product, 
that grouping shall be respected. However, the fact that an affiliated 
group does not actually group two or more items of property shall be 
disregarded in determining whether any item of property is a new 
product. Notwithstanding the above, if a possessions corporation is 
producing a possession product in one possession and such corporation or 
a member of its affiliated group begins operations in a different 
possession, regardless of whether the items of property could be 
grouped, the affiliated group may treat the units of the item of 
property produced at the new site of operations in the different 
possession as a new product.

    (8) Alternative significant business presence test.

    Q. 1: Will the Secretary adopt a significant business presence test 
other than those set forth in section 936(h)(5)(B)(ii)?
    A. 1: Yes. The following significant business presence test is 
adopted both for the transitional period and thereafter. A possessions 
corporation will have a significant business presence in a possession 
for a taxable year with respect to a product or type of service if--
    (i) No less than 50 percent of the direct labor costs of the 
affiliated group for units of the product produced, in whole or in part, 
during the taxable year by the possessions corporation or for the type 
of service rendered by the possessions corporation during the taxable 
year are incurred by the possessions corporation as compensation for 
services performed in the possession; and
    (ii) The direct labor costs of the possessions corporation for units 
of the product produced or the type of service rendered plus the base 
period construction costs are no less than 70 percent of the sum of such 
base period construction costs and the direct labor costs of the 
affiliated group for such units of the product produced or the type of 
service rendered.

Notwithstanding satisfaction of the above test, for purposes of 
determining whether a possessions corporation may compute its income 
under the profit split method, a possessions corporation will not be 
treated as having a significant business presence in a possession with 
respect to a product unless the possessions corporation manufactures the 
product in the possession within the meaning of section 954(d)(1)(A).
    Q. 2: How is the term ``base period construction costs'' defined?
    A. 2: The term ``base period construction costs'' means the average 
construction costs incurred by or on behalf of the possessions 
corporation for services in the possession during the taxable year and 
the preceding four taxable years for section 1250 property (as defined 
in section 1250(c) and the regulations thereunder) that is used for the

[[Page 155]]

production of the product or the rendering of the service in the 
possession, and which represents the original use of the section 1250 
property. For purposes of the preceding sentence, if the possessions 
corporation was not in existence during one or more of the four 
preceding taxable years, its construction costs for that year or years 
shall be deemed to be zero. Construction costs include architects' and 
engineers' fees, labor costs, and overhead and profit (if the 
construction is performed by a person that is not a member of the 
affiliated group).

    (c) Definition and treatment of contract manufacturing.

    Q. 1: For purposes of determining whether a possessions corporation 
satisfies the significant business presence test with respect to a 
product, the costs incurred by the possessions corporation or by any of 
its affiliates in connection with contract manufacturing which is 
related to that product and is performed outside the possession shall be 
treated as direct labor costs of the affiliated group and shall not be 
treated as production costs of the possessions corporation or as 
material costs. How is the term ``contract manufacturing'' to be 
defined?
    A. 1: The term ``contract manufacturing'' includes any arrangement 
between a possessions corporation (or another member of the affiliated 
group) and an unrelated person if the unrelated person:
    (1) Performs work on inventory owned by a member of the affiliated 
group for a fee without the passage of title;
    (2) Performs production activities (including manufacturing, 
assembling, finishing, or packaging) under the direct supervision and 
control of a member of the affiliated group; or
    (3) Does not undertake any significant risk in manufacturing its 
product (e.g., it is paid by the hour).

    Q. 2: Does an arrangement between a member of the affiliated group 
and an unrelated party constitute contract manufacturing if the 
unrelated party uses an intangible owned or licensed by a member of the 
affiliated group?
    A. 2: Such an arrangement will be treated as contract manufacturing 
if the unrelated party makes use of a patent owned or licensed by a 
member of the affiliated group in producing the product which becomes 
part of the possession product of the possessions corporation. In 
addition, such use of manufacturing intangibles other than patents may 
be treated as contract manufacturing if it is established that the 
arrangement has the effect of materially distorting the application of 
the significant business presence test. However, the preceding sentence 
shall not apply if the possessions corporation establishes that the 
arrangement was entered into for a substantial business purpose (e.g., 
to obtain the benefit of special expertise of the manufacturer or 
economies of scale). These rules shall not apply to such contract 
manufacturing performed in taxable years beginning before January 1, 
1986, nor shall the rules apply to binding contracts for the performance 
of such contract manufacturing entered into before June 13, 1986.
    Q. 3: For purposes of the significant business presence test, how 
shall a possessions corporation treat the cost of contract manufacturing 
performed within a possession?
    A. 3: If the possessions corporation uses the value added test, it 
will be permitted to treat the cost of the contract manufacturing 
performed in a possession, not including material costs, as a production 
cost of the possessions corporation. If it uses the direct labor test or 
the alternative significant business presence test set forth in 
Sec. 1.936-5(b)(8), it is permitted to treat the direct labor costs of 
the contract manufacturer associated with such contract manufacturing as 
a cost of direct labor of the possessions corporation. The allowable 
amount of the direct labor cost shall be determined in accordance with 
question and answer 4 below.
    Q. 4: How are the amounts paid by a possessions corporation to a 
contract manufacturer for services rendered in a possession to be 
treated by the possessions corporation in computing the direct labor 
cost of the product to which such contract manufacturing relates?

[[Page 156]]

    A. 4: If the possessions corporation can establish the contract 
manufacturer's direct labor cost which was incurred in the possession, 
such cost will be treated as incurred by the possessions corporation as 
compensation for services performed in the possession. If the 
possessions corporation cannot establish such cost, then 50 percent of 
the amount paid to such contract manufacturer may be treated as incurred 
by the possessions corporation as compensation for services performed in 
the possession: provided, that not more than 50 percent of the fair 
market value of the product manufactured by the contract manufacturer is 
attributable to articles shipped into the possession, and the 
possessions corporation receives a statement from the contract 
manufacturer that this test has been satisfied. If this fair market 
value test is not satisfied, then the cost of contract manufacturing 
performed within a possession shall not be treated as a production cost 
or a direct labor cost of either the possessions corporation or the 
affiliated group.
    Q. 5: For purposes of the significant business presence test, what 
is the treatment of costs which are incurred by a member of the 
affiliated group (including the possessions corporation) for contract 
manufacturing performed outside of the possession with respect to an 
item of property which is a component of the possession product?
    A. 5: If the possession product is treated as including such 
component, the cost of the contract manufacturing shall be treated as a 
direct labor cost of members of the affiliated group other than the 
possessions corporation for purposes of the direct labor test and the 
alternative significant business presence test, and shall not be treated 
as a production cost of the possessions corporation or as a cost of 
materials for purposes of the value added test. If the possession 
product is treated as not including such component, the cost of the 
contract manufacturing shall not be treated as a direct labor cost of 
any member of the affiliated group for purposes of the direct labor test 
and the alternative significant business presence test, and shall not be 
treated as a production cost of the possessions corporation or as a cost 
of materials for purposes of the value added test.

[T.D. 8090, 51 FR 21524, June 13, 1986; 51 FR 27174, July 30, 1986]


<R05>
Sec. 1.936-6  Intangible property income when an election out is made: Cost sharing and profit split options; covered intangibles.

    The rules in this section apply for purposes of section 936(h) and 
also for purposes of section 934(e) where applicable.

    (a) Cost sharing option--(1) Product area research.

    Q. 1: Cost sharing payments are based on research undertaken by the 
affiliated group in the ``product area'' which includes the possession 
product. The term ``product area'' is defined by reference to the three-
digit classification under the Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) 
code. Which governmental agency has jurisdiction to decide the proper 
SIC category for any specfic product?
    A. 1: Solely for the purpose of determining the tax consequences of 
operating in a possession, the Secretary or his delegate has exclusive 
jurisdiction to decide the proper SIC category under which a product is 
classified. For this purpose, the product area under which a product is 
classified will be determined according to the 1972 edition of the SIC 
code. From time to time and in appropriate cases, the Secretary may 
prescribe regulations or issue rulings determining the proper SIC 
category under which a particular product is to be classified, and may 
prescribe regulations for aggregating two or more three-digit 
classifications of the SIC code and for classifying product areas 
according to a system other than under the SIC code.
    Q. 2: How is the term ``affiliated group'' defined for purposes of 
the cost sharing option?
    A. 2: For purposes of the cost sharing option, the term ``affiliated 
group'' means the possessions corporation and all other organizations, 
trades or businesses (whether or not incorporated, whether or not 
organized in the United States, and whether or not affiliated) owned or 
controlled directly or indirectly by the same interests, within the 
meaning of section 482.

[[Page 157]]

    Q. 3: Are research and development expenditures that are included in 
product area research limited to research and development expenditures 
that are deductible under section 174 or that are incurred by U.S. 
affiliates?
    A. 3: No, product area research is not limited to product area 
research expenditures deductible under section 174 or to expenses 
incurred by U.S. affiliates. Product area research also includes 
deductions permitted under section 168 with respect to research property 
which are not deductible under section 174; qualified research expenses 
within the meaning of section 30(b); payments (such as royalities) for 
the use of, or right to use, a patent, invention, formula, process, 
design, pattern or know-how; and a proper allowance for amounts incurred 
in the acquisition of manufacturing intangible property. In the case of 
an acquisition of depreciable or amortizable manufacturing intangible 
property, the annual amount of product area research shall be be equal 
to the allowable depreciation or amortization on the intangible property 
for the taxable year. In the case of an acquisition of nondepreciable or 
nonamortizable manufacturing intangible property, the amount expended 
for the acquisition shall be deemed to be amortized over a five year 
period and included in product area research in the year of the deemed 
amortization. Any contingent payment made with respect to the 
acquisition of nonamortizable manufacturing intangible property shall be 
treated as amounts incurred in the acquisition of nonamortizable 
manufacturing intangible property when paid or accrued.
    Q. 4: Does royalty income from a person outside the affiliated group 
with respect to the manufacturing intangibles within a product area 
reduce the product area research pool within the same product area?
    A. 4: Yes.
    Q. 5: Does income received from a person outside the affiliated 
group from the sale of a manufacturing intangible reduce the product 
area research pool within the same product area?
    A. 5: In determining product area research, the income from the sale 
attributable to noncontingent payments will reduce product area research 
ratably over the remaining useful life of the property in the case of an 
amortizable intangible and ratably over a 5-year period in the case of a 
nonamortizable intangible. Any income attributable to contingent amounts 
received with respect to the sale of manufacturing intangible property 
shall be treated as amounts received from the sale of the manufacturing 
intangible property in the year in which such contingent amounts are 
received or accrued.
    Q. 6: If a member of an affiliated group incurs research and 
development expenses pursuant to a contract with an unrelated person who 
is entitled to exclusive ownership of all the technology resulting from 
the expenditures, is the amount of product area research reduced by the 
amount of such expenditures?
    A. 6: To the extent that the product area research expenditures can 
be allocated solely to the technology produced for the unrelated person, 
such expenditures will not be included in product area research 
expenditures provided, however, that the unrelated person has exclusive 
ownership of all the technology resulting from these expenditures, and 
further that no member of the affiliated group has a right to use any of 
the technology.
    Q. 7: What is the treatment of product area research expenditures 
attributable to a component where the component and the integrated 
product fall within different product areas?
    A. 7: For purposes of the computation of product area research 
expenditures in the product area by the affiliated group, the product 
area in which the component falls is aggregated with the product area in 
which the integrated product falls. However, if the component product 
and integrated product are in separate SIC codes and if the component 
product is not included in the definition of the possession product, 
then the product area research expenditures are not aggregated. The same 
rule applies where the taxpayer elects a component product which 
encompasses another component product and the two component products 
fall into separate SIC codes. In such case, the product area in which 
the first

[[Page 158]]

component falls is aggregated with the product area in which the second 
component falls.

    (2) Possession sales and total sales.

    Q. 1: The cost sharing payment is the same proportion of the total 
cost of product area research which the amount of ``possession sales'' 
of the affiliated group bears to the ``total sales'' of the affiliated 
group within the product area. How are ``possession sales'' defined for 
purposes of the cost sharing fraction?
    A. 1: The term ``possession sales'' means the aggregate sales or 
other dispositions of the possession product, to persons who are not 
members of the affiliated group, less returns and allowances and less 
indirect taxes imposed on the production of the product, for the taxable 
year. Except as otherwise indicated in Sec. 1.936-6(a)(2), the sales 
price to be used is the sales price received by the affiliated group 
from persons who are not members of the affiliated group.
    Q. 2: For purposes of the numerator of the cost sharing fraction, 
how are possession sales computed where the possession product is a 
component product or an end-product form?
    A. 2: (i) The sales price of the component product or end-product 
form is determined as follows. With respect to a component product, an 
independent sales price from comparable uncontrolled transactions must 
be used if such price can be determined in accordance with Sec. 1.482-
2(e)(2). If an independent sales price of the component product from 
comparable uncontrolled transactions cannot be determined, then the 
sales price of the component product shall be deemed to be equal to the 
transfer price, determined under the appropriate section 482 method, 
which the possessions corporation uses under the cost sharing method in 
computing the income it derives from the active conduct of a trade or 
business in the possession with respect to the component product. The 
possessions corporation in lieu of using the transfer price determined 
under the preceding sentence may treat the sales price for the component 
product as equal to the same proportion of the third party sales price 
of the integrated product which the production costs attributable to the 
component product bear to the total production cost for the integrated 
product. Production cost will be the sum of direct and indirect 
production costs as defined in Sec. 1.936-5(b)(4). If the possessions 
corporation determines the sales price of the component product using 
the production cost ratio, the transfer price used by the possessions 
corporation in computing its income from the component product under the 
cost sharing method may not be greater than such sales price.
    (ii) With respect to an end-product form, the sales price of the 
end-product form is equal to the difference between the third party 
sales price of the integrated product and the independent sales price of 
the excluded component(s) from comparable uncontrolled transactions, if 
such price can be determined under Sec. 1.482-2(e)(2). If an independent 
sales price of the excluded component(s) from uncontrolled transactions 
cannot be determined, then the sales price of the end-product form shall 
be deemed to be equal to the transfer price, determined under the 
appropriate section 482 method, which the possessions corporation uses 
under the cost sharing method in computing the income it derives from 
the active conduct of a trade or business in the possession with respect 
to such end-product form. The possessions corporation in lieu of using 
the transfer price determined under the preceding sentence may use the 
production cost ratio method described above to determine the sales 
price of the end-product form (i.e., the same proportion of the third 
party sales price of the integrated product which the production costs 
attributable to the end-product form bear to the total production costs 
for the integrated product). If the possessions corporation determines 
the sales price of the end-product form using the production cost ratio, 
the transfer price used by the possessions corporation in computing its 
income from the end-product form under the cost sharing method may not 
be greater than such sales price. For similar rules applicable to the 
profit split option see Sec. 1.936-6(b)(1), question and answer 12.

[[Page 159]]

    Q. 3: For purposes of determining possessions sales in the numerator 
of the cost sharing fraction, will the replacement part price of the 
product be treated as a price from comparable uncontrolled transactions?
    A. 3: Prices for replacement parts are generally higher than prices 
for equipment sold as part of an original system. Thus, prices for 
replacement parts cannot generally be used directly as prices for 
comparable uncontrolled transactions. However, replacement part prices 
may be used for estimating comparable uncontrolled prices where the 
price differential can be reasonably determined and taken into account 
under Sec. 1.482-2(e)(2).
    Q. 4: For purposes of determining possession sales in the cost 
sharing fraction, what is the treatment of components that are purchased 
by one possessions corporation from an affiliated possessions 
corporation and which are incorporated into a possession product where 
the transferor possessions corporation treats the transferred component 
as a possession product?
    A. 4: When one possessions corporation purchases components from a 
second possessions corporation which is an affiliated corporation, the 
purchase price of the components paid to the second possessions 
corporation shall be subtracted from the sales proceeds of the product 
produced in the possession by the first possessions corporation, and 
only the remainder is included in the numerator of the cost sharing 
formula for the first corporation. For example, assume that N 
corporation manufactures a component for sale to O corporation for $100 
(a price which reflects prices in comparable uncontrolled transactions). 
Both N and O are affiliated possessions corporations. N has designated 
that component product as its possession product. O then incorporates 
that product into a second product which is sold to customers for $300 N 
and O must make separate cost sharing payments. The cost sharing payment 
of N corporation is determined by including $100 as possession sales, 
and the payment of O is determined by subtracting that $100 purchase 
price from the $300 received from customers. Thus, the possessions sales 
amount of O is $200. This rule is intended to prevent the double 
counting of the sales of a component produced by one possessions 
corporation and incorporated into another product by an affiliated 
possessions corporation.
    Q. 5: Are pre-TEFRA sales included in the cost sharing fraction?
    A. 5: No. Pre-TEFRA sales are sales of products produced by the 
possessions corporation and transferred to an affiliate prior to a 
possessions corporation's first taxable year beginning after December 
31, 1982. Pre-TEFRA sales are not included in either the numerator or 
denominator of the cost sharing fraction. If the U.S. affiliate uses the 
FIFO method of costing inventory, the pre-TEFRA inventory will be 
treated as the first inventory sold by the U.S. affiliate during the 
first year in which section 936(h) applies. If the U.S. affiliate uses 
the LIFO method of costing inventory (either dollar-value or specific 
goods LIFO), pre-TEFRA inventor will be treated as inventory sold by the 
U.S. affiliate in the year in which the U.S. afiliate's LIFO layer 
containing pre-TEFRA LIFO inventory is liquidated.
    Q. 6: How are ``possession sales'' determined under the cost sharing 
formula if members of the affiliated group (other than the possessions 
corporation) include purchases of the possession product, X, in a 
dollar-value LIFO inventory pool (as provided under Sec. 1.472-8)?
    A. 6: Possession sales may be determined by applying the revenue 
identification method provided under paragraph (b)(1) Question and 
Answer 18 of this section.
    Q. 7: Do possession sales include excise taxes paid by the 
possessions corporation when the product is sold for ultimate use or 
consumption in the possession?
    A. 7: No. The amount of excise taxes is excluded from both the 
numerator and denominator of the cost sharing fraction.
    Q. 8: How are ``total sales'' defined for purposes of the cost 
sharing fraction?
    A. 8: The term ``total sales'' means aggregate sales or other 
dispositions of products in the same product area as the possession 
product, less returns and allowances and less indirect taxes

[[Page 160]]

imposed on the production of the product, for the taxable year to 
persons who are not members of the affiliated group. The sales price to 
be used is the sales price received by the affiliated group from persons 
who are not members of the affiliated group.
    Q. 9: In computing that cost sharing payment, how are ``total 
sales'' computed if the dollar-value LIFO inventory pool includes some 
products which are not included in the product area (determined under 
the 3-digit SIC code) on which the denominator of the cost sharing 
fraction is based?
    A. 9: In such case, the amount of the total sales within the product 
area to persons who are not members of the affiliated group by persons 
who are members of the affiliated group is determined by multiplying the 
total sales of the products within the dollar-value LIFO inventory pool 
by a fraction. The numerator of the fraction includes the dollar-value 
of purchases by members of the affiliated group (including the 
possessions corporation) of products within the product area made during 
the year, plus any added production costs (as defined in Sec. 1.471-
11(b), (c), and (d) but not including the costs of materials) incurred 
by the affiliates during the same period. The denominator of the 
fraction includes the dollar-value of purchases by members of the 
affiliated group (including the possessions corporation) of products 
within the dollar-value LIFO inventory pool made during the same period 
(including any production costs, as described above, incurred by the 
affiliate during the same period). For these purposes, purchases of a 
possession product are determined on the basis of the possessions 
corporation's cost for its inventory purposes.
    Q. 10: May a possessions corporation compute its income under the 
cost sharing method with respect to a possession product which the 
possessions corporation sells to a member of its affiliated group and 
which that member then leases to an unrelated person or uses in its own 
trade or business?
    A. 10: Yes, provided that an independent sales price for the 
possession product from comparable uncontrolled transactions can be 
determined in accordance with Sec. 1.482-2(e)(2), and, provided further, 
that such member complies with the requirements of Sec. 1.936-6(a)(2), 
question and answer 14. If, however, there is a comparable uncontrolled 
price for an integrated product and the possession product is a 
component product or end-product form thereof, the possessions 
corporation may, if such member complies with the requirements of 
Sec. 1.936-6(a)(2), question and answer 14, compute its income under the 
cost sharing method with respect to such possession product. In that 
case, the cost sharing payment shall be computed under the following 
question and answer.
    Q. 11: How are possession sales and total sales to be determined for 
purposes of computing the cost sharing payment with respect to a 
possession product which the possessions corporation sells to a member 
of its affiliated group where that member then leases the possession 
product to unrelated persons or uses it in its own trade or business?
    A. 11: If the possessions corporation is entitled to compute its 
income from such sales of the possession product under the cost sharing 
method, both possession sales and total sales shall be determined as if 
the possession product had been sold by the affiliate to an unrelated 
person at the time the possession product was first leased or otherwise 
placed in service by the affiliate. The sales price on such deemed sale 
shall be equal to the independent sales price from comparable 
uncontrolled transactions determined in accordance with Sec. 1.482-
2(e)(2), if any. If the possession product is a component product or an 
end-product form for which there is no such independent sales price but 
there is a comparable uncontrolled price for the integrated product 
which includes the possession product, the deemed sales price of the 
possession product shall be computed under the rules of Sec. 1.936-
6(a)(2) question and answer 2. The full amount of income received under 
the lease shall be treated as income of (and taxed to) the affiliate and 
not the possessions corporation.
    Q. 12: When may a possessions corporation take into account in 
computing total sales under the cost sharing method products in the same 
product area as the possession product (other

[[Page 161]]

than the possession product itself) where such products are leased by 
members of the affiliated group to unrelated persons or used by any such 
member in its own trade or business?
    A. 12: For purposes of computing total sales under the cost sharing 
method, the possessions corporation may take into account products in 
the same product area as the possession product itself where such 
products are leased by members of the affiliated group to unrelated 
persons or used in the trade or business of any such member, but only if 
an independent sales price of such products from comparable uncontrolled 
transactions may be determined under Sec. 1.482-2(e)(2). In such cases, 
the units of such products which are leased or otherwise used internally 
by members of the affiliated group may be treated as sold to unrelated 
persons for such independent sales price for purposes of computing total 
sales.
    Q. 13: Assuming that a possessions corporation is entitled to 
compute its income under the cost sharing method with respect to sales 
of a possession product to affiliates in cases where those affiliates 
lease units of the possession product to unrelated persons or use them 
internally, is the possessions corporation's income from the possession 
product any different than if the affiliates had sold the product to 
unrelated parties?
    A. 13: No.
    Q. 14: If a possessions corporation sells units of a possession 
product to a member of its affiliated group and that affiliate then 
leases those units to an unrelated person or uses the units in its own 
trade or business, what requirements must the affilate meet in order for 
the possessions corporation to be entitled to the benefits of the cost 
sharing method with respect to such units?
    A. 14: (i) For taxable years of the possessions corporation 
beginning on or before June 13, 1986, the affiliate need not meet any 
special requirements in order for the possessions corporation to be 
entitled to the beneifts of the cost sharing method with respect to such 
units. Thus, the affiliate's basis in such units shall be equal to the 
transfer price used for computing the possessions corporation's gross 
income with respect to such units under section 936(h)(5)(C)(i)(II), and 
the income derived by the affiliate from such lease or internal use 
shall be reported by the affiliate when and to the extent actually 
derived. The affiliate shall not be deemed to have sold such units to an 
unrelated party at the time they were first leased or otherwise placed 
in service for any purpose other than the computation of possession 
sales and total sales. A similar rule applies to other products in the 
same product area as the possession product which are sold by any member 
in its own trade or business and which the possessions corporation takes 
into account in computing total sales under the cost sharing method.
    (ii) For taxable years of the possessions corporations beginning 
after June 13, 1986, a possessions corporations will not be entitled to 
the benefits of the cost sharing method with respect to units of the 
possession product which the possessions corporation sells to an 
affiliate where the affiliate then leases such units to an unrelated 
person or uses them in its own trade or business, unless the affiliate 
agrees to be treated for all tax purposes as having sold such units to 
an unrelated party at the time they were first leased or otherwise 
placed in service by such affiliate. The affiliate must demonstrate such 
agreement by reporting its income from such units as if:
    (A) It had sold such units to an unrelated person at such time at a 
price equal to the price used to compute possessions sales under 
Sec. 1.936-6(a)(2), question and answer 11;
    (B) It had immediately repurchased such units for the same price; 
and
    (C) Its basis in such units for all subsequent purposes was equal to 
its cost basis from such deemed repurchase.
For treatment of other products in the same product area as the 
possession product see Sec. 1.936-6(a)(2), question and answer 12.
    (iii) The principles contained in questions and answers 11, 12, 13, 
and 14 are illustrated by the following example:

    Example. Possessions corporation S and its affiliate A are calendar 
year taxpayers. In 1985, S manufactures 100 units of possession product 
X. S sells 50 units of X to unrelated persons in arm's length 
transactions for $10

[[Page 162]]

per unit. In applying the cost sharing method to determine the portion 
of its gross income from such sales which qualifies for the possessions 
tax credit, S determines that $8 of the $10 sales price may be taken 
into account. S sells the remaining 50 units of X to A, and A then 
leases such units to unrelated persons. In 1985, A also manufacturers 
100 units of product Y, the only other product in the same product area 
as X manufactured or sold by any member of the affiliated group. A 
manufactured the 100 units of Y at a cost of $15 per unit, sold 50 units 
of Y to unrelated persons in arm's length transactions for $20 per unit, 
and leased the remaining 50 units of Y to unrelated persons.
    S may compute its income under the cost sharing method with respect 
to the 50 units of X it sold to A because S can determine an independent 
sales price of X from comparable uncontrolled transactions under 
Sec. 1.482-2(e)(2). For purposes of computing both possessions sales and 
total sales, the 50 units of X sold to A will be deemed to have been 
sold by A to an unrelated person for $10 per unit. The income of S 
qualifying for the possessions tax credit from the sale of those 50 
units of X to A, and A's basis in those units, will both be determined 
using the $8 transfer price determined under section 936 
(h)(5)(C)(i)(II). For purposes of computing total sales in the 
denominator of the cost sharing fraction, S may also take into account 
the 50 units of Y leased by A to unrelated persons, as if A had sold 
those units for $20 per unit. A's basis in those units of Y will 
continue to be its actual cost basis of $15 per unit.
    If all of the above transactions had occurred in 1987, S would be 
entitled to compute its income under the cost sharing method with 
respect to the 50 units of X it sold to A only if A agreed to be treated 
for all tax purposes as if it had sold such units for $10 per unit, 
realized income on such deemed sale of $2 per unit, repurchased such 
units immediately for $10 per unit, and then leased such units, which 
would then have a $10 per unit basis in A's hands. For purposes of 
computing total sales, S would be entitled to take into account the 50 
units of X leased by A to unrelated persons as if A had sold such units 
for $20 per unit.

    (3) Credits against cost sharing payments.

    Q. 1: Is the cost of product area research paid or accrued by the 
possessions corporation in a taxable year creditable against the cost 
sharing payment?
    A. 1: Yes, if the cost of the product area research is paid or 
accrued solely by the possessions corporation. Thus, payments by the 
possessions corporation under cost sharing arrangements with, or 
royalties paid to, unrelated persons are so creditable. Amounts (such as 
royalties) paid directly or indirectly to, or on behalf of, related 
persons and amounts paid under any cost sharing agreements with related 
persons are not creditable against the cost sharing payment.
    Q. 2: Do royalties or other payments made by an affiliate of the 
possessions corporation to another member of the affiliated group reduce 
the cost sharing payment if such royalties or other payments are based, 
in part, on activity of the possessions corporation?
    A. 2: No. Payments made between affiliated corporations do not 
reduce the cost sharing payment. Thus, for example, if a possessions 
corporation sells a component to a foreign affiliate for incorporation 
by the foreign affiliate into an integrated product sold to unrelated 
persons, and the foreign affiliate pays a royalty to the U.S. parent of 
the possessions corporation based on the total value of the integrated 
product, the cost sharing payment of the possessions corporation is not 
reduced.

    (4) Computation of cost sharing payment.

    Q. 1: S is a possessions corporation engaged in the manufacture and 
sale of four products (A, B, C, and D) all of which are classified under 
the same three-digit SIC code. S sells its production to a U.S. 
affiliate, P, which resells it to unrelated parties in the United 
States. P's third party sales of each of these products produced in 
whole or in part by S (computed as provided under paragraph (a)(2) of 
Sec. 1.936-6) are $1 million or a total of $4 million for A, B, C, and 
D. P's other sales of products in the same SIC code are $3,000,000; and 
the defined worldwide product area research of the affiliated group is 
$350,000. How should S compute the cost sharing amount for products A, 
B, C, and D?
    A. 1: The cost sharing amount is computed separately for each 
product on Schedule P of Form 5735. S should use the following formula 
for each of the products A, B, C, and D:

[[Page 163]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC09OC91.006


[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC09OC91.007

    Q. 2: The facts are the same as in question 1 except that S 
manufactures product D under a license from an unrelated person. S pays 
the unrelated party an annual license fee of $20,000. Thus, the 
worldwide product area research expense of the affiliated group is 
$370,000. How should the cost sharing payment be adjusted?
    A. 2: The cost sharing fee should be reduced by the $20,000 license 
fee made as a direct annual payment to a third party on account of 
product D. The cost sharing payment with respect to product D in this 
example will be adjusted as follows:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC09OC91.008

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC09OC91.009

    Q. 3: The facts are the same as in question 1 except that S also 
manufactures and exports product E to a foreign affiliate, which resells 
it to unrelated persons for $1 million. S makes a separate election for 
its export sales. How should S compute the cost sharing amount for 
product E?
    A. 3: The numerator of the cost sharing fraction is the aggregate 
sales or other dispositions by members of the affiliated group of the 
units of product E produced in whole or in part in the possession to 
persons who are not members of the affiliated group. The cost sharing 
amount for product E would be computed as follows:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC09OC91.010

    or
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC09OC91.011


[[Page 164]]


    Q. 4: The facts are the same as in question 1, except that S also 
receives $10,000 in royalty income from unrelated persons for the 
licensing of certain manufacturing intangible property rights. What is 
the amount of the product area research that must be allocated in 
determining the cost sharing amount?
    A. 4: If the affiliated group receives royalty income from unrelated 
persons with respect to manufacturing intangibles in the same product 
area, then the product area research to be considered shall be first 
reduced by such royalty income. In this case, the amount of product area 
research to be used in determining S's cost sharing payment should be 
reduced by the $10,000 royalty payment received to $340,000.
    Q. 5: May a possessions corporation redetermine the amount of its 
required cost sharing payment after filing its tax return?
    A. 5: If after filing its tax return, a possessions corporation 
files an amended return, or if an adjustment is made on audit, either of 
which affects the amount of the cost sharing payment required, then a 
redetermination of the cost sharing payment must be made. See, however, 
section 936(h)(5)(C)(i)(III)(a) with respect to the increase in the cost 
sharing payment due to interest imposed under section 6601(a).

    (5) Effect of election under the cost sharing method.

    Q. 1: What is the effect of the cost sharing method?
    A. 1: The cost sharing payment reduces the amount of deductions (and 
the amount of reductions in earnings and profits) otherwise allowable to 
the U.S. affiliates (other than tax-exempt affiliates) within the 
affiliated group as determined under section 936(h)(5)(C)(i)(I)(b) which 
have incurred research expenditures (as defined in Sec. 1.936-6(a)(1), 
question and answer (3) in the same product area for which the cost 
sharing option is elected, during the taxable year in which the cost 
sharing payment accrues. If there are no such U.S. affiliates, the 
reductions with respect to deductions and earnings and profits, as the 
case may be, are made with respect to foreign affiliates within the same 
affiliated group which have incurred product area research expenditures 
in such product area attributable to a U.S. trade or business. If there 
are no affiliates which have incurred research expenditures in such 
product area, the reductions are then made with respect to any other 
U.S. affiliate and, if there is no such U.S. affiliate, then to any 
other foreign affiliate. The allocations of these reductions in each 
case shall be made in proportion to the gross income of the affiliates. 
In the case of foreign affiliates, the allocation shall be made in 
proportion to gross income attributable to the U.S. trade or business or 
worldwide gross income, as the case may be. With respect to each group 
above, the reduction of deductions shall be applied first to deductions 
under section 174, then to deductions under section 162, and finally to 
any other deductions on a pro rata basis.
    Q. 2: For purposes of estimated tax payments, when is the cost 
sharing amount deemed to accrue?
    A. 2: The cost sharing amount is deemed to accrue to the appropriate 
affiliate on the last day of the taxable year of each such affiliate in 
which or with which the taxable year of the possessions corporation 
ends.
    Q. 3: If the cost sharing method is elected and the year of accrual 
of the cost sharing payment to the appropriate affiliate (described in 
question and answer 1 of this paragraph (a)(5)) differs from the year of 
actual payment by the possessions corporation, in what year are the 
deductions of the recipients reduced?
    A. 3: In the year the cost sharing payment has accrued.
    Q. 4: What is the treatment of income from intangibles under the 
cost sharing method?
    A. 4: Under the cost sharing method, a possessions corporation is 
treated as the owner, for purposes of obtaining a return thereon, of 
manufacturing intangibles related to a possession product. The term 
``manufacturing intangible'' means any patent, invention, formula, 
process, design, pattern, or know-how. The possessions corporation will 
not be treated as the owner, for purposes of obtaining a return thereon,

[[Page 165]]

of any manufacturing intangibles related to a component product produced 
by an affiliated corporation and transferred to the possessions 
corporation for incorporation into the possession product, except in the 
case that the possession product is treated as including such component 
product for all purposes of section 936(h)(5). Further, the possessions 
corporation will not be treated as the owner, for purposes of obtaining 
a return thereon, of any marketing intangibles except ``covered 
intangibles.'' (See Sec. 1.936-6(c).)
    Q. 5: If the cost sharing option is elected, is it necessary for the 
possessions corporation to be the legal owner of the manufacturing 
intangibles related to the possession product in order for the 
possessions corporation to receive a full return with respect to such 
intangibles?
    A. 5: No. There is no requirement that manufacturing intangibles be 
owned by the possessions corporation.
    Q. 6: How is income attributable to marketing intangibles treated 
under the cost sharing method?
    A. 6: Except in the case of ``covered intangibles'' (see Sec. 1.936-
6(c)), the possessions corporation is not treated as the owner of any 
marketing intangibles, and income attributable to marketing intangible 
of the possessions corporation will be allocated to the possessions 
corporation's U.S. shareholders with the proration of income based on 
shareholdings. If a shareholder of the possessions corporation is a 
foreign, person or is otherwise tax exempt, the possessions corporation 
is taxable on that shareholder's pro rata amount of the intangible 
property income. If the possessions corporation is a corporation any 
class of the stock of which is regularly traded on an established 
securities market, then the income attributable to marketing intangibles 
will be taxable to the possessions corporation rather than the 
corporation's U.S. shareholders.
    Q. 7: What is the source of the intangible property income described 
in question and answer 6?
    A. 7: The intangible property income is U.S. source whether taxed to 
the U.S. shareholder or taxed to the possessions corporation and section 
863 (b) does not apply for this purpose. However, such intangible 
property income, if treated as income of the possessions corporation, 
does not enter into the calculation of the 80-percent possession source 
test or the 65-percent active trade or business test.
    Q. 8: May marketing intangible income, if any, be allocated to the 
possessions corporation with respect to custom-made products?
    A. 8: No. If the cost sharing option is elected, then income 
attributable to marketing intangibles (other than ``covered 
intangibles'' described in Sec. 1.936-6(c)) will be taxed as discussed 
in questions and answers 6 and 7 of paragraph (a)(5) of this section. It 
is immaterial whether the product is custom-made.
    Q. 9: In order to sell a pharmaceutical product in the United 
States, a New Drug Application (``NDA'') for the product must be 
approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Is an NDA considered 
a manufacturing or marketing intangible for purposes of the allocation 
of income under the cost sharing method?
    A. 9: A manufacturing intangible.
    Q. 10: Can a copyright be, in whole or in part, a manufacturing 
intangible for purposes of the allocation of income under the cost 
sharing method?
    A. 10: In general, a copyright is a marketing intangible. See 
section 936(h)(3)(B)(ii). However, copyrights may be treated either as 
manufacturing intangibles or nonmanufacturing intangibles (or as partly 
each) depending upon the function or the use of the copyright. If the 
copyright is used in manufacturing, it will be treated as a 
manufacturing intangible; but if it is used in marketing, even if it is 
also classified as know-how, it will be treated as a marketing 
intangible.
    Q. 11: If the cost sharing option is elected and a patent is related 
to the product produced by the possessions corporation, does the return 
to the possessions corporation with respect to the manufacturing 
intangible include the make, use, and sell elements of the patent?
    A. 11: Yes. A patent confers an exclusive right for 17 years to sell 
a product

[[Page 166]]

covered by the patent. During this period, the return to the possessions 
corporation includes the make, use and sell elements of the patent.
    Q. 12: For purposes of the cost sharing option, may a safe haven 
rule be applied to determine the amount of marketing intangible income?
    A. 12: No. The amount of marketing intangible income is determined 
on the basis of all relevant facts and circumstances. The section 482 
regulations will continue to apply except to the extent modified by the 
election. Rev. Proc. 63-10 and Rev. Proc. 68-22 do not apply for this 
purpose.
    Q. 13: If a product covered by the cost sharing election is sold by 
a possessions corporation to an affiliated corporation for resale to an 
unrelated party, may the resale price method under section 482 be used 
to determine the intercompany price of the possessions corporation?
    A. 13: In general, the resale price method may be used if (a) no 
comparable uncontrolled price for the product exists, and (b) the 
affiliated corporation does not add a substantial amount of value to the 
product by manufacturing or by the provision of services which are 
reflected in the sales price of the product to the customer. The 
possessions corporation will not be denied use of the resale price 
method for purposes of such inter-company pricing merely because the 
reseller adds more than an insubstantial amount to the value of the 
product by the use of intangible property.
    Q. 14: If a possessions corporation makes the cost sharing election 
and uses the cost-plus method under section 482 to determine the arm's-
length price of a possession product, will the cost base include the 
cost of materials which are subject to processing or which are 
components in the possession product?
    A. 14: A taxpayer may include the cost of materials in the cost base 
if it is appropriate under the regulations under Sec. 1.482-2(e)(4).
    Q. 15: If the possessions corporation computes its income with 
respect to a product under the cost sharing method, and the price of the 
product is determined under the cost-plus method under section 482, does 
the cost base used in computing cost-plus under section 482 include the 
amount of the cost sharing payment?
    A. 15: The amount of the cost sharing payment is included in the 
cost base. However, no profit with respect to the cost sharing payment 
will be allowed.
    Q. 16: If a member of the affiliated group transfers to a 
possessions corporation a component which is incorporated into a 
possession product, how will the transfer price for the component be 
determined?
    A. 16: The transfer price for the component will be determined under 
section 482, and as follows. If the possession product is treated as not 
including such component for purposes of section 936(h)(5), the transfer 
price paid for the component will include a return on all intangibles 
related to the component product. If the posssession product is treated 
as including such component for purposes of section 936(h)(5), then the 
transfer price paid for the component by the possessions corporation 
will not include a return on any manufacturing intangible related to the 
component product, and the possessions corporation will obtain the 
return on the manufacturing intangibles associated with the component.
    Q. 17: If the possessions corporation computes its income with 
respect to a product under the cost sharing method, with respect to 
which units of the product shall the possessions corporation be treated 
as owning intangible property as a result of having made the cost 
sharing election?
    A. 17: The possessions corporation shall not be treated as owning 
intangible property, as a result of having made the cost sharing 
election, with respect to any units of a possession product which were 
not taken into account by the possessions corporation in applying the 
significant business presence test for the current taxable year or for 
any prior taxable year in which the possessions corporation also had a 
significant business presence in the possession with respect to such 
product.

    (b) Profit split option--(1) Computation of combined taxable income.

    Q. 1: In determining combined taxable income from sales of a 
possession

[[Page 167]]

product, how are the allocations and apportionments of expenses, losses, 
and other deductions to be determined?
    A. 1: (i) Expenses, losses, and other deductions are to be allocated 
and apportioned on a ``fully-loaded'' basis under Sec. 1.861-8 to the 
combined gross income of the possessions corporation and other members 
of the affiliated group (other than foreign affiliates). For purposes of 
the profit split option, the term ``affiliated group'' is defined the 
same as under Sec. 1.936-6 (a)(1) question and answer 2. The amount of 
research, development, and experimental expenses allocated and 
apportioned to combined gross income is to be determined under 
Sec. 1.861-8(e)(3). The amount of research, development and experimental 
expenses and related deductions (such as royalties paid or accrued with 
respect to manufacturing intangibles by the possessions corporation or 
other domestic members of the affiliated group to unrelated persons or 
to foreign affiliates) allocated and apportioned to combined gross 
income shall in no event be less than the amount of the cost sharing 
payment that would have been required under the rules set forth in 
section 936(h)(5)(C)(i)(II) and paragraph (a) of this section if the 
cost sharing option had been elected. Other expenses which are subject 
to Sec. 1.861-8(e) are to be allocated and apportioned in accordance 
with that section. For example, interest expense (including payments 
made with respect to bonds issued by the Puerto Rican Industrial, 
Medical and Environmental Control Facilities Authority (AFICA)) is to be 
allocated and apportioned under Sec. 1.861-8(e)(2). With the exception 
of marketing and distribution expenses discussed below, the other 
remaining expenses which are definitely related to a class of gross 
income shall be allocated to that class of gross income and shall be 
apportioned on the basis of any reasonable method, as described in 
Sec. 1.861-8 (b)(3) and (c)(1). Examples of such methods may include, 
but are not limited to, those specified in Sec. 1.861-8(c)(1)(i) through 
(vi).
    (ii) The class of gross income to which marketing and distribution 
expenses relate and shall be allocated is generally to be defined by the 
same ``product area'' as is determined for the relevant research, 
development, and experimental expenses (i.e., the appropriate 3-digit 
SIC code), but shall include only gross income generated or reasonably 
expected to be generated from the geographic area or areas to which the 
expenses relate. It shall be presumed that marketing and distribution 
expenses relate to all product sales within the same product area. If, 
however, it can be established that any of these expenses are separately 
identifiable expenses, such as advertising, and relate, directly or 
indirectly, solely to a specific product or a specific group of 
products, such expenses shall be allocated to the class of gross income 
defined by the specific product or group of products. Thus, advertising 
and other separately identifiable marketing expenses which relate 
specifically and exclusively to a particular product must be allocated 
entirely to the gross income from that product, even though the taxpayer 
or other members of an affiliated group which includes the taxpayer 
produce and market other products in the same 3-digit SIC code 
classification. The mere display of a company logo or mention of a 
company name solely in the context of identifying the manufacturer shall 
not prevent an advertisement from relating specifically and exclusively 
to a particular product or group of products.
    (iii) If marketing and distribution expenses are allocated to a 
class of gross income which consists both of income from sales of 
possession products (the statutory grouping) and other income such as 
from sale by U.S. affiliates of products not produced in the possession 
(the residual grouping), then these marketing and distribution expenses 
shall be apportioned on a ``fully loaded'' basis which reflects, to a 
reasonably close extent, the factual relationship between these 
deductions and the statutory and residual groupings of gross income. 
Apportionment methods based upon comparisons of amounts incurred before 
ultimate sale of a product (including apportionment on a comparison of 
costs of goods sold, other expenses incurred, or other comparisons set 
forth in Sec. 1.861-8 (c)(1)(v), such as time spent) are not on a 
``fully-

[[Page 168]]

loaded'' basis and do not reflect this required factual relationship. 
These deductions shall be apportioned on a basis of comparison of the 
amount of gross sales or receipts or another method if it is established 
that such method similarly reflects the required factual relationship. 
Thus, for example, a comparison of units sold may be used only where the 
units are of the same or similar value and are, thus, in fact 
comparable.
    (iv) The rules for allocation and apportionment of marketing and 
distribution expenses may be illustrated by the following examples:

    Example 1. Assume that possessions corporation A manufacturers 
prescription pharmaceutical product #1 for resale by P, its U.S. parent 
corporation, in the United States. Additionally, assume that P 
manufactures prescription pharmaceutical products #2 and #3 in the 
United States for sale there. Further, assume that all three products 
are within the same product area, and that marketing and distribution 
expenses are internally divided by P among the three products on the 
basis of time spent by sales persons of P on marketing of the three 
products, as follows:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
Product #1.....................................................      50X
Product #2.....................................................      80X
Product #3.....................................................     110X
                                                                --------
    Total......................................................     240X
                                                                        

These expenses of 240X are allocated to gross income generated by all 
three products and shall be apportioned on the basis of gross sales or 
receipts of product #1 as compared to products #2 and #3 or another 
method which similarly reflects the factual relationship between these 
expenses and gross income derived from product #1 and products #2 and 
#3. Thus, if a sales method were used and sales of product #1 accounted 
for one-third of sales receipts from the three products, 80X (240 
<divide> 3) of marketing and distribution expenses would be apportioned 
to the combined gross income from product #1.
    Example 2. Corporation B produces and sells Brand W whiskey, in the 
United States. B's subsidiary, S, which is a possessions corporation, 
produces soft drink extract in Puerto Rico which it sells to independent 
bottlers to produce Brand S soft drinks for sale in the United States. 
Corporation B's advertisements and other promotional materials for Brand 
W whiskey make no reference to Brand S soft drinks (or any other 
Corporation B products), and Brand S soft drink advertisements and other 
promotional materials make no reference to Brand W whiskey (or any other 
corporation B products). For purposes of section 936(h), the advertising 
and other promotional expenses for Brand W whiskey must be allocated 
entirely to the gross income from sales of Brand W whiskey and the 
advertising and other promotional expenses for Brand S soft drink must 
be allocated entirely to the gross income from the sales of soft drink 
extract, notwithstanding the fact that whiskey and soft drink extract 
are both included in SIC code 208. A similar result would apply, for 
example, to separately identifiable advertising and other marketing 
expenses which relate specifically and exclusively to one or the other 
of the following pairs of products: chewing gum and granulated sugar 
(SIC code 206); canned tuna fish and freeze-dried coffee (SIC code 209); 
children's underwear and ladies' brassieres (SIC code 234); aspirin 
tablets and prescription antibiotic tablets (SIC code 283); floor wax 
and perfume (SIC code 284); adhesives and inks (SIC code 289); semi-
conductors and cathode-ray tubes (SIC code 367); batteries and extension 
cords (SIC code 369); bandages and dental supplies (SIC code 384); 
stainless steel flatware and jewelry parts (SIC code 391); children's 
toys and sporting goods (SIC code 394); hair curlers and zippers (SIC 
code 396); and paint brushes and linoleum tiles (SIC code 399).
    Example 3. Assume the same facts as in Example 1 and that 
possessions corporation A also manufactures aspirin, a non-prescription 
product, for resale by its U.S. parent corporation, P. Further, assume 
that the advertising and separately identifiable marketing expenses 
which relate specifically and exclusively to aspirin sales total $100 
and that these expenses are allocable solely to gross income derived 
from aspirin sales. The sales method continues to be used to apportion 
the marketing and distribution expenses related, directly or indirectly, 
to products #1, #2, and #3, and the apportionment of such expenses to 
product #1 for purposes of determining combined taxable income from 
product #1 will remain as stated in Example 1. None of the advertising 
and other separately identifiable marketing expenses which relate 
specifically and exclusively to aspirin will be taken into account in 
allocating and apportioning the marketing and distribution expenses 
relating to the gross income attributable to products #1, #2, and #3. 
Gross income attributable to aspirin will be considered as a separate 
class of gross income, and all the advertising and separately 
identifiable marketing expenses which relate specifically and 
exclusively to aspirin sales of $100 will be allocated to the class of 
gross income derived from aspirin sales. Similarly, none of the 
marketing and distribution expenses, directly or indirectly, related 
solely to the group of products #1, #2, and #3 will be taken into 
account in determining the combined taxable income from aspirin sales. 
the

[[Page 169]]

remaining marketing and distribution expenses which do not, directly or 
indirectly, relate solely to any specific product or group of products 
(e.g., the salaries of a Vice-President of Marketing who has 
responsibility for marketing all products and his staff) shall be 
allocated and apportioned on the basis of the gross receipts from the 
sales of all of the products (or a similar method) in determining 
combined taxable income of any product.

    Q. 2: How may the allocation and apportionment of expenses to 
combined gross income be verified?
    A. 2: Substantiation of the allocation and apportionment of expenses 
will be required upon audit of the possessions corporation and 
affiliates. Detailed substantiation may be necessary, particularly where 
the entities are engaged in multiple lines of business involving 
distinct product areas. Sources of substantiation may include certified 
financial reports. Form 10-K's, annual reports, internal production 
reports, product line assembly work papers, and other relevant 
materials. In this regard, see Sec. 1.861-8(f)(5).
    Q. 3: Does section 936(h) override the moratorium provided by 
section 223 of the Economic Recovery Tax Act of 1981 and any subsequent 
similar moratorium?
    A. 3: Yes. Thus, the allocation and apportionment of product area 
research described in question and answer 1 must be made without regard 
to the moratorium.
    Q. 4: Is the cost of samples treated as a marketing expense?
    A. 4: Yes. The cost of producing samples will be treated as a 
marketing expense and not as inventoriable costs for purposes of 
determining combined taxable income (and compliance with the significant 
business presence test). However, for taxable years beginning prior to 
January 1, 1986, the cost of producing samples may be treated as either 
a marketing expense or as inventoriable costs.
    Q. 5: If a possessions corporation uses the profit split method to 
determine its taxable income from sales of a product, how does it 
determine its gross income for purposes of the 80-percent possession 
source test and the 65-percent active trade or business test of section 
936(a)(2)?
    A. 5: One-half of the deductions of the affiliated group (other than 
foreign affiliates) which are used in determining the combined taxable 
income from sales of the product are added to the portion of the 
combined taxable income allocated to the possessions corporation in 
order to determine the possessions corporation's gross income from sales 
of such product.
    Q. 6: How will income from intangibles related to a possession 
product be treated under the profit split method?
    A. 6: Combined taxable income of the possessions corporation and 
affiliates from the sale of the possession product will include income 
attributable to all intangibles, including both manufacturing and 
marketing intangibles, associated with the product.
    Q. 7: Can a possessions corporation apply the profit split option to 
a possession product if no U.S. affiliates derive income from the sale 
of the possession product?
    A. 7: Yes.
    Q. 8: With respect to the factual situation discussed in question 
and answer 7 how is combined taxable income computed?
    A. 8: The profit split option is applied to the taxable income of 
the possessions corporation from sales of the possession product to 
foreign affiliates and unrelated persons. Fifty percent of that income 
is allocated to the possessions corporation, and the remainder is 
allocated to the appropriate affiliates as described in question and 
answer 13 of this paragraph (b)(1).
    Q. 9: May a possessions corporation compute its income under the 
profit split method with respect to units of a possession product which 
it sells to a U.S. affiliate if the U.S. affiliate leases such units to 
unrelated persons or to foreign affiliates or uses such units in its own 
trade or business?
    A. 9: Yes, provided that an independent sales price for the 
possession product from comparable uncontrolled transactions can be 
determined in accordance with Sec. 1.482-2 (e)(2). If, however, there is 
a comparable uncontrolled price for an integrated product and the 
possession product is a component product or end-product form thereof, 
the possessions corporation may compute its income under the profit 
split method with respect to

[[Page 170]]

such units. In either case, the possessions corporation shall compute 
combined taxable income with respect to such units under the following 
question and answer.
    Q. 10: If the possessions corporation is entitled to use the profit 
split method in the situation described in Q. 9 (leasing units of the 
possession product or use of such units in the taxpayer's own trade or 
business), how should it compute combined taxable income with respect to 
such units?
    A. 10: (i) Combined taxable income shall be computed as if the U.S. 
affiliate had sold the units to an unrelated person (or to a foreign 
affiliate) at the time the units were first leased or otherwise placed 
in service by the U.S. affiliate. The sales price on such deemed sale 
shall be equal to the independent sales price from comparable 
uncontrolled transactions determined in accordance with Sec. 1.482-
2(e)(2), if any.
    (ii) If the possession product is a component product or an end-
product form, the combined taxable income with respect to the possession 
product shall be determined under Q&A. 12 of this paragraph (b)(1).
    (iii) For purposes of determining the basis of a component product 
or an end-product form, the deemed sales price of such product must be 
determined. The deemed sales price of the component product shall be 
determined by multiplying the deemed sales price of the integrated 
product that includes the component product by a ratio, the numerator of 
which is the production costs of the component product and the 
denominator of which is the production costs of the integrated product 
that includes the component product. The deemed sales price of an end-
product form shall be determined by multiplying the deemed sales price 
of the integrated product that includes the end-product form by a ratio, 
the numerator of which is the production costs of the end-product form 
and the denominator of which is the production costs of the integrated 
product that includes the end-product form. For the definition of 
production costs, see Q&A. 12 of this paragraph (b)(1).
    (iv)(A) If combined taxable income is determined under paragraph (v) 
of A. 12 of this paragraph (b)(1), in the case of a component product, 
the deemed sales price shall be determined by using the actual sales 
price of that product when sold as an integrated product (as adjusted 
under the rules of the fourth sentence of Sec. 1.482-3(b)(2)(ii)(A)).
    (B) If combined taxable income is determined under paragraph (v) of 
A. 12 of this paragraph (b)(1), in the case of an end-product form, the 
deemed sales price shall be determined by subtracting from the deemed 
sales price of the integrated product that includes the end-product form 
(e.g., the leased property) the actual sales price of the excluded 
component when sold as an integrated product to an unrelated person (as 
adjusted under the rules of the fourth sentence of Sec. 1.482-
3(b)(2)(ii)(A)).
    (v) The full amount of income received under the lease shall be 
treated as income of (and be taxed to) the U.S. affiliate and not the 
possessions corporation.
    Q. 11: In the situation described in question 9, how does the U.S. 
affiliate determine its basis in such units for purposes of computing 
depreciation and similar items?
    A. 11: The U.S. affiliate shall be treated, for purposes of 
computing its basis in such units, as if it had repurchased such units 
immediately following the deemed sale and at the deemed sales price as 
provided in Q&A. 10 of this paragraph (b)(1).

The principles of questions and answers 10 and 11 are illustrated by the 
following example:

    Example: Possessions corporation S manufactures 100 units of 
possession product X. S sells 50 units of X to an unrelated person in an 
arm's length transaction for $10 per unit. S sells the remaining 50 
units to its U.S. affiliate, A, which leases such units to unrelated 
persons. The combined taxable income for the 100 units of X is computed 
below on the basis of the given production, sales, and cost data:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
Sales:                                                                  
  1. Total sales by S to unrelated persons (50 x $10)..........     $500
  2. Total deemed sales by A to unrelated persons (50 x $10)...      500
  3. Total gross receipts (line 1 plus line 2).................    1,000
Total costs:                                                            
  4. Material costs............................................      200
  5. Production costs..........................................      300
  6. Research expenses.........................................        0

[[Page 171]]

                                                                        
  7. Other expenses............................................      100
  8. Total (add lines 4 through 7).............................      600
Combined taxable income attributable to the 100 units of X:             
  9. Combined taxable income (line 3 minus line 8).............      400
  10. Share of combined taxable income apportioned to S (50% of         
   line 9).....................................................      200
  11. Share of combined taxable income apportioned to A (line 9         
   minus line 10)..............................................      200
A's basis in 50 units of X leased by it to unrelated persons:           
  12. 50 units times $10 deemed repurchase price...............      500
                                                                        

Subsequent leasing income is entirely taxed to A.

    Q. 12: If the possession product is a component product or an end-
product form, how is the combined taxable income for such product to be 
determined?
    A. 12: (i) Except as provided in paragraph (v) of this A. 12, 
combined taxable income for a component product or an end-product form 
is computed under the production cost ratio (PCR) method.
    (ii) Under the PCR method, the combined taxable income for a 
component product will be the same proportion of the combined taxable 
income for the integrated product that includes the component product 
that the production costs attributable to the component product bear to 
the total production costs (including costs incurred by the U.S. 
affiliates) for the integrated product that includes the component 
product. Production costs will be the sum of the direct and indirect 
production costs as defined under Sec. 1.936-5(b)(4) except that the 
costs will not include any costs of materials. If the possession product 
is a component product that is transformed into an integrated product in 
whole or in part by a contract manufacturer outside of the possession, 
within the meaning of Sec. 1.936-5(c), the denominator of the PCR shall 
be computed by including the same amount paid to the contract 
manufacturer, less the costs of materials of the contract manufacturer, 
as is taken into account for purposes of the significant business 
presence test under Sec. 1.936-5(c) Q&A. 5.
    (iii) Under the PCR method the combined taxable income for an end-
product form will be the same proportion of the combined taxable income 
for the integrated product that includes the end-product form that the 
production costs attributable to the end-product form bear to the total 
production costs (including costs incurred by the U.S. affiliates) for 
the integrated product that includes the end-product form. Production 
costs will be the sum of the direct and indirect production costs as 
defined under Sec. 1.936-5(b)(4) except that the costs will not include 
any costs of materials. If the possession product is an end-product form 
and an excluded component is contract manufactured outside of the 
possession, within the meaning of Sec. 1.936-5(c), the denominator shall 
be computed by including the same amount paid to the contract 
manufacturer, less cost of materials of the contract manufacturer, as is 
also taken into account for purposes of the significant business 
presence test under Sec. 1.936-5(c) Q&A. 5.
    (iv) This paragraph (iv) of A. 12 illustrates the computation of 
combined taxable income for a component product or end-product form 
under the PCR method. S, a possessions corporation, is engaged in the 
manufacture of microprocessors. S obtains a component from a U.S. 
affiliate, O. S sells its production to another U.S. affiliate, P, which 
incorporates the microprocessors into central processing units (CPUs). P 
transfers the CPUs to a U.S. affiliate, Q, which incorporates the CPUs 
into computers for sale to unrelated persons. S chooses to define the 
possession product as the CPUs. The combined taxable income for the sale 
of the possession product on the basis of the given production, sales, 
and cost data is computed as follows:

Production costs (excluding costs of materials):                        
    1. O's costs for the component.........................          100
    2. S's costs for the microprocessors...................          500
    3. P's costs for the CPUs (the possession                           
     product)..............................................          200
    4. Q's costs for the computers.........................          400
    5. Total production costs for the computer (Add lines 1             
     through 4)............................................        1,200

[[Page 172]]

                                                                        
    6. Combined production costs for the CPU (the                       
     possession product) (Add lines 1 through                           
     3)....................................................          800
    7. Ratio of production costs for the CPUs (the                      
     possession product) to the production costs for the                
     computer..............................................        0.667
Determination of combined taxable income for computers:                 
  Sales:                                                                
    8. Total possession sales of computers to unrelated                 
     customers and foreign affiliates......................        7,500
  Total costs of O, S, P, and Q incurred in production of a             
   computer:                                                            
    9. Production costs (enter from line                                
     5)....................................................        1,200
    10. Material costs ....................................          100
    11. Total costs (line 9 plus line 10)..................        1,300
    12. Combined gross income from sale of computers (line              
     8 minus line 11)......................................        6,200
  Expenses of the affiliated group (other than foreign                  
   affiliates) allocable and apportionable to the computers             
   or any component thereof under the rules of Secs.  1.861-            
   8 through 1.861-14T and 1.936-6 (b)(1), Q&A. 1:                      
    13. Expenses (other than research expenses)............          980
  Research expenses of the affiliated group allocable and               
   apportionable to the computers:                                      
    14. Total sales in the 3-digit SIC Code................       12,500
    15. Possession sales of the computers (enter from line              
     8)....................................................        7,500
    16. Cost sharing fraction (divide line 15 by line                   
     14)...................................................          0.6
    17. Research expenses incurred by the affiliated group              
     in 3-digit SIC Code multiplied by 120                              
     percent...............................................          700
    18. Cost sharing amount (multiply line 16 by line                   
     17)...................................................          420
    19. Research of the affiliated group (other than                    
     foreign affiliates) allocable and apportionable under              
     Secs.  1.861-17 and 1.861-14T(e)(2) to the                         
     computers.............................................          300
    20. Enter the greater of line 18 or line 19............          420
Computation of combined taxable income of the computer and              
 the CPU:                                                               
    21. Combined taxable income attributable to the                     
     computer (line 12 minus line 13 and line                           
     20)...................................................        4,800
    22. Combined taxable income attributable to CPUs                    
     (multiply line 21 by line 7) (production cost                      
     ratio)................................................        3,200
    23. Share of combined taxable income apportioned to S               
     (50 percent of line 22)...............................        1,600
Share of combined taxable income apportioned to U.S.                    
 affiliate(s) of S:                                                     
    24. Adjustments for research expenses (line 18 minus                
     line 19 multiplied by line 7).........................           80
    25. Adjusted combined taxable income (line 22 plus line             
     24)...................................................        3,280
    26. Share of combined taxable income apportioned to                 
     affiliates of S (line 25 minus line 23)...............        1,680
                                                                        

    (v)(A) If a possession product is sold by a taxpayer or its 
affiliate to unrelated persons in covered sales both as an integrated 
product and as a component product and the conditions of paragraph 
(v)(C) of this A. 12 are satisfied, the taxpayer may elect to determine 
the combined taxable income derived from covered sales of the component 
product under this paragraph (v). In that case, the combined taxable 
income derived from covered sales of the component product shall be 
determined by using the same per unit combined taxable income as is 
derived from covered sales of the product as an integrated product, but 
subject to the limitation of paragraph (v)(D) of this A. 12.
    (B) In the case of a possession product that is an end-product form, 
if all of the excluded components are also separately sold by the 
taxpayer or its affiliate to unrelated persons in uncontrolled 
transactions and the conditions of paragraph (v)(C) of this A. 12 are 
satisfied, the taxpayer may elect to determine the combined taxable 
income of such end-product form under this paragraph (v). In that case, 
the combined taxable income derived from covered sales of the end-
product form shall be determined by reducing the per unit combined 
taxable income from the integrated product that includes the end-product 
form by the per unit combined

[[Page 173]]

taxable income for excluded components determined under the rules of 
this paragraph (v), but subject to the limitation of paragraph (v)(D) of 
this A. 12. For this purpose, combined taxable income of the excluded 
components must be determined under section 936 as if the excluded 
components were possession products.
    (C) In the case of component products, this paragraph (v) applies 
only if the sales price of the possession product sold in covered sales 
as an integrated product (i.e., in uncontrolled transactions) would be 
the most direct and reliable measure of an arm's length price within the 
meaning of the fourth sentence of Sec. 1.482-3(b)(2)(ii)(A) for the 
component product. For purposes of applying the fourth sentence of 
Sec. 1.482-3(b)(2)(ii)(A), the sale of the integrated product that 
includes the component product is treated as being immediately preceded 
by a sale of the component (i.e. without further processing) in a 
controlled transaction. In the case of end-product forms, this paragraph 
(v) applies only if the sales price of excluded components separately 
sold in uncontrolled transactions would be the most direct and reliable 
measure of an arm's length price within the meaning of the fourth 
sentence of Sec. 1.482-3(b)(2)(ii)(A) for all excluded components of an 
integrated product that includes an end-product form. For purposes of 
applying the fourth sentence of Sec. 1.482-3(b)(2)(ii)(A), the sale of 
the integrated product that includes excluded components is treated as 
being immediately preceded by a sale of the excluded components (i.e. 
without further processing) in a controlled transaction. Under the 
fourth sentence of Sec. 1.482-3(b)(2)(ii)(A), the uncontrolled 
transactions referred to in this paragraph (v)(C) must have no 
differences with the controlled transactions that would affect price, or 
have only minor differences that have a definite and reasonably 
ascertainable effect on price and for which appropriate adjustments are 
made (resulting in appropriate adjustments to the computation of 
combined taxable income). If such adjustments cannot be made, or if 
there are more than minor differences between the controlled and 
uncontrolled transactions, the method provided by this paragraph (v)(C) 
cannot be used. Thus, for example, these uncontrolled transactions must 
involve substantially identical property in the same or a substantially 
identical geographic market, and must be substantially identical to the 
controlled transaction in terms of their volumes, contractual terms, and 
market level. See Sec. 1.482-3(b)(2)(ii)(B).
    (D) In no case can the per unit combined taxable income as 
determined under paragraph (v)(A) or (B) of this A. 12 be greater than 
the per unit combined taxable income of the integrated product that 
includes the component product or end-product form.
    (E) The provisions of this paragraph (v) are illustrated by the 
following example. Taxpayer manufactures product A in a U.S. possession. 
Some portion of product A is sold to unrelated persons as an integrated 
product and the remainder is sold to related persons for transformation 
into product AB. The combined taxable income of integrated product A is 
$400 per unit and the combined taxable income of product AB is $300 per 
unit. The production cost ratio with respect to product A when sold as a 
component of product AB, is 2/3. Unless the taxpayer elects and 
satisfies the conditions of this paragraph (v), the combined taxable 
income with respect to A will be $200 per unit (combined taxable income 
for AB of $300  x  the production cost ratio of 2/3). If, however, the 
comparability standards of paragraph (v)(C) of this A. 12 are met, the 
taxpayer may elect to determine combined taxable income of product A 
when sold as a component of product AB using the same per unit combined 
taxable income as product A when sold as an integrated product. However, 
the per unit combined taxable income from sales of product A as a 
component product may not exceed the per unit combined taxable income on 
the sale of product AB. Therefore, the combined taxable income of 
component product A may not exceed $300 per unit.
    (vi) Taxpayers that have not elected the percentage limitation under 
section 936(a)(1) for the first taxable year beginning after December 
31, 1993, may do so if the taxpayer has elected the profit split method 
and computation of

[[Page 174]]

combined taxable income is affected by Q&A.12 of this paragraph (b)(1).
    (vii) The rules of Q&A. 12 of this paragraph (b)(1) apply for 
taxable years ending after June 9, 1996. If, however, the election under 
paragraph (v) of A. 12 of Sec. 1.936-6(b)(1) is made, this election must 
be made for the taxpayer's first taxable year beginning after December 
31, 1993, and if not made effective for that year, the election cannot 
be made for any later taxable year. A successor corporation that makes 
the same or substantially similar products as its predecessor 
corporation cannot make an election under paragraph (v) of A.12 of 
Sec. 1.936-6(b)(1) unless the election was made by its predecessor 
corporation for its first taxable year beginning after December 31, 
1993.
    Q. 13: If the profit split option is elected, how is the portion of 
combined taxable income not allocated to the possessions corporation to 
be treated?
    A. 13: (i) The income shall be allocated to affiliates in the 
following order, but no allocations will be made to affiliates described 
in a later category if there are any affiliates in a prior category--
    (A) First, to U.S. affiliates (other than tax exempt affiliates) 
within the group (as determined under section 482) that derive income 
with respect to the product produced in whole or in part in the 
possession;
    (B) Second, to U.S. affiliates (other than tax exempt affiliates) 
that derive income from the active conduct of a trade or business in the 
same product area as the possession product;
    (C) Third, to other U.S. affiliates (other than tax-exempt 
affiliates);
    (D) Fourth, to foreign affiliates that derive income from the active 
conduct of a U.S. trade or business in the same product area as the 
possession product (or, if the foreign members are resident in a country 
with which the U.S. has an income tax convention, then to those foreign 
members that have a permanent establishment in the United States that 
derives income in the same product area as the possession product); and
    (E) Fifth, to all other affiliates.
    (ii) The allocations made under paragraph (i)(A) of this A. 13 shall 
be made on the basis of the relative gross income derived by each such 
affiliate with respect to the product produced in whole or in part in 
the possession. For this purpose, gross income must be determined 
consistently for each affiliate and consistently from year to year.
    (iii) The allocations made under paragraphs (i)(B) and (i)(D) of 
this A. 13 shall be made on the basis of the relative gross income 
derived by each such affiliate from the active conduct of the trade or 
business in the same product area.
    (iv) The allocations made under paragraphs (i)(C) and (i)(E) of this 
A. 13 shall be made on the basis of the relative total gross income of 
each such affiliate before allocating income under this section.
    (v) Income allocated to affiliates shall be treated as U.S. source 
and section 863(b) does not apply for this purpose.
    (vi) For purposes of determining an affiliate's estimated tax 
liability for income thus allocated for taxable years beginning prior to 
January 1, 1995, the income shall be deemed to be received on the last 
day of the taxable year of each such affiliate in which or with which 
the taxable year of the possessions corporation ends. For taxable years 
beginning after December 31, 1994, quarterly estimated tax payments will 
be required as provided under section 711 of the Uruguay Round 
Agreements, Public Law 103-465 (1994), page 230, and any administrative 
guidance issued by the Internal Revenue Service thereunder.
    Q. 14: What is the source of the portion of combined taxable income 
allocated to the possessions corporation?
    A. 14: Income allocated to the possessions corporation shall be 
treated as possession source income and as derived from the active 
conduct of a trade or business within the possession.
    Q. 15: How is the profit split option to be applied to properly 
account for costs incurred in a year with respect to products which are 
sold by the possessions corporation to a U.S. affiliate during such 
year, but are not resold by the U.S. affiliate to persons who are not 
members of the affiliated group or to foreign affiliates until a later 
year?

[[Page 175]]

    A. 15: The rules under Sec. 1.994-1(c)(5) are to be applied. 
Incomplete transactions will not be taken into consideration in 
computing combined taxable income. Thus, for example, if in 1983, A, a 
possessions corporation, sells units of a product with a cost to A of 
$5000 to B corporation, its U.S. affiliate, which use the dollar-value 
LIFO method of costing inventory, and B sells units with a cost of $4000 
(representing A's cost) to C corporation, a foreign affiliate, only 
$4000 of such costs shall be taken into consideration in computing the 
combined taxable income of the possessions corporation and U.S. 
affiliates for 1983. If a specific goods LIFO inventory method is used 
by B, the determination of whether A's goods remain in B's inventory 
shall be based on whether B's specific goods LIFO grouping has 
experienced an increment or decrement for the year on the specific LIFO 
cost of such units, rather than on an average unit cost of such units. 
If the FIFO method of costing inventory is used by B, transfers may be 
based on the cost of the specific units transferred or on the average 
unit production cost of the units transferred, but in each case a FIFO 
flow assumption shall be used to identify the units transferred. For a 
determination of which goods are sold by taxpayers using the LIFO 
method, see question and answer 19.
    Q. 16: If a possessions corporation purchases materials from an 
affiliate and computes combined taxable income for a possession product 
which includes such materials, how are those materials to be treated in 
the possessions corporation's inventory?
    A. 16: The cost of those materials is considered to be equal to the 
affiliate's cost using the affiliate's method of costing inventory.
    Q. 17: If the possessions corporation uses the FIFO method of 
costing inventory and the U.S. affiliate uses the LIFO method of costing 
inventory, or vice versa, what method of costing inventory should be 
used in computing combined taxable income?
    A. 17: The transferor corporation's method of costing inventory 
determines the cost of inventory for purposes of combined taxable income 
while the transferee corporation's method of costing inventory 
determines the flow. Assume, for example, that X corporation, a 
possessions corporation, using the FIFO method of costing inventory 
purchases materials from Y corporation, U.S. affiliate, also using the 
FIFO method. X corporation produces a product which it transfers to Z 
corporation, another U.S. affiliate using the LIFO method. Assume also 
that the final product satisfies the significant business presence test. 
Under the facts, the cost of the materials purchased by X from Y is Y's 
FIFO cost. The costs of the inventory transferred by X to Z are 
determined under X's FIFO method of accounting as is the flow of the 
inventory from X to Z. The costs added by Z are determined under Z's 
LIFO method of inventory, as is the flow of the inventory from Z to 
unrelated persons or foreign affiliates.
    Q. 18: How are the costs of a possession product and the revenues 
derived from the sale of a possession product determined if the U.S. 
affiliate includes purchases of the possessions product in a dollar-
value LIFO inventory pool (as provided under Sec. 1.472-8)?
    A. 18: The following method will be accepted in determining the 
revenues derived from the sale of a possession product and the costs of 
a possession product if the U.S. affiliate includes purchases of the 
possession product in a dollar-value LIFO inventory pool. The rules 
apply solely for the cost sharing and profit split options under section 
936(h).
    (i) Revenue identification. The identification of revenues derived 
from sales of a possession product must generally be made on a specific 
identification basis. The particular method employed by a taxpayer for 
valuing its inventory will have no impact on the determination of what 
units are sold or how much revenue is derived from such sales. Thus, if 
a U.S. affiliate sells both item A (a possession product) and item B (a 
non-possession product), the actual sales revenues received by the U.S. 
affiliate from item A sales would constitute possession product revenue 
for purposes of the profit split option and possession sales for 
purposes of the cost sharing option regardless of whether the U.S. 
affiliate values its inventories on the FIFO or the LIFO

[[Page 176]]

method. In instances where sales of item A (i.e., the possession 
product) cannot be determined by use of specific identification (for 
example, in cases where items A and B are identical except that one is 
produced in the possession (item A) and the other (item B) is produced 
outside of the possession and it is not possible to segregate these 
items in the hands of the U.S. affiliate), it will be necessary to 
identify the portion of the combined sales of items A and B (which 
together can be identified on a specific identification basis) which is 
attributed to item A sales and the portion which is attributed to item B 
sales. The determination of the portion of aggregated sales attributable 
to item A and item B is independent of the LIFO method used to determine 
the cost of such sales and may be made under the following approach. A 
taxpayer may, for purposes of this section of the regulations, use the 
relative purchases (in units) of items A and B by the U.S. affiliate 
during the taxable year (or other appropriate measuring period such as 
the period during the taxable year used to determine current-year costs, 
i.e., earliest acquisitions period, latest acquisitions period, etc.) in 
determining the ratio to apply against the combined items A and B sales 
revenue. If the sales exceed current purchases, the taxpayer can use a 
FIFO unit approach which identifies actual unit sales on a first-in, 
first-out basis. Revenue determination where specific identification is 
not possible is illustrated by the following example:

    Example. At the end of year 1, there are 600 units of combined items 
A and B which are to be allocated between A and B on the basis of annual 
purchases of A and B units during year 1. During year 1, 1,000 units of 
item A, a possession product, and 2,000 units of item B, a non-
possession product, were purchased. Thus, the 600 units in year 1 ending 
inventory are allocated 200 (i.e. \1/3\) to item A units and 400 (i.e. 
\2/3\) to item B units based on the relative purchases of A (1,000) and 
B (2,000) in year 1. These units appear as beginning inventory in year 
2.
    In year 2, 1,500 units of item A are purchased and 1,500 units of 
item B are purchased. However, 3,300 units of items A and B in the 
aggregate are sold for $600,000. The relative proportion of the $600,000 
attributable to item A and to item B sales would be determined as 
follows:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                      Year 2 sales                        Item A  Item B
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Unit sales from opening inventory.......................     200     400
Unit sale from current-year purchases...................   1,350   1,350
                                                         ---------------
    Total unit sales (3,300)............................   1,550   1,750
    Percentage..........................................      47      53
------------------------------------------------------------------------


                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                         1550                   
Revenues from item A sales.................      281,818  <3-ln           $600,000  x    ----  <3-ln }>         
                                                                                         3300                   
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                         1750                   
Revenues from item B sales.................     $318,182  <3-ln           $600,000  x    ----  <3-ln }>         
                                                                                         3300                   
                                                                                                                


------------------------------------------------------------------------
                    Year 2 Closing Inventory                       Units
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Item A..........................................................     150
Item B..........................................................     150
------------------------------------------------------------------------

Thus, revenues from Item A sales for purposes of computing possession 
sales for the cost sharing option and revenues for the profit split 
option are $281,818.
    (ii) Cost identification. The determination of the cost of 
possession product sales by the U.S. affiliate must be based on the LIFO 
inventory method of the U.S. affiliate. The LIFO cost of possession 
product sales will, for purposes of this section of the regulations, be 
determined by maintaining a separate LIFO cost for possession products 
in a taxpayer's opening and closing LIFO inventory and using this cost 
to calculate an independent cost of possession product sales. This 
separate LIFO cost for possession products in the LIFO pool of a 
taxpayer is to be determined as follows:
    (A) Determine the base-year cost of possession products in ending 
inventory in a LIFO pool.
    (B) Determine the percentage of the base-year cost of possession 
products in the pool as compared to the total base-year cost of all 
items in the pool.

[[Page 177]]

    (C) Multiply the percentage determined in step (B) of this 
subdivision (ii) by the ending LIFO inventory value of the pool to 
determine the deemed LIFO cost attributable to possession products in 
the pool.
    (D) Subtract the LIFO cost of possession products in ending 
inventory in the pool (as calculated in step (C) of this subdivision 
(ii)) from the sum of:
    (1) Possession product purchases for the year, plus
    (2) The portion of the opening LIFO inventory value of the pool 
attributed to possession products (i.e., the result obtained in step (C) 
of this subdivision (ii) for the prior year).
The number determined by this calculation is the LIFO cost of possession 
product sales from the taxpayer's LIFO pool.

    Example: Assume that item A is a possession product and item B is a 
non-possession product and also assume the inventory and purchases with 
respect to the LIFO pool as provided below:

                        Year 1--Ending Inventory                        
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                No. of   Base-year  Base-year           
                                units    cost/unit     cost     Percent 
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Item A......................        100      $2.00       $200         20
Item B......................        200       4.00        800         80
------------------------------------------------------------------------


                           Year 1--LIFO Value                           
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                         Base-year                      
                                            cost      Index    LIFO cost
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Increment layer 2......................       $300        3.0       $900
Increment layer 1......................        400        2.0        800
Base layer.............................        300        1.0        300
                                        -----------           ----------
      Pool total.......................     $1,000  .........     $2,000
------------------------------------------------------------------------


                       Year 1--LIFO Value Per Item                      
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                    Base-year     LIFO  
                                                       cost      value  
------------------------------------------------------------------------
      Total pool..................................     $1,000     $2,000
                                                   ---------------------
Item A............................................        200        400
Item B............................................        800      1,600
------------------------------------------------------------------------


                            Year 2--Purchases                           
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                 Total  
                                                               purchases
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Item A.......................................................     $6,000
Item B.......................................................      4,000
------------------------------------------------------------------------


                        Year 2--Ending Inventory                        
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                No. of   Base-year  Base-year           
                                units    cost/unit     cost     Percent 
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Item A......................        200      $2.00       $400         50
Item B......................        100       4.00        400         50
------------------------------------------------------------------------


                           Year 2--LIFO Value                           
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                         Base-year                      
                                            cost      Index    LIFO cost
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Increment layer 2......................       $100        3.0       $300
Increment layer 1......................        400        2.0        800
Base layer.............................       $300        1.0        300
                                        -----------           ----------
Pool total.............................        800  .........     1,400 
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The year 2 LIFO cost of possession product A sales will be calculated as
  follows:                                                              
(1) Base-year cost of item in year 2 ending inventory=$400              
(2) Percentage of item A base-year cost to total base-year cost ($400   
  <divide> $800) = 50%                                                  
(3) LIFO value of item A ($1,400  x  50%) = $700                        
(4) LIFO cost of item A sales is determined by adding to the beginning  
  inventory in year 2 the purchases of item A in year 2 and subtracting 
  from this amount the ending inventory in year 2 ($400 + $6000 - $700 =
  $5700). The beginning inventory in year 2 is determined by multiplying
  the LIFO cost of the year 1 ending inventory by a percentage of item A
  base year cost to the total base-year cost in year 1. The ending      
  inventory in year 2 is determined under (3) above.                    

    Q. 19: If a possession product is purchased from a possessions 
corporation by a U.S. affiliate using the dollar-value LIFO method of 
costing its inventory and is included in a LIFO pool of the U.S. 
affiliate which includes products purchased from the possessions 
corporation in pre-TEFRA years, how should the LIFO index computation of 
the U.S. affiliate be made in the first year in which section 936(h) 
applies and in subsequent taxable years?
    A. 19: The U.S. affiliate should treat the first taxable year for 
which section 936(h) applies as a new base year in accordance with 
procedures provided by regulations under section 472. Thus, the opening 
inventory for the first year for which section 936(h) applies (valuing 
possession products purchased from the possessions corporation on the 
basis of the cost of such possession products), would equal the new base 
year cost of the inventory of such pool of the U.S. affiliate. 
Increments and decrements at new base year cost would be valued for LIFO 
purposes pursuant to the procedures provided by regulations under 
section 472.
    Q. 20: If the possessions corporation computes its income with 
respect to a product under the profit split method, with respect to 
which units of the product shall the profit split method apply?

[[Page 178]]

    A. 20: The profit split method shall apply to units of the 
possession product produced in whole or in part by the possessions 
corporation in the possession and sold during the taxable year by 
members of the affiliated group (other than foreign affiliates) to 
unrelated parties or to foreign affiliates. In no event shall the profit 
split method apply to units of the product which were not taken into 
account by the possessions corporation in applying the significant 
business presence test for the current taxable year or for any prior 
taxable year in which the possessions corporation also had a significant 
business presence in the possession with respect to such product.

    (2) Pre-TEFRA inventory.

    Q. 1: How is pre-TEFRA inventory to be determined if the profit 
split option is elected and the FIFO method of costing inventory is used 
by the U.S. affiliate?
    A. 1: Pre-TEFRA inventory is inventory which was produced by the 
possessions corporation and transferred to a U.S. affiliate prior to the 
possessions corporation's first taxable year beginning after December 
31, 1982. Pre-TEFRA inventory will not be included for purposes of the 
profit split option. If the U.S. affiliate uses the FIFO method of 
costing inventory, the pre-TEFRA inventory will be treated as the first 
inventory sold by the U.S. affiliate during the first year in which 
section 936(h) applies and will not be included in the computation of 
combined taxable income for purposes of the profit split option. The 
treatment of pre-TEFRA inventory when FIFO costing is used by both the 
U.S. affiliate and the possessions corporation is illustrated by the 
following example in which FIFO unit costing is used:

    Example. Assume the following:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                              X                 Y       
                                     -----------------------------------
                                         Possessions     U.S. affiliate 
                                         corporation   -----------------
                                     ------------------                 
                                       Number    Cost    Number    Cost 
                                         of      per       of      per  
                                       units     unit    units     unit 
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Beginning inventory.................      500     $150      200     $225
Units produced during 1983..........    1,000      200  .......  .......
Ending inventory....................      400      200      300  .......
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    In 1983, the beginning inventory of X, a possessions corporation, is 
500 units with a unit cost of $150 and the beginning inventory of Y, the 
U.S. affiliate, is 200 units with a unit cost of $225, which represents 
the section 482 price paid by Y. Y's beginning inventory in 1983 
represents purchases made in 1982 of products produced by X in that 
year. Y sells all the units it purchases from X to Z, a foreign 
affiliate. In 1983, X produces 1000 units at a unit cost of $200 and 
sells 1100 units to Y (the difference between 1500 units, representing 
X's 1983 beginning inventory (500) and the units produced by X in 1983 
(1000), and X's ending inventory of 400 units). Of the 1100 units sold 
by X to Y in 1983 only 800 units (and not 1000 units) which were sold by 
Y to Z are taken into consideration in computing combined taxable income 
for 1983. Since FIFO costing by the possessions corporation is used, the 
cost is $150 per unit for the first 500 units and $200 per unit for the 
remaining 300 units. The 200 units sold by X to Y in 1982 are pre-TEFRA 
inventory and are not included in the computation of combined taxable 
income for 1983. They are also treated as the first units sold by Y to Z 
in 1983. This inventory has a unit cost of $225, which reflects the 
section 482 transfer price from X to Y in 1982. Y's 1983 ending 
inventory of 300 units will not be taken into consideration in computing 
the combined taxable income of X and Y for 1983 because the units have 
not been sold to a foreign affiliate or to persons who are not members 
of the affiliated group. In a subsequent year when the units are sold to 
Z, the cost to X and selling price to Z of these units will enter into 
the computation of combined taxable income for that year.

    (c) Covered Intangibles.

    Q. 1: What are ``covered intangibles'' under section 
936(h)(5)(C)(i)(II)?
    A. 1: The term ``covered intangibles'' means (1) intangible property 
developed in a possession solely by the possessions corporation and 
owned by it, (2) manufacturing intangible property (described in section 
936(h)(3)(B)(i)) which is acquired by the possessions corporation from 
unrelated persons, and (3) any other intangible property (described in 
section 936(h)(3)(B) (ii) through (v), to the extent not described in 
section 936(h)(3)(B)(i)) which relates to sales of products or services 
to unrelated persons for ultimate consumption or use in the possession 
in which the possessions corporation conducts its business. The 
possessions corporation is treated as the owner of covered intangibles 
for purposes of obtaining a return thereon.

[[Page 179]]

    Q. 2: Do covered intangibles include manufacturing intangible 
property which is acquired by an affiliate and subsequently transferred 
to the possessions corporation?
    A. 2: No. In order for a manufacturing intangible to be treated as a 
covered intangible, the intangible property must be acquired directly by 
the possessions corporation from an unrelated person unless the 
manufacturing intangible was acquired by an affiliate from an unrelated 
person and was transferred to the possessions corporation by the 
affiliate prior to September 3, 1982.
    Q. 3: If a possessions corporation licenses a manufacturing 
intangible from an unrelated party, will the licensed intangible be 
treated as a covered intangible?
    A. 3: No.
    Q. 4: How is ultimate consumption or use determined for purposes of 
the definition of covered intangibles?
    A. 4: A product will be treated as having its ultimate use or 
consumption in a possession if it is sold by the possessions corporation 
to a related or unrelated person in a possession and is not resold or 
used or consumed outside of the possession within one year after the 
date of the sale.
    Q. 5: Are sales of products that relate to covered intangibles 
excluded from the cost sharing fraction?
    A. 5: If no manufacturing intangibles other than covered intangibles 
are associated with the possession product, then sales of such product 
will be excluded from the cost sharing fraction. If both covered and 
non-covered manufacturing intangibles are associated with the possession 
product, then sales of such product will be included in the cost sharing 
fraction.
    Q. 6: If the cost sharing option is elected, is it necessary for the 
possessions corporation to be the legal owner of covered intangibles 
described in section 936(h)(5)(C)(i)(II)(c) related to the product in 
order for the possessions corporation to receive a full return with 
respect to such intangibles?
    A. 6: No. For purposes of section 936(h), it is immaterial whether 
such covered intangibles are owned by the possessions corporation or by 
another member of the affiliated group. Moreover, if the legal owner of 
such covered intangibles which are subject to section 936(h)(5) is an 
affiliate of the possessions corporation, such person will not be 
required to charge an arm's-length royalty under section 482 to the 
possessions corporation.

[T.D. 8090, 51 FR 21532, June 13, 1986; 51 FR 27174, July 30, 1986, as 
amended by T.D. 8669, 61 FR 21367, May 10, 1996; 61 FR 39072, July 26, 
1996]


<R05>
Sec. 1.936-7  Manner of making election under section 936 (h)(5); special election for export sales; revocation of election under section 936(a).

    The rules in this section apply for purposes of section 936(h) and 
also for purposes of section 934(e), where applicable.

    (a) Manner of making election.

    Q. 1: How does a possessions corporation make an election to use the 
cost sharing method or profit split method?
    A. 1: A possessions corporation makes an election to use the cost 
sharing or profit split method by filing Form 5712-A and attaching it to 
its tax return. Form 5712-A must be filed on or before the due date 
(including extensions) of the tax return of the possessions corporation 
for its first taxable year beginning after December 31, 1982. The 
electing corporation must set forth on the form the name and the 
taxpayer identification number or address of all members of the 
affiliated group (including foreign affiliates not required to file a 
U.S. tax return). All members of the affiliated group must consent to 
the election. An authorized officer of the electing corporation must 
sign the statement of election and must declare that he has received a 
signed statement of consent from an authorized officer, director, or 
other appropriate official of each member of the affiliated group. The 
election is not valid unless all affiliates consent. However, a failure 
to obtain an affiliate's written consent will not invalidate the 
election out if the possessions corporation made a good faith effort to 
obtain all the necessary consents or the failure to obtain the missing 
consent was inadvertent. Subsequently created or acquired affiliates are 
bound by the election. If an election out is revoked under section 
936(h)(5)(F)(iii), a new

[[Page 180]]

election out with respect to that product area cannot be made without 
the consent of the Commissioner. The possessions corporation shall file 
an amended Form 5712-A with its timely filed income tax return to 
reflect any changes in the names or number of the members of the 
affiliated group for any taxable year after the first taxable year to 
which the election out applies. By consenting to the election out, all 
affiliates agree to provide information necessary to compute the cost 
sharing payment under the cost sharing method or combined taxable income 
under the profit split method, and failure to provide such information 
shall be treated as a request to revoke the election out under section 
936(h)(5)(F)(iii).
    Q. 2: May the ``election out'' under section 936(h)(5) be made on a 
product-by-product basis, or must it be made on a wide basis?
    A. 2: An electing corporation is required to treat products in the 
same product area in the same manner. Similarly, all possessions 
corporations in the same affiliated group that produce any products or 
render any services in the same product area must make the same election 
for all products that fall within the same product area. However, 
Sec. 1.936-7(b) provides that the electing corporation may make a 
different election for export sales than for domestic sales. The 
electing corporation or corporations may also make different elections 
for products that fall within different product areas.
    Q. 3: May the possessions corporation elect to define product area 
more narrowly than the 3-digit SIC code?
    A. 3: No. Certain alternatives, such as the 4-digit SIC code, would 
not be permitted under the statute. However, other methods for defining 
product area may be considered by the Commissioner in the future.
    Q. 4: May a possessions corporation make an election out under the 
cost sharing method with respect to a product area if the affiliated 
group incurs no research, development or experimental costs in the 
product area?
    A. 4: Yes. In that case the cost sharing payment will be zero.
    Q. 5: If the significant business presence test is not satisfied for 
a product or type of service within the product area covered by the 
election out under section 936(h)(5) what rules will apply with respect 
to that product?
    A. 5: With respect to the product which does not satisfy the 
significant business presence test, the provisions of section 936 (h)(1) 
through (h)(4) will apply to the allocation of income. However, if a 
cost sharing or a profit split election has been made with respect to 
the product area, the cost sharing payment or the research and 
development floor under section 936(h)(5)(C)(ii)(II) will not be 
reduced.
    Q. 6: Is a taxpayer permitted to make a change of election with 
respect to the cost sharing and profit split methods?
    A. 6: In general, once the election is properly made, it is binding 
for the first year in which it applies and all subsequent years 
(including upon any later created or acquired affiliates), and 
revocation is only permitted with the consent of the Commissioner of 
Internal Revenue. However, a taxpayer will be permitted to change its 
election once from the cost sharing method to the profit split method or 
vice versa, or from the method permitted under section 936 (h)(1) 
through (h)(4) to cost sharing or profit split or vice versa, without 
the consent of the Commissioner if the change is made on the taxpayer's 
return for its first taxable year ending after June 13, 1986. Such 
change will apply to such taxable year and all subsequent taxable years, 
and, at the taxpayer's option, may also apply to all prior taxable years 
for which section 936(h) was in effect. A change of election will be 
treated as an election subject to the procedures set forth above and to 
section 481 of the Internal Revenue Code.
    Q. 7: If the Commissioner determines that a possessions corporation 
does not meet the 80-percent possession source test or the 65-percent 
active trade or business test (the ``qualification tests'') for any 
taxable year beginning after 1982, under what circumstances is the 
possessions corporation permitted to make a distribution of property 
after the close of its taxable year to meet the qualification tests?
    A. 7: A possessions corporation may make a pro rata distribution of 
property to its shareholders after the close

[[Page 181]]

of the taxable year if the Commissioner determines that the possessions 
corporation does not satisfy the qualification tests (a) by reason of 
the exclusion from gross income of intangible income under section 
936(h)(1)(B) or section 936(h)(5)(C)(i)(II) or (b) by reason of the 
allocation to the shareholders of the possessions corporation of income 
under section 936(h)(5)(C)(ii)(III); provided, however, that the 
determination of the Commissioner does not contain a finding that the 
failure of such corporation to satisfy the qualification tests was due, 
in whole or in part, to fraud with intent to evade tax or willful 
neglect on the part of the possessions corporation. The possessions 
corporation must designate the distribution at the time the distribution 
is made as a distribution to meet qualification requirements, and it 
will be subject to the provisions of section 936(h)(4). Such 
distributions will not qualify for the dividends received deduction.
    Q. 8: If a possessions corporation owns stock in a subsidiary 
possessions corporation, any intangible property income allocated to the 
parent possessions corporation under section 936(h) will be treated as 
U.S. source income and taxable to the parent possessions corporation. Is 
the intangible property income taken into consideration in determining 
whether the parent possessions corporation meets the income tests of 
section 936(a)(2)?
    A. 8: While taxable to the parent possessions corporation, the 
intangible property income does not enter into the calculation of the 
80-percent possession source test or the 65-percent active trade or 
business test of section 936(a)(2)(A) and (B). This would also be the 
case if the subsidiary possessions corporation made a qualifying 
distribution under section 936(h)(4).

    (b) Separate election for export sales.

    Q. 1: What methods of computing income can a possessions corporation 
use under the separate election for export sales?
    A. 1: The only two methods which are available under the separate 
election for export sales are the cost sharing method and the profit 
split method.
    Q. 2: What is the definition of export sales for purposes of the 
separate election for export sales?
    A. 2: The determination of export sales is based upon the 
destination of the product, i.e., where it is to be used or consumed. If 
the product is sold to a U.S. affiliate, it will be treated as an export 
sale only if resold or otherwise transferred abroad to a foreign person 
(including a foreign affiliate or foreign branch of a U.S. affiliate) 
within one year from the date of sale to the U.S. affiliate for ultimate 
use or consumption outside the United States as provided under 
Sec. 1.954-3(a)(3)(ii).
    Q. 3: Assume that a possessions corporation sells a product to both 
foreign affiliates and foreign branches of U.S. affiliates. In addition, 
it sells the product to its U.S. parent for resale in the U.S. The 
possessions corporation makes a profit split election for domestic sales 
and a cost sharing election of export sales. Will the sales to foreign 
branches of U.S. affiliates be treated as exports subject to the cost 
sharing method or as domestic sales subject to the profit split method?
    A. 3: The sales to a foreign branch of a U.S. corporation are 
exports if for ultimate use or consumption outside of the United States 
as provided under Sec. 1.954-3(a)(3)(ii).
    Q. 4: Under what circumstances may a possessions corporation make 
the separate election under section 936(h)(5)(F)(iv)(II) for computing 
its income from products exported to a foreign person when the income 
derived by such foreign person on the resale of such products is 
included in foreign base company income under section 954(a)?
    A. 4: If the income derived by a foreign person on the resale of 
products manufactured, in whole or in part, by a possessions corporation 
is included in foreign base company income under section 954(a), then 
the possessions corporation may make the separate export election under 
section 936(h)(5)(F)(iv)(II) for computing its income from such products 
only if such foreign person has been formed or is availed of for 
substantial business reasons that are unrelated to an affiliated 
corporation's U.S. tax liability. For purposes of the proceding 
sentence, a

[[Page 182]]

foreign person will be considered to be formed or availed of for such 
substantial business reasons if the foreign person in the normal course 
of business purchases substantial quantities of products from both the 
possessions corporation and its affiliates for resale, and, in addition 
provides support services for affiliated companies such as centralized 
testing, marketing of products, management of local currency exposures, 
or other similar services. However, a foreign person that purchases and 
resells products only from a possessions corporation is presumed to be 
formed or availed of for other than such substantial business reasons, 
even if the foreign person provides additional services.
    Q. 5: When will the ``manufacturing'' test set forth in subsection 
(d)(1)(A) of section 954 be applicable to the export sales of a product 
of a possessions corporation which makes a separate election for export 
sales?
    A. 5: An electing corporation will be required to meet the 
``manufacturing'' test set forth in subsection (d)(1)(A) of section 954 
with respect to export sales of its product in each taxable year in 
which the separate election for export sales is in effect.

    (c) Revocation of election under section 936(a).

    Q. 1: When may an election under section 936(a) be revoked?
    A. 1: An election under section 936(a) may be revoked during the 
first ten years of section 936 status only with the consent of the 
Commissioner, and without the Commissioner's consent after that time. 
The Commissioner hereby consents to all requests for revocation that are 
made with respect to the taxapayer's first taxable year beginning after 
December 31, 1982 provided that the section 936(a) election was in 
effect for the corporation's last taxable year beginning before January 
1, 1983, if the taxpayer agrees not to re-elect section 936(a) prior to 
its first taxable year beginning after December 31, 1988. A taxpayer 
that wishes to revoke a section 936(a) election under the terms of the 
blanket revocation must attach a ``Statement of Revocation--Section 
936'' to the taxpayer's timely filed return (including extensions) and 
must state that in revoking the election the taxpayer agrees not to re-
elect section 936(a) prior to its first taxable year beginning after 
December 31, 1988. Other requests to revoke not covered by the 
Commissioner's blanket consent should be addressed to the District 
Director having jurisdiction over the taxpayer's tax return.

[T.D. 8090, 51 FR 21545, June 13, 1986]
Sec. 1.936-8T  Qualified possession source investment income 
(temporary). [Reserved]
Sec. 1.936-9T  Source of qualified possession source investment income 
(temporary). [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 1.936-10  Qualified investments.

    (a) In general. [Reserved]
    (b) Qualified investments in Puerto Rico. [Reserved]
    (c) Qualified investment in certain Caribbean Basin countries--(1) 
General rule. An investment of qualified funds described in this section 
shall be treated as a qualified investment of funds for use in Puerto 
Rico if the funds are used for a qualified investment in a qualified 
Caribbean Basin country. A qualified investment in a qualified Caribbean 
Basin country is a loan of qualified funds by a qualified financial 
institution (described in paragraph (c)(3) of this section) directly to 
a qualified recipient (described in paragraph (c)(9) of this section) or 
indirectly through a single financial intermediary for investment in 
active busines assets (as defined in paragraph (c)(4) of this section) 
in a qualified Caribbean Basin country (described in paragraph 
(c)(10)(ii) of this section) or for investment in development projects 
(as defined in paragraph (c)(5) of this section) in a qualified 
Caribbean Basin country, provided--
    (i) The investment is authorized, prior to disbursement of the 
funds, by the Commissioner of Financial Institutions of Puerto Rico (or 
his delegate) pursuant to regulations issued by such Commissioner; and
    (ii) The agreement, certification, and due diligency requirements 
under paragraphs (c)(11), (12), and (13) of this section are met.

A loan by a qualified financial institution shall not be disqualified 
merely

[[Page 183]]

because the loan transaction is processed by the central bank of issue 
of the country into which the loan is made pursuant to, and solely for 
purposes of complying with, the exchange control laws or regulations of 
such country. Further, a loan by a qualified financial institution shall 
not be disqualified merely because the loan is acquired by another 
person, provided such other person is also a qualified financial 
institution.
    (2) Termination of qualification--(i) In general. An investment 
that, at any time after having met the requirements for a qualified 
investment in a qualified Caribbean Basin country under the terms of 
this paragraph (c), fails to meet any of the conditions enumerated in 
this paragraph (c) shall no longer be considered a qualified investment 
in a qualified Caribbean Basin country from the time of such failure, 
unless the investment satisfies the requirements for a timely cure 
described in paragraph (c)(2)(ii) of this section. Such a failure 
includes, but is not limited to, the occurrence of any of the following 
events:
    (A) Active business assets cease to qualify as such;
    (B) Proceeds from the investment are diverted for the financing of 
assets, projects, or operations that are not active business assets or 
development projects or are not the assests or the project of the 
qualified recipient;
    (C) The holder of the qualified recipient's obligation is not a 
qualified financial institution;
    (D) The qualified recipient's qualified business activity ceases to 
qualify as such; or
    (E) The qualified Caribbean Basin country ceases to be a country 
described in paragraph (c)(10)(ii) of this section.
    (ii) Timely cure--(A) In general. A timely cure shall be considered 
to have been made if the event or events that cause disqualification of 
the investment are corrected within a reasonable period of time. For 
purposes of this section, a reasonable period of time shall not exceed 
60 days after such event or events come to the attention of the 
qualified recipient or the qualified financial institution or should 
have some to their attention by the exercise of reasonable diligence.
    (B) Due diligence requirements. A time cure of a failure to comply 
with the due diligence requirements of paragraphs (c)(11), (12), and 
(13) of this section shall be considered to be made if the failure to 
comply is due to reasonable cause and, upon request of the Commissioner 
of Financial Institutions of Puerto Rico (or his delegate) or of the 
Assistant Commissioner (International) (or his authorized 
representative), the qualified financial institution (and its trustee or 
agent), if any), the financial intermediary, or the qualified recipient 
establishes to the satisfaction of the Commissioner of Financial 
Institutions of Puerto Rico (or his delegate) or of the Assistant 
Commissioner (International) (or his authorized representative) that it 
has exercised due diligence in ensuring that the funds were property 
disbursed to a qualified recipient and applied by or on behalf of such 
qualified recipient to uses that qualify the investment as an investment 
in qualified business assets or a development project under the 
provisions of this paragraph (c).
    (iii) Assumption of qualified recipient's obligation. An investment 
shall not cease to qualify merely because the qualified recipient's 
obligation to the qualified financial institution (or to a financial 
intermediary, if any) is assumed by another person, provided such other 
person assumes the qualified recipient's agreement and certification 
requirements under paragraph (c)(11)(i) of this section and is either--
    (A) A qualified recipient on the date of assumption, in which case 
such person shall be treated for purposes of this section as the 
original qualified recipient and shall be subject to all the 
requirements of this section for continued qualification of the loan as 
a qualified investment in a qualified Caribbean Basin country; or
    (B) An international organization, the principal purpose of which is 
to foster economic development in developing countries and which is 
described in section 1 of the International Organizations Immunities Act 
(22 U.S.C. 288), if the assumption of the obligation is pursuant to a 
bona fide guarantee agreement.

[[Page 184]]

    (3) Qualified financial institution--(i) General rule. For purposes 
of section 936(d)(4)(A) and this section, a qualified financial 
institution includes only--
    (A) A banking, financing, or similar business defined in Sec. 1.864-
4(c)(5)(i) that is an eligible institution described in paragraph 
(c)(3)(ii) of this section, but not including branches of such 
institution outside of Puerto Rico;
    (B) A single-purpose entity described in paragraph (c)(3)(iii) of 
this section;
    (C) The Government Development Bank for Puerto Rico;
    (D) The Puerto Rico Economic Development Bank; and
    (E) Such other entity as may be determined by the Commissioner by 
Revenue Procedure or other guidance published in the Internal Revenue 
Bulletin.
    (ii) Eligible institution. An eligible institution means an 
institution--
    (A) That is an entity organized under the laws of the Commonwealth 
of Puerto Rico or is the Puerto Rican branch of an entity organized 
under the laws of another jurisdiction, if such entity is engaged in a 
banking, financing, or similar business defined in Sec. 1.864-
4(c)(5)(i), and
    (B) That is licensed as an eligible institution under Regulation No. 
3582 (or any successor regulation) issued by the Commissioner of 
Financial Institutions of Puerto Rico (hereinafter ``Puerto Rican 
Regulation No. 3582'').
    (iii) Single-purpose entity. A single-purpose entity is an entity 
that meets all of the following conditions:
    (A) The entity is organized under the laws of the Commonwealth of 
Puerto Rico and is a corporation, a partnership or a trust, which 
conducts substantially all of its activities in Puerto Rico.
    (B) The sole purpose of the entity is to use qualified funds from 
possessions corporations to make one or more qualified investments in a 
qualified Caribbean Basin country and the entity actually uses such 
funds only for such purpose.
    (C) In the case of an entity that is a trust, one of the trustees is 
a qualified financial institution described in paragraph (c)(3)(i) of 
this section.
    (D) The entity is licensed as an eligible institution under Puerto 
Rican Regulation No. 3582 (or any successor regulation).
    (E) Any temporary investment by the entity for its own account of 
funds received from a possessions corporation, and the income from the 
investment thereof, and any temporary investment by the entity for its 
own account of principal and interest paid by a borrower to the entity, 
and the income from the investment thereof, are limited to investments 
in eligible activities, as described in section 6.2.4 of Puerto Rican 
Regulation No. 3582, as in effect on September 22, 1989.
    (4) Investments in active business assets--(i) In general. For 
purposes of section 936(d)(4)(A)(i)(I) and this section and subject to 
the provisions of paragraph (c)(8) of this section, a loan qualifies as 
an investment in active business assets if--
    (A) The amounts disbursed to a qualified recipient under the loan or 
bond issue are promptly applied (as defined in paragraphs (c)(6) and (7) 
of this section) by (or on behalf of) the qualified recipient solely for 
capital expenditures for the construction, rehabilitation (including 
demolition associated therewith), improvement, or upgrading of qualified 
assets described in paragraphs (c)(4)(ii)(A), (B), (E), and (F) of this 
section, for the acquisition of qualified assets described in paragraphs 
(c)(4)(ii)(B), (C), (E), and (F) of this section, for the expenditures 
described in paragraphs (c)(4)(ii)(D), (E), and (F) of this section, 
and, if applicable, for the financing of incidental expenditures 
described in paragraph (c)(4)(iii) of this section;
    (B) The qualified recipient owns the assets for United States income 
tax purposes and uses them in a qualified business activity (as defined 
in paragraph (c)(4)(iv)); and
    (C) The requirements of paragraph (c)(6) of this section (regarding 
temporary investments and time periods within which the funds must be 
invested) and of paragraph (c)(7) of this section (regarding the 
refinancing of existing funding and the time periods within which 
funding for investments must be secured) are satisfied.
    (ii) Definition of qualified assets. For purposes of this paragraph 
(c), qualified assets mean--

[[Page 185]]

    (A) Real property;
    (B) Tangible personal property (such as furniture, machinery, or 
equipment) that is not property described in section 1221(1) and that is 
either new property or property which at no time during the period 
specified in paragraph (c)(4)(v) of this section was used in a business 
activity in the qualified Caribbean Basin country in which the property 
is to be used;
    (C) Rights to intangible property that is a patent, invention, 
formula, process, design, pattern, know-how, or similar item, or rights 
under a franchise agreement, provided that such rights--
    (1) Were not at any time during the period specified in paragraph 
(c)(4)(v) of this section used in a business activity in the qualified 
Caribbean Basin country in which the rights are to be used,
    (2) Are not rights the use of which gives rise, or would give rise 
if used, to United States source income, and
    (3) Are not rights acquired by the qualified recipient from a person 
related (within the meaning of section 267(b), using ``10 percent'' 
instead of ``50 percent'' in the places where it appears) to the 
qualified recipient;
    (D) Exploration and development expenditures incurred by a qualified 
recipient for the purpose of ascertaining the existence, location, 
extent or quality of any deposit of ore, oil, gas, or other mineral in a 
qualified Caribbean Basin country, as well as for purposes of developing 
such deposit (within the meaning of section 616 of the Code and the 
regulations thereunder);
    (E) Living plants and animals (other than crops, plants, and animals 
that are acquired primarily to hold as inventory by the qualified 
recipient for resale in the ordinary course of trade or business) 
acquired in connection with a farming business (as defined in 
Sec. 1.263-1T(c)(4)(i)), expenditures of a preparatory nature to prepare 
the land or area for farming (such as planting trees, drilling wells, 
clearing brush, leveling land, laying pipes, building roads, 
constructing tanks and reservoirs), expenditures for soil and water 
conservation of a type described in section 175(c)(1), and expenditures 
of a development nature incurred in connection with, and during, the 
preproductive period of property produced in a farming business (as 
defined in Sec. 1.263-1T(c)(4)(ii));
    (F) Other assets or expenditures that are not described in 
paragraphs (c)(4)(ii)(A) through (E) of this section and that the 
Commissioner may, by Revenue Procedure or other guidance published in 
the Internal Revenue Bulletin or by ruling issued to a qualified 
financial institution or qualified recipient upon its request, determine 
to be qualified assets.
    (iii) Incidental expenditures. An amount in addition to the loan 
proceeds borrowed to make an investment in active business assets shall 
be considered an investment in active business assets if such amount is 
applied to finance expenditures that are incidental to making the 
investment in active business assets, provided such amount is disbursed 
at or about the same time the proceeds for making the investment in 
active business assets are disbursed. For purposes of this section, 
expenditures incidental to an investment in active business assets 
include only the following items:
    (A) A reasonable amount of costs (other than the cost of credit 
enhancement or bond insurance premiums) associated with arranging the 
financing of an investment in active business assets, not to exceed 3.5 
percent of the proceeds of the loan or bond issue.
    (B) A reasonable amount of installation costs and other reasonable 
costs associated with placing an active business asset in service in the 
qualified business activity.
    (C) An amount not in excess of 10 percent of the total amount of 
investment in qualified assets to finance the acquisition of inventory, 
and other working capital requirements, but if an investment is in 
connection with a manufacturing or farming business, the percentage 
limitation shall be 50 percent rather than 10 percent provided the 
excess over the 10 percent limitation is used to finance inventory 
property. For purposes of this paragraph (c), whether a business is a 
manufacturing business shall be determined under principles similar to 
those described in section 954(d)(1)(A) and the regulations thereunder; 
whether a business is a farming

[[Page 186]]

business shall be determined under Sec. 1.263-1T(c)(4)(i).
    (D) An amount not in excess of 5 percent of the sum of the 
investment in active business assets and the costs described in 
paragraphs (c)(4)(iii)(A), (B), and (C) of this section for the 
refinancing of an existing debt of the qualified recipient if such 
refinancing is incidental to an investment in active business assets. 
For this purpose, the replacement of an existing loan arrangement shall 
not be considered the refinancing of an existing indebtedness to the 
extent that the funds under such loan arrangement have not yet been 
disbursed to the qualified recipient.
    (iv) Qualified business activity. A qualified business activity is a 
lawful industrial or commercial activity that is conducted as an active 
trade or business (under principles similar to those described in 
Sec. 1.367(a)-2T(b) (2) and (3)) in a qualified Caribbean Basin country. 
A trade or business for purposes of this paragraph (c)(4)(iv) is any 
business activity meeting the principles of section 367 of the Code and 
described in Divisions A through I (excluding group 43 in Division E 
(relating to the United States Postal Service) and groups 84 (relating 
to museums, art galleries, and botanical and zoological gardens), 86 
(relating to membership organizations), and 88 (relating to private 
households in Division I) of the 1987 Standard Industrial Classification 
Manual issued by the Executive Office of the President, Office of 
Management and Budget, or in the comparable provisions of any successor 
Standard Industrial Classification Manual that is adopted by the 
Commissioner of Internal Revenue in a notice, regulation, or other 
document published in the Internal Revenue Cumulative Bulletin.
    (v) Period of use. The period referred to in paragraphs 
(c)(4)(ii)(B) and (C) of this section shall be a five year period 
preceding the date of acquisition with the loan proceeds, if the date of 
acquisition is on or before May 13, 1991. If the date of acquisition is 
after May 13, 1991, then the period specified in this paragraph 
(c)(4)(v) shall be three years preceding the date of acquisition with 
the loan proceeds.
    (5) Investments in development projects--(i) In general. Subject to 
the provisions of paragraph (c)(8) of this section, this paragraph 
(c)(5)(i) describes the requirements in order for a loan by a qualified 
financial institution to qualify as an investment in a development 
project for purposes of section 936(d)(4)(A)(i)(II) and for this 
section.
    (A) The amounts disbursed under the loan or bond issue must be 
promptly applied (as defined in paragraphs (c)(6) and (7) of this 
section) by (or on behalf of) the qualified recipient solely for one or 
more investments described in paragraph (c)(4)(i)(A) of this section and 
in any land, buildings, or other property functionally related and 
subordinate to a facility described in paragraph (c)(5)(ii) of this 
section (determined under principles similar to those described in 
Sec. 1.103-8(a)(3)), for use (under principles similar to those 
described in Sec. 1.367(a)-2T(b)(5)) in connection with one or more 
activities described in paragraph (c)(5)(i)(B) of this section.
    (B) The activities referred to in paragraph (c)(5)(i)(A) of this 
section are--
    (1) A development project described in paragraph (c)(5)(ii) of this 
section in a qualified Caribbean Basin country; or
    (2) The performance in a qualified Caribbean Basin country of a non-
commercial governmental function described in paragraph (c)(5)(iv) of 
this section;
    (C) The qualified recipient must own the assets for United States 
income tax purposes;
    (D) The requirements of paragraph (c)(6) of this section (regarding 
temporary investments and time periods within which the funds must be 
invested) and of paragraph (c)(7) of this section (regarding the 
refinancing of existing funding and time periods within which funding 
for investments must be secured) must be satisfied.
    (ii) Development project. For purposes of this paragraph (c), a 
development project is one or more facilities in a qualified Caribbean 
Basin country that support economic development in that country and that 
satisfy the public use requirement of paragraph (c)(5)(iii) of this 
section. Examples of facilities that may meet the public use requirement 
include, but are not limited to--

[[Page 187]]

    (A) Transportation systems and equipment, including sea, surface, 
and air, such as roads, railways, air terminals, runways, harbor 
facilities, and ships and aircraft;
    (B) Communications facilities;
    (C) Training and education facilities related to qualified business 
activities;
    (D) Industrial parks, including necessary support facilities such as 
roads; transmission lines for water, gas, electricity, and sewage; 
docks; plant sites preparations; power generation; sewage disposal; and 
water treatment;
    (E) Sports facilities;
    (F) Convention or trade show facilities;
    (G) Sewage, solid waste, water, and electric facilities;
    (H) Housing projects pursuant to a government program designed to 
provide affordable housing to low or moderate income families, based 
upon local standards; and
    (I) Hydroelectric generating facilities.
    (iii) Public use requirement. To satisfy the public use requirement 
in paragraph (c)(5)(ii) of this section, a facility must serve or be 
available on a regular basis for general public use, as contrasted with 
similar types of facilities which are constructed for the exclusive use 
of a limited number of persons as determined under principles similar to 
those described in Sec. 1.103-8(a)(2).
    (iv) Non-commercial governmental functions. For purposes of 
paragraph (c)(5)(i)(B) of this section, the term ``non-commercial 
governmental functions'' refers to activities that, under U.S. 
standards, are not customarily attributable to or carried on by private 
enterprises for profit and are performed for the general public with 
respect to the common welfare or which relate to the administration of 
some phase of government. For example, the operation of libraries, toll 
bridges, or local transportation services, and activities substantially 
equivalent to those carried out by the Federal Aviation Authority, 
Interstate Commerce Commission, or United States Postal Service, are 
considered non-commercial governmental functions. For purposes of this 
section, non-commercial government functions shall not include military 
activities.
    (v) [Reserved]
    (6) Prompt application of borrowed proceeds. This paragraph (c)(6) 
provides rules for determining whether amounts disbursed to a qualified 
recipient by a qualified financial institution (or a financial 
intermediary) shall be considered to have been promptly applied for the 
purpose of paragraphs (c)(4)(i)(A) and (c)(5)(i)(A) of this section.
    (i) In general. Except as otherwise provided in paragraphs 
(c)(6)(ii) and (c)(7)(iii)(B) of this section, amounts disbursed to a 
qualified recipient by a qualified financial institution (or a financial 
intermediary) shall be considered to have been promptly applied for the 
purpose of paragraphs (c)(4)(i)(A) and (c)(5)(i)(A) of this section if 
the amounts are fully expended for any of the purposes described in 
paragraphs (c)(4)(i)(A) or (c)(5)(i)(A) of this section no later than 
six months from the date of such disbursement and any temporary 
investment of such funds by the qualified recipient during such period 
complies with the rules of paragraph (c)(6)(iii)(A) of this section. 
Where the amounts disbursed are bond proceeds described in paragraph 
(c)(6)(iv)(A) of this section, the six-month period shall begin on the 
date of issuance of the bonds. In the event the qualified financial 
institution (or financial intermediary) invests any part of the bond 
proceeds before disbursement of those proceeds to the qualified 
recipient, all earnings from any such investment shall be paid to the 
qualified recipient or applied for its benefit.
    (ii) Special rules for long term projects financed out of bond 
proceeds. In the case of a long term project described in paragraph 
(c)(6)(iv)(B) of this section that is financed out of bond proceeds, the 
six-month period described in paragraph (c)(6)(i) of this section shall 
be extended with respect to the amount of bond proceeds used to fund the 
project for such reasonable period of time as shall be necessary until 
completion of the project or until beginning of production (in the case 
of a farming business), but, in any event, not to exceed three years 
from the date of issuance of the bonds, and only if--
    (A) The project that is financed out of bond proceeds was identified 
as of the date of issue;

[[Page 188]]

    (B) A construction and expenditure plan certified by an independent 
expert (such as an engineer, an architect, or a farming expert) is filed 
with, and approved by, the Commissioner of Financial Institutions of 
Puerto Rico (or his delegate) prior to the date of issue, which makes a 
reasonable estimate, as of the date of filing of the plan, of the 
amounts and uses of the bond proceeds and the time of completion or 
production, and includes a schedule of progress payments until such 
time;
    (C) The terms of the construction and expenditure plan are disclosed 
in the public offering memorandum, private placement memorandum, or 
similar document prepared for information or disclosure purposes in 
relation to the issuance of bonds; and
    (D) Any temporary investment of the bond proceeds complies with the 
rules of paragraph (c)(6)(iii)(A) and (B) of this section.
    (iii) Temporary investments--(A) During six-month period. During the 
six-month period described in paragraph (c)(6)(i) of this section, 
during the first six months of the period described in paragraph 
(c)(6)(ii) of this section, and during the 30-day period described in 
paragraph (c)(7)(iii)(A) of this section, loan proceeds disbursed to a 
qualified recipient, bond proceeds, and income from the investment 
thereof, may be held in unrestricted yield investments, provided such 
yield reflects normal market yield for such type of investments and 
provided the income from such investments, if any, is or would be 
sourced either in Puerto Rico or in a country in which the investment in 
active business assets or development project is to be made.
    (B) During other periods. During any other period, any temporary 
investment of bond proceeds, and of income from such investments, shall 
be limited to investments in eligible activities. For purposes of this 
paragraph (c)(6)(iii)(B), the term ``eligible activities'' shall mean 
those investments described in section 6.2.4 of Puerto Rican Regulation 
No. 3582, as in effect on September 22, 1989.
    (iv) Definitions--(A) Bond proceeds. For purposes of this paragraph 
(c), bond proceeds shall mean the proceeds from the issuance of 
obligations by way of a public offering or a private placement by a 
qualified financial institution for investment in active business assets 
or a development project that has been identified at the time of issue 
and is described in a public offering memorandum, private placement 
memorandum, or similar document prepared for information or disclosure 
purposes in relation to the issuance of the bonds.
    (B) Long term project. For purposes of this section, the term long 
term project means--
    (1) A project, whether or not under a contract, for the 
construction, rehabilitation, improvement, upgrading, or production of 
qualified assets, or for expenditures, described in paragraph (c)(4)(ii) 
of this section (other than paragraph (c)(4)(ii)(C) of this section), 
which is reasonably expected to require more than 12 months to complete; 
or
    (2) The production of property in a farming business referred to in 
paragraph (c)(4)(ii)(E) of this section, which is reasonably expected to 
require a preproductive period in excess of 12 months.
    (7) Financing of previously incurred costs. Loan or bond proceeds 
which are disbursed after a qualified recipient has paid or incurred 
part or all of the costs of acquiring active business assets or 
investing in a development project shall be considered to have been 
applied for such purposes only as provided in this paragraph (c)(7).
    (i) Replacement of temporary non-section 936 financing of a 
qualified investment. This paragraph (c)(7)(i) prescribes the maximum 
time limits within which temporary non-section 936 financing of 
qualified investments may be replaced with section 936 funds without 
being considered a prohibited refinancing transaction. This paragraph 
(c)(7)(i) applies to the refinancing of costs incurred with respect to 
investments that, at the time the costs were first incurred, were either 
qualified investments in a qualified Caribbean Basin country or were 
investments by a qualified recipient in active business assets or a 
development project in a qualified Caribbean Basin country. This 
paragraph (c)(7)(i) applies also to the refinancing of costs incurred 
with

[[Page 189]]

respect to any other investment. However, in the latter case, the amount 
of costs that may be refinanced with section 936 funds is limited to the 
amount of costs that are incurred with respect to the investment after 
the investment becomes a qualified investment in a qualified Caribbean 
Basin country. For purposes of this paragraph (c)(7)(i), the time when 
costs are incurred shall be determined under principles similar to those 
applicable under section 461(h) dealing with the economic performance 
test for the accrual of deductible liabilities. This paragraph (c)(7)(i) 
applies only to the situations described in this paragraph (c)(7)(i).
    (A) In the case of an investment in active business assets or a 
development project, a loan shall be a qualified investment for purposes 
of this paragraph (c) if the loan proceeds are disbursed, or the 
obligations are issued, no later than six months after the date on which 
the qualified recipient takes possession of the asset or the facility 
or, if earlier, places the asset or the facility in service. However, in 
the case of a small project described in paragraph (c)(8)(v) of this 
section, the six-month period shall be one year.
    (B) In the case of an investment in active business assets or a 
development project that is part of a long term project described in 
paragraph (c)(6)(iv)(B) of this section, a loan shall also be a 
qualified investment for purposes of this paragraph (c) if the loan 
proceeds are disbursed, or the obligations are issued, no later than six 
months after completion of the project or, in the case of a farming 
business, after the beginning of production, and in any event, no later 
than three years after the date on which the first payment is made 
toward the eligible costs of the project. The amount of the qualified 
investment may not exceed the sum of--
    (1) The eligible costs relating to investments described in 
paragraph (c)(4)(i)(A) in the case of an investment in active business 
assets, or the eligible costs relating to investments described in 
paragraph (c)(5)(i) of this section in the case of a development 
project, but only to the extent of the costs that are incurred after the 
date described in paragraph (c)(7)(i)(D) of this section, and
    (2) The portion of unpaid interest that would be required to be 
capitalized under U.S. tax rules and that accrued on prior temporary 
non-section 936 financing from the date described in paragraph 
(c)(7)(i)(D) of this section through the date the section 936 loan 
proceeds are disbursed or the section 936 obligations are issued.
    (C) In order to qualify for the special rules of this paragraph 
(c)(7)(i), a plan must be filed with the Commissioner of Financial 
Institutions of Puerto Rico (or his delegate) stating the qualified 
recipient's intention to refinance the costs of the long term project 
with section funds.
    (D) The date referred to in paragraph (c)(7)(i)(B) (1) and (2) of 
this section is a date that is the later of--
    (1) The date the plan described in paragraph (c)(7)(i)(C) is filed, 
or
    (2) The date the investment becomes a qualified investment by a 
qualified recipient in active business assets or a development project 
in a qualified Caribbean Basin country.
    (ii) Refinancing of section 936 financing. A section 936 loan or 
bond issue used to finance a qualified investment described in paragraph 
(c)(1) of this section may be refinanced with section 936 funds through 
a new loan or bond issue to the extent of the remaining principal 
balance on such existing qualified financing, increased by the amount of 
unpaid interest accrued through the date the new loan proceeds are 
disbursed or the new obligations are issued and that would be required 
to be capitalized under U.S. tax rules.
    (iii) Prompt application of borrowed proceeds--(A) In general. In 
the case of a loan or bond issue described in paragraph (c)(7)(i) or 
(ii) of this section, the rules of paragraph (c)(6) of this section 
shall apply but the six-month period described in paragraph (c)(6)(i) of 
this section shall be limited to 30 days from the date of disbursement 
of loan proceeds to the qualified recipient or from the date of issuance 
in the case of a bond issue.
    (B) Special rules for long term projects financed out of bond 
proceeds. In the case of a long term project described in paragraph 
(c)(6)(iv)(B) of this section

[[Page 190]]

that is financed out of bond proceeds, the 30-day period described in 
paragraph (c)(7)(iii)(A) of this section shall be extended with respect 
to the amount of bond proceeds used for the permanent financing of the 
long term project for such reasonable period of time as shall be 
necessary until completion of the project or beginning of production (in 
the case of a farming business), but, in any event, not to exceed three 
years from the date of issuance of the bonds. For purposes of this 
paragraph (c)(7)(iii)(B), the period of time shall be considered 
reasonable only if--
    (1) A construction and expenditure plan certified by an independent 
expert (such as an engineer, an architect, or a farming expert) is filed 
with, and approved by, the Commissioner of Financial Institutions of 
Puerto Rico (or his delegate) prior to the date of issue, which makes a 
reasonable estimate, as of the date of issue, of the amounts and uses of 
the bond proceeds and the time of completion or production, and includes 
a schedule of progress payments until such time; and
    (2) The terms of the construction and expenditure plan are disclosed 
in the public offering memorandum, private placement memorandum, or 
similar document prepared for information or disclosure purposes in 
relation to the bond issue.
    (8) Miscellaneous operating rules--(i) Sale and leaseback. An asset 
that is acquired and leased back to the person from whom acquired does 
not constitute an investment in an active business asset or an 
investment in a development project.
    (ii) Use of asset in qualified business activity. For purposes of 
paragraph (c)(4)(i)(B), an asset shall be considered used or held for 
use in a qualified business activity if it is used or held for use in 
such activity under principles similar to those described in 
Sec. 1.367(a)-2T(b)(5), or a successor provision.
    (iii) Definition of capital expenditures. For purposes of this 
paragraph (c), capital expenditures mean those expenditures described in 
section 263(a) of the Code (without regard to paragraphs (A) through (G) 
of section 263(a)(1)), and those costs required to be capitalized under 
section 263A with respect to property described in section 263A(b)(1), 
relating to self-constructed assets.
    (iv) Loans through certain financial intermediaries. A loan by a 
qualified financial institution shall not be disqualified from being an 
investment in active business assets or in a development project merely 
because the proceeds are first lent to a financial intermediary (as 
defined in paragraph (c)(8)(iv)(H) of this section) which, in turn, on-
lends the proceeds directly to a qualified recipient, provided the 
requirements of this paragraph (c)(8)(iv) are satisfied.
    (A) The loan to the qualified recipient must satisfy the 
requirements of paragraph (c)(4)(i) of this section in the case of an 
investment in active business assets, or of paragraph (c)(5)(i) of this 
section in the case of an investment in a development project.
    (B) The qualified recipient and the active business assets or 
development project in which the proceeds are to be invested must be 
identified prior to disbursement of any part of the proceeds by the 
qualified financial institution to the financial intermediary.
    (C) The effective interest rate charged by the qualified financial 
institution to the financial intermediary must not exceed the average 
interest rate paid by the qualified financial institution with respect 
to its eligible funds, increased by such number of basis points as is 
required to provide reasonable compensation to the qualified financial 
institution for services performed and risks assumed with respect to the 
loan to the financial intermediary that are not ordinarily required to 
be performed or assumed with respect to a deposit, loan, repurchase 
agreement or other transfer of eligible funds with another qualified 
financial institution. The average interest rate shall be the average 
rate, determined on a daily basis, paid by the qualified financial 
institution on its eligible funds over the most recent quarter preceding 
the date on which the rate on the loan to the financial intermediary is 
committed.
    (D) The effective interest rate charged by the financial 
intermediary to the qualified recipient must not exceed the effective 
interest rate charged to the financial intermediary by the

[[Page 191]]

qualified financial institution, increased by such number of basis 
points as is required to provide reasonable compensation to the 
financial intermediary for services performed and risks assumed with 
respect to the loan to the qualified recipient.
    (E) The financial intermediary must borrow from the qualified 
financial institution under substantially the same terms as it lends to 
the qualified recipient. In particular, both loans must have 
disbursement terms, repayment schedules and maturity dates for interest 
and principal amounts such that the financial intermediary does not 
retain for more than 48 hours any of the funds disbursed by the 
qualified financial institution nor any of the funds paid by the 
qualified recipient in repayment of principal or interest on the loan.
    (F) The financial institution and the financial intermediary must 
agree to comply with the due diligence requirements described in 
paragraphs (c)(11), (12), and (13) of this section;
    (G) The time periods and temporary investments rules in paragraphs 
(c)(6) and (7) of this section must be complied with; and
    (H) For purposes of this paragraph (c), the financial intermediary 
must be--
    (1) An active trade or business which a person maintains in a 
qualified Caribbean Basin country and which consists of a banking, 
financing or similar business as defined in Sec. 1.864-4(c)(5)(i) (other 
than a central bank of issue); or
    (2) A public international organization, the principal purpose of 
which is to foster economic development in developing countries and 
which is described in section 1 of the International Organizations 
Immunities Act (22 U.S.C. 288).

For purposes of paragraphs (c)(8)(iv)(C) and (D) of this section, the 
determination of whether compensation is reasonable shall be made in 
relation to normal commercial practices for comparable transactions 
carrying a similar degree of commercial, currency and political risk. 
Reasonable credit enhancement fees and other reasonable fees and amounts 
charged to the financial intermediary or the qualified recipient with 
respect to the loan transaction in addition to interest shall be added 
to the interest cost in determining the effective interest rate.
    (v) Small project. For purposes of this paragraph (c), a small 
project shall be a project (including the acquisition of an asset) for 
which the total amount of section 936 funds used for its financing does 
not exceed $1,000,000 in the aggregate, or such other amount as the 
Commissioner may publish, from time to time, in the Internal Revenue 
Bulletin.
    (9) Qualified recipient. For purposes of this section, a qualified 
recipient is any person described in paragraph (c)(9)(i) or (ii) of this 
section. The term ``person'' means a person described in section 
7701(a)(1) or a government (within the meaning of Sec. 1.892-2T(a)(1)) 
of a qualified Caribbean Basin country.
    (i) In the case of an investment described in paragraph (c)(4) of 
this section (relating to investments in active business assets), a 
qualified recipient is a person that carries on a qualified business 
activity in a qualified Caribbean Basin country, and complies with the 
agreement and certification requirements described in paragraph 
(c)(11)(i) of this section at all times during the period in which the 
investment remains outstanding.
    (ii) In the case of an investment described in pargraph (c)(5) of 
this section (relating to investments in development projects), a 
qualified recipient is the borrower (including a person empowered by the 
borrower to authorize expenditures for the investment in the development 
project) that has authority to comply, and complies, with the agreement 
and certification requirements described in paragraph (c)(11)(i) of this 
section at all times during the period in which the investment remains 
outstanding.
    (10) Investments in a qualified Caribbean Basin country--(i) Rules 
for determining the place of an investment. The rules of this paragraph 
(c)(10)(i) shall apply to determine the extent to which an investment in 
an active business asset or a development project will be considered 
made in qualified Caribbean Basin Country.
    (A) An investment in real property is considered made in the 
qualified Caribbean Basin country in which the real property is located.

[[Page 192]]

    (B) Except as otherwise provided in this paragraph (c)(10)(i)(B), an 
investment in tangible personal property is considered made in a 
qualified Caribbean Basin Country so long as the tangible personal 
property is predominantly used in that country. Whether property is used 
predominantly in a qualified Caribbean Basin country shall be determined 
under principles similar to those described in Sec. 1.48-1(g)(1), 
(g)(2)(ii), (g)(2)(iv), (g)(2)(vi), (g)(2)(viii), and (g)(2)(x) 
(relating to investment tax credits for property used outside the United 
States) as in effect on December 31, 1985. A vessel, container, or 
aircraft shall be considered for use predominantly in a qualified 
Caribbean Basin country in any year if it is used for transport to and 
from such country with some degree of frequency during that year and at 
least 30 percent of the income from the use of such vessel, container or 
aircraft for that year is sourced in such country under principles 
similar to those described in section 863(c)(1) and (2) (relating to 
source rules for certain transportation income). Cables and pipelines 
which are premanently installed as part of a communication or 
transportation system between a qualified Caribbean Basin country and 
another country or among several countries which include a qualified 
Caribbean Basin country shall be considered used in a qualified 
Caribbean Basin country to the extent of 50 percent of the portion of 
the facility that directly links the qualified country to another 
country or to a hub, unless it is established by notice or other 
guidance published in the Internal Revenue Bulletin or by ruling issued 
to a qualified institution or qualified recipient upon request that it 
is appropriate to attribute a greater portion of the cost of the 
facility to the qualified Caribbean Basin country.
    (C) An investment in rights to intangible property is considered 
made in a qualified Caribbean Basin country to the extent such rights 
are used in that country. Where rights to intangible property are used 
shall be determined under principles similar to those described in 
Sec. 1.954-2T(b)(3)(vii) or a successor provision.
    (ii) Qualified Caribbean Basin country. For purposes of this 
section, the term ``qualified Caribbean Basin country'' means any 
beneficiary country (within the meaning of section 212(a)(1)(A) of the 
Caribbean Basin Economic Recovery Act, Public Law 98-67 (Aug. 5, 1983), 
97 Stat. 384, 19 U.S.C. 2702(a)(1)(A)), which meets the requirements of 
section 274(h)(6)(A)(i) and (ii) and the U.S. Virgin Islands, and 
includes the territorial waters and continental shelf thereof.
    (11) Agreements and certifications by qualified recipients and 
financial intermediaries--(i) In general. In order for an investment to 
be considered a qualified investment under section 936(d)(4) and 
paragraph (c)(1) of this section, a qualified recipient must certify to 
the qualified financial institution (or to the financial intermediary, 
if the loan is made through a financial intermediary) on the date of 
closing of the loan agreement and on each anniversary date thereof, that 
it is a qualified recipient described in paragraph (c)(9) of this 
section. In addition, the qualified recipient must agree in the loan 
agreement with the qualified financial institution (or with the 
financial intermediary, if the loan is made through a financial 
intermediary)--
    (A) To use the funds at all times during the period the loan is 
outstanding solely for the purposes and in the manner described in 
paragraph (c)(4) of this section (regarding investment in active 
business assets) or in paragraph (c)(5) of this section (regarding 
investment in development projects);
    (B) To comply with the requirements of paragraph (c)(6) of this 
section (regarding temporary investments and time periods within which 
the funds must be invested) and paragraph (c)(7) of this section 
(regarding the refinancing of existing funding and the time periods 
within which funding for investments must be secured);
    (C) To notify the Assistant Commissioner (International), the 
qualified financial institution (or the financial intermediary, if the 
loan is made through a financial intermediary), and the Commissioner of 
Financial Institutions of Puerto Rico (or his delegate) pursuant to 
paragraph (c)(14) of this section if it no longer is a qualified 
recipient or if, for any other reason, the investment has ceased to 
qualify as a

[[Page 193]]

qualified investment described in paragraph (c)(1) of this section, 
promptly upon the occurrence of such disqualifying event; and
    (D) To permit examination by the office of the Assistant 
Commissioner (International) (or by the office of any District Director 
authorized by the Assistant Commissioner (International)) and the 
Commissioner of Financial Institutions of Puerto Rico (or his delegate) 
of all necessary books and records that are sufficient to verify that 
the funds were used for investments in active business assets or 
development projects in conformity with the terms of the loan agreement.
    (ii) Certification by a financial intermediary. In the case of a 
loan by a qualified financial institution to a financial intermediary, 
the financial intermediary must certify to the qualified financial 
institution (using the procedures described in paragraph (c)(11)(i) of 
this section) that it is a financial intermediary described in paragraph 
(c)(8)(iv)(H) of this section, and must furnish to the qualified 
financial institution a copy of the qualified recipient's certification 
described in paragraph (c)(11)(i) of this section and of its loan 
agreement with the qualified recipient. In addition, the financial 
intermediary must agree in the loan agreement with the qualified 
financial institution:
    (A) To comply with the requirements of paragraph (c)(8)(iv) of this 
section; and
    (B) To permit examination by the office of the Assistant 
Commissioner (International) (or by the office of any District Director 
authorized by the Assistant Commissioner (International)) and the 
Commissioner of Financial Institutions of Puerto Rico (or his delegate) 
of all its necessary books and records that are sufficient to verify 
that the funds were used in conformity with the terms of the loan 
agreements.
    (12) Certification requirements. In order for an investment to be 
considered a qualified investment under section 936(d)(4), section 
936(d)(4)(C)(i) requires that both the person in whose trade or business 
such investment is made and the financial institution certify to the 
Secretary of the Treasury and the Commissioner of Financial Institutions 
of Puerto Rico that the proceeds of the loan will be promptly used to 
acquire active business assets or to make other authorized expenditures. 
This certification requirement is satisfied as to the qualified 
financial institution, the financial intermediary (if any), and the 
qualified recipient if the qualified financial institution submits a 
certificate to both the Assistant Commissioner (International) and to 
the Commissioner of Financial Institutions of Puerto Rico (or his 
delegate) pursuant to paragraph (c)(14) of this section upon 
authorization of the investment by the Commissioner of Financial 
Institutions and, in any event, prior to the first disbursement of the 
loan proceeds to the qualified recipient or to the financial 
intermediary (if any), in which the qualified financial institution--
    (i) Represents that, as of the date of the certification, the 
qualified recipient and the financial intermediary (if any) have 
complied with the requirements described in paragraph (c)(11) of this 
section;
    (ii) Describes the important terms of the loan to the financial 
intermediary (if any) and to the qualified recipient, including the 
amount of the loan, the nature of the investment, the basis for its 
qualification as an investment in active business assets or a 
development project under this section, the identity of the financial 
intermediary (if any) and of the qualified recipient, the qualified 
Caribbean Basin country involved, and the nature of the collateral or 
other security used, including any guarantee;
    (iii) Agrees to permit examination by the Assistant Commissioner 
(International) (or by the office of any District Director authorized by 
the Assistant Commissioner (International)) and the Commissioner of 
Financial Institutions of Puerto Rico (or his delegate) of all its 
necessary books and records that are sufficient to verify that the funds 
were used for investments in active business assets or development 
projects in conformity with the terms of the loan agreement or 
agreements with the financial intermediary (if any) and with the 
qualified recipient; and

[[Page 194]]

    (iv) In the case of a single-purpose entity that is a qualified 
financial institution, discloses the name and address of the entity's 
trustee or agent, if any, that assists the qualified financial 
institution in the performance of its due diligence requirement under 
paragraph (c) of this section, and represents that the trustee or agent 
has agreed with the qualified financial institution to permit 
examination by the Assistant Commissioner (International) (or by the 
office of any District Director authorized by the Assistant Commissioner 
(International)) and the Commissioner of Financial Institutions of 
Puerto Rico (or his delegate) of all necessary books and records of such 
trustee or agent that are sufficient to verify that the funds were used 
for investments in active business assets or development projects in 
conformity with the terms of the loan agreement or agreements with the 
financial intermediary (if any) and with the qualified recipient.
    (13) Continuing due diligence requirements. In order to maintain the 
qualification for an investment under paragraph (c)(1) of this section, 
the continuing due diligence requirements described in this paragraph 
(c)(13) must be satisfied.
    (i) Requirements of qualified recipient. A qualified recipient 
must--
    (A) Submit annually to the qualified financial institution or to the 
financial intermediary from which its qualified funds were obtained a 
copy of its most recent annual financial statement accompanied by an 
opinion of an independent accountant familiar with the financials of the 
qualified recipient disclosing the amount of the loan, the current 
outstanding balance of the loan, describing the assets financed with 
such loan and the qualified business activity in which such assets are 
used or the development project for which the loan is used, and stating 
that there are no reasons to doubt that the loan proceeds have been 
properly used and continue to be properly used, and
    (B) Act in a manner consistent with its representations and 
agreements described in paragraph (c)(11) of this section.
    (ii) Requirements of qualified financial institutions. Except as 
otherwise provided in paragraph (c)(13)(iii) of this section, a 
qualified financial institution described in paragraph (c)(3) of this 
section must maintain in its records and have available for inspection 
the documentation described in paragraph (c)(13)(ii)(A) or (B) of this 
section. In addition, the qualified financial institution is required to 
notify the Assistant Commissioner (International) and the Commissioner 
of Financial Institutions of Puerto Rico (or his delegate) pursuant to 
paragraph (c)(14) of this section upon becoming aware that a loan has 
ceased to be an investment in active business assets or a development 
project under this section. For purposes of this paragraph (c)(13)(ii), 
multiple loans for investment in a single qualified business activity or 
development project will be aggregated in determining what due diligence 
requirements apply.
    (A) In the case of a small project described in paragraph (c)(8)(v) 
of this section, the following documents must be maintained and 
available for inspection:
    (1) The loan application or other similar document;
    (2) The financial statements of the qualified recipient filed as 
part of the loan application;
    (3) The statement required by section 6.4.3(a)(iii) of Puerto Rican 
Regulation No. 3582 or any successor thereof, signed by the qualified 
recipient (or its duly authorized representative), acknowledging the 
receipt of the loan proceeds, describing the assets financed with such 
loan and the business activity in which such assets are to be used or 
the development project for which the funds will be utilized, the 
collateral to be provided for the transaction including any guarantee, 
and the basis for its qualification as a qualified recipient;
    (4) The loan documents; and
    (5) In the case of a qualified financial institution that is a 
single-purpose entity, a copy of the agreement with the entity's trustee 
or agent, if any, described in paragraph (c)(12)(iv) of this section.
    (B) In the case of a disbursement concerning a project that is not a 
small project described in paragraph (c)(8)(v)

[[Page 195]]

of this section, the following documents must be maintained and 
available for inspection, in addition to the documents required by 
paragraph (c)(13)(ii)(A) of this section:
    (1) A memorandum of credit prepared by an officer of the qualified 
financial institution (or, in the case of a single purpose entity, an 
agent of the entity or a trustee for the entity, if any) and signed by 
the officer of the qualified financial institution, containing the 
details of the investigation and review that the qualified financial 
institution, or its trustee or agent, if any, conducted in order to 
evaluate whether the investment is qualified under paragraph (c)(1) of 
this section and the opinion of the officer of the qualified financial 
institution, or the opinion of an officer of the agent of, or of the 
trustee for, the qualified financial institution, if any, that there is 
no reasonable ground for belief that the qualified funds will be 
diverted to a use that is not permitted under the provisions of this 
section; in making this investigation and review, factors that must be 
utilized are ones similar to those listed in Puerto Rico Regulation No. 
3582, section 6.4.2;
    (2) The annual financial statement of the qualified recipient; and
    (3) The written report of an officer of the qualified financial 
institution, or of an officer of an agent of, or of the trustee for, the 
qualified financial institution, if any, documenting discussions, both 
before and after the disbursement of the loan proceeds, with each 
recipient's accounting, financial and executive personnel with respect 
to the proposed and actual use of the loan proceeds and his analysis of 
the annual financial statements of the qualified recipient including an 
analysis of the statement of sources and uses of funds. After the loan 
disbursement, such discussions and review shall occur annually during 
the term of the loan. Such report shall include the conclusion that in 
such officer's opinion there is no reasonable ground for belief that the 
qualified recipient is improperly utilizing the funds.
    (iii) Requirements in the case of a financial intermediary. Where a 
qualified financial institution lends funds to a financial intermediary 
which are on-lent to a qualified recipient--
    (A) The obligation to maintain the documentation described in 
paragraph (c)(13)(ii)(A) or (B) of this section shall apply only to the 
financial intermediary and not to the qualified financial institution 
and the provisions of paragraph (c)(13)(ii)(A) or (B) of this section 
shall be read so as to impose on the financial intermediary any 
obligation imposed on the qualified financial institution.
    (B) The financial intermediary shall forward annually to the 
qualified financial institution a copy of the documentation it is 
required to maintain in its records pursuant to the provisions of this 
paragraph (c)(13)(iii) and shall notify the Assistant Commissioner 
(International), the Commissioner of Financial Institutions of Puerto 
Rico (or his delegate) and the qualified financial institution pursuant 
to paragraph (c)(14) of this section upon becoming aware that a loan has 
ceased to be an investment in active business assets or a development 
project under this section. The qualified financial institution must 
maintain in its records and have available for inspection the 
documentation furnished by the financial intermediary pursuant to this 
paragraph (c)(13)(iii)(B).
    (C) The qualified financial institution shall cause one of its 
officers (or one of the officers of its agent or trustee, if any) to 
prepare a written report documenting his analysis of the documentation 
furnished by the financial intermediary pursuant to paragraph 
(c)(13)(iii)(B) of this section, his discussions, both before and after 
the disbursement of the loan proceeds, with the financial intermediary's 
accounting, financial and executive personnel with respect to the 
proposed and actual use of the loan proceeds, and his analysis of the 
annual financial statements of the qualified recipient including an 
analysis of the statement of sources and uses of funds. After the loan 
disbursement, such discussions and review shall occur annually during 
the term of the loan. Such report shall include the conclusion that in 
such officer's opinion there is no reasonable ground for belief that the 
qualified recipient is improperly utilizing the funds.

[[Page 196]]

    (14) Procedures for notices and certifications. Notices and 
certifications to the Assistant Commissioner (International) required 
under paragraphs (c)(11), (12) and (13) of this section shall be 
addressed to the attention of the Assistant Commissioner 
(International), Office of Taxpayer Service and Compliance, IN:C, 950 
L'Enfant Plaza South, SW., Washington, DC 20024. Notices and 
certifications to the Commissioner of Financial Institutions of Puerto 
Rico required under paragraphs (c)(11), (12), and (13) of this section 
shall be addressed as follows: Commissioner of Financial Institutions, 
GPO Box 70324, San Juan, Puerto Rico 00936.
    (15) Effective date. This paragraph (c) is effective May 13, 1991. 
It is applicable to investments by a possessions corporation in a 
financial institution that are used by a financial institution for 
investments in accordance with a specific authorization granted by the 
Commissioner of Financial Institutions of Puerto Rico (or his delegate) 
after September 22, 1989. However, the taxpayer may choose to apply 
Sec. 1.936-10T(c) for periods before June 12, 1991.

[T.D. 8350, 56 FR 21927, May 13, 1991]

                      china trade act corporations


<R05>
Sec. 1.941-1   Special deduction for China Trade Act corporations.

    In addition to the deductions from taxable income otherwise allowed 
such a corporation, a China Trade Act corporation is, under certain 
conditions, allowed an additional deduction in computing taxable income. 
This special deduction is an amount equal to the proportion of the 
taxable income derived from sources within Formosa and Hong Kong 
(determined without regard to this section and determined in a manner 
similar to that provided in part I (section 861 and following), 
subchapter N, chapter 1 of the Code, and the regulations thereunder) 
which the par value of the shares of stock of the corporation, owned on 
the last day of the taxable year by (a) persons resident in Formosa, 
Hong Kong, the United States, or possessions of the United States, and 
(b) individual citizens of the United States wherever resident, bears to 
the par value of the whole number of shares of stock of the corporation 
outstanding on that date. The decrease, by reason of such deduction, in 
the tax imposed by section 11 must not, however, exceed the amount of 
the special dividend referred to in section 941 (b), and is not 
allowable unless the special dividend has been certified to the 
Commissioner by the Secretary of Commerce.


<R05>
Sec. 1.941-2   Meaning of terms used in connection with China Trade Act corporations.

    (a) A China Trade Act corporation is one organized under the 
provisions of the China Trade Act, 1922 (15 U.S.C. chapter 4).
    (b) The term ``special dividend'' means the amount which is 
distributed as a dividend to or for the benefit of such persons as on 
the last day of the taxable year were resident in Formosa, Hong Kong, 
the United States, or possessions of the United States, or were 
individual citizens of the United States, and owned shares of stock of 
the corporation. Such dividend must be distributed prior to or at the 
time fixed by law for filing the return of the corporation, including 
the period of any extension of time granted under rules and regulations 
prescribed by the Commissioner with the approval of the Secretary or his 
delegate. Such special dividend does not include any other amounts 
payable or to be payable to such persons or for their benefit by reason 
of their interest in the corporation and must be made in proportion to 
the par value of the shares of stock of the corporation owned by each.
    (c) For the purposes of section 941, the shares of stock of a China 
Trade Act corporation are considered to be owned by the person in whom 
the equitable right to the income from such shares is in good faith 
vested.
    (d) ``Taxable income derived from sources within Formosa and Hong 
Kong'' is the sum of the taxable income from sources wholly within 
Formosa and Hong Kong and that portion of the taxable income from 
sources partly within and partly without Formosa and Hong Kong which may 
be allocated to sources within Formosa and Hong Kong. The method of 
computing this income is similar to that described in

[[Page 197]]

part I (section 861 and following), subchapter N, chapter 1 of the Code, 
and the regulations thereunder.


<R05>
Sec. 1.941-3   Illustration of principles.

    The application of section 941 may be illustrated by the following 
example:

    Example. (1) The A Company, a China Trade Act corporation, has 
taxable income (computed without regard to the deduction under section 
941) for the calendar year 1954 of $200,000 and receives no dividends 
from domestic corporations. All of its stock on December 31, 1954, is 
owned on that date by persons resident in Formosa, Hong Kong, the United 
States, or possessions of the United States, or individual citizens of 
the United States. It distributes a special dividend amounting to 
$100,000 on February 15, 1955, which is certified by the Secretary of 
Commerce as provided in section 941(b). For the purpose of the tax 
imposed by section 11, it is necessary in this example to make two 
computations, first, without allowing the special deduction from taxable 
income on account of income derived from sources within Formosa and Hong 
Kong, and, second, allowing such deduction. The computations are as 
follows:
    (2) First computation; without allowing the special deduction from 
taxable income.

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
Taxable income...............................................   $200,000
Normal tax (section 11 (b))..................................     60,000
Surtax (section 11 (c))......................................     38,500
Total income tax.............................................     98,500
                                                                        

    (3) Second computation; allowing the special deduction from taxable 
income.

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
Taxable income.............................................     $200,000
                                                                        

Since the total taxable income is derived from sources within Formosa 
and Hong Kong and since the par value of the shares of stock of the 
corporation owned on the last day of the taxable year by (a) persons 
resident in Formosa, Hong Kong, the United States, or possessions of the 
United States, and (b) individual citizens of the United States wherever 
resident, is 100 percent of the par value of the total number of shares 
of stock of the corporation outstanding on that day, 100 percent of such 
taxable income is deductible.

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
Special deduction from taxable income......................     $200,000
Amount of income subject to tax under section 11...........         None
                                                                        

    (4) Since the special dividend ($100,000) exceeds the diminution of 
the tax ($98,500) on account of the allowance of the special deduction 
from taxable income, the entire amount of the special deduction is 
allowable and the corporation has no income tax liability for 1954.


<R05>
Sec. 1.943-1   Withholding by a China Trade Act corporation.

    Dividends paid by a China Trade Act corporation to a nonresident 
alien individual, foreign partnership, or foreign corporation are 
subject to withholding of tax at source under Sec. 1.1441-1. However, 
see paragraph (c) of Sec. 1.1441-4 for exemption applicable to dividends 
paid to residents of Formosa or Hong Kong.

[T.D. 6908, 31 FR 16769, Dec. 31, 1966]

                     controlled foreign corporations


<R05>
Sec. 1.951-1   Amounts included in gross income of United States shareholders.

    (a) In general. If a foreign corporation is a controlled foreign 
corporation (within the meaning of section 957) for an uninterrupted 
period of 30 days or more (determined under paragraph (f) of this 
section) during any taxable year of such corporation beginning after 
December 31, 1962, every person--
    (1) Who is a United States shareholder (as defined in section 951(b) 
and paragraph (g) of this section) of such corporation at any time 
during such taxable year, and
    (2) Who owns (within the meaning of section 958(a)) stock in such 
corporation on the last day, in such year, on which such corporation is 
a controlled foreign corporation shall include in his gross income for 
his taxable year in which or with which such taxable year of the 
corporation ends, the sum of--
    (i) Except as provided in section 963, such shareholder's pro rata 
share (determined under paragraph (b) of this section) of the 
corporation's subpart F income (as defined in section 952) for such 
taxable year of the corporation,
    (ii) Such shareholder's pro rata share (determined under paragraph 
(c)(1) of this section) of the corporation's previously excluded subpart 
F income withdrawn from investment in less developed countries for such 
taxable year of the corporation,
    (iii) Such shareholder's pro rata share (determined under paragraph 
(c)(2) of this section) of the corporation's previously excluded subpart 
F income withdrawn from investment in foreign base company shipping 
operations for such taxable year of the corporation, and

[[Page 198]]

    (iv) Such shareholder's pro rata share (determined under paragraph 
(d) of this section) of the corporation's increase in earnings invested 
in United States property for such taxable year of the corporation (but 
only to the extent such pro rata share is not excluded from such 
shareholder's gross income for his taxable year under section 
959(a)(2)).

For purposes of determining whether a United States shareholder which is 
a domestic corporation is a personal holding company under section 542 
and Sec. 1.542-1, the character of the amount includible in gross income 
of such domestic corporation under this paragraph shall be determined as 
if such amount were realized directly by such corporation from the 
source from which it is realized by the controlled foreign corporation. 
See paragraph (a) of Sec. 1.957-2 for special limitation on the amount 
of subpart F income in the case of a controlled foreign corporation 
described in section 957(b). See section 970(a) and Sec. 1.970-1 which 
provides for the reduction of subpart F income of export trade 
corporations.
    (b) Limitation on a United States shareholder's pro rata share of 
subpart F income--(1) In general. For purposes of paragraph (a)(2)(i) of 
this section, a United States shareholder's pro rata share (determined 
in accordance with the rules of paragraph (e) of this section) of the 
foreign corporation's subpart F income for the taxable year of such 
corporation is--
    (i) The amount which would have been distributed with respect to the 
stock which such shareholder owns (within the meaning of section 958(a)) 
in such corporation if on the last day, in such corporation's taxable 
year, on which such corporation is a controlled foreign corporation it 
had distributed pro rata to its shareholders an amount which bears the 
same ratio to its subpart F income for such taxable year as the part of 
such year during which such corporation is a controlled foreign 
corporation bears to the entire taxable year, reduced by--
    (ii) The amount of distributions received by any other person during 
such taxable year as a dividend with respect to such stock, but only to 
the extent that such distributions do not exceed the dividend which 
would have been received by such other person if the distributions by 
such corporation to all its shareholders had been the amount which bears 
the same ratio to the subpart F income of such corporation for the 
taxable year as the part of such year during which such shareholder did 
not own (within the meaning of section 958(a)) such stock bears to the 
entire taxable year.
    (2) Illustrations. The application of this paragraph may be 
illustrated by the following examples:

    Example 1. A, a United States shareholder, owns 100 percent of the 
only class of stock of M, a controlled foreign corporation throughout 
1963. Both A and M Corporation use the calendar year as a taxable year. 
For 1963, M Corporation derives $100 of subpart F income, has $100 of 
earnings and profits, and makes no distributions. A must include $100 in 
his gross income for 1963 under section 951(a)(1)(A)(i).
    Example 2. The facts are the same as in example 1, except that 
instead of holding 100 percent of the stock of M Corporation for the 
entire year, A sells 60 percent of such stock to B, a nonresident alien, 
on May 26, 1963. Thus, M Corporation is a controlled foreign corporation 
for the period January 1, 1963, through May 26, 1963. A must include $40 
($100 x 146/365) in his gross income for 1963 under section 
951(a)(1)(A)(i).
    Example 3. The facts are the same as in example 1, except that 
instead of holding 100 percent of the stock of M Corporation for the 
entire year, A holds 60 percent of such stock on December 31, 1963, 
having acquired such interest on May 26, 1963, from B, a nonresident 
alien, who owned such interest from January 1, 1963. Before A's 
acquisition of such stock, M Corporation had distributed a dividend of 
$15 to B in 1963 with respect to such stock. A must include $21 in his 
gross income for 1963 under section 951(a)(1)(A)(i), such amount being 
determined as follows:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
Corporation M's Subpart F income for 1963.......................    $100
Less: Reduction under section 951(a)(2)(A) for period (1-1-63           
 through 5-26-63) during which M Corporation is not a controlled        
 foreign corporation ($100 x 146/365)...........................      40
                                                         ---------      
Subpart F income for 1963 as limited by section 951(a)(2)(A)....      60
A's pro rata share of subpart F income as determined under              
 section 951 (a)(2)(A) (60 percent of $60)......................      36
Less: Reduction under section 951(a)(2)(B) for dividends                
 received by B during 1963 with respect to the stock acquired by        
 A in M Corporation:                                                    
  (i) Dividend received by B............................      15        

[[Page 199]]

                                                                        
  (ii) B's pro rata share of the amount which bears the                 
   same ratio to M Corporation's subpart F income for                   
   1963 ($100) as the period during which A did not own                 
   (within the meaning of section 958(a)) his stock (146                
   days) bears to the entire taxable year (365 days) (60                
   percent of ($100 x 146/365)).........................      24        
  (iii) Amount of reduction (lesser of (i) or (ii)).....              15
                                                                 -------
A's pro rata share of Subpart F income as determined under              
 section 951(a)(2)..............................................      21
                                                                        

    Example 4. A, a United States shareholder, owns 100 percent of the 
only class of stock of P, a controlled foreign corporation throughout 
1963, and P owns 100 percent of the only class of stock of R, a 
controlled foreign corporation throughout 1963. A and Corporations P and 
R each use the calendar year as a taxable year. For 1963, R Corporation 
derives $100 of subpart F income, has $100 of earnings and profits, and 
distributes a dividend of $20 to P Corporation. Corporation P has no 
income for 1963 other than the dividend received from R Corporation. A 
must include $100 in his gross income for 1963 under section 
951(a)(1)(A)(i) as subpart F income of R Corporation for such year. Such 
subpart F income is not reduced under section 951(a)(2)(B) for the 
dividend of $20 paid to P Corporation because there was no part of the 
year 1963 during which A did not own (within the meaning of section 
958(a)) the stock of R Corporation. By reason of the application of 
section 959(b), the $20 distribution from R Corporation to P Corporation 
is not again includible in the gross income of A under section 951(a).
    Example 5. The facts are the same as in example 4, except that 
instead of holding the stock of R Corporation for the entire year, P 
Corporation acquires 60 percent of the only class of stock of R 
Corporation on March 14, 1963, from C, a nonresident alien, after R 
Corporation distributes in 1963 a dividend of $35 to C with respect to 
the stock so acquired by P Corporation. The stock interest so acquired 
by P Corporation was owned by C from January 1, 1963, until acquired by 
P Corporation. A must include $36 in his gross income for 1963 under 
section 951(a)(1)(A)(i), such amount being determined as follows:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
Corporation R's Subpart F income for 1963......................     $100
Less: Reduction under section 951(a)(2)(A) for period (1-1-63           
 through 3-14-63) during which R Corporation is not a                   
 controlled foreign corporation ($100 x 73/365)................       20
                                                       ----------       
Subpart F income for 1963 as limited by section 951(a)(2)(A)...       80
A's pro rata share of subpart F income as determined under              
 section 951 (a)(2)(A) (60 percent of $80).....................       48
Less: Reduction under section 951(a)(2)(B) for dividends                
 received by C during 1963 with respect to the stock indirectly         
 acquired by A in R Corporation:                                        
  (i) Dividend received by C..........................       35         
  (ii) C's pro rata share of the amount which bears                     
   the same ratio to R Corporation's Subpart F income                   
   for 1963 ($100) as the period during which A did                     
   not indirectly own (within the meaning of section                    
   958(a)(2)) his stock (73 days) bears to the entire                   
   taxable year (365 days) (60 percent of ($100 x 73/                   
   365))..............................................       12         
                                                       ----------       
  (iii) Amount of reduction (lesser of (i) or (ii))...                12
                                                                --------
A's pro rata share of Subpart F income as determined under              
 section 951 (a)(2)............................................       36
                                                                        

    (c) Limitation on a United States shareholder's pro rata share of 
previously excluded subpart F income withdrawn from investments--(1) 
Investments in less developed countries. For purposes of paragraph 
(a)(2)(ii) of this section, a United States shareholder's pro rata share 
(determined in accordance with the rules of paragraph (e) of this 
section) of the foreign corporation's previously excluded subpart F 
income withdrawn from investment in less developed countries for the 
taxable year of such corporation shall not exceed an amount which bears 
the same ratio to such shareholder's pro rata share of such income 
withdrawn (as determined under section 955(a)(3), as in effect before 
the enactment of the Tax Reduction Act of 1975, and paragraph (c) of 
Sec. 1.955-1) for such taxable year as the part of such year during 
which such corporation is a controlled foreign corporation bears to the 
entire taxable year. See paragraph (c)(2) of Sec. 1.955-1 for a special 
rule applicable to exclusions and withdrawals occurring before the date 
on which the United States shareholder acquires his stock.
    (2) Investments in foreign base company shipping operations. For 
purposes of paragraph (a)(2)(iii) of this section, a United States 
shareholder's pro rata share (determined in accordance with the rules of 
paragraph (e) of this section) of the foreign corporation's previously 
excluded subpart F income withdrawn from investment in foreign base 
company shipping operations for the taxable year of such corporation 
shall not exceed an amount which bears the same ratio to such 
shareholder's pro rata share of such income withdrawn (as determined 
under section 955(a)(3) and paragraph (c) of Sec. 1.955A-1) for such 
taxable year as the part of such year during which such

[[Page 200]]

corporation is a controlled foreign corporation bears to the entire 
taxable year. See paragraph (c)(2) of Sec. 1.955A-1 for a special rule 
applicable to exclusions and withdrawals occurring before the date on 
which the United States shareholder acquires his stock.
    (d) Limitation on a United States shareholder's pro rata share of 
increase in investment in United States property. For purposes of 
paragraph (a)(2)(iv) of this section, a United States shareholder's pro 
rata share (determined in accordance with the rules of paragraph (e) of 
this section) of the foreign corporation's increase in earnings invested 
in United States property for the taxable year of such corporation shall 
not exceed an amount which bears the same ratio to such shareholder's 
pro rata share of such increase (as determined under section 956(a)(2) 
and paragraph (c) of Sec. 1.956-1) for such taxable year as the part of 
such year during which such corporation is a controlled foreign 
corporation bears to the entire taxable year. The amount determined 
under the preceding sentence, however, shall be taken into account under 
paragraph (a)(2)(iv) of this section only to the extent such amount is 
not excluded from such shareholder's gross income for his taxable year 
under section 959(a)(2) and the regulations thereunder.
    (e) ``Pro rata share'' defined--(1) In general. For purposes of 
paragraphs (b), (c), and (d) of this section, a United States 
shareholder's pro rata share of a controlled foreign corporation's 
subpart F income, previously excluded subpart F income withdrawn from 
investment in less developed countries, previously excluded subpart F 
income withdrawn from investment in foreign base company shipping 
operations, or increase in earnings invested in United States property, 
respectively, for any taxable year is his pro rata share determined 
under paragraph (a) of Sec. 1.952-1, paragraph (c) of Sec. 1.955-1, 
paragraph (c) of Sec. 1.955A-1, or paragraph (c) of Sec. 1.956-1, 
respectively.
    (2) More than one class of stock. If a controlled foreign 
corporation for a taxable year has more than one class of stock 
outstanding, the amount of such corporation's subpart F income, 
withdrawal, or increase in investment, for the taxable year which shall 
be taken into account with respect to any one class of such stock for 
purposes of subparagraph (1) of this paragraph shall be that amount 
which bears the same ratio to the total of such subpart F income, 
withdrawal, or increase in investment for such year as the earnings and 
profits which would be distributed with respect to such class of stock 
if all earnings and profits of such corporation for such year were 
distributed on the last day of such corporation's taxable year on which 
such corporation is a controlled foreign corporation bear to the total 
earnings and profits of such corporation for such taxable year. For 
purposes of the preceding sentence, if an arrearage in dividends for 
prior taxable years exists with respect to a class of preferred stock of 
such corporation, the earnings and profits for the taxable year shall be 
attributed to such arrearage only to the extent such arrearage exceeds 
the earnings and profits of such corporation remaining from prior 
taxable years beginning after December 31, 1962.
    (3) Discretionary power to allocate earnings to different classes of 
stock. If the allocation of a foreign corporation's earnings and profits 
for the taxable year between two or more classes of stock depends upon 
the exercise of discretion by that body of persons which exercises with 
respect to such corporation the powers ordinarily exercised by the board 
of directors of a domestic corporation, the allocation of earnings and 
profits to such classes shall be made for purposes of this paragraph as 
if such classes constituted one class of stock in which each share has 
the same rights to dividends as any other share, unless a different 
method of allocation of earnings and profits is established as proper by 
the United States shareholder.
    (4) Illustrations. The application of this paragraph may be 
illustrated by the following examples:

    Example 1. Throughout its taxable year 1964, controlled foreign 
corporation A has outstanding 40 shares of common stock and 60 shares of 
6-percent, nonparticipating, nonvoting, preferred stock with a par value 
of $100 per share. D, a United States citizen who uses the calendar year 
as a taxable year, owns 30 shares of the common, and 15 shares of the 
preferred, stock during 1964: Corporation A for 1964 has earnings and 
profits of

[[Page 201]]

$1,000, and income of $500 with respect to which amounts are required to 
be included in gross income of United States shareholders under section 
951(a). In such case, if the total $1,000 of earnings and profits were 
distributed on December 31, 1964, $360 (0.06 x $100 x 60) would be 
distributed with respect to A Corporation's preferred stock and $640 
($1,000 minus $360) would be distributed with respect to its common 
stock. Accordingly, of the $500 with respect to which amounts are 
required to be included in gross income of United States shareholders 
under section 951(a), $180 ($360/$1,000 x  $500) is allocated to the 
outstanding preferred stock and $320 ($640/$1,000 x $500) is allocated 
to the outstanding common stock. D's pro rata share of such amounts for 
1964 is $285 [($180 x 15/60)+($320 x  30/40)].
    Example 2. The facts are the same as in example 1, except that the 
preferred stock is cumulative and there is an arrearage in dividends 
with respect to such stock of $900; on December 31, 1963, Corporation A 
has accumulated earnings and profits for 1963 of $700; therefore, for 
purposes of this paragraph, Corporation A's earnings and profits for 
1964 attributable to such arrearage may not exceed $200 ($900 minus 
$700). In such case, for purposes of this paragraph, if the $1,000 
earnings and profits for 1964 were distributed on December 31, 1964, 
$560 [(0.06 x $100 x 60)+$200] would be distributed with respect to A 
Corporation's preferred stock and $440 ($1,000 minus $560) would be 
distributed with respect to its common stock. Accordingly, of the $500 
with respect to which amounts are required to be included in gross 
income of United States shareholders under section 951 (a), $280 ($560/
$1,000 x $500) is allocated to the outstanding preferred stock and $220 
($440/ $1,000 x $500) is allocated to the outstanding common stock. D's 
pro rata share of such amounts for 1964 is $235 [($280 x 15/ 
60)+($220 x 30/40)].

    (f) Determination of holding period. For purposes of sections 951 
through 964, the holding period of an asset (including stock of a 
controlled foreign corporation) shall be determined by excluding the day 
on which such asset is acquired and including the day on which such 
asset is disposed of. The application of this paragraph may be 
illustrated by the following example:

    Example. On June 30, 1963, United States person E acquires 70 of the 
100 shares of the only class of stock of foreign corporation A from 
nonresident alien B, who until such time owns all such 100 shares. E 
sells 10 shares of stock of such corporation on November 30, 1963, and 
60 shares on December 31, 1963, to nonresident alien F. Corporation A is 
a controlled foreign corporation for the period beginning with July 1, 
1963, and extending through December 31, 1963. As to the 10 shares of 
stock sold on November 30, 1963, E is treated as not owning such shares 
at any time after November 30, 1963, nor before July 1, 1963. As to the 
remaining 60 shares of stock, E is treated as not owning them before 
July 1, 1963, or after December 31, 1963.

    (g) United States shareholder defined-- (1) In general. For purposes 
of sections 951 through 964, the term ``United States shareholder'' 
means, with respect to a foreign corporation, a United States person (as 
defined in section 957(d)) who owns within the meaning of section 
958(a), or is considered as owning by applying the rules of ownership of 
section 958(b), 10 percent or more of the total combined voting power of 
all classes of stock entitled to vote of such foreign corporation.
    (2) Percentage of total combined voting power owned by United States 
person--(i) Meaning of combined voting power. In determining for 
purposes of subparagraph (1) of this paragraph whether a United States 
person owns the requisite percentage of voting power of all classes of 
stock entitled to vote, consideration will be given to all the facts and 
circumstances in each case. In any case where--
    (a) A foreign corporation has more than one class of stock 
outstanding, and
    (b) One or more United States persons own (within the meaning of 
section 958) shares of any one class of stock which possesses the power 
to elect, appoint, or replace a person, or persons, who with respect to 
such corporation, exercise the powers ordinarily exercised by a member 
of the board of directors of a domestic corporation,

the percentage of the total combined voting power with respect to such 
corporation owned by any such United States person shall be his 
proportionate share of the percentage of the persons exercising the 
powers ordinarily exercised by members of the board of directors of a 
domestic corporation (described in (b) of this subdivision) which such 
class of stock (as a class) possesses the power to elect, appoint, or 
replace. In all cases, however, a United States person will be deemed to 
own 10 percent or more of

[[Page 202]]

the total combined voting power with respect to a foreign corporation if 
such person owns (within the meaning of section 958) 20 percent or more 
of the total number of shares of a class of stock of such corporation 
possessing one or more powers enumerated in paragraph (b)(1) of 
Sec. 1.957-1. Whether a foreign corporation is a controlled foreign 
corporation for purposes of sections 951 through 964 shall be determined 
by applying the rules of section 957 and Secs. 1.957-1 through 1.957-4.
    (ii) Illustration. The application of this paragraph may be 
illustrated by the following examples:

    Example 1. Foreign corporation S has two classes of capital stock 
outstanding, consisting of 60 shares of class A stock and 40 shares of 
class B stock. Each class of the outstanding stock is entitled to 
participate on a share for share basis in any dividend distributions by 
S Corporation. The owners of a majority of the class A stock are 
entitled to elect 7 of the 10 corporate directors, and the owners of a 
majority of the class B stock are entitled to elect the other 3 of the 
10 directors. Thus, the class A stock (as a class) possesses 70 percent 
of the total combined voting power of all classes of stock entitled to 
vote of S Corporation, and the class B stock (as a class) possesses 30 
percent of such voting power. D, a United States person, owns 31 shares 
of the class A stock and thus owns 36,167 percent (31/60 x 70 percent) 
of the total combined voting power of all classes of stock entitled to 
vote of S Corporation. By reason of the ownership of such voting power, 
D is a United States shareholder of S Corporation under section 951(b). 
For purposes of section 957, S Corporation is a controlled foreign 
corporation by reason of D's ownership of a majority of the class A 
stock, as illustrated in example 2 of paragraph (c) of Sec. 1.957-1. E, 
a United States person, owns eight shares of the class A stock and thus 
owns 9.333 percent (8/60 x 70 percent) of the total combined voting 
power of all classes of stock entitled to vote of S Corporation. Since E 
owns only 9.333 percent of such voting power and less than 20 percent of 
the number of shares of the class A stock, he is not a United States 
shareholder of S Corporation under section 951(b). F, a United States 
person, owns 14 shares of the class B stock and thus owns 10.5 percent 
(14/40 x 30 percent) of the total combined voting power of all classes 
of stock entitled to vote of S Corporation. By reason of the ownership 
of such voting power, F is a United States shareholder of S Corporation 
under section 951(b).
    Example 2. Foreign corporation R has three classes of stock 
outstanding, consisting of 10 shares of class A stock, 20 shares of 
class B stock, and 300 shares of class C stock. Each class of the 
outstanding stock is entitled to participate on a share for share basis 
in any distribution by R Corporation. The owners of a majority of the 
class A stock are entitled to elect 6 of the 10 corporate directors, and 
the owners of a majority of the class B stock are entitled to elect the 
other 4 of the 10 directors. The class C stock is not entitled to vote. 
D, E, and F, United States persons, each own 2 shares of the class A 
stock and 100 shares of the class C stock. As owners of a majority of 
the class A stock, D, E, and F elect 6 members of the board of 
directors. D, E, and F are United States shareholders of R Corporation 
under section 951(b) since each owns 20 percent of the total number of 
shares of the class A stock which possesses the power to elect a 
majority of the board of directors of R Corporation. For purposes of 
section 957, R Corporation is a controlled foreign corporation by reason 
of the ownership by D, E, and F of a majority of the class A stock, as 
illustrated in example 2 of paragraph (c) of Sec. 1.957-1.

[T.D. 6795, 30 FR 935, Jan. 29, 1965, as amended by T.D. 7893, 48 FR 
22507, May 19, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 1.951-2   Coordination of subpart F with election of a foreign investment company to distribute income.

    A United States shareholder who for his taxable year is a qualified 
shareholder (within the meaning of section 1247(c)) of a foreign 
investment company with respect to which an election under section 
1247(a) and the regulations thereunder is in effect for the taxable year 
of such company which ends with or within such taxable year of such 
shareholder shall not be required to include any amount in his gross 
income for his taxable year under paragraph (a) of Sec. 1.951-1 with 
respect to such company for that taxable year of such company.

[T.D. 6795, 30 FR 937, Jan. 29, 1965]


<R05>
Sec. 1.951-3   Coordination of subpart F with foreign personal holding company provisions.

    A United States shareholder (as defined in section 951(b)) who is 
required under section 551(b) to include in his gross income for his 
taxable year his share of the undistributed foreign personal holding 
company income for the taxable year of a foreign personal holding 
company (as defined in section 552) which for that taxable year is a 
controlled foreign corporation (as defined in section 957) shall not be 
required to

[[Page 203]]

include in his gross income for his taxable year under section 951(a) 
and paragraph (a) of Sec. 1.951-1 any amount attributable to the 
earnings and profits of such corporation for that taxable year of such 
corporation. If a foreign corporation is both a foreign personal holding 
company and a controlled foreign corporation for the same period which 
is only a part of its taxable year, then, for purposes of applying the 
immediately preceding sentence, such corporation shall be deemed to be, 
for such part of such year, a foreign personal holding company and not a 
controlled foreign corporation and the earnings and profits of such 
corporation for the taxable year shall be deemed to be that amount which 
bears the same ratio to its earnings and profits for the taxable year as 
such part of the taxable year bears to the entire taxable year. The 
application of this section may be illustrated by the following 
examples:

    Example 1. A, a United States shareholder, owns 100 percent of the 
only class of stock of controlled foreign corporation M which, in turn, 
owns 100 percent of the only class of stock of controlled foreign 
corporation N. A and Corporations M and N use the calendar year as a 
taxable year. During 1963, N Corporation derives $40,000 of gross income 
all of which is foreign personal holding company income within the 
meaning of section 553; thus, N Corporation is a foreign personal 
holding company for such year within the meaning of section 552(a). For 
1963, N Corporation has undistributed foreign personal holding company 
income (as defined in section 556(a)) of $30,000, derives $25,000 of 
subpart F income, and has earnings and profits of $32,000. During 1963, 
M Corporation derives $100,000 of gross income (including as a dividend 
under section 555(c)(2) the $30,000 of N Corporation's undistributed 
foreign personal holding company income), 65 percent of which is foreign 
personal holding company income within the meaning of section 553. 
Therefore, M Corporation is a foreign personal holding company for such 
year. For 1963, M Corporation has undistributed foreign personal holding 
company income (as defined in section 556(a)) of $90,000, determined by 
taking into account under section 552(c)(1) N Corporation's $30,000 of 
undistributed foreign personal holding company income for such year; in 
addition, M Corporation derives $50,000 of subpart F income and has 
earnings and profits of $92,000. Neither M Corporation nor N Corporation 
makes any actual distributions during 1963. A is required under section 
551(b) to include in his gross income for 1963 as a dividend the $90,000 
of M Corporation's undistributed foreign personal holding company income 
for such year. For 1963, A is not required to include in his gross 
income under section 951(a) any of the $50,000 subpart F income of M 
Corporation or of the $25,000 subpart F income of N Corporation.
    Example 2. The facts are the same as in example 1, except that only 
45 percent of M Corporation's gross income (determined by including 
under section 555(c)(2) the $30,000 of N Corporation's undistributed 
foreign personal holding company income) is foreign personal holding 
company income within the meaning of section 553; accordingly, M 
Corporation is not a foreign personal holding company for 1963. Since 
for such year M Corporation is not a foreign personal holding company, 
the undistributed foreign personal holding company income ($30,000) of N 
Corporation is not required under section 555(b) to be included in the 
gross income of M Corporation for 1963; as a result, such income is not 
required under section 551(b) to be included in the gross income of A 
for such year even though N Corporation is a foreign personal holding 
company for that year. For 1963, A is required to include $75,000 in his 
gross income under section 951(a)(1)(A)(i) and paragraph (a) of 
Sec. 1.951-1, consisting of the $50,000 subpart F income of M 
Corporation and the $25,000 subpart F income of N Corporation.
    Example 3. The facts are the same as in example 1, except that in 
1963 N Corporation actually distributes $30,000 to M Corporation and M 
Corporation, in turn, actually distributes $90,000 to A. Under section 
556 the undistributed foreign personal holding company income of both M 
corporation and N Corporation is thus reduced to zero; accordingly, no 
amount is included in the gross income of A under section 551(b) by 
reason of his interest in corporations M and N. A must include $75,000 
in his gross income for 1963 under section 951(a)(1)(A)(i) and paragraph 
(a) of Sec. 1.951-1, consisting of the $50,000 subpart F income of M 
Corporation and the $25,000 subpart F income of N Corporation. Of the 
$90,000 distribution received by A from M Corporation, $75,000 is 
excludable from his gross income under section 959(a)(1) as previously 
taxed earnings and profits; the remaining $15,000 is includible in his 
gross income for 1963 as a dividend.
    Example 4. (a) A, a United States shareholder, owns 100 percent of 
the only class of stock of controlled foreign corporation P, organized 
on January 1, 1963. Both A and P Corporation use the calendar year as a 
taxable year. During 1963, 1964, and 1965, P Corporation is not a 
foreign personal holding company as defined in section 552(a); in each 
of such years, P Corporation derives dividend income of $10,000 which 
constitutes foreign personal holding company income (within

[[Page 204]]

the meaning of Sec. 1.954-2) but under 26 CFR 1.954-1(b)(1) (Revised as 
of April 1, 1975) excludes such amounts from foreign base company income 
as dividends received from, and reinvested in, qualified investments in 
less developed countries. Corporation P's earnings and profits 
accumulated for 1963, 1964, and 1965 and determined under paragraph 
(b)(2) of Sec. 1.955-1 are $40,000. For 1966, P Corporation is a foreign 
personal holding company, has predistribution earnings and profits of 
$10,000, derives $10,000 of income which is both foreign personal 
holding company income within the meaning of section 553 and subpart F 
income within the meaning of section 952, distributes $8,000 to A, and 
has undistributed foreign personal holding company income of $2,000 
within the meaning of section 556. In addition, for 1966 P Corporation 
has a withdrawal (determined under section 955(a) as in effect before 
the enactment of the Tax Reduction Act of 1975 but without regard to its 
earnings and profits for such year) of $25,000 of previously excluded 
subpart F income from investment in less developed countries. A is 
required under section 551(b) to include in his gross income for 1966 as 
a dividend the $2,000 undistributed foreign personal holding company 
income. The $8,000 distribution is includible in A's gross income for 
1966 under sections 61(a)(7) and 301 as a distribution to which section 
316(a)(2) applies. Corporation P's $25,000 withdrawal of previously 
excluded subpart F income from investment in less developed countries is 
includible in A's gross income for 1966 under section 951(a)(1)(A)(ii) 
and paragraph (a)(2) of Sec. 1.951-1.
    (b) If P Corporation's earnings and profits accumulated for 1963, 
1964, and 1965 were $15,000, instead of $40,000, the result would be the 
same as in paragraph (a) of this example, except that a withdrawal of 
only $15,000 of previously excluded subpart F income from investment in 
less developed countries would be includible in A's gross income for 
1966 under section 951(a)(1)(A)(ii) and paragraph (a)(2) of Sec. 1.951-
1.
    (c) The principles of this example also apply to withdrawals 
(determined under section 955(a), as in effect before the enactment of 
the Tax Reduction Act of 1975) of previously excluded subpart F income 
from investment in less developed countries effected after the effective 
date of such Act, and to withdrawals (determined under section 955(a), 
as amended by such Act) of previously excluded subpart F income from 
investment in foreign base company shipping operations.
    Example 5. (a) The facts are the same as in paragraph (a) of example 
4, except that, instead of having a $25,000 decrease in qualified 
investments in less developed countries for 1966, P Corporation invests 
$20,000 in tangible property (not described in section 956(b)(2)) 
located in the United States and such investment constitutes an increase 
(determined under section 956(a) but without regard to the earnings and 
profits of P Corporation for 1966) in earnings invested in United States 
property. Corporation P's earnings and profits accumulated for 1963, 
1964, and 1965 and determined under paragraph (b)(1) of Sec. 1.956-1 are 
$22,000. The result is the same as in paragraph (a) of example 4, except 
that instead of including the $25,000 withdrawal, A must include $20,000 
in his gross income for 1966 under section 951(a)(1)(B) and paragraph 
(a)(2)(iv) of Sec. 1.951-1 as an investment of earnings in United States 
property.
    (b) If P Corporation's earnings and profits accumulated for 1963, 
1964, and 1965 were $9,000 instead of $22,000, the result would be the 
same as in paragraph (a) of this example, except that only $9,000 would 
be includible in A's gross income for 1966 under section 951(a)(1)(B) 
and paragraph (a)(2)(iv) of Sec. 1.951-1 as an investment of earnings in 
United States property.

[T.D. 6795, 30 FR 937, Jan. 29, 1965, as amended by T.D. 7893, 48 FR 
22508, May 19, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 1.952-1   Subpart F income defined.

    (a) In general. For purposes of sections 951 through 964, a 
controlled foreign corporation's subpart F income for any taxable year 
shall, except as provided in paragraph (b) of this section and subject 
to the limitations of paragraphs (c) and (d) of this section, consist of 
the sum of--
    (1) The income derived by such corporation for such year from the 
insurance of United States risks (determined in accordance with the 
provisions of section 953 and Secs. 1.953-1 through 1.953-6),
    (2) The income derived by such corporation for such year which 
constitutes foreign base company income (determined in accordance with 
the provisions of section 954 and Secs. 1.954-1 through 1.954-8),
    (3)(i) An amount equal to the product of--
    (A) The income of such corporation other than income which--
    (1) Is attributable to earnings and profits of the foreign 
corporation included in the gross income of a United States person under 
section 951 (other than by reason of this paragraph) (determined in 
accordance with the provisions of section 951 and Sec. 1.951-1), or
    (2) Is described in section 952(b),
multiplied by

[[Page 205]]

    (B) The international boycott factor determined in accordance with 
the provisions of section 999(c)(1), or
    (ii) In lieu of the amount determined under paragraph (a)(3)(i) of 
this section, the amount described under section 999(c)(2) of such 
international boycott income, and
    (4) The sum of the amount of any illegal bribes, kickbacks, or other 
payments paid after November 3, 1976, by or on behalf of the corporation 
during the taxable year of the corporation directly or indirectly to an 
official, employee, or agent in fact of a government. An amount is paid 
by a controlled foreign corporation where it is paid by an officer, 
director, employee, shareholder or agent of such corporation for the 
benefit of such corporation. For purposes of this section, the 
principles of section 162(c) and the regulations thereunder shall apply. 
In the case of payments made after September 3, 1982, a payment is 
illegal if the payment would be unlawful under the Foreign Corrupt 
Practices Act of 1977 if the payor were a United States person. The fair 
market value of an illegal payment made in the form of property or 
services shall be considered the amount of such illegal payment.

Pursuant to section 951(a)(1)(A)(i) and Sec. 1.951-1, a United States 
shareholder of such controlled foreign corporation must include his pro 
rata share of such subpart F income in his gross income for his taxable 
year in which or with which such taxable year of the foreign corporation 
ends. See section 952(a). However, see paragraph (a) of Sec. 1.957-2 for 
special rule limiting the subpart F income to the income derived from 
the insurance of United States risks in the case of certain controlled 
foreign corporations described in section 957(b).
    (b) Exclusion of U.S. income--(1) Taxable years beginning before 
January 1, 1967. For rules applicable to taxable years beginning before 
January 1, 1967, see 26 CFR 1.952-1(b)(1) (Revisedof April 1, 1975).
    (2) Taxable years beginning after December 31, 1966. Notwithstanding 
paragraph (a) of this section, a controlled foreign corporation's 
subpart F income for any taxable year beginning after December 31, 1966, 
shall not include any item of income from sources within the United 
States which is effectively connected for that year with the conduct by 
such corporation of a trade or business in the United States unless, 
pursuant to a treaty to which the United States is a party, such item of 
income either is exempt from the income tax imposed by chapter 1 
(relating to normal taxes and surtaxes) of the Code or is subject to 
such tax at a reduced rate.

Thus, for example, dividends received from sources within the United 
States by a foreign corporation engaged in business in the United States 
during the taxable year, which are not effectively connected for that 
year with the conduct of a trade or business in the United States by 
that corporation, shall not be excluded from subpart F income under 
section 952(b) and this subparagraph even though such dividends are 
subject to the tax of 30 percent imposed by section 881 (a). Also, for 
example, if, by reason of an income tax convention to which the United 
States is a party, an amount of interest from sources within the United 
States which is effectively connected for the taxable year with the 
conduct of a business in the United States by a foreign corporation is 
subject to tax under chapter 1 at a flat rate of 15 percent, as provided 
in Sec. 1.871-12, such interest is not excluded from subpart F income 
under section 952(b) and this subparagraph. The deductions attributable 
to items of income which are excluded from subpart F income under this 
subparagraph shall not be taken into account for purposes of section 
952.
    (3) Rule applicable under section 956 (b)(2). For purposes only of 
paragraph (b)(1))(viii) of Sec. 1.956-2, an item of income derived by a 
controlled foreign corporation from sources within the United States 
with respect to which for the taxable year a tax is imposed in 
accordance with section 882(a) shall be considered described in section 
952(b) whether or not such item of income would have constituted subpart 
F income for such year.
    (c) Limitation on a controlled foreign corporation's subpart F 
income--(1) In general. A United States shareholder's pro rata share 
(determined in accordance with the rules of paragraph (e) of

[[Page 206]]

Sec. 1.951-1) of a controlled foreign corporation's subpart F income for 
any taxable year shall not exceed his pro rata share of the earnings and 
profits (as defined in section 964(a) and Sec. 1.964-1) of such 
corporation for such taxable year, computed as of the close of such 
taxable year without diminution by reason of any distributions made 
during such taxable year, minus the sum of--
    (i) The amount, if any, by which such shareholder's pro rata share 
of--
    (a) The sum of such corporation's deficits in earnings and profits 
for prior taxable years beginning after December 31, 1962, plus
    (b) The sum of such corporation's deficits in earnings and profits 
for taxable years beginning after December 31, 1959, and before January 
1, 1963 (reduced by the sum of the earnings and profits (as so defined) 
of such corporation for any of such taxable years) exceeds
    (c) The sum of such corporation's earnings and profits for prior 
taxable years beginning after December 31, 1962, which, with respect to 
such shareholder, are allocated to other earnings and profits under 
section 959(c)(3) and Sec. 1.959-3; and
    (ii) Such shareholder's pro rata share of any deficits in earnings 
and profits of other foreign corporations for a taxable year beginning 
after December 31, 1962, which are attributable to stock of such other 
foreign corporations owned by such shareholder within the meaning of 
section 958(a) and which, in accordance with section 952(d) and 
paragraph (d) of this section, are taken into account as a reduction in 
the controlled foreign corporation's earnings and profits for such 
taxable year.

For purposes of applying this subparagraph, the reduction (if any) 
provided by subdivision (i) of this subparagraph in a United States 
shareholder's pro rata share of the earnings and profits of a controlled 
foreign corporation shall be taken into account before the reduction 
provided by subdivision (ii) of this subparagraph. See section 952(c).
    (2) Special rules. For purposes only of determining the limitation 
under subparagraph (1) of this paragraph on a United States 
shareholder's pro rata share of a controlled foreign corporation's 
subpart F income for any taxable year--
    (i) Status of foreign corporation. The earnings and profits, or 
deficit in earnings and profits, of a foreign corporation for any 
taxable year shall be taken into account whether or not such foreign 
corporation is a controlled foreign corporation at the time such 
earnings and profits are derived or such deficit in earnings and profits 
is incurred.
    (ii) Deficits in earnings and profits taken into account only once. 
A controlled foreign corporation's deficit in earnings and profits for 
any taxable year preceding the taxable year shall be taken into account 
for the taxable year only to the extent such deficit has not been taken 
into account under this paragraph, paragraph (d) of this section, or 
paragraph (d)(2)(ii) of Sec. 1.963-2 (applied as if section 963 had not 
been repealed by the Tax Reduction Act of 1975) in computing a minimum 
distribution, for any taxable year preceding the taxable year, to reduce 
earnings and profits of such preceding year of such controlled foreign 
corporation or of any other controlled foreign corporation. To the 
extent a controlled foreign corporation's (the ``first corporation'') 
excess foreign base company shipping deductions for any taxable year 
(determined under Sec. 1.955A-3(c)(2)(i)) reduce the foreign base 
company shipping income of another member of a related group (as defined 
in Sec. 1.955A-2(b)), such deductions shall not be taken into account in 
determining the earnings and profits or deficits in earnings and profits 
of such first corporation for such taxable year for purposes of this 
paragraph (c) and paragraph (d) of this section. The rule of the 
preceding sentence shall not apply to the extent the excess foreign base 
company shipping deductions of the first corporation reduce the foreign 
base company shipping income of another member of a related group below 
zero.
    (iii) Determination of pro rata share. A United States shareholder's 
pro rata share of a controlled foreign corporation's earnings and 
profits, or deficit in earnings and profits, for any taxable year shall 
be determined in accordance

[[Page 207]]

with the principles of paragraph (e) of Sec. 1.951-1 and paragraph 
(d)(2)(ii) of Sec. 1.963-2.
    (3) Illustrations. The application of this paragraph may be 
illustrated by the following examples:

    Example 1. (a) A is a United States shareholder who owns 100 percent 
of the only class of stock of M Corporation, a controlled foreign 
corporation organized on January 1, 1963. Both A and M Corporation use 
the calandar year as a taxable year.
    (b) During 1963, M Corporation derives $20,000 of subpart F income 
and has earnings and profits of $30,000. Corporation M makes no 
distributions to A during such year. The limitation under section 952(c) 
on M Corporation's subpart F income for 1963 is $30,000; and $20,000 is 
includible in A's gross income for such year under section 
951(a)(1)(A)(i).
    (c) On January 1, 1964, M Corporation acquires 100 percent of the 
only class of stock of N Corporation, a controlled foreign corporation 
which uses the calendar year as a taxable year. During 1964, N 
Corporation derives $6,000 of subpart F income, has $7,000 of earnings 
and profits, and distributes $5,000 to M Corporation. The limitation 
under section 952(c) on N Corporation's subpart F income for 1964 is 
$7,000; and $6,000 of subpart F income is includible in A's gross income 
for such year under section 951(a)(1)(A)(i).
    (d) During 1964, M Corporation derives $8,000 of rents which 
constitute subpart F income, makes a $10,000 distribution to A, and has 
earnings and profits of $12,000 (including the $5,000 dividend received 
from N Corporation). The limitation under section 952(c) on M 
Corporation's subpart F income for 1964 is $7,000, determined as 
follows:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
Corporation M's earnings and profits for 1964 (determined               
 under section 964(a) and Sec.  1.964-1 as of the close of              
 such year without diminution for any distributions made                
 during such year).........................................      $12,000
Less: Corporation M's earnings and profits for 1964                     
 described in section 959(b)...............................        5,000
                                                            ------------
Limitation on M Corporation's Subpart F income for 1964....        7,000
                                                                        

Thus, for 1964 with respect to A's interest in M Corporation, $7,000 of 
subpart F income is includible in his gross income under section 
951(a)(1)(A)(i). The $10,000 dividend received from M Corporation is 
excludible from A's gross income for 1964 under section 959(a)(1) and 
paragraph (b) of Sec. 1.959-1.
    Example 2. A is a United States shareholder who owns 100 percent of 
the only class of stock of R Corporation which was organized on January 
1, 1961. R Corporation is a controlled foreign corporation for the 
entire period after December 31, 1962, here involved. Both A and R 
Corporation use the calendar year as a taxable year. During 1963, R 
Corporation derives $25,000 of subpart F income and has $50,000 of 
earnings and profits. Corporation R has $15,000 of earnings and profits 
for 1961, and a deficit in earnings and profits of $45,000 for 1962. 
Thus, R Corporation has as of December 31, 1963, a net deficit in 
earnings and profits of $30,000 for the years 1961 and 1962. Corporation 
R makes no distributions to A during 1963. The limitation under section 
952(c) on R Corporation's subpart F income for 1963 is $20,000 ($50,000 
minus $30,000), and $20,000 of subpart F income is includible in A's 
gross income for 1963 under section 951(a)(1)(A)(i). During 1964, R 
Corporation derives $18,000 of subpart F income and has $30,000 of 
earnings and profits. Corporation R makes no distributions to A during 
1964. The entire $18,000 of subpart F income is includible in A's gross 
income for 1964 under section 951(a)(1)(A)(i).

    (d) Treatment of deficits in earnings and profits attributable to 
stock of other foreign corporation indirectly owned by a United States 
shareholder--(1) In general. For purposes of paragraph (c)(1)(ii) of 
this section, if--
    (i) A United States shareholder owns (within the meaning of section 
958(a)) stock in two or more foreign corporations in a chain of foreign 
corporations (as defined in subparagraph (2)(ii) of this paragraph), and
    (ii) Any of the corporations in such chain has a deficit in earnings 
and profits for a taxable year beginning after December 31, 1962,

then, with respect to such shareholder and only for purposes of 
determining the limitation on subpart F income under paragraph (c) of 
this section, the earnings and profits for the taxable year of each such 
foreign corporation which is a controlled foreign corporation shall, in 
accordance with the rules of subparagraph (2) of this paragraph, be 
reduced to take into account any deficit in earnings and profits 
referred to in subdivision (ii) of this subparagraph. See section 
952(d).
    (2) Special rules. For purposes of this paragraph--
    (i) Applicable rules. The special rules set forth in paragraph 
(c)(2) of this section shall apply.
    (ii) ``Chain'' defined. A chain of foreign corporations shall, with 
respect to a United States shareholder, include--
    (a) Any foreign corporation in which such shareholder owns (within 
the meaning of section 958(a)(1)(A)) stock

[[Page 208]]

but, only to the extent of the stock so owned and
    (b) All foreign corporations in which such shareholder owns (within 
the meaning of section 958(a)(2)) stock, but only to the extent of the 
stock so owned by reason of his ownership of the stock referred to in 
(a) of this subdivision.
    (iii) Allocation of deficit. If one or more foreign corporations 
(whether or not a controlled foreign corporation) includible in a chain 
of foreign corporations has a deficit in earnings and profits 
(determined under section 964(a) and Sec. 1.964-1) for the taxable year, 
the amount of deficit taken into account under section 952(d) with 
respect to a United States shareholder in such chain as a reduction in 
earnings and profits for the taxable year of a controlled foreign 
corporation includible in such chain shall be an amount which bears the 
same ratio to such shareholder's pro rata share of the total deficit in 
earnings and profits for the taxable year of all includible foreign 
corporations as his pro rata share of the earnings and profits 
(determined under paragraph (c) of this section but without regard to 
the provisions of subparagraph (1)(ii) of such paragraph) for the 
taxable year of such includible controlled foreign corporation bears to 
his pro rata share of the total earnings and profits (as so determined 
under paragraph (c) of this section) for the taxable year of all 
includible controlled foreign corporations. The amount of deficit taken 
into account under this subdivision with respect to any controlled 
foreign corporation includible in a chain of foreign corporations shall 
not exceed the United States shareholder's pro rata share of the 
controlled foreign corporation's earnings and profits for the taxable 
year.
    (iv) Taxable year. The taxable year from which a deficit is 
allocated under this paragraph, and the taxable year to which such 
deficit is allocated to reduce earnings and profits, shall be the 
taxable year of the foreign corporation ending with or within the 
taxable year of the United States shareholder described in subparagraph 
(1)(i) of this paragraph.
    (3) Illustration. The application of this paragraph may be 
illustrated by the following examples:

    Example 1. (a) Domestic corporation M owns 100 percent, 20 percent, 
and 100 percent, respectively, of the only class of stock of foreign 
corporations A, B, and F, respectively. Corporation A owns 80 percent of 
the only class of stock of each of foreign corporations B and C, 
respectively. Corporation F owns 20 percent of such stock of C 
Corporation. Corporation B owns 75 percent of the only class of stock of 
foreign corporation D, and 50 percent of the only class of stock of each 
of foreign corporations G and H, respectively. C Corporation owns 75 
percent of the only class of stock of foreign corporation E. All the 
corporations use the calendar year as a taxable year, and all of the 
foreign corporations, except corporations G and H, are controlled 
foreign corporations throughout the period here involved.
    (b) The subpart F income, and the earnings and profits (determined 
under paragraph (c) of this section but without regard to subparagraph 
(1)(ii) of such paragraph) or deficit in earnings and profits 
(determined under section 964(a) and Sec. 1.964-1), of each of the 
foreign corporations for 1963 are as follows, the deficits being set 
forth in parentheses:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                               Earnings 
                                                   Subpart F      and   
                                                    income      profits 
                                                              (deficits)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A Corporation...................................      $6,000     $18,000
B Corporation...................................  ..........     (7,500)
C Corporation...................................  ..........     (2,500)
D Corporation...................................       4,000       5,000
E Corporation...................................      12,000      15,000
F Corporation...................................       8,000      20,250
G Corporation...................................  ..........    (10,000)
H Corporation...................................  ..........       7,000
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (c) The chains of foreign corporations (within the meaning of 
subparagraph (2)(ii) of this paragraph) for 1963 are the ``A'' chain, 
consisting of corporations, A, B, C, D, E, G, and H, but only to the 
extent of M Corporation's stock interest in such corporations under 
section 958(a) by reason of its ownership of stock in A Corporation; the 
``B'' chain, consisting of corporations B, D, G, and H, but only to the 
extent of M Corporation's stock interest in such corporations under 
section 958(a) by reason of its ownership of stock in B Corporation; and 
the ``F'' chain, consisting of corporations F, C, and E, but only to the 
extent of M Corporation's stock interest in such corporations under 
section 958(a) by reason of its ownership of stock in F Corporation.
    (d) Corporation M's stock interest under section 958(a) in each of 
the chains of foreign corporations is as follows for 1963:

[[Page 209]]



                                                  [In percent]                                                  
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                     A       B       C       D       E       F       G       H  
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
A chain:                                                                                                        
  Direct interest...............................     100  ......  ......  ......  ......  ......  ......  ......
  (100% x 80%)..................................  ......      80  ......  ......  ......  ......  ......  ......
  (100% x 80%)..................................  ......  ......      80  ......  ......  ......  ......  ......
  (80% x 75%)...................................  ......  ......  ......      60  ......  ......  ......  ......
  (80% x 75%)...................................  ......  ......  ......  ......      60  ......  ......  ......
  (80% x 50%)...................................  ......  ......  ......  ......  ......  ......      40  ......
  (80% x 50%)...................................  ......  ......  ......  ......  ......  ......  ......      40
B chain:                                                                                                        
  Direct interest...............................  ......      20  ......  ......  ......  ......  ......  ......
  (20% x 75%)...................................  ......  ......  ......      15  ......  ......  ......  ......
  (20% x 50%)...................................  ......  ......  ......  ......  ......  ......      10  ......
  (20% x 50%)...................................  ......  ......  ......  ......  ......  ......  ......      10
F chain:                                                                                                        
  Direct interest...............................  ......  ......  ......  ......  ......     100  ......  ......
  (100% x 20%)..................................  ......  ......      20  ......  ......  ......  ......  ......
  (20% x 75%)...................................  ......  ......  ......  ......      15  ......  ......  ......
                                                 ---------------------------------------------------------------
    Total interests.............................     100     100     100      75      75     100      50      50
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (e) Corporation M's pro rata share of the earnings and profits 
(determined under paragraph (c) of this section but without regard to 
subparagraph (1)(ii) of such paragraph), or of the deficit, of each 
controlled foreign corporation of each foreign corporation, 
respectively, includible in the respective chains for 1963 is as 
follows:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                  Earnings              
                                                and profits    Deficit  
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A chain:                                                                
  A Corporation (100%)........................      $18,000  ...........
  B Corporation (80%).........................  ...........     ($6,000)
  C Corporation (80%).........................  ...........      (2,000)
  D Corporation (60%).........................        3,000  ...........
  E Corporation (60%).........................        9,000  ...........
  G Corporation (40%).........................  ...........      (4,000)
  H Corporation (40%).........................        (\1\)  ...........
                                               -------------------------
      Total...................................       30,000     (12,000)
                                               =========================
B chain:                                                                
  B Corporation (20%).........................  ...........     ($1,500)
  D Corporation (15%).........................         $750  ...........
  G Corporation (10%).........................  ...........      (1,000)
  H Corporation (10%).........................        (\1\)  ...........
                                               -------------------------
      Total...................................         $750     ($2,500)
                                               =========================
F chain:                                                                
  F Corporation (100%)........................       20,250  ...........
  C Corporation (20%).........................  ...........        (500)
  E Corporation (15%).........................        2,250  ...........
                                               -------------------------
    Total.....................................      $22,500       (500) 
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\The earnings and profits of H Corporation are not included in the    
  total earnings and profits for the chain because H Corporation is not 
  a controlled foreign corporation.                                     

    (f) The amount by which M Corporation's pro rata share of the 
earnings and profits for 1963 of the controlled foreign corporations in 
each respective chain shall be reduced under section 952(d) by M 
Corporation's pro rata share of the deficits of corporations B, C, and G 
for 1963 is determined as follows:

                                                                        
                                                              Amount of 
                                                              reduction 
                                                                        
A chain:                                                                
  A Corporation ($12,000 x $18,000/$30,000)................       $7,200
  D Corporation ($12,000 x $3,000/$30,000).................        1,200
  E Corporation ($12,000 x $9,000/$30,000).................        3,600
                                               --------------           
      Total................................................       12,000
                                               ==============           
B chain:                                                                
  D Corporation ($2,500 x $750/$750)..........       $2,500             
  Limitation: M Corporation's pro-rata share                            
   of D Corporation's earnings and profits....          750             
  Allocation of used deficit ($750) to M                                
   Corporation's pro rata share of the                                  
   deficits of corporations B and G:                                    
    B Corporation ($750 x  ($1,500/$2,500))...         $450             
    G Corporation ($750 x  ($1,000/$2,500))...          300             
                                               -------------            
      Total...................................          750         $750
                                               =========================
F chain:                                                                
  F Corporation ($500 x $20,250/$22,500)...................          450
  E Corporation ($500 x $2,250/$22,500)....................           50
                                               --------------           
    Total..................................................          500
                                                                        

    (g) Corporation M's pro rata share of the earnings and profits 
(determined after reduction for deficits under section 952(d)) for 1963 
of each controlled foreign corporation in the respective chains, 
determined on a chain-by-chain basis, is determined as follows:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                          Earnings                      
                                            and     Reduction   Reduced 
                                          profits     (sec.     earnings
                                           before    952(d))      and   
                                         reduction              profits 
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A chain:                                                                
  A Corporation........................    $18,000     $7,200    $10,800
  D Corporation........................      3,000      1,200      1,800

[[Page 210]]

                                                                        
  E Corporation........................      9,000      3,600      5,400
B chain: D Corporation.................        750        750  .........
F chain:                                                                
  F Corporation........................     20,250        450     19,800
  E Corporation........................      2,250         50      2,200
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (h) Corporation M's pro rata share of each controlled foreign 
corporation's subpart F income, limited as provided by section 952(c) 
and paragraph (c) of this section, for 1963 which is includible in its 
gross income for such year under section 951(a)(1)(A)(i) and Sec. 1.951-
1 is determined as follows:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                    Earnings            
                                       Subpart F      and       Amount  
                                         income      profit   includible
                                        (before    (sec. 952   in income
                                      limitation)     (c))              
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A Corporation (100%)................      $6,000     $10,800      $6,000
D Corporation (75%)                        3,000       1,800       1,800
E Corporation (75%)                        9,000       7,600       7,600
F Corporation (100%)                       8,000      19,800       8,000
                                     -----------------------------------
  Total includible under sec.                                           
   951(a)(1)(A)(i)..................  ...........  .........      23,400
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    Example 2. The facts are the same as in example 1 except that, in 
addition, for 1964, foreign corporations C, D, and E have no subpart F 
income and no earnings and profits and foreign corporations G and H have 
no earnings and profits. For 1964, B Corporation has subpart F income of 
$1,000 and earnings and profits (determined in accordance with section 
964(a) and Sec. 1.964-1) of $1,500; A Corporation has subpart F income 
of $800 and earnings and profits of $1,000; and F Corporation has 
subpart F income of $500 and earnings and profits of $1,000. Such 
earnings and profits are determined without regard to distributions for 
1964. Corporation B has an unused deficit in earnings and profits of 
$1,050 for 1963 ($1,500 minus $450) applicable to M Corporation's 
interest in such corporation (paragraph (f) of example 1), and, under 
paragraph (c)(1)(i)(a) of this section, with respect to M Corporation, 
such deficit reduces B Corporation's earnings and profits for 1964 to 
$450. Inasmuch as G Corporation is not a controlled foreign corporation 
for 1964, such corporation's unused deficit in earnings and profits of 
$700 for 1963 ($1,000 minus $300) applicable to M Corporation's interest 
in such corporation (paragraph (f) of example 1) may be used under 
paragraph (c)(1)(i)(a) of this section to reduce M Corporation's 
interest in G Corporation's earnings and profits in a later year or 
years for which G Corporation is a controlled foreign corporation. 
Corporation M's pro rata share of each controlled foreign corporation's 
subpart F income, limited as provided by section 952(c) and paragraph 
(c) of this section, for 1964 which is includible in its gross income 
for such year under section 951(a)(1)(A)(i) and Sec. 1.951-1 is 
determined as follows:


------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                    Earnings            
                                       Subpart F      and       Amount  
                                         income     profits   includible
                                        (before      (sec.     in income
                                      limitation)   952(c))             
------------------------------------------------------------------------
A Corporation.......................        $800      $1,000        $800
B Corporation.......................       1,000         450         450
F Corporation.......................         500       1,000         500
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    Example 3. The facts are the same as in example 2, except that for 
1964 B Corporation has subpart F income of $550 and earnings and profits 
(determined in accordance with section 964(a) and Sec. 1.964-1) of $550; 
such earnings and profits are determined without regard to distributions 
for 1964. Under paragraph (c)(1)(i)(a) of this section, B Corporation's 
unused deficit of $1,050 for 1963 reduces its earnings and profits for 
1964 with respect to M Corporation to zero. The remaining $500 of the 
unused deficit for 1963 applicable to M Corporation's interest in B 
Corporation may be used under paragraph (c)(1)(i)(a) of this section in 
later years to reduce M Corporation's interest in B Corporation's 
earnings and profits.

    (e) Application of current earnings and profits limitation--(1) In 
general. If the subpart F income (as defined in section 952(a)) of a 
controlled foreign corporation exceeds the foreign corporation's 
earnings and profits for the taxable year, the subpart F income 
includible in the income of the corporation's United States shareholders 
is reduced under section 952(c)(1)(A) in accordance with the following 
rules. The excess of subpart F income over current year earnings and 
profits shall--
    (i) First, proportionately reduce subpart F income in each separate 
category of the controlled foreign corporation, as defined in 
Sec. 1.904-5(a)(1), in which current earnings and profits are zero or 
less than zero;
    (ii) Second, proportionately reduce subpart F income in each 
separate category in which subpart F income exceeds current earnings and 
profits; and
    (iii) Third, proportionately reduce subpart F income in other 
separate categories.
    (2) Allocation to a category of subpart F income. An excess amount 
that is allocated under paragraph (e)(1) of this section to a separate 
category must be further allocated to a category of subpart F income if 
the separate category contains more than one category of subpart F 
income described in section

[[Page 211]]

952(a) or, in the case of foreign base company income, described in 
Sec. 1.954-1(c)(1)(iii)(A) (1) or (2). In such case, the excess amount 
that is allocated to the separate category must be allocated to the 
various categories of subpart F income within that separate category on 
a proportionate basis.
    (3) Recapture of subpart F income reduced by operation of earnings 
and profits limitation. Any amount in a category of subpart F income 
described in section 952(a) or, in the case of foreign base company 
income, described in Sec. 1.954-1(c)(1)(iii)(A) (1) or (2) that is 
reduced by operation of the current year earnings and profits limitation 
of section 952(c)(1)(A) and this paragraph (e) shall be subject to 
recapture in a subsequent year under the rules of section 952(c)(2) and 
paragraph (f) of this section.
    (4) Coordination with sections 953 and 954. The rules of this 
paragraph (e) shall be applied after the application of sections 953 and 
954 and the regulations under those sections, except as provided in 
Sec. 1.954-1(d)(4)(ii).
    (5) Earnings and deficits retain separate limitation character. The 
income reduction rules of paragraph (e)(1) of this section shall apply 
only for purposes of determining the amount of an inclusion under 
section 951(a)(1)(A) from each separate category as defined in 
Sec. 1.904-5(a)(1) and the separate categories in which recapture 
accounts are established under section 952(c)(2) and paragraph (f) of 
this section. For rules applicable in computing post-1986 undistributed 
earnings, see generally section 902 and the regulations under that 
section. For rules relating to the allocation of deficits for purposes 
of computing foreign taxes deemed paid under section 960 with respect to 
an inclusion under section 951(a)(1)(A), see Sec. 1.960-1(i).
    (f) Recapture of subpart F income in subsequent taxable year--(1) In 
general. If a controlled foreign corporation's subpart F income for a 
taxable year is reduced under the current year earnings and profits 
limitation of section 952(c)(1)(A) and paragraph (e) of this section, 
recapture accounts will be established and subject to recharacterization 
in any subsequent taxable year to the extent the recapture accounts were 
not previously recharacterized or distributed, as provided in paragraphs 
(f)(2) and (3) of this section.
    (2) Rules of recapture--(i) Recapture account. If a category of 
subpart F income described in section 952(a) or, in the case of foreign 
base company income, described in Sec. 1.954-1(c)(1)(iii)(A) (1) or (2) 
is reduced under the current year earnings and profits limitation of 
section 952(c)(1)(A) and paragraph (e) of this section for a taxable 
year, the amount of such reduction shall constitute a recapture account.
    (ii) Recapture. Each recapture account of the controlled foreign 
corporation will be recharacterized, on a proportionate basis, as 
subpart F income in the same separate category (as defined in 
Sec. 1.904-5(a)(1)) as the recapture account to the extent that current 
year earnings and profits exceed subpart F income in a taxable year. The 
United States shareholder must include his pro rata share (determined 
under the rules of Sec. 1.951-1(e)) of each recharacterized amount in 
income as subpart F income in such separate category for the taxable 
year.
    (iii) Reduction of recapture account and corresponding earnings. 
Each recapture account, and post-1986 undistributed earnings in the 
separate category containing the recapture account, will be reduced in 
any taxable year by the amount which is recharacterized under paragraph 
(f)(2)(ii) of this section. In addition, each recapture account, and 
post-1986 undistributed earnings in the separate category containing the 
recapture account, will be reduced in the amount of any distribution out 
of that account (as determined under the ordering rules of section 
959(c) and paragraph (f)(3)(ii) of this section).
    (3) Distribution ordering rules--(i) Coordination of recapture and 
distribution rules. If a controlled foreign corporation distributes an 
amount out of earnings and profits described in section 959(c)(3) in a 
year in which current year earnings and profits exceed subpart F income 
and there is an amount in a recapture account for such year, the 
recapture rules will apply first.
    (ii) Distributions reduce recapture accounts first. Any distribution 
made by a controlled foreign corporation out of

[[Page 212]]

earnings and profits described in section 959(c)(3) shall be treated as 
made first on a proportionate basis out of the recapture accounts in 
each separate category to the extent thereof (even if the amount in the 
recapture account exceeds post-1986 undistributed earnings in the 
separate category containing the recapture account). Any remaining 
distribution shall be treated as made on a proportionate basis out of 
the remaining earnings and profits of the controlled foreign corporation 
in each separate category. See section 904(d)(3)(D).
    (4) Examples. The application of paragraphs (e) and (f) of this 
section may be illustrated by the following examples:

    Example 1. (i) A, a U.S. person, is the sole shareholder of CFC, a 
controlled foreign corporation formed on January 1, 1998, whose 
functional currency is the u. In 1998, CFC earns 100u of foreign base 
company sales income that is general limitation income described in 
section 904(d)(1)(I) and incurs a (200u) loss attributable to activities 
that would have produced general limitation income that is not subpart F 
income. In 1998 CFC also earns 100u of foreign personal holding company 
income that is passive income described in section 904(d)(1)(A), and 
100u of foreign personal holding company income that is dividend income 
subject to a separate limitation described in section 904(d)(1)(E) for 
dividends from a noncontrolled section 902 corporation. CFC's subpart F 
income for 1998, 300u, exceeds CFC's current earnings and profits, 100u, 
by 200u. Under section 952(c)(1)(A) and paragraph (e) of this section, 
subpart F income is limited to CFC's current earnings and profits of 
100u, all of which is included in A's gross income under section 
951(a)(1)(A). The 200u of CFC's 1998 subpart F income that is not 
included in A's income in 1998 by reason of section 952(c)(1)(A) is 
subject to recapture under section 952(c)(2) and paragraph (f) of this 
section.
    (ii) For purposes of determining the amount and type of income 
included in A's gross income and the amount and type of income in CFC's 
recapture account, the rules of paragraphs (e)(1) and (2) of this 
section apply. Under paragraph (e)(1)(i) of this section, the amount by 
which CFC's subpart F income exceeds its earnings and profits for 1998, 
200u, first reduces from 100u to 0 CFC's subpart F income in the general 
limitation category, which has a current year deficit of (100u) in 
earnings and profits. Next, under paragraph (e)(1)(iii) of this section, 
the remaining 100u by which CFC's 1998 subpart F income exceeds earnings 
and profits is applied proportionately to reduce CFC's subpart F income 
in the separate categories for passive income (100u) and dividends from 
the noncontrolled section 902 corporation (100u). Thus, A includes 50u 
of passive limitation/foreign personal holding company income and 50u of 
dividends from the noncontrolled section 902 corporation/foreign 
personal holding company income in gross income in 1998. CFC has 100u in 
its general limitation/foreign base company sales income recapture 
account attributable to the 100u of foreign base company sales income 
that is not included in A's income by reason of the earnings and profits 
limitation of section 952(c)(1)(A). CFC also has 50u in its passive 
limitation recapture account, all of which is attributable to foreign 
personal holding company income, and 50u in its recapture account for 
dividends from the noncontrolled section 902 corporation, all of which 
is attributable to foreign personal holding company income.
    (iii) For purposes of computing post-1986 undistributed earnings, 
the rules of sections 902 and 960, including the rules of Sec. 1.960-
1(i), apply. Under Sec. 1.960-1(i), the general limitation deficit of 
(100u) is allocated proportionately to reduce passive limitation 
earnings of 100u and noncontrolled section 902 dividend earnings of 
100u. Thus, passive limitation earnings are reduced by 50u to 50u (100u 
passive limitation earnings/200u total earnings in positive separate 
categories  x  (100u) general limitation deficit=50u reduction), and the 
noncontrolled section 902 corporation earnings are reduced by 50u to 50u 
(100u noncontrolled section 902 corporation earnings/200u total earnings 
in positive separate categories  x  (100u) general limitation 
deficit=50u reduction). All of CFC's post-1986 foreign income taxes with 
respect to passive limitation income and dividends from the 
noncontrolled section 902 corporation are deemed paid by A under section 
960 with respect to the subpart F inclusions (50u inclusion/50u earnings 
in each separate category). After the inclusion and deemed-paid taxes 
are computed, at the close of 1998 CFC has a (100u) deficit in general 
limitation earnings (100u subpart F earnings + (200u) nonsubpart F 
loss), 50u of passive limitation earnings (100u of earnings attributable 
to foreign personal holding company income -50u inclusion) with a 
corresponding passive limitation/foreign personal holding company income 
recapture account of 50u, and 50u of earnings subject to a separate 
limitation for dividends from the noncontrolled section 902 corporation 
(100u earnings -50u inclusion) with a corresponding noncontrolled 
section 902 corporation/foreign personal holding company income 
recapture account of 50u.
    Example 2. (i) The facts are the same as in Example 1 with the 
addition of the following facts. In 1999, CFC earns 100u of foreign base 
company sales income that is general limitation income and 100u of 
foreign personal

[[Page 213]]

holding company income that is passive limitation income. In addition, 
CFC incurs (10u) of expenses that are allocable to its separate 
limitation for dividends from the noncontrolled section 902 corporation. 
Thus, CFC's subpart F income for 1999, 200u, exceeds CFC's current 
earnings and profits, 190u, by 10u. Under section 952(c)(1)(A) and 
paragraph (e) of this section, subpart F income is limited to CFC's 
current earnings and profits of 190u, all of which is included in A's 
gross income under section 951(a)(1)(A).
    (ii) For purposes of determining the amount and type of income 
included in A's gross income and the amount and type of income in CFC's 
recapture accounts, the rules of paragraphs (e)(1) and (2) of this 
section apply. While CFC's general limitation post-1986 undistributed 
earnings for 1999 are 0 ((100u) opening balance + 100u subpart F 
income), CFC's general limitation subpart F income (100u) does not 
exceed its general limitation current earnings and profits (100u) for 
1999. Accordingly, under paragraph (e)(1)(iii) of this section, the 
amount by which CFC's subpart F income exceeds its earnings and profits 
for 1999, 10u, is applied proportionately to reduce CFC's subpart F 
income in the separate categories for general limitation income, 100u, 
and passive income, 100u. Thus, A includes 95u of general limitation 
foreign base company sales income and 95u of passive limitation foreign 
personal holding company income in gross income in 1999. At the close of 
1999 CFC has 105u in its general limitation/foreign base company sales 
income recapture account (100u from 1998 + 5u from 1999), 55u in its 
passive limitation/foreign personal holding company income recapture 
account (50u from 1998 + 5u from 1999), and 50u in its dividends from 
the noncontrolled section 902 corporation/foreign personal holding 
company income recapture account (all from 1998).
    (iii) For purposes of computing post-1986 undistributed earnings in 
each separate category, the rules of sections 902 and 960, including the 
rules of Sec. 1.960-1(i), apply. Thus, post-1986 undistributed earnings 
(or an accumulated deficit) in each separate category are increased (or 
reduced) by current earnings and profits or current deficits in each 
separate category. The accumulated deficit in CFC's general limitation 
earnings and profits (100u) is reduced to 0 by the addition of 100u of 
1999 earnings and profits. CFC's passive limitation earnings of 50u are 
increased by 100u to 150u, and CFC's noncontrolled section 902 
corporation earnings of 50u are decreased by (10u) to 40u. After the 
addition of current year earnings and profits and deficits to the 
separate categories there are no deficits remaining in any separate 
category. Thus, the allocation rules of Sec. 1.960-1(i)(4) do not apply 
in 1999. Accordingly, in determining the post-1986 foreign income taxes 
deemed paid by A, post-1986 undistributed earnings in each separate 
category are unaffected by earnings in the other categories. Foreign 
taxes deemed paid under section 960 for 1999 would be determined as 
follows for each separate category: with respect to the inclusion of 95u 
of foreign base company sales income out of general limitation earnings, 
the section 960 fraction is 95u inclusion/0 total earnings; with respect 
to the inclusion of 95u of passive limitation income the section 960 
fraction is 95u inclusion/150u passive earnings. Thus, no general 
limitation taxes would be associated with the inclusion of the general 
limitation earnings because there are no accumulated earnings in the 
general limitation category. After the deemed-paid taxes are computed, 
at the close of 1999 CFC has a (95u) deficit in general limitation 
earnings and profits ((100u) opening balance + 100u current earnings 
-95u inclusion), 55u of passive limitation earnings and profits (50u 
opening balance + 100u current foreign personal holding company income 
-95u inclusion), and 40u of earnings and profits subject to the separate 
limitation for dividends from the noncontrolled section 902 corporation 
(50u opening balance + (10u) expense).
    Example 3. (i) A, a U.S. person, is the sole shareholder of CFC, a 
controlled foreign corporation whose functional currency is the u. At 
the beginning of 1998, CFC has post-1986 undistributed earnings of 275u, 
all of which are general limitation earnings described in section 
904(d)(1)(I). CFC has no previously-taxed earnings and profits described 
in section 959(c)(1) or (c)(2). In 1998, CFC has a (200u) loss in the 
shipping category described in section 904(d)(1)(D), 100u of foreign 
personal holding company income that is passive income described in 
section 904(d)(1)(A), and 125u of general limitation manufacturing 
earnings that are not subpart F income. CFC's subpart F income for 1998, 
100u, exceeds CFC's current earnings and profits, 25u, by 75u. Under 
section 952(c)(1)(A) and paragraph (e) of this section, subpart F income 
is limited to CFC's current earnings and profits of 25u, all of which is 
included in A's gross income under section 951(a)(1)(A). The 75u of 
CFC's 1998 subpart F income that is not included in A's income in 1998 
by reason of section 952(c)(1)(A) is subject to recapture under section 
952(c)(2) and paragraph (f) of this section.
    (ii) For purposes of determining the amount and type of income 
included in A's gross income and the amount and type of income in CFC's 
recapture account, the rules of paragraphs (e)(1) and (2) of this 
section apply. Under paragraph (e)(1) of this section, the amount of 
CFC's subpart F income in excess of earnings and profits for 1998, 75u, 
reduces the 100u of passive limitation foreign personal holding company 
income. Thus, A includes 25u of passive limitation foreign personal 
holding company income in gross

[[Page 214]]

income, and CFC has 75u in its passive limitation/foreign personal 
holding company income recapture account.
    (iii) For purposes of computing post-1986 undistributed earnings in 
each separate category the rules of sections 902 and 960, including the 
rules of Sec. 1.960-1(i), apply. Under Sec. 1.960-1(i), the shipping 
limitation deficit of (200u) is allocated proportionately to reduce 
general limitation earnings of 400u and passive limitation earnings of 
100u. Thus, general limitation earnings are reduced by 160u to 240u 
(400u general limitation earnings/500u total earnings in positive 
separate categories  x  (200u) shipping deficit=160u reduction), and 
passive limitation earnings are reduced by 40u to 60u (100u passive 
earnings/500u total earnings in positive separate categories  x  (200u) 
shipping deficit=40u reduction). Five-twelfths of CFC's post-1986 
foreign income taxes with respect to passive limitation earnings are 
deemed paid by A under section 960 with respect to the subpart F 
inclusion (25u inclusion/60u passive earnings). After the inclusion and 
deemed-paid taxes are computed, at the close of 1998 CFC has 400u of 
general limitation earnings (275u opening balance + 125u current 
earnings), 75u of passive limitation earnings (100u of foreign personal 
holding company income -25u inclusion), and a (200u) deficit in shipping 
limitation earnings.
    Example 4. (i) The facts are the same as in Example 3 with the 
addition of the following facts. In 1999, CFC earns 50u of general 
limitation earnings that are not subpart F income and 75u of passive 
limitation income that is foreign personal holding company income. Thus, 
CFC has 125u of current earnings and profits. CFC distributes 200u to A. 
Under paragraph (f)(3)(i) of this section, the recapture rules are 
applied first. Thus, the amount by which 1999 current earnings and 
profits exceed subpart F income, 50u, is recharacterized as passive 
limitation foreign personal holding company income. CFC's total subpart 
F income for 1999 is 125u of passive limitation foreign personal holding 
company income (75u current earnings plus 50u recapture account), and 
the passive limitation/foreign personal holding company income recapture 
account is reduced from 75u to 25u.
    (ii) CFC has 150u of previously-taxed earnings and profits described 
in section 959(c)(2) (25u attributable to 1998 and 125u attributable to 
1999), all of which is passive limitation earnings and profits. Under 
section 959(c), 150u of the 200u distribution is deemed to be made from 
earnings and profits described in section 959(c)(2). The remaining 50u 
is deemed to be made from earnings and profits described in section 
959(c)(3). Under paragraph (f)(3)(ii) of this section, the dividend 
distribution is deemed to be made first out of the passive limitation 
recapture account to the extent thereof (25u). Under paragraph 
(f)(2)(iii) of this section, the passive limitation recapture account is 
reduced from 25u to 0. The remaining distribution of 25u is treated as 
made out of CFC's general limitation earnings and profits.
    (iii) For purposes of computing post-1986 undistributed earnings, 
the rules of section 902 and 960, including the rules of Sec. 1.960-
1(i), apply. Thus, the shipping limitation accumulated deficit of (200u) 
reduces general limitation earnings and profits of 450u and passive 
limitation earnings and profits of 150u on a proportionate basis. Thus, 
100% of CFC's post-1986 foreign income taxes with respect to passive 
limitation earnings are deemed paid by A under section 960 with respect 
to the 1999 subpart F inclusion of 125u (100u inclusion (numerator 
limited to denominator)/100u passive earnings). No post-1986 foreign 
income taxes remain to be deemed paid under section 902 in connection 
with the 25u distribution from the passive limitation/foreign personal 
holding company income recapture account. One-twelfth of CFC's post-1986 
foreign income taxes with respect to general limitation earnings are 
deemed paid by A under section 902 with respect to the distribution of 
25u general limitation earnings and profits described in section 
959(c)(3) (25u inclusion/300u general limitation earnings). After the 
deemed-paid taxes are computed, at the close of 1999 CFC has 425u of 
general limitation earnings and profits (400u opening balance + 50u 
current earnings--25u distribution), 0 of passive limitation earnings 
(75u recapture account + 75u current foreign personal holding company 
income--125u inclusion--25u distribution), and a (200u) deficit in 
shipping limitation earnings.

    (5) Effective date. Paragraph (e) of this section and this paragraph 
(f) apply to taxable years of a controlled foreign corporation beginning 
after March 3, 1997.

[T.D. 6795, 30 FR 938, Jan. 29, 1965, as amended by T.D. 6892, 31 FR 
11144, Aug. 23, 1966; T.D. 7293, 38 FR 32802, Nov. 28, 1973; T.D. 7545, 
43 FR 19652, May 8, 1978; T.D. 7862, 47 FR 56490, Dec. 17, 1982; T.D. 
7893, 48 FR 22508, May 19, 1983; T.D. 7894, 48 FR 22516, May 19, 1983; 
T.D. 8331, 56 FR 2846, Jan. 25, 1991; T.D. 8704, 62 FR 18, Jan. 2, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 1.952-2   Determination of gross income and taxable income of a foreign corporation.

    (a) Determination of gross income--(1) In general. Except as 
provided in subparagraph (2) of this paragraph, the gross income of a 
foreign corporation for any taxable year shall, subject to the special 
rules of paragraph (c) of this section, be determined by treating such 
foreign corporation as a domestic

[[Page 215]]

corporation taxable under section 11 and by applying the principles of 
section 61 and the regulations thereunder.
    (2) Insurance gross income--(i) Life insurance gross income. The 
gross income for any taxable year of a controlled foreign corporation 
which is engaged in the business of reinsuring or issuing insurance or 
annuity contracts and which, if it were a domestic corporation engaged 
only in such business, would be taxable as a life insurance company to 
which part I (sections 801 through 820) of subchapter L of chapter 1 of 
the Code applies, shall, subject to the special rules of paragraph (c) 
of this section, be the sum of--
    (a) The gross investment income, as defined under section 804(b), 
except that interest which is excluded from gross income under section 
103 shall not be taken into account;
    (b) The sum of the items taken into account under section 809(c), 
except that advance premiums shall not be taken into account; and
    (c) The amount by which the net long-term capital gain exceeds the 
net short-term capital loss.
    (ii) Mutual and other insurance gross income. The gross income for 
any taxable year of a controlled foreign corporation which is engaged in 
the business of reinsuring or issuing insurance or annuity contracts and 
which, if it were a domestic corporation engaged only in such business, 
would be taxable as a mutual insurance company to which part II 
(sections 821 through 826) of subchapter L of chapter 1 of the Code 
applies or as a mutual marine insurance or other insurance company to 
which part III (sections 831 and 832) of subchapter L of chapter 1 of 
the Code applies, shall, subject to the special rules of paragraph (c) 
of this section, be--
    (a) The sum of--
    (1) The gross income, as defined in section 832(b)(1);
    (2) The amount of losses incurred, as defined in section 832(b)(5); 
and
    (3) The amount of expenses incurred, as defined in section 
832(b)(6); reduced by
    (b) The amount of interest which under section 103 is excluded from 
gross income.
    (b) Determination of taxable income--(1) In general. Except as 
provided in subparagraph (2) of this paragraph, the taxable income of a 
foreign corporation for any taxable year shall, subject to the special 
rules of paragraph (c) of this section, be determined by treating such 
foreign corporation as a domestic corporation taxable under section 11 
and by applying the principles of section 63.
    (2) Insurance taxable income. The taxable income for any taxable 
year of a controlled foreign corporation which is engaged in the 
business of reinsuring or issuing insurance or annuity contracts and 
which, if it were a domestic corporation engaged only in such business, 
would be taxable as an insurance company to which subchapter L of 
chapter 1 of the Code applies shall, subject to the special rules of 
paragraph (c) of this section, be determined by treating such 
corporation as a domestic corporation taxable under subchapter L of 
chapter 1 of the Code and by applying the principles of Secs. 1.953-4 
and 1.953-5 for determining taxable income.
    (c) Special rules for purposes of this section--(1) Nonapplication 
of certain provisions. Except where otherwise distinctly expressed, the 
provisions of subchapters F, G, H, L, M, N, S, and T of chapter 1 of the 
Internal Revenue Code shall not apply and, for taxable years of a 
controlled foreign corporation beginning after March 3, 1997, the 
provisions of section 103 of the Internal Revenue Code shall not apply.
    (2) Application of principles of Sec. 1.964-1. The determinations 
with respect to a foreign corporation shall be made as follows:
    (i) Books of account. The books of account to be used shall be those 
regularly maintained by the corporation for the purpose of accounting to 
its shareholders.
    (ii) Accounting principles. Except as provided in subparagraphs (3) 
and (4) of this paragraph, the accounting principles to be employed are 
those described in paragraph (b) of Sec. 1.964-1. Thus, in applying 
accounting principles generally accepted in the United States

[[Page 216]]

for purposes of reflecting in the financial statements of a domestic 
corporation the operations of foreign affiliates, no adjustment need be 
made unless such adjustment will have a material effect, within the 
meaning of paragraph (a) of Sec. 1.964-1.
    (iii) Translation into United States dollars--(a) In general. Except 
as provided in (b) of this subdivision, the amounts determined in 
accordance with subdivision (ii) of this subparagraph shall be 
translated into United States dollars in accordance with the principles 
of paragraph (d) of Sec. 1.964-1.
    (b) Special rule. In any case in which the value of the foreign 
currency in relation to the United States dollar fluctuates more than 10 
percent during any translation period (within the meaning of paragraph 
(d)(6) of Sec. 1.964-1), the subpart F income and non-subpart F income 
shall be separately translated as if each constituted all the income of 
the controlled foreign corporation for the translation period.
    (iv) Tax accounting methods. The tax accounting methods to be 
employed are those established or adopted by or on behalf of the foreign 
corporation under paragraph (c) of Sec. 1.964-1. Thus, such accounting 
methods must be consistent with the manner of treating inventories, 
depreciation, and elections referred to in subdivisions (ii), (iii), and 
(iv) of paragraph (c)(1) of Sec. 1.964-1 and used for purposes of such 
paragraph; however, if, in accordance with paragraph (c)(6) of 
Sec. 1.964-1, a foreign corporation receives foreign base company income 
before any elections are made or before an accounting method is adopted 
by or on behalf of such corporation under paragraph (c)(3) of 
Sec. 1.964-1, the determinations of whether an exclusion set forth in 
section 954(b) applies shall be made as if no elections had been made 
and no accounting method had been adopted.
    (v) Exchange gain or loss--(a) Exchange gain or loss, determined in 
accordance with the principles of Sec. 1.964-1(e), shall be taken into 
account for purposes of determining gross income and taxable income.
    (b) Exchange gain or loss shall be treated as foreign base company 
shipping income (or as a deduction allocable thereto) to the extent that 
it is attributable to foreign base company shipping operations. The 
extent to which exchange gain or loss is attributable to foreign base 
company shipping operations may be determined under any reasonable 
method which is consistently applied from year to year. For example, the 
extent to which the exchange gain or loss is attributable to foreign 
base company shipping operations may be determined on the basis of the 
ratio which the foreign based company shipping income of the corporation 
for the taxable year bears to its total gross income for the taxable 
year, such ratio to be determined without regard to this subdivision 
(v).
    (c) The remainder of the exchange gain or loss shall be allocated 
between subpart F income and non-subpart F income under any reasonable 
method which is consistently applied from year to year. For example, 
such remainder may be allocated to subpart F income in the same ratio 
that the gross subpart F income (exclusive of foreign base company 
shipping income) of the corporation for the taxable year bears to its 
total gross income (exclusive of foreign base company shipping income) 
for the taxable year, such ratio to be determined without regard to this 
subdivision (v).
    (3) Necessity for recognition of gain or loss. Gross income of a 
foreign corporation (including an insurance company) includes gain or 
loss only if such gain or loss would be recognized under the provisions 
of the Internal Revenue Code if the foreign corporation were a domestic 
corporation taxable under section 11 (subject to the modifications of 
subparagraph (1) of this paragraph). See section 1002. However, a 
foreign corporation shall not be treated as a domestic corporation for 
purposes of determining whether section 367 applies.
    (4) Gross income and gross receipts. The term ``gross income'' may 
not have the same meaning as the term ``gross receipts''. For example, 
in a manufacturing, merchandising, or mining business, gross income 
means the total sales less the cost of goods sold, plus any income from 
investments and from incidental or outside operations or sources.

[[Page 217]]

    (5) Treatment of capital loss and net operating loss. In determining 
taxable income of a foreign corporation for any taxable year--
    (i) Capital loss carryback and carryover. The capital loss carryback 
and carryover provided by section 1212(a) shall not be allowed.
    (ii) Net operating loss deduction. The net operating loss deduction 
under section 172(a) or the operations loss deduction under section 812 
shall not be allowed.
    (6) Corporations which have insurance income. For purposes of 
paragraphs (a)(2) and (b)(2) of this section, in determining whether a 
controlled foreign corporation which is engaged in the business of 
reinsuring or issuing insurance or annuity contracts and which, if it 
were a domestic corporation engaged only in such business, would be 
taxable as an insurance company to which subchapter L of chapter 1 of 
the Code applies, it is immaterial that--
    (i) The corporation would be exempt from taxation as an organization 
described in section 501(a),
    (ii) The corporation would not be taxable as an insurance company to 
which subchapter L of the Code applies, or
    (iii) The corporation would be subject to the alternative tax for 
small mutual insurance companies provided by section 821(c).

[T.D. 6795, 30 FR 941, Jan. 29, 1965, as amended by T.D. 7893, 48 FR 
22508, May 19, 1983; T.D. 7894, 48 FR 22516, May 19, 1983; T.D. 8704, 62 
FR 20, Jan. 2, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 1.953-1   Income from insurance of United States risks.

    (a) In general. The subpart F income of a controlled foreign 
corporation for any taxable year includes its income derived from the 
insurance of United States risks for such taxable year. See section 
952(a)(1). A controlled foreign corporation shall have income derived 
from the insurance of United States risks for such purpose of it has 
taxable income, as determined under Sec. 1.953-4 or Sec. 1.953-5, which 
is attributable to the reinsuring or the issuing of any insurance or 
annuity contract in connection with United States risks, as defined in 
Sec. 1.953-2 or Sec. 1.953-3, and if it satisfies the 5-percent minimum 
premium requirement prescribed in paragraph (b) of this section. It is 
immaterial for purposes of this section whether the person insured or 
the beneficiary of any insurance, annuity, or reinsurance contract is, 
as to such corporation, a related person or a United States shareholder. 
For definition of the term ``controlled foreign corporation'' for 
purposes of taking into account income derived from the insurance of 
United States risks under section 953, see section 957 (a) and (b) and 
Secs. 1.957-1 and 1.957-2.
    (b) 5-percent minimum premium requirement. A controlled foreign 
corporation shall not have income derived from the insurance of United 
States risks for purposes of this section unless the premiums received 
by such corporation during the taxable year which are attributable to 
the reinsuring and the issuing of insurance and annuity contracts in 
connection with the United States risks exceed 5 percent of the total 
premiums which are received by such corporation during such taxable year 
and which are attributable to the reinsuring and the issuing of 
insurance and annuity contracts in connection with all risks.
    (c) General definitions. For purposes of Secs. 1.953-1 to 1.953-6, 
inclusive--
    (1) Reinsurance, etc. The terms ``reinsurance'', ``insurance'', and 
``annuity contract'' have the same meaning which they have for purposes 
of applying section 809(c)(1) or section 832(b)(4), as the case may be.
    (2) Premiums. The term ``premiums'' means the items taken into 
account for the taxable year under section 809(c)(1), or the amount 
computed for the taxable year under section 832(b)(4) without the 
application of subparagraph (B) thereof, as the case may be; except 
that, for purposes of determining the amount of premiums received in 
applying paragraph (b) of this section or paragraph (a) of Sec. 1.953-3, 
advance premiums and deposits shall not be taken into account.
    (3) Insurance company. The term ``insurance company'' has the same 
meaning which it has for purposes of applying section 801(a), determined 
by applying the principles of paragraph (a) of Sec. 1.801-3.
    (4) Related person. The term ``related person'', when used with 
respect to a

[[Page 218]]

controlled foreign corporation, shall have the meaning assigned to it by 
paragraph (e) of Sec. 1.954-1.
    (5) Policy period. With respect to any insurance or annuity contract 
under which a corporation is potentially liable at any time during its 
taxable year, the term ``policy period'' means with respect to such year 
each period of coverage under the contract if such period begins or ends 
with or within the taxable year, except that, if such period of coverage 
is more than one year, such term means such of the following periods as 
are applicable, each one of which is a policy period with respect to the 
taxable year:
    (i) The one-year period which begins with the effective date of the 
contract and begins or ends with or within the taxable year,
    (ii) The one-year period which begins with an anniversary of the 
contract and begins or ends with or within the taxable year, and
    (iii) The period of less than one year if such period begins with an 
anniversary of the contract, ends with the date on which coverage under 
the contract terminates, and begins or ends with or within the taxable 
year.

For such purposes, the effective date of the contract is the date on 
which coverage under the contract begins, and the anniversary of the 
contract is the annual return of the effective date. The period of 
coverage under a contract is the period beginning with the effective 
date of the contract and ending with the date on which the coverage 
under the contract expires; except that, if the risk under the contract 
has been transferred by assumption reinsurance, the period of coverage 
shall end with the effective date of such transfer or, if the contract 
is canceled, with the effective date of cancellation. For this purpose, 
the term ``assumption reinsurance'' shall have the meaning provided by 
paragraph (a)(7)(ii) of Sec. 1.809-5. The application of this 
subparagraph may be illustrated by the following examples:

    Example 1. Controlled foreign corporation A issues to domestic 
corporation M an insurance contract which provides coverage for the 2\1/
2\ year period beginning on July 1, 1963. Corporation A uses the 
calendar year as the taxable year. For 1963, the policy period under 
such contract as to A Corporation is July 1, 1963, to June 30, 1964. For 
1964, the policy periods under such contract as to A Corporation are 
July 1, 1963, to June 30, 1964, and July 1, 1964, to June 30, 1965. For 
1965, the policy periods under such contract as to A Corporation are 
July 1, 1964, to June 30, 1965, and July 1, 1965, to December 31, 1965.
    Example 2. The facts are the same as in example 1 except that M 
Corporation cancels the contract on August 31, 1963. For 1963, the 
policy period under such contract as to A Corporation is July 1, 1963, 
to August 31, 1963.
    Example 3. The facts are the same as in example 1 except that on 
January 15, 1965, A Corporation cedes insurance under the contract to 
controlled foreign corporation B, which also uses the calendar year as 
the taxable year. For 1964, the policy periods under such contract as to 
A Corporation are July 1, 1963, to June 30, 1964, and July 1, 1964, to 
June 30, 1965. For 1965, the policy periods under such contract as to 
both A Corporation and B Corporation are July 1, 1964, to June 30, 1965, 
and July 1, 1965, to December 31, 1965.
    Example 4. Controlled foreign corporation C, which uses the calendar 
year as the taxable year, issues to domestic corporation N an insurance 
contract which covers the marine risks in connection with shipping a 
machine to Europe. The contract does not specify the dates during which 
the machine is covered, but provides coverage from the time the machine 
is delivered alongside a named vessel in Hoboken, New Jersey, until the 
machine is delivered alongside such vessel in Liverpool, England. Such 
deliveries in New Jersey and England take place on February 1, and 
February 28, 1963, respectively. For 1963, the policy period under such 
contract as to C Corporation is February 1, to February 28, 1963.

    (6) Foreign country. The term ``foreign country'' includes, where 
not otherwise expressly provided, a possession of the United States.

[T.D. 6781, 29 FR 18201, Dec. 23, 1964]


<R05>
Sec. 1.953-2   Actual United States risks.

    (a) In general. For purposes of paragraph (a) of Sec. 1.953-1, the 
term ``United States risks'' means risks described in section 
953(a)(1)(A)--
    (1) In connection with property in the United States (as defined in 
paragraph (b) of this section),
    (2) In connection with liability arising out of activity in the 
United States (as defined in paragraph (c) of this section), or
    (3) In connection with the lives or health of residents of the 
United States

[[Page 219]]

(as defined in paragraph (d) of this section).

For purposes of section 953(a), the term ``United States'' is used in a 
geographical sense and includes only the States and the District of 
Columbia. Therefore, the reinsuring or the issuing of insurance or 
annuity contracts by a controlled foreign corporation in connection with 
property located in a foreign country or a possession of the United 
States, in connection with activity in a foreign country or a 
possession, or in connection with the lives or health of citizens of the 
United States who are not residents of the United States will not give 
rise to income to which paragraph (a) of Sec. 1.953-1 applies, unless 
the income derived by the controlled foreign corporation from such 
contracts constitutes income derived in connection with risks which are 
deemed to be United States risks, as defined in Sec. 1.953-3.
    (b) Property in the United States. The term ``property in the United 
States'' means property, as defined in subparagraph (1) of this 
paragraph, which is in the United States, within the meaning of 
subparagraph (2) of this paragraph.
    (1) Property defined. The term ``property'' means any interest of an 
insured in tangible (including real and personal) or intangible 
property. Such interests include, but are not limited to, those of an 
owner, landlord, tenant, mortgagor, mortgagee, trustee, beneficiary, or 
partner. Thus, for example, if insurance is issued against loss from 
fire and theft with respect to an insured's home and its contents, such 
risks are risks in connection with property, whether the insured is the 
owner or lessee and whether the contents include furniture or cash and 
securities. Furthermore, if insurance is issued against all risks of 
damage or loss with respect to the automobile of an insured, such risks 
are risks in connection with property, whether the risks insured against 
may be caused by the insured, another person, or natural forces.
    (2) United States location--(i) In general. Property will be 
considered property in the United States when it is exclusively located 
in the United States. Conversely, property will be considered property 
not in the United States when it is exclusively located outside the 
United States. In addition, property which is ordinarily located in, but 
temporarily located outside, the United States will be considered 
property in the United States both when it is ordinarily located in, and 
when it is temporarily located outside, the United States if the premium 
which is attributable to the reinsuring or issuing of any insurance 
contract in connection with such property cannot be allocated to, or 
apportioned between, risks incurred when such property is actually 
located in the United States and risks incurred when it is actually 
located outside the United States. If such premium can be so allocated 
or apportioned on a reasonable basis, however, such property will be 
considered property not in the United States when it is actually located 
outside the United States. However, property will not be considered 
property in the United States if it is neither property which is 
exclusively located in the United States nor property which is 
ordinarily located in, but temporarily located outside, the United 
States. The rules prescribed in subdivision (ii) of this subparagraph 
shall apply in determining whether a premium can be allocated or 
apportioned on a reasonable basis to or between risks incurred when 
property is actually located in the United States and risks incurred 
when such property is actually located outside the United States. The 
rules prescribed in subdivisions (iii) through (x) of this subparagraph 
shall apply in determining whether property is, or will be considered, 
exclusively located in or outside the United States and whether property 
is, or will be considered, ordinarily located in the United States; such 
rules also limit the rule of premium allocation and apportionment 
prescribed in this subdivision and subdivision (ii) of this 
subparagraph. The determinations required by this subparagraph shall be 
made with respect to the location of property during the policy period 
applicable to the taxable year of the insuring or reinsuring 
corporation, or, if more than one policy period exists with respect to 
such taxable year, such determinations shall be

[[Page 220]]

made separately with respect to the location of property during each 
such policy period.
    (ii) Premium allocation or apportionment. Whether a premium can be 
allocated or apportioned on a reasonable basis to or between risks 
incurred when property is actually located in the United States and 
risks incurred when such property is actually located outside the United 
States shall depend on the intention of the parties to the insurance 
contract, as determined from its provisions and the facts and 
circumstances preceding its execution. Contract provisions on the basis 
of which the premium reasonably may be so allocated or apportioned 
include, but are not limited to, provisions which separately describe 
each risk covered, the period of coverage of each risk, the special 
warranties for each risk, the premium for each risk (or the basis for 
determining such premium), and the conditions of paying the premium for 
each risk. For purposes of this subdivision, it shall be unnecessary 
formally to make a separate policy with respect to each risk covered or 
with respect to each clause attached to the policy, provided that the 
intention of the parties to the contract is reasonably clear. For 
example, if in the ordinary course of carrying on an insurance business 
an insurance policy is issued which covers fire, theft, and water damage 
risks incurred when property is actually located in the United States 
and marine risks incurred when such property is actually located outside 
the United States and which, pursuant to accepted insurance principles, 
properly describes the premium rates as percentages of the amount of 
coverage as ``.825% plus .3% fire, etc. risks plus .12% water risks = 
1.245%'', a reasonable basis exists to allocate a $124.50 premium paid 
for $10,000 of such coverage to $82.50 for foreign risks and $42.00 
($30.00+ $12.00) to United States risks.
    (iii) Property in general--(a) Ordinary and temporary location. 
Except as otherwise provided in subdivisions (iv) through (x) of this 
subparagraph, the determination of whether property is ordinarily 
located in the United States will depend on all the facts and 
circumstances in each case. Property is ordinarily located in the United 
States if its location in the United States is regular, usual, or often 
occurring. However, in all cases property will be considered ordinarily 
located in the United States if it is actually located in the United 
States for an aggregate of more than 50 percent of the days in the 
applicable policy period whereas property will, under no circumstances, 
be considered ordinarily located in the United States if it is actually 
located in the United States for an aggregate of not more than 30 
percent of the days in the applicable policy period. Property which is 
ordinarily located in the United States is temporarily located outside 
the United States when it is actually located outside the United States. 
For purposes of determining the number and percent of the days in an 
applicable policy period, the term ``day'' means, not any 24-
consecutive-hour period, but a continuous period of twenty-four hours 
commencing from midnight and ending with the following midnight; in 
determining the location of property for such purposes, an amount of 
time which is at least one-half of such a day, but less than the entire 
day, shall be considered a day, and an amount of time which is less than 
one-half of such a day shall not be considered a day.
    (b) Illustrations. The application of this subdivision may be 
illustrated by the following examples:

    Example 1. Controlled foreign corporation A issues to domestic 
corporation M a comprehensive blanket or floater insurance policy which, 
for one year, covers inventory samples which M Corporation regularly 
ships from the United States in order to encourage sales. Such shipments 
are made on the condition that they be returned to the United States 
within 5 days after they are received. During the one-year policy 
period, such samples are sent from, and returned to, the United States 
50 times, and during such one-year period are actually located in the 
United States for an aggregate of 120 days. Since the location of the 
samples in the United States during such one-year period is often 
recurring, they are property ordinarily located in, but temporarily 
located outside, the United States. Therefore, they will be considered 
property in the United States even though for such one-year period their 
location in the United States is not regular or usual and is not for an 
aggregate of more than 50 percent of the days in the policy period. 
However, if,

[[Page 221]]

by considering such factors as the terms and premium schedule of the 
insurance contract as well as the number, value, and duration of the 
location in and outside the United States, of such samples, the premium 
which is attributable to the issuing of such contract can be allocated 
to, or apportioned between, risks occurring when such samples are 
actually located in the United States and risks occurring when they are 
actually located outside the United States, such samples will be 
considered property not in the United States when they are actually 
located outside the United States.
    Example 2. A machine, located for several years in a foreign branch 
of a United States manufacturer, is permanently transferred to the home 
office of such manufacturer, where it arrives on January 1, 1963, and 
remains for the remainder of 1963. Under a separate insurance contract 
issued by a controlled foreign corporation, which uses the calendar year 
as the taxable year, such machine is insured against damage for the 
three-year period commencing on May 1, 1962. Because of the change in 
location of the machine, the premiums are increased as of January 1, 
1963. Since the machine is in the United States from January 1, 1963, to 
April 30, 1963, its location in the United States is regular and usual 
during the policy period of May 1, 1962, to April 30, 1963. Accordingly, 
the machine is ordinarily located in the United States for such policy 
period. However, since the premium which is attributable to the issuing 
of such contract is allocable to risks occurring when the machine is 
actually located in, and when it is actually located outside, the United 
States, such machine will be considered property not in the United 
States from May 1, 1962, through December 31, 1962.

    (iv) Commercial motor vehicles, ships, aircraft, railroad rolling 
stock, and containers. Any motor vehicle, ship, aircraft, railroad 
rolling stock, or any container transported thereby, which is used 
exclusively in the commercial transportation of persons or property to 
or from the United States (including such transportation from one place 
to another in the United States) and is ordinarily located in the United 
States will be considered property in the United States both when such 
property is ordinarily located in, and when such property is temporarily 
located outside, the United States. Whether such property is used in the 
transportation of persons or property to or from the United States and 
is ordinarily located in the United States are issues to be determined 
from all the facts and circumstances in each case. However, in all cases 
such transportation property will be considered ordinarily located in 
the United States if either more than 50 percent of the miles traversed 
during the applicable policy period in the use of such property are 
traversed within the United States or such property is located in the 
United States more than 50 percent of the time during such period. 
Further, such transportation property will not at any time be considered 
property in the United States if either not more than 30 percent of the 
miles traversed during the applicable policy period in the use of such 
property are traversed within the United States or such property is 
located in the United States for not more than 30 percent of the time 
during such period. Nevertheless, if not more than 30 percent of the 
miles traversed during the applicable policy period in the use of such 
transportation property are traversed within the United States, such 
property will be considered ordinarily located in the United States if 
it is located in the United States more than 50 percent of the time 
during such period Moreover, if such transportation property is located 
in the United States for not more than 30 percent of the time during the 
applicable policy period, such property will be considered ordinarily 
located in the United States if more than 50 percent of the miles 
traversed during such period in the use of such property are traversed 
within the United States. If such transportation property is considered 
property in the United States because more than 50 percent of the miles 
traversed during the applicable policy period in the use of such 
property are traversed within the United States, the apportionment of 
premium provided in subdivision (i) of this subparagraph shall be made 
on a mileage basis. If, however, such property is considered property in 
the United States because such property is located in the United States 
more than 50 percent of the time during the applicable policy period, 
the apportionment of premium provided in subdivision (i) of this 
subparagraph shall be made on a time basis.
    (v) Noncommercial motor vehicles, ships, aircraft, and railroad 
rolling stock. Except as provided in subdivision (iv)

[[Page 222]]

of this subparagraph, any motor vehicle, ship or boat, aircraft, or 
railroad rolling stock which at any time is actually located in the 
United States and which either (a) is registered with the United States, 
a State (including any political subdivision thereof), or any agency 
thereof or (b), if not so registered, is owned by a citizen, resident, 
or corporation of the United States will be considered property which is 
ordinarily located in the United States. Unless the premium which is 
attributable to the reinsuring or issuing of any insurance contract in 
connection with such property considered ordinarily located in the 
United States is specifically allocated under the contract to risks 
incurred when such property is actually located in the United States and 
to risks incurred when it is actually located outside the United States, 
such property will be considered property in the United States both when 
it is ordinarily located in, and when it is temporarily located outside, 
the United States; under no circumstances will such property be 
considered outside the United States on the basis of any apportionment 
of such premium.
    (vi) Property exported or imported by railroad or motor vehicle. Any 
property which is exported from, or imported to, the United States by 
railroad or motor vehicle will be considered property ordinarily located 
in the United States which, when such property is not actually located 
in the United States, is temporarily located outside the United States. 
For example, if an insurance contract reinsured or issued in connection 
with property exported from the United States by motor vehicle covers 
risks commencing when such property is loaded on the motor vehicle at 
the United States warehouse and terminating when such property is 
unloaded at the foreign warehouse, and if the premium payable with 
respect to risks incurred when the property is in the United States and 
risks incurred when the property is in the foreign country is not 
separately stated, such property will be considered property in the 
United States only until such property is actually located outside the 
United States, provided that the premium can be properly apportioned 
(for example) on the basis of time or mileage, between risks incurred 
when the property is actually located in the United States and risks 
incurred when it is actually located outside the United States. If in 
such case the premium is not so apportionable, such property will be 
considered property in the United States both when such property is 
ordinarily located in, and when it is temporarily located outside, the 
United States.
    (vii) Property exported by ship or aircraft. If an insurance 
contract which is reinsured or issued in connection with property which 
is exported from the United States by ship or aircraft covers risks all 
of which terminate when such property is placed aboard a ship or 
aircraft at the United States port of exit for shipment from the United 
States, such property will be considered property in the United States. 
If such insurance contract covers risks all of which commence when such 
property is placed aboard a ship or aircraft at the United States port 
of exit for shipment from the United States, such property will be 
considered property not in the United States. If such insurance contract 
covers risks commencing before, and terminating after, such property is 
placed aboard a ship or aircraft at the United States port of exit for 
shipment from the United States, such property will be considered 
property ordinarily located in the United States which, after such 
property is placed aboard such ship or aircraft at the United States 
port of exit, is temporarily located outside the United States. The 
application of this subdivision may be illustrated by the following 
example:

    Example. A controlled foreign corporation issues an insurance 
contract in connection with property exported from the United States by 
ship. The contract covers risks commencing after such property is 
removed from the United States warehouse and terminating when such 
property is unloaded at the foreign port of entry. Assuming that the 
premium payable with respect to the risks incurred before and the risks 
incurred after the property is placed aboard the ship at the United 
States port of exit for shipment from the United States or with respect 
to the steps in handling such property during such coverage, such as 
transporting the property to the United States port of exit, unloading 
the property there, placing the property aboard the ship, holding the 
property aboard

[[Page 223]]

the ship in port, the actual voyage, and unloading the property at the 
foreign port of entry, is separately stated in, or is determinable from, 
such contract, the property will be considered property in the United 
States only until such property is placed aboard the ship at the United 
States port of exit for shipment from the United States. Assuming, 
however, that the premiums payable with respect to such steps, or with 
respect to the risks incurred before and the risks incurred after the 
property is placed aboard the ship at the United States port of exit, 
are not allocable or apportionable under the contract, such property 
will be considered property in the United States both before and after 
such property is placed aboard the ship at the United States port of 
exit.

    (viii) Property imported by ship or aircraft. If an insurance 
contract which is reinsured or issued in connection with property which 
is imported to the United States by ship or aircraft covers risks all of 
which terminate when such property is unloaded at the United States port 
of entry, such property will be considered property not in the United 
States. If such insurance contract covers risks all of which commence 
after such property is unloaded at the United States port of entry, such 
property will be considered property in the United States. If such 
insurance contract covers risks commencing before, and terminating 
after, such property is unloaded at the United States port of entry, 
such property will be considered property ordinarily located in the 
United States which, before such property is unloaded at the United 
States port of entry, is temporarily located outside the United States. 
For an illustration pertaining to the allocation or apportionment of the 
premium, see the example in subdivision (vii) of this subparagraph.
    (ix) Shipments originating and terminating in the United States. Any 
property which is shipped from one place in the United States to another 
place in the United States, on or over a foreign country, the high seas, 
or the coastal waters of the United States will be considered property 
actually located at all times in the United States. For example, 
property which is shipped from New York City to Los Angeles via the 
Panama Canal or from San Francisco to Hawaii or Alaska will be 
considered property actually located at all times in the United States.
    (x) Shipments originating and terminating in a foreign country. Any 
property which is shipped by any means, or a combination of means, of 
transportation from one foreign country to another foreign country, or 
from a contiguous foreign country to the same contiguous foreign 
country, on or over the United States will be considered property 
exclusively located outside the United States. Notwithstanding the 
foregoing, any property which is shipped by any means, or a combination 
of means, of transportation from one contiguous foreign country to 
another contiguous foreign country on or over the United States will be 
considered property ordinarily located in the United States which, when 
such property is not actually located in the United States, is 
temporarily located outside the United States.
    (c) Liability from United States activity. The term ``liability 
arising out of activity in the United States'' means a loss, as 
described in subparagraph (1) of this paragraph, or a liability, as 
described in subparagraph (2) of this paragraph, which could arise from 
activity performed in the United States, as defined in subparagraph (3) 
of this paragraph.
    (1) Loss described. The term ``loss'' includes all loss of an 
insured which could arise from the occurrence of the event insured 
against except that such term does not include any loss in connection 
with property described in paragraph (b) of this section. For example, 
such term includes, in the case of a promoter of outdoor sporting 
events, the loss which could arise from the cancellation of such an 
event because of inclement weather.
    (2) Liability described. The term ``liability'' includes all 
liability of an insured in tort, contract, property, or otherwise. It 
includes, for example, the liability of a principal for the acts of his 
agent, of a husband for the acts of his spouse, and of a parent for the 
acts of his child. The term not only includes the direct liability which 
may be incurred, for example, by a tortfeasor to the person harmed, but 
also the indirect liability which may be incurred, for example, by a 
manufacturer to the

[[Page 224]]

purchaser at retail for a breach of warranty.
    (3) Activity in the United States--(i) In general. A loss or 
liability will be considered a loss or liability which could arise from 
activity performed in the United States if the loss or liability would 
result, if at all, from an activity exclusively carried on in the United 
States. Conversely, a loss or liability will be considered a loss or 
liability which could not arise from activity performed in the United 
States if the loss or liability would result, if at all, from an 
activity exclusively carried on outside the United States. In addition, 
a loss or liability will be considered a loss or liability which could 
arise from activity performed in the United States if the loss or 
liability would result, if at all, from an activity ordinarily carried 
on in, but partly carried on outside, the United States. If the premium 
which is attributable to the reinsuring or issuing of any insurance 
contract in connection with an activity ordinarily carried on in, but 
partly carried on outside, the United States can, on a reasonable basis, 
be allocated to, or apportioned between, the risks incurred with respect 
to the activity carried on in, and the risks incurred with respect to 
the activity carried on outside, the United States, such loss or 
liability will be considered a loss or liability which could not arise 
from activity performed in the United States to the extent the loss or 
liability would result, if at all, from that activity carried on outside 
the United States. However, a loss or liability will not be considered a 
loss or liability which could arise from an activity performed in the 
United States if such loss or liability would result, if at all, from an 
activity which is neither exclusively carried on in the United States 
nor ordinarily carried on in, but partly carried on outside, the United 
States. The principles of paragraph (b)(2)(ii) of this section for 
allocating or apportioning a premium on a reasonable basis to or between 
risks incurred when property is actually located in the United States 
and risks incurred when such property is actually located outside the 
United States shall apply for allocating or apportioning a premium on a 
reasonable basis to or between the risks incurred with respect to the 
activity carried on in, and the risks incurred with respect to the 
activity carried on outside, the United States. The rules prescribed in 
subdivisions (ii) through (vi) of this subparagraph shall apply in 
determining whether an activity is, or will be considered, exclusively 
carried on in or outside the United States and whether an activity is, 
or will be considered, ordinarily carried on in the United States and in 
determining what is the activity which is performed by the insured from 
which a loss or liability results or could result; such rules also limit 
the rule of premium allocation and apportionment prescribed in this 
subdivision. The determinations required by this subparagraph shall be 
made with respect to the location of an activity of the insured 
performed during the policy period applicable to the taxable year of the 
insuring or reinsuring corporation, or, if more than one policy period 
exists with respect to such taxable year, such determinations shall be 
made separately with respect to the location of the activity during each 
such policy period.
    (ii) Substantial activity carried on in the United States. The term 
``activity'' is used in its broadest sense and includes the performance 
of an act unlawfully undertaken, the wrongful performance of an act 
lawfully undertaken, and the wrongful failure to perform an act lawfully 
required to be undertaken. With respect to a loss described in 
subparagraph (1) of this paragraph, the term ``activity'' includes the 
occurrence of the event insured against. The determination of whether an 
activity ordinarily is carried on in, but is partly carried on outside, 
the United States will depend on all the facts and circumstances in each 
case. An activity ordinarily is carried on in the United States if a 
substantial amount of such activity is carried on in the United States. 
Factors which will be taken into account in determining whether a 
substantial amount of activity is carried on in the United States are 
those which are connected with the activity and include, but are not 
limited to, the location of the insured's assets, the place where 
personal services are performed, and the place where sales occur, but 
only if

[[Page 225]]

such assets, services, and sales are connected with the activity. In all 
cases an activity will be considered substantially carried on in the 
United States if more than 50 percent of the insured's total assets, 
personal services, and sales, if any, connected with such activity are 
located, performed, or occur in the United States. On the other hand, an 
activity will, under no circumstances, be considered substantially 
carried on in the United States if not more than 30 percent of the 
insured's total assets, personal services, and sales, if any, connected 
with such activity are located, performed, or occur in the United 
States. For this purpose, the mean of the value of the total assets at 
the beginning and end of the policy period shall be used, determined by 
taking assets into account at their actual value (not reduced by 
liabilities), which, in the absence of affirmative evidence to the 
contrary, shall be deemed to be (a) face value in the case of bills 
receivable, accounts receivable, notes receivable, and open accounts 
held by an insured using the cash receipts and disbursements method of 
accounting and (b) adjusted basis in the case of all other assets. 
Personal services shall be measured by the amount of compensation paid 
or accrued for such services, and sales shall be measured by the volume 
of gross sales. An activity is carried on partly outside the United 
States if it is carried on, whether substantially or in substantially, 
outside the United States.
    (iii) Manufacturing, producing, constructing, or assembling 
activity. If a person who manufactures, produces, constructs, or 
assembles property is liable with regard to the consumption or use of 
such property, such liability will be considered to result from the 
activity performed of manufacturing, producing, constructing, or 
assembling such property. If such person manufactures, produces, 
constructs, or assembles more than one type of product, the liability 
with regard to the consumption or use of one of such products will be 
considered to result from the activity performed of manufacturing, 
producing, constructing, or assembling that particular product. For 
example, the liability of a building contractor, which constructs 
apartment buildings only in the United States, for the improper 
construction of, or the failure to construct, an apartment building, 
will be considered to result from an activity exclusively carried on in 
the United States and will be considered a liability which could arise 
from activity performed in the United States. In further illustration, 
the liability (which is covered by a single policy of insurance) of a 
domestic corporation, which assembles refrigerators exclusively in the 
United States and manufactures automobiles both in a foreign country and 
in the United States through substantial activity carried on in each of 
such countries, for the negligent manufacturing of a part for one of the 
automobiles by the foreign branch, will be considered to result from an 
activity ordinarily carried on in, but partly carried on outside, the 
United States and will be considered a liability which could arise from 
activity performed in the United States.
    (iv) Selling activity. If a person is liable with regard to selling 
activity performed, such liability will be considered, except as 
provided in subdivisions (iii), (v), and (vi) of this subparagraph, to 
result from such selling activity. A person will be considered to be 
engaged in selling activity if such person engages in an activity 
resulting in the sale of property. Thus, it is immaterial that, under 
the Code, such activity would not constitute engaging in or carrying on 
a trade or business in the country in which such activity is carried on, 
the property in the goods does not pass in such country, or delivery of 
the property is not made in such country. For example, if a foreign 
wholesale distributor, which manages its entire business operations in a 
foreign country and sells its inventory exclusively in the United 
States--its only contact in the United States being the promotion of 
such sales to United States retail outlets by advertising in trade 
publications and distributing sales catalogues--is liable for a breach 
of warranty with regard to the sale of property to a United States 
retail outlet, such liability will be considered to result from an 
activity exclusively carried on in the United States and will be 
considered a liability which could arise

[[Page 226]]

from activity performed in the United States.
    (v) Liability from service or driving activity--(a) In general. If a 
person is liable with regard to any service activity performed, or is 
liable with regard to driving activity performed in connection with a 
motor vehicle, ship or boat, aircraft, or railroad rolling stock, 
whether or not exclusively used in the commercial transportation of 
persons or property, such liability will be considered to result from 
such service or driving activity. For example, if an oil company which 
drills for oil exclusively in a foreign country is liable with regard to 
the negligent handling by its employees of explosives in the course of 
such drilling there, such liability will be considered to result from an 
activity exclusively carried on outside the United States and will be 
considered a liability which could not arise from activity performed in 
the United States. In further illustration, if a corporation which 
services machinery exclusively in a foreign country under servicing 
contracts is liable with regard to the negligent repairing of a machine 
under such a contract, such liability will be considered to result from 
an activity exclusively carried on outside the United States and will be 
considered a liability which could not arise from activity performed in 
the United States.
    (b) Location of activities in connection with transportation 
property. For purposes of (a) of this subdivision, service or driving 
activity performed in connection with a motor vehicle, ship or boat, 
aircraft, or railroad rolling stock, whether or not exclusively used in 
the commercial transportation of persons or property, will be considered 
activity performed in the United States if the activity is carried on at 
a time when such property is or will be considered, in accordance with 
subdivision (iv) or (v) of paragraph (b)(2) of this section, actually in 
the United States or ordinarily located in the United States. However, 
if the premium which is attributable to the reinsuring or issuing of any 
insurance contract in connection with such service or driving activity 
which is carried on at a time when such property is, or will be 
considered, ordinarily located in the United States can be allocated to, 
or apportioned between, the risks incurred when such property is 
actually located in the United States and risks incurred when it is 
actually located outside the United States, such liability will be 
considered a liability which could arise from activity performed in the 
United States only when such property is actually located in the United 
States. Any allocation or apportionment of premium under the preceding 
sentence shall be made in accordance with the rules of allocation and 
apportionment provided in subdivision (iv) or (v) of paragraph (b)(2) of 
this section. For example, if a person is liable with regard to the 
performance of services outside the United States in the operation of a 
motor vehicle which is used exclusively in the commercial transportation 
of persons to and from the United States and which, because more than 50 
percent of the miles traversed during the applicable policy period in 
the use of such property are traversed within the United States, is 
considered ordinarily located in the United States, such liability will 
be considered to be a liability which could not arise from activity 
performed in the United States only to the extent that the premium which 
is attributable to the reinsuring or issuing of any insurance contract 
in connection with such service activity is apportioned on a mileage 
basis between the risks incurred when such motor vehicle is actually 
located in the United States and when such vehicle is actually located 
outside the United States. See paragraph (b)(2)(iv) of this section. In 
further illustration, if a person is liable with regard to his negligent 
driving of a motor vehicle which is not used exclusively in the 
commercial transportation of persons or property, which is registered 
with any State, and which is driven both in the United States and a 
foreign country, such liability will be considered a liability which 
could arise from activity performed in the United States, unless the 
premium which is attributable to the reinsuring or issuing of an 
insurance contract in connection with such driving performed in such 
motor vehicle ordinarily located in the United States is specifically 
allocated under the contract to risks incurred with respect to

[[Page 227]]

driving performed in, and to risks incurred with respect to driving 
performed outside, the United States. See paragraph (b)(2)(v) of this 
section.
    (c) Illustration. The application of this subdivision may be further 
illustrated by the following example:

    Example. Controlled foreign corporation A is a wholly owned 
subsidiary of domestic corporation M. Both corporations are insurance 
companies and use the calendar year as the taxable year. Corporation M 
is exclusively engaged in issuing to owners of commercial rental 
property which is located in the United States insurance contracts which 
cover any harm which may be caused in 1963 by the tortious conduct of 
the owners' employees in managing and maintaining such property. The 
owners insured under such contracts include both residents and 
nonresidents of the United States. In 1963, M Corporation cedes to A 
Corporation one-half of the insurance contracts issued by M Corporation 
in that year, including the contracts issued to nonresidents. Income of 
A Corporation derived in 1963 from reinsuring the risks of M Corporation 
is income from the insurance of United States risks since all the 
insurance contracts reinsured by it are in connection with a liability 
which could arise from service activity performed in the United States.

    (vi) Liability from delivery of property. If the person who is 
obligated to deliver property is liable with regard to such delivery, 
such liability will be considered to result from the activity performed 
of delivering such property. For example, if a corporation which exports 
all of its inventory from the United States to foreign countries or 
possessions of the United States is liable with regard to its failure to 
make delivery outside the United States of inventory it has sold, such 
liability will be considered to result from an activity exclusively 
carried on outside the United States and will be considered a liability 
which could not arise from activity performed in the United States. In 
further illustration, if a corporation which exports all of its 
inventory from a foreign country to the United States is liable with 
regard to its improper delivery in the United States of inventory it has 
sold, such liability will be considered to result from an activity 
exclusively carried on in the United States and will be considered a 
liability which could arise from activity performed in the United 
States.
    (d) Lives or health of United States residents. Risks in connection 
with the lives or health of residents of the United States include those 
risks which are the subject of insurance contracts referred to in 
section 801(a), relating to the definition of a life insurance company. 
If the insured is a resident of the United States at the time the 
insurance contract is approved, the risk is in connection with the life 
or health of a resident of the United States for the period of coverage 
under the contract. However, if during such period of coverage the 
insured notifies the insurer, or circumstances known to the insurer 
indicate, that the insured is no longer a resident of the United States, 
the risk shall cease to be a risk in connection with the life or health 
of a resident of the United States for the policy period in which the 
insured gives such notice or such circumstances are known to the 
insurer, and for each subsequent policy period. Conversely, if the 
insured is a resident of a particular foreign country at the time the 
insurance contract is approved, the risk is in connection with the life 
or health of a resident of such foreign country for the period of 
coverage under the contract. However, if during such period of coverage 
the insured notifies the insurer, or circumstances known to the insurer 
indicate, that the insured is no longer a resident of such foreign 
country, the risk shall cease to be a risk in connection with the life 
or health of a resident of such particular foreign country for the 
policy period in which the insured gives such notice or such 
circumstances are known to the insurer, and for each subsequent policy 
period. In determining the country of residence of an insured, the 
principles of Secs. 301.7701(b)-1 through 301.7701(b)-9 of this chapter, 
relating to the determination of residence and nonresidence in the 
United States and of foreign residence, shall apply. Citizens of the 
United States are not residents of the United States merely because of 
their citizenship. The application of this paragraph may be illustrated 
by the following example:

    Example. Controlled foreign corporation A is a wholly owned 
subsidiary of domestic corporation M. Corporation A uses the calendar 
year as the taxable year and is engaged in

[[Page 228]]

the life insurance business in foreign country X. In 1963, A Corporation 
issues ordinary life insurance contracts on the lives of residents of 
the United States, including one issued on February 1, 1963, to R, a 
citizen of foreign country Y and a resident of the United States on such 
date. All activity in connection with the issuing of such contracts is 
transacted by mail. On May 1, 1963, R abandons his United States 
residence and establishes residence in foreign country Z. There are no 
circumstances known to A Corporation that R has changed his residence 
until R, on March 1, 1964, actually notifies A Corporation of that 
change. Income of A Corporation for the policy period of February 1, 
1963, to January 31, 1964, from issuing such insurance contracts is 
income derived from the insurance of United States risks. However, 
income of A Corporation derived for the policy period of February 1, 
1964, to January 31, 1965, from R's insurance contract is not income 
derived from the insurance of United States risks.

(Secs. 913(m) (92 Stat. 3106; 26 U.S.C. 913(m)), and 7805 (68A Stat. 
917; 26 U.S.C. 7805), Internal Revenue Code of 1954)

[T.D. 6781, 29 FR 18202, Dec. 23, 1964, as amended by T.D. 7736, 45 FR 
76143, Nov. 18, 1980; T.D. 8411, 57 FR 15241, Apr. 27, 1992]


<R05>
Sec. 1.953-3   Risks deemed to be United States risks.

    (a) Artificial arrangements. For purposes of paragraph (a) of 
Sec. 1.953-1, the term ``United States risks'' also includes under 
section 953(a)(1)(B) risks which are deemed to be United States risks. 
They are risks (other than United States risks described in section 
953(a)(1)(A) and Sec. 1.953-2) which a controlled foreign corporation 
reinsures under an insurance or annuity contract, or with respect to 
which a controlled foreign corporation issues any insurance or annuity 
contract, in accordance with any arrangement whereby another corporation 
which is not a controlled foreign corporation receives an amount of 
premiums (for reinsuring or issuing any insurance or annuity contract in 
connection with the United States risks described in section 
953(a)(1)(A) and Sec. 1.953-2) which is substantially equal to the 
amount of premiums which the controlled foreign corporation receives 
under its contracts. Arrangements to which this rule applies include 
those entered into by the controlled foreign corporation, by its United 
States shareholders, or by a related person.
    (b) Evidence of arrangements. The determination of the existence of 
an arrangement referred to in paragraph (a) of this section shall depend 
on all the facts and circumstances in each case. In making this 
determination, it will be recognized that arrangements of this type 
generally are orally entered into outside the United States and that 
direct evidence of such an arrangement is not ordinarily available. 
Therefore, in determining the existence of such an arrangement, 
consideration will be given to whether or not there is substantial 
similarity between the type, location, profit margin expected, and loss 
experience of the risks which the corporation which is not a controlled 
foreign corporation insures or reinsures and the risks which the 
controlled foreign corporation insures or reinsures. Further, 
consideration will be given to the existence of prior similar 
arrangements between, and the identity of the directors or shareholders 
of, the corporation which is not a controlled foreign corporation, its 
shareholders, or related persons and the controlled foreign corporation, 
its shareholders, or related persons. However, the absence of such prior 
arrangements or identity of directors or shareholders will not of itself 
establish the nonexistence of an arrangement referred to in paragraph 
(a) of this section. In determining whether the amounts received by the 
controlled foreign corporation and the corporation which is not a 
controlled foreign corporation are substantially equal, the period in 
which the controlled foreign corporation receives premiums need not be 
the same as, or identical in length with, that of the corporation which 
is not a controlled foreign corporation nor limited to a taxable year of 
the controlled foreign corporation.
    (c) Illustrations. The application of this section may be 
illustrated by the following examples:

    Example 1. Controlled foreign corporation A is a wholly owned 
subsidiary of domestic corporation M. Foreign corporation B is a wholly 
owned subsidiary of foreign corporation R. All corporations use the 
calendar year as the taxable year. Corporations M and R, which are not 
related persons, agree that from July 1, 1963, through December 31, 
1963, B Corporation will reinsure all risks of M Corporation which are 
United States risks

[[Page 229]]

described in section 953(a)(1)(A), and that from January 1, 1964, 
through June 30, 1964, A Corporation will reinsure all risks of R 
Corporation which are not United States risks described in section 
953(a)(1)(A). The amount of premiums received by A Corporation and B 
Corporation, respectively, as a result of the agreement are 
substantially equal. The income of A Corporation derived in 1964 from 
reinsuring the risks of R Corporation is income derived from the 
insurance of United States risks described in section 953(a)(1)(B).
    Example 2. Assume the same facts as in example 1, except that M and 
R Corporations also agree, as part of their arrangement, that from July 
1, 1964, through December 31, 1964, B Corporation will reinsure all 
risks of M Corporation which are United States risks described in 
section 953(a)(1)(A), and that from January 1, 1965, through June 30, 
1965, A Corporation will reinsure all risks of R Corporation which are 
not United States risks described in section 953(a)(1)(A). The amount of 
premiums derived by B Corporation from July 1, 1963, through December 
31, 1963, under the agreement is not substantially equal to the amount 
of premiums derived by A Corporation from January 1, 1964, through June 
30, 1964, and the amount of premiums derived by B Corporation from July 
1, 1964, through December 31, 1964, is not substantially equal to the 
amount of premiums derived by A Corporation from January 1, 1965, 
through June 30, 1965. However, the aggregate amount of premiums 
received by B Corporation under the arrangement is substantially equal 
to the aggregate amount of premiums received by A Corporation. The 
income of A Corporation derived in 1964 and 1965 from reinsuring the 
risks of R Corporation is income derived from the insurance of United 
States risks described in section 953(a)(1)(B).
    Example 3. Assume the same facts as in example 1, except that 
foreign corporation C is also a wholly owned subsidiary of R 
Corporation. Assume that C Corporation uses the calendar year as its 
taxable year. Assume further that M Corporation and R Corporation agree 
that from July 1, 1963, through December 31, 1963, B Corporation and C 
Corporation together will reinsure the United States risks described in 
section 953(a)(1)(A) of M Corporation. The amount of premiums received 
by B Corporation in respect of such United States risks is equal to one-
third of the amount received by A Corporation in respect of the risks 
which are not United States risks described in section 953(a)(1)(A), and 
the amount of premiums received by C Corporation in respect of such 
United States risks is equal to two-thirds of the amount so received by 
A Corporation. The income of A Corporation derived in 1964 from 
reinsuring the risks of R Corporation is income derived from the 
insurance of United States risks described in section 953(a)(1)(B).
    Example 4. Assume the same facts as in example 3, except that 
controlled foreign corporation D is also a wholly owned subsidiary of M 
Corporation and uses the calendar year as its taxable year. Assume 
further that M Corporation and R Corporation agree that in 1964 R 
Corporation will pay premiums of $300,000 to A Corporation and $700,000 
to D Corporation to reinsure all risks of R Corporation which are not 
United States risks described in section 953(a)(1)(A), and that in 1963 
M Corporation will pay premiums of $400,000 to B Corporation and 
$600,000 to C Corporation to reinsure all risks of M Corporation which 
are United States risks described in section 953(a)(1)(A). The income of 
A Corporation and D Corporation derived in 1964 from reinsuring the 
risks of R Corporation is income derived from the insurance of United 
States risks described in section 953(a)(1)(B).
    Example 5. Controlled foreign corporation A is a wholly owned 
subsidiary of domestic insurance corporation M. Controlled foreign 
corporation B is a wholly owned subsidiary of domestic insurance 
corporation N. All corporations use the calendar year as the taxable 
year. As a result of an arrangement between M Corporation and N 
Corporation, in 1963 A Corporation reinsures all the United States risks 
described in section 953(a)(1)(A) of N Corporation, and B Corporation 
reinsures all the United States risks described in section 953(a)(1)(A) 
of M Corporation. The premiums and other consideration received by A 
Corporation and B Corporation in respect of such reinsurance are not 
substantially equal. The income of A Corporation and B Corporation in 
1962 from reinsuring the risks of N Corporation and M Corporation, 
respectively, is income derived from the insurance of United States 
risks described in section 953(a)(1)(A) and is not income derived from 
the insurance or United States risks described in section 953(a)(1)(B).
    Example 6. Assume the same facts as in example 5, except that B 
Corporation is not a controlled foreign corporation. The income of A 
Corporation in 1963 from reinsuring the risks of N Corporation is income 
derived from the insurance of United States risks described in section 
953(a)(1)(A) and is not income derived from the insurance of United 
States risks described in section 953(a)(1)(B).

[T.D. 6781, 29 FR 18207, Dec. 23, 1964]


<R05>
Sec. 1.953-4   Taxable income to which section 953 applies.

    (a) Taxable income defined--(1) Life insurance taxable income. For a 
controlled foreign corporation which is engaged in the business of 
reinsuring or issuing insurance or annuity contracts and which, if it 
were a domestic corporation engaged only in such business,

[[Page 230]]

would be taxable as a life insurance company to which part I (sections 
801 through 820) of subchapter L of the Code applies, the term ``taxable 
income'' means for purposes of paragraph (a) of Sec. 1.953-1 the gain 
from operations, as defined in section 809(b) and as modified by this 
section, derived from, and attributable to, the insurance of United 
States risks. For purposes of determining such taxable income, the 
provisions of section 802(b) (relating to the definition of life 
insurance company taxable income) shall not apply. Determinations for 
purposes of this subparagraph shall be made without regard to section 
501(a).
    (2) Mutual and other insurance taxable income. For a controlled 
foreign corporation which is engaged in the business of reinsuring or 
issuing insurance or annuity contracts and which, if it were a domestic 
corporation engaged only in such business, would be taxable as a mutual 
insurance company to which part II (sections 821 through 826) of 
subchapter L of the Code applies or a mutual marine insurance or other 
insurance company to which part III (sections 831 and 832) of subchapter 
L of the Code applies, the term ``taxable income'' means for purposes of 
paragraph (a) of Sec. 1.953-1 taxable income, as defined in section 
832(a) and as modified by this section, derived from, and attributable 
to, the insurance of United States risks. Determinations for purposes of 
this subparagraph shall be made without regard to section 501(a).
    (3) Corporations not qualifying as insurance companies. For special 
rules applicable under this section in the case of a controlled foreign 
corporation which, if it were a domestic corporation, would not qualify 
as an insurance company, see Sec. 1.953-5.
    (b) Certain provisions inapplicable. In determining taxable income 
under this section, the following provisions of subchapter L of the Code 
shall not apply:
    (1) Section 809(d)(4), relating to the operations loss deduction;
    (2) Section 809(d)(5), relating to certain nonparticipating 
contracts;
    (3) Section 809(d)(6), relating to certain accident and health 
insurance and group life insurance;
    (4) Section 809(d)(10), relating to small business deduction;
    (5) Section 817(b), relating to gain on property held on December 
31, 1958, and certain substituted property acquired after 1958; and
    (6) Section 832(c)(5), relating to capital losses.
    (c) Computation of reserves required by law--(1) Law applicable in 
determining reserves. The reserves which will be taken into account as 
reserves required by law under section 801(b)(2), both in determining 
for any taxable year whether a controlled foreign corporation is a 
controlled foreign corporation described in paragraph (a)(1) or (2) of 
this section and in determining taxable income of such corporation for 
the taxable year under paragraph (a) of this section, shall be the 
following reserves:
    (i) Reserves required by the law of a State. The reserves which are 
required by the law of the State or States to which the insurance 
business of the controlled foreign corporation is subject, but only with 
respect to its United States business, if any, which is taxable under 
section 819(a).
    (ii) Reserves deemed to be required. To the extent of such 
controlled foreign corporation's insurance business not taxable under 
section 819(a)--
    (a) Except as provided in (b) of this subdivision (ii), the reserves 
which would result if such reserves were determined by applying the 
minimum standards of the law of New York as if such controlled foreign 
corporation were an insurance company transacting all of its insurance 
business (other than its United States business which is taxable under 
section 819(a)) for such taxable year in such State, and
    (b) With respect to all risks covered by insurance ceded to such 
controlled foreign corporation by an insurance company to which apply 
the provisions of subchapter L of the Code (determined without regard to 
section 501(a)) and in respect of which an election is made by or on 
behalf of such controlled foreign corporation to determine its reserves 
in accordance with this subdivision (b), the amount of reserves against 
such risks which would result if all of such reserves were determined by 
applying the law of the State, to which

[[Page 231]]

the risks in the hands of such insurance company are subject, as if such 
controlled foreign corporation were an insurance company engaged in 
reinsuring such risks in such State.
    (2) Rules of application. For purposes of subparagraph (1) of this 
paragraph, the following rules shall apply:
    (i) Life insurance reserves computed on preliminary term basis. For 
purposes of determining under paragraph (a) of this section the taxable 
income of a controlled foreign corporation, an election may be made by 
or on behalf of such corporation that the amount of reserves which are 
taken into account as life insurance reserves with respect to contracts 
for which reserves are computed on a preliminary term basis shall be 
determined as provided in section 818(c). This election shall apply, 
subject to section 818(c), to all life insurance reserves of the 
controlled foreign corporation, whether or not reserves applicable to 
the United States business taxable under section 819(a). However, 
reserves determined as provided in section 818(c) shall not be taken 
into account in determining whether a controlled foreign corporation is 
a controlled foreign corporation described in paragraph (a)(1) or (2) of 
this section.
    (ii) Actual reserves required. (a) A controlled foreign corporation 
will be considered to have a reserve only to the extent the reserve has 
been actually held during the taxable year for which such reserve is 
claimed.
    (b) For determining when reserves are required by the law of a 
State, see paragraph (b) of Sec. 1.801-5 of this chapter.
    (iii) Total reserves to be taken into account. The total reserves of 
a controlled foreign corporation shall be taken into account in 
determining whether such corporation is a controlled foreign corporation 
described in paragraph (a)(1) or (2) of this section. Therefore, in 
making such determination, the reserves which, under subparagraph (1)(i) 
of this paragraph, are required by the law of any State shall be taken 
into account together with the reserves which, under subparagraph 
(1)(ii) of this paragraph, are deemed to be required. Moreover, reserves 
applicable to the reinsuring or the issuing of insurance or annuity 
contracts of both United States risks and foreign risks shall be taken 
into account. Finally, except as provided in subdivision (i) of this 
subparagraph, the reserves which are taken into account in determining 
whether a controlled foreign corporation is a controlled foreign 
corporation described in paragraph (a)(1) or (2) of this section shall 
be the same reserves which are taken into account in determining under 
paragraph (a) of this section the taxable income of such corporation.
    (iv) Method of comparing reserves when subject to more than one 
State. If the insurance business of a controlled foreign corporation is 
subject to the law of more than one State, the amount of reserves taken 
into account under subparagraph (1)(i) of this paragraph shall be the 
amount of the highest aggregate reserve required by any State, 
determined as provided in paragraph (a) of Sec. 1.801-5 of this chapter.
    (d) Domestic corporation tax attributes. In determining taxable 
income of a controlled foreign corporation under this section there 
shall be allowed, except as provided in section 953(b), this section, 
and Sec. 1.953-5, the exclusions and deductions from gross income which 
would be allowed if such corporation were a domestic insurance company 
engaged in the business of only reinsuring or issuing the insurance or 
annuity contracts which have been reinsured or issued by such 
corporation. For this purpose, the provisions of sections 819, 821(e), 
822(e), 831(b), and 832(d), relating to foreign insurance companies, 
shall not apply; however, for the exclusion from the taxable income 
determined under section 953 of amounts derived from sources within the 
United States, see section 952(b) and paragraph (b) of Sec. 1.952-1. 
Furthermore, taxable income shall be determined under this section 
without regard to section 882 (b) and (c), relating to gross income and 
deductions of a foreign corporation, and without regard to whether the 
controlled foreign corporation is carrying on an insurance business in 
the United States. For other rules relating to the determination of 
gross income and taxable income of a foreign corporation for purposes of 
subpart F, see Sec. 1.952-2.

[[Page 232]]

    (e) Limitation on certain amounts in respect of United States risks. 
In determining taxable income under this section the following amounts 
shall not, in accordance with section 953(b)(4), be taken into account 
except to the extent they are attributable to the reinsuring or issuing 
of any insurance or annuity contract in connection with United States 
risks described in Sec. 1.953-2 or Sec. 1.953-3:
    (1) The amount of premiums determined under section 809(c)(1);
    (2) The net decrease in reserves determined under section 809(c)(2);
    (3) The net increase in reserves determined under section 809(d)(2); 
and
    (4) The premiums earned on insurance contracts during the taxable 
year, as determined under section 832(b)(4). For the allocation and 
apportionment of such amounts to income from the insurance of United 
States risks, see paragraphs (f) and (g) of this section.
    (f) Items allocated or apportioned--(1) Rules of allocation or 
apportionment. In determining taxable income under this section, first 
determine all items of income, expenses, losses, and other deductions 
which directly relate to the premiums received for the reinsuring or the 
issuing of any insurance or annuity contract in connection with United 
States risks, as defined in Secs. 1.953-2 and 1.953-3, and allocate such 
items to the insurance of United States risks. For example, the 
deductions allowed by section 809(d)(1), relating to death benefits, 
section 809(d)(3), relating to dividends to policyholders, and section 
809(d)(7), relating to the assumption by another person of liabilities 
under insurance contracts, shall be allocated to the insurance of United 
States risks to the extent they relate directly to the premiums received 
for reinsuring or issuing insurance or annuity contracts in connection 
with United States risks. Next, determine all items of income, expenses, 
losses, and other deductions which directly relate to the premiums 
received for the reinsuring or the issuing of any insurance or annuity 
contract in connection with foreign risks and allocate such items to the 
reinsuring of foreign risks. Finally, determine all items of income, 
expenses, losses, and other deductions which relate to the premiums 
received for the reinsuring or the issuing of any insurance or annuity 
contract in connection with both United States risks and foreign risks, 
and, except as provided in paragraph (g) of this section, apportion such 
items between the insurance of United States risks and the insurance of 
foreign risks in the manner prescribed in subparagraph (2) or (3) of 
this paragraph, as the case may be. As used in this section, the term 
``foreign risks'' means risks which are not United States risks as 
defined in Sec. 1.953-2 or Sec. 1.953-3.
    (2) Method of apportionment in determination of life insurance 
taxable income--(i) Investment yield and net long-term capital gain. 
Unless they can be allocated to the insurance of United States risks, as 
provided in subparagraph (1) of this paragraph, in determining a 
controlled foreign corporation's taxable income for any taxable year 
under paragraph (a)(1) of this section--
    (a) The investment yield under section 804(c),
    (b) The amount (if any) under section 809(b)(1)(B) by which the net 
long-term capital gain exceeds the net short-term capital loss, and
    (c) Those deductions allowed under section 809(d)(8), (9), and (12) 
which relate to gross investment income shall be apportioned to the 
reinsuring and issuing of insurance and annuity contracts in connection 
with United States risks in an amount which bears the same ratio to each 
of such amounts of investment yield, excess gain, and deductions as the 
sum of the mean of each of the items described in section 810(c) at the 
beginning and end of the taxable year attributable to reinsuring and 
issuing any insurance and annuity contracts in connection with United 
States risks bears to the sum of the mean of each of the items described 
in section 810(c) at the beginning and end of the taxable year 
attributable to reinsuring and issuing all insurance and annuity 
contracts. Thus, for example, if the ratio which the sum of the mean of 
each of the items described in section 810(c) at the beginning and end 
of the taxable year attributable to reinsuring and issuing insurance and 
annuity contracts in connection with United States risks bears to the 
sum of the

[[Page 233]]

mean of each of the items described in section 810(c) at the beginning 
and end of the taxable year attributable to reinsuring and issuing all 
insurance and annuity contracts in one to three, then, unless an 
allocation to the insurance of United States risks can be made as 
provided in subparagraph (1) of this paragraph, one-third of each of 
such amounts of investment yield, excess gain, and deductions shall be 
apportioned to the reinsuring and issuing of insurance and annuity 
contracts in connection with United States risks, and two-thirds of each 
of such amounts shall be apportioned to the reinsuring and issuing of 
insurance and annuity contracts in connection with foreign risks.
    (ii) Other income and deductions--(a) Amount taken into account. In 
determining a controlled foreign corporation's taxable income for any 
taxable year under paragraph (a)(1) of this section, all items of income 
taken into account under section 809(c)(3), relating to other amounts of 
gross income, and the other deductions allowed under section 809(d)(12) 
to the extent that such other deductions do not relate to gross 
investment income shall be apportioned to the reinsuring and issuing of 
insurance and annuity contracts in connection with United States risks 
in an amount which bears the same ratio to each of such items of income 
or of such other deductions as the numerator determined under (b) of 
this subdivision bears to the denominator determined under (c) of this 
subdivision.
    (b) Numerator. The numerator used for purposes of the apportionment 
under (a) of this subdivision shall be an amount which equals the amount 
determined under (c) of this subdivision, but only to the extent that 
the amount so determined is taken into account under paragraph (e) of 
this section in determining taxable income for the taxable year.
    (c) Denominator. The denominator used for purposes of the 
apportionment under (a) of this subdivision shall be an amount which 
equals--
    (1) The amount of premiums determined under section 809(c)(1) for 
the taxable year, plus
    (2) The net decrease in reserves determined under section 809(c)(2) 
for such year, minus
    (3) The net increase in reserves determined under section 809(d)(2) 
for such year.
    (iii) Reserves used in apportionment formula. The rules for 
determining which reserves are taken into account in determining the 
taxable income of a controlled foreign corporation under paragraph (a) 
of this section shall also apply under subdivision (ii) (b) and (c) of 
this subparagraph in determining the net decrease in reserves under 
section 809(c)(2) or the net increase in reserves under section 
809(d)(2). See paragraph (c) of this section.
    (3) Method of apportionment in determination of mutual and other 
insurance income--(i) In general. In determining a controlled foreign 
corporation's taxable income for any taxable year under paragraph (a)(2) 
of this section, any item which is required to be apportioned under 
subparagraph (1) of this paragraph shall be apportioned to the 
reinsuring and issuing of insurance and annuity contracts in connection 
with United States risks in an amount which bears the same ratio to the 
total amount of such item as the amount of premiums earned on insurance 
contracts during the taxable year which is required to be taken into 
account by such corporation under paragraph (e)(4) of this section in 
determining such taxable income bears to the total amount of all its 
premiums earned (as determined under section 832(b)(4)) on insurance 
contracts during the taxable year.
    (ii) Reserves used in apportionment formula. The principles of 
subparagraph (2)(iii) of this paragraph shall apply in determining the 
reserves included in premiums earned on insurance contracts during the 
taxable year for purposes of subdivision (i) of this subparagraph.
    (g) Separate accounting. The methods of apportionment prescribed in 
subparagraphs (2) and (3) of paragraph (f) of this section for 
determining taxable income under this section shall not apply if the 
district director determines that the controlled foreign corporation, in 
good faith and unaffected by considerations of tax liability, regularly 
employs in its books of account a

[[Page 234]]

detailed segregation of receipts, expenditures, assets, liabilities, and 
net worth which clearly reflects the income derived from the reinsuring 
or issuing of insurance or annuity contracts in connection with United 
States risks. The district director, in making such determination, shall 
give effect to any foreign law, satisfactory evidence of which is 
presented by the United States shareholder to the district, director, 
which requires a reasonable segregation of those items of income, 
expense, losses, and other deductions which relate to determining such 
taxable income.
    (h) Illustration. The application of paragraphs (e) and (f) of this 
section may be illustrated by the following example:

    Example. Controlled foreign corporation A, incorporated under, and 
engaged in an insurance business subject to, the laws of foreign country 
X, is a wholly owned subsidiary of domestic corporation M. Both 
corporations use the calendar year as the taxable year. Corporation M is 
a life insurance company as defined in section 801(a); A Corporation 
would, if it were a domestic corporation, be taxable under part I of 
subchapter L of the Code. In 1963, A Corporation derives income from the 
insurance of United States risks as a result of reinsuring the life 
insurance policies issued by M Corporation on lives of residents of the 
United States. In 1963, A Corporation also issues policies of life 
insurance on individuals who are not residents of the United States, but 
its premiums from the reinsuring of United States risks exceed he 5-
percent minimum premium requirement prescribed in paragraph (b) of 
Sec. 1.953-1. Based upon the facts set forth in paragraph (a) of this 
example, A Corporation for 1963 has taxable income under this section of 
$40,200, which is attributable to the reinsuring of life insurance 
contracts in connection with United States risks, determined in the 
manner provided in paragraphs (b), (c), and (d) of this example.
    (a) A summary of the entire operations of A Corporation for 1963, 
determined under this section as though such corporation were a domestic 
life insurance company but without applying paragraph (f) of this 
section, is as follows:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                              Attributable  Attributable
                                Attributable       to        to insuring
             Item                  to all      reinsuring      foreign  
                                  insurance    U.S. risks       risks   
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Investment Income:                                                      
  (1) Investment yield under                                            
   section 804(c).............       $90,000   Unallocable   Unallocable
  (2) Sum of the mean of each                                           
   of the items described in                                            
   section 810(c) at beginning                                          
   and end of 1963............     2,500,000    $1,000,000    $1,500,000
  (3) Required interest under                                           
   section 809(a)(2)..........        60,000        25,000        35,000
  (4) Deductions allowed under                                          
   section 809(d)(8), (9), and                                          
   (12) which relate to gross                                           
   investment income..........        10,000   Unallocable   Unallocable
Underwriting Income:                                                    
  (5) Premiums under section                                            
   809(c)(1)..................       600,000       200,000       400,000
  (6) Net decrease in reserves                                          
   under section 809(c)(2)....        10,000          None        10,000
  (7) Net increase in reserves                                          
   under section 809(d)(2)....        40,000        40,000          None
  (8) Deductions allowed under                                          
   section 809(d) (other than                                           
   deduction allowed under                                              
   section 809(d)(2) and other                                          
   than those deductions                                                
   allowed under section                                                
   809(d)(8), (9), and (12)                                             
   which relate to gross                                                
   investment income):                                                  
    (i) Allocable.............       330,000       110,000       220,000
    (ii) Unallocable..........        60,000   Unallocable   Unallocable
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (b) The unallocable investment yield ($90,000) under paragraph 
(a)(1) of this example and the unallocable deductions ($10,000) under 
paragraph (a)(4) relating to gross investment income are apportioned to 
the reinsuring of United States risks under paragraph (f)(1)(i) of this 
section in the amounts of $36,000, and $4,000, respectively, determined 
as follows:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
(1) Sum of the mean of each of the items described in                   
 section 810(c) at beginning and end of 1963, attributable              
 to reinsuring U.S. risks (paragraph (a)(2))................  $1,000,000
(2) Sum of the mean of each of the items described in                   
 section 810(c) at beginning and end of 1963, attributable              
 to all insurance (paragraph (a)(2))........................  $2,500,000
(3) Ratio of amount under subparagraph (1) to amount under              
 subparagraph (2) ($1,000,000/$2,500,000)...................         40%
(4) Amount of investment yield attributable to reinsuring of            
 U.S. risks (40% of $90,000)................................     $36,000
(5) Amount of such deductions attributable to reinsuring of             
 U.S. risks (40% of $10,000)................................      $4,000
                                                                        

    (c) The unallocable deductions ($60,000) under paragraph (a)(8)(ii) 
of this example which do not relate to gross investment income are 
apportioned to the reinsuring of United States risks under paragraph 
(f)(2)(ii) of this section in the amount of $16,800, determined as 
follows:

[[Page 235]]

    (1) The numerator determined under paragraph (f)(2)(ii)(b) of this 
section is $160,000, determined as follows:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
(i) Premiums under section 809(c)(1)                                    
 attributable to reinsuring U.S. risks                                  
 (paragraph (a)(5))...........................     $200,000             
(ii) Plus: Net decrease in reserves under                               
 section 809(c)(2) attributable to reinsuring                           
 U.S. risks (paragraph (a)(6))................                  $200,000
                                               -------------            
(iii) Less: Net increase in reserves under section                      
 809(d)(2) attributable to reinsuring U.S. risks (paragraph             
 (a)(7))...................................................      $40,000
                                                            ------------
                                                                $160,000
                                                                        

    (2) The denominator determined under paragraph (f)(2)(ii)(c) of this 
section is $570,000, determined as follows:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
(i) Premiums under section 809(c)(1)                                    
 attributable to all insurance (paragraph                               
 (a)(5))......................................     $600,000             
(ii) Plus: Net decrease in reserves under                               
 section 809(c)(2) attributable to all                                  
 insurance (paragraph (a)(6)).................       10,000             
                                               -------------            
                                                                $610,000
(iii) Less: Net increase in reserves under section                      
 809(d)(2) attributable to all insurance (paragraph (a)(7))       40,000
                                                            ------------
                                                                $570,000
                                                                        

    (3) Ratio which the numerator determined under subparagraph (1) 
bears to the denominator determined under subparagraph (2) ($160,000/
$570,000)--28%.
    (4) Amount of deductions attributable to reinsuring of U.S. risks 
(28% of $60,000)-- $16,800.
    (d) The taxable income of A Corporation for 1963 which constitutes 
its income derived from the insurance of United States risks for 
purposes of paragraph (a) of Sec. 1.953-1 is $40,200, determined as 
follows:

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                 Attributable to all     Attributable to       Attributable to  
                                                      insurance          reinsuring U.S.      insuring foreign  
                                               ----------------------         risks                 risks       
                                                                     -------------------------------------------
                                                                                                                
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Item:                                                                                                           
  (1) Investment yield under section 804(c)                                                                     
   (paragraph (a)(1), unallocable but as                                                                        
   apportioned under paragraph (b)(4).........    $90,000               $36,000               $54,000           
  (2) Less: Required interest under section                                                                     
   809(a)(2) (paragraph (a)(3))...............     60,000                25,000                35,000           
                                               -----------           -----------           -----------          
  (3) Life insurance company's share of                                                                         
   investment yield under section 809(b)(1)(A)  .........    $30,000               $11,000               $19,000
Plus sum of:                                                                                                    
  (4) Premiums under section 809(c)(1)                                                                          
   (paragraph (a)(5)).........................    600,000               200,000               400,000           
  (5) Net decrease in reserves under section                                                                    
   809(c)(2) (paragraph (a)(6))...............     10,000    610,000       None    200,000     10,000    410,000
                                               -----------------------------------------------------------------
      Sum determined under section 809(b)(1)..  .........    640,000               211,000               429,000
Less sum of:                                                                                                    
  (6) Net increase in reserves under section                                                                    
   809(d)(2) (paragraph (a)(7))...............     40,000                40,000                  None           
  (7) Deductions allowed under section                                                                          
   809(d)(8), (9), and (12) which relate to                                                                     
   gross investment income (paragraph (a)(4)),                                                                  
   unallocable but as apportioned under                                                                         
   paragraph (b)(5)...........................     10,000                 4,000                 6,000           
  (8) Deductions allowed under section 809(d)                                                                   
   (other than deduction allowed under section                                                                  
   809(d)(2) and other than those deductions                                                                    
   allowed under section 809(d)(8), (9), and                                                                    
   (12) which relate to gross investment                                                                        
   income) (paragraph (a)(8)):................                                                                  
    (i) Allocable.............................    330,000               110,000               220,000           
    (ii) Unallocable, but as apportioned under                                                                  
     paragraph (c)(4).........................     60,000    440,000     16,800    170,800     43,200    269,200
                                               -----------------------------------------------------------------
        Gain from operations..................  .........    200,000                40,200               159,800
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

[T.D. 6781, 29 FR 18207, Dec. 23, 1964]


<R05>
Sec. 1.953-5   Corporations not qualifying as insurance companies.

    (a) In general. A controlled foreign corporation is not excluded 
from the application of paragraph (a) of Sec. 1.953-1 because such 
corporation, if it were a domestic corporation, would not be taxable as 
an insurance company to which subchapter L of the Code applies. Thus, if 
a controlled foreign corporation reinsures or issues insurance or 
annuity contracts in connection with

[[Page 236]]

United States risks, as defined in Sec. 1.953-2 or Sec. 1.953-3, and 
satisfies the 5-percent minimum premium requirement prescribed in 
paragraph (b) of Sec. 1.953-1, such corporation may derive income from 
the insurance of United States risks even though the primary and 
predominant business activity of such corporation during the taxable 
year is not the issuing of insurance or annuity contracts or the 
reinsuring of risks underwritten by insurance companies.
    (b) Income from insurance of United States risks by noninsurance 
company. For purposes of paragraph (a) of Sec. 1.953-1, the taxable 
income derived from the reinsuring or the issuing of any insurance or 
annuity contract in connection with United States risks by a controlled 
foreign corporation which, if it were a domestic corporation, would not 
be taxable as an insurance company to which subchapter L of the Code 
applies shall be determined under Sec. 1.953-4, subject to, and to the 
extent not inconsistent with, the special rules prescribed in paragraph 
(c) or (d) of this section, whichever applies.
    (c) Special rules in determining taxable income--(1) In general. The 
rules prescribed in this paragraph apply in order to exclude from the 
determination under Sec. 1.953-4 of the taxable income described in 
paragraph (b) of this section those items of the controlled foreign 
corporation's gross income and deductions which are not attributable to 
the reinsuring and issuing of insurance and annuity contracts.
    (2) Life insurance taxable income--(i) Amount of investment yield 
taken into account. For purposes of determining the taxable income of a 
controlled foreign corporation which would not be taxable as an 
insurance company to which subchapter L of the Code applies if it were a 
domestic corporation but would be taxable as an insurance company to 
which part I of such subchapter applies if it were a domestic insurance 
company engaged in the business of only reinsuring or issuing the 
insurance or annuity contracts which have been reinsured or issued by 
such corporation, the investment yield under section 804(c), the amount 
(if any) by which the net long-term capital gain exceeds the net short-
term capital loss, and all items of income taken into account under 
section 809(c)(3) shall be taken into account, subject to the provisions 
of paragraphs (e) and (f) of Sec. 1.953-4, in an amount which bears the 
same ratio to each of such amounts of investment yield, excess gain, and 
income items, as the case may be, as the numerator determined under 
subdivision (ii) of this subparagraph bears to the denominator 
determined under subdivision (iii) of this subparagraph.
    (ii) Numerator. The numerator used for purposes of the apportionment 
under subdivision (i) of this subparagraph shall be the sum of--
    (a) The mean of each of the items described in section 810(c) at the 
beginning and end of the taxable year, determined in accordance with the 
rules prescribed in paragraph (c) of Sec. 1.953-4 for purposes of 
determining taxable income of a controlled foreign corporation under 
paragraph (a) of Sec. 1.953-4,
    (b) The mean of other liabilities at the beginning and end of the 
taxable year which are attributable to the reinsuring and issuing of 
insurance and annuity contracts, and
    (c) The mean of the earnings and profits accumulated by the 
controlled foreign corporation at the beginning and end of the taxable 
year (determined without diminution by reason of any distributions made 
during the taxable year) which are attributable to the reinsuring and 
issuing of insurance and annuity contracts.
    (iii) Denominator. The denominator used for purposes of the 
apportionment under subdivision (i) of this subparagraph shall be the 
mean of the value of the total assets held by the controlled foreign 
corporation at the beginning and end of the taxable year, determined by 
taking assets into account at their actual value (not reduced by 
liabilities), which, in the absence of affirmative evidence to the 
contrary, shall be deemed to be (a) face value in the case of bills 
receivable, accounts receivable, notes receivable, and open accounts 
held by a controlled foreign corporation using the cash receipts and 
disbursements method of accounting and (b) adjusted basis in the case of 
all other assets.
    (3) Mutual and other insurance taxable income--(i) Amount of 
insurance income

[[Page 237]]

taken into account. For purposes of determining the taxable income of a 
controlled foreign corporation which, if it were a domestic corporation, 
would not be taxable as an insurance company to which subchapter L of 
the Code applies but which if it were a domestic insurance company 
engaged in the business of only reinsuring or issuing the insurance or 
annuity contracts which have been reinsured or issued by such 
corporation, would be taxable as a mutual insurance company to which 
part II of subchapter L of the Code applies, or would be taxable as a 
mutual marine insurance or other insurance company to which part III of 
subchapter L of the Code applies, the sum of the items of gross income 
referred to in section 832(b)(1) (except the gross amount earned during 
the taxable year from underwriting income described in section 
832(b)(1)(A)) reduced by the deductions allowable under section 832(c) 
which are related to such items of gross income shall be taken into 
account, subject to the provisions of paragraphs (e) and (f) of 
Sec. 1.953-4, in an amount which bears the same proportion to the sum of 
such items of gross income reduced by such deductions as the numerator 
determined under subdivision (ii) of this subparagraph bears to the 
denominator determined under subdivision (iii) of this subparagraph.
    (ii) Numerator. The numerator used for purposes of the apportionment 
under subdivision (i) of this subparagraph shall be the sum of--
    (a) The mean of the controlled foreign corporation's unearned 
premiums at the beginning and end of the taxable year, determined under 
section 832(b)(4)(B) and in accordance with the rules prescribed in 
paragraph (c) of Sec. 1.953-4 for purposes of determining taxable income 
of a controlled foreign corporation under paragraph (a) of Sec. 1.953-4,
    (b) The mean of such corporation's unpaid losses at the beginning 
and end of the taxable year, determined under section 832(b)(5)(B),
    (c) The mean of the items described in section 810(c)(4) at the 
beginning and end of the taxable year, to the extent allowable to such 
corporation under section 832(c)(11),
    (d) The mean of other liabilities at the beginning and end of the 
taxable year which are attributable to the reinsuring and issuing of 
insurance and annuity contracts, and
    (e) The mean of the earnings and profits accumulated by such 
corporation at the beginning and end of the taxable year (determined 
without diminution by reason of any distributions made during the 
taxable year) which are attributable to the reinsuring and issuing of 
insurance and annuity contracts.
    (iii) Denominator. The denominator used for purposes of the 
apportionment under subdivision (i) of this subparagraph shall be the 
mean of the value of the total assets held by the controlled foreign 
corporation at the beginning and end of the taxable year, determined in 
the manner prescribed in subparagraph (2)(iii) of this paragraph.
    (d) Separate accounting. The special rules prescribed in paragraph 
(c) of this section shall not apply if the district director determines 
that the controlled foreign corporation, in good faith and unaffected by 
considerations of tax liability, regularly employs in its books of 
account a detailed segregation of receipts, expenditures, assets, 
liabilities, and net worth which clearly reflects the income derived 
from the reinsuring or issuing of insurance or annuity contracts. The 
district director, in making such determination, shall give effect to 
any foreign law, satisfactory evidence of which is presented by the 
United States shareholder to the district director, which requires a 
reasonable segregation of the insurance assets of the controlled foreign 
corporation.

[T.D. 6781, 29 FR 18211, Dec. 23, 1964]


<R05>
Sec. 1.953-6   Relationship of sections 953 and 954.

    (a) Priority of application. For purposes of determining the subpart 
F income of a controlled foreign corporation under section 952 for any 
taxable year, the provisions of section 954, relating to foreign base 
company income, shall be applied, after first applying section 953, only 
with respect to income which is not income derived from the insurance of 
United States risks under section 953. For example, the provisions of 
section 954 may be applied

[[Page 238]]

with respect to the income of a controlled foreign corporation which is 
not income derived from the insurance of United States risks under 
section 953 because such corporation does not satisfy the 5-percent 
minimum premium requirement prescribed in paragraph (b) of Sec. 1.953-1, 
even though such corporation has taxable income, as determined under 
Sec. 1.953-4, which is attributable to the reinsuring or the issuing of 
any insurance or annuity contracts in connection with United States 
risks. In addition, the provisions of section 954 may apply with respect 
to the income of a controlled foreign corporation to the extent such 
income is not allocated or apportioned under Sec. 1.953-4 to the 
insurance of United States risks.
    (b) Decrease in income not material. It is not material that the 
income of a controlled foreign corporation is decreased as a result of 
the application of paragraph (a) of this section. Thus, in applying 
Sec. 1.953-4 to the income of a controlled foreign corporation described 
in paragraph (c)(2) of Sec. 1.953-5 which would, but for paragraph (a) 
of this section, be subject to the provisions of section 954, there 
shall be allowed, in determining the taxable income derived from the 
insurance of United States risks under Sec. 1.953-4, a deduction under 
section 809(a)(1) for the share of each and every item of investment 
yield set aside for policyholders; it is not material that in 
determining foreign base company income such deduction would not be 
allowed under section 954(b)(5). Further, income of a controlled foreign 
corporation which is required to be taken into account under section 953 
in determining income derived from the insurance of United States risks 
and would, but for the provisions of paragraph (a) of this section, 
constitute foreign base company income under section 954 shall not be 
taken into account under section 954(b)(3)(B) in determining whether 
foreign base company income exceeds 70 percent of gross income for the 
taxable year.
    (c) Increase in income not material. It is not material that the 
income of a controlled foreign corporation is increased as a result of 
the application of paragraph (a) of this section. Thus, in applying 
Sec. 1.953-4 to income of a controlled foreign corporation which would, 
but for paragraph (a) of this section, be subject to the provisions of 
section 954, it is not material that the dividends, interest, and gains 
from the sale or exchange of stock or securities derived from certain 
investments which would not be included in foreign personal holding 
company income under section 954(c)(3)(B) are included under section 953 
in income derived from the insurance of United States risks. Further, 
income of a controlled foreign corporation which is required to be taken 
into account under section 953 in determining income derived from the 
insurance of United States risks and would, but for paragraph (a) of 
this section, constitute foreign base company income shall not be 
excluded under section 954(b)(3)(A) for the taxable year.

[T.D. 6781, 29 FR 18212, Dec. 23, 1964]


<R05>
Sec. 1.954-0  Introduction.

    (a) Effective dates--(1) Final regulations--(i) In general. Except 
as otherwise specifically provided, the provisions of Secs. 1.954-1 and 
1.954-2 apply to taxable years of a controlled foreign corporation 
beginning after November 6, 1995. If any of the rules described in 
Secs. 1.954-1 and 1.954-2 are inconsistent with provisions of other 
regulations under subpart F, these final regulations are intended to 
apply instead of such other regulations.
    (ii) Election to apply final regulations retroactively--(A) Scope of 
election. An election may be made to apply the final regulations 
retroactively with respect to any taxable year of the controlled foreign 
corporation beginning on or after January 1, 1987. If such an election 
is made, these final regulations must be applied in their entirety for 
such taxable year and all subsequent taxable years. All references to 
section 11 in the final regulations shall be deemed to include section 
15, where applicable.
    (B) Manner of making election. An election under this paragraph 
(a)(1)(ii) is binding on all United States shareholders of the 
controlled foreign corporation and must be made--
    (1) By the controlling United States shareholders, as defined in 
Sec. 1.964-1(c)(5), by attaching a statement to

[[Page 239]]

such effect with their original or amended income tax returns for the 
taxable year of such United States shareholders in which or with which 
the taxable year of the CFC ends, and including any additional 
information required by applicable administrative pronouncements, or
    (2) In such other manner as may be prescribed in applicable 
administrative pronouncements.
    (C) Time for making election. An election may be made under this 
paragraph (a)(1)(ii) with respect to a taxable year of the controlled 
foreign corporation beginning on or after January 1, 1987 only if the 
time for filing a return or claim for refund has not expired for the 
taxable year of any United States shareholder of the controlled foreign 
corporation in which or with which such taxable year of the controlled 
foreign corporation ends.
    (D) Revocation of election. An election made under this paragraph 
(a)(1)(ii) may not be revoked.
    (2) Temporary regulations. The provisions of Secs. 4.954-1 and 
4.954-2 of this chapter apply to taxable years of a controlled foreign 
corporation beginning after December 31, 1986 and on or before November 
6, 1995. However, the provisions of Sec. 4.954-2(b)(6) of this chapter 
continue to apply. For transactions entered into on or before October 
10, 1995, taxpayers may rely on Notice 89-90, 1989-2 C.B. 407, in 
applying the temporary regulations.
    (3) Secs. 1.954A-1 and 1.954A-2. The provisions of Secs. 1.954A-1 
and 1.954A-2 (as contained in 26 CFR part 1 edition revised April 1, 
1995) apply to taxable years of a controlled foreign corporation 
beginning before January 1, 1987. All references therein to sections of 
the Code are to the Internal Revenue Code of 1954 prior to the 
amendments made by the Tax Reform Act of 1986.
    (b) Outline of regulation provisions for sections 954(b)(3), 
954(b)(4), 954(b)(5) and 954(c) of the Internal Revenue Code.

Sec. 1.954-0  Introduction.
    (a) Effective dates.
    (1) Final regulations.
    (i) In general.
    (ii) Election to apply final regulations retroactively.
    (A) Scope of election.
    (B) Manner of making election.
    (C) Time for making election.
    (D) Revocation of election.
    (2) Temporary regulations.
    (3) Secs. 1.954A-1 and 1.954A-2.
    (b) Outline of regulation provisions for sections 954(b)(3), 
954(b)(4), 954(b)(5) and 954(c) of the Internal Revenue Code.
Sec. 1.954-1  Foreign base company income.
    (a) In general.
    (1) Purpose and scope.
    (2) Gross foreign base company income.
    (3) Adjusted gross foreign base company income.
    (4) Net foreign base company income.
    (5) Adjusted net foreign base company income.
    (6) Insurance income.
    (7) Additional items of adjusted net foreign base company income or 
adjusted net insurance income by reason of section 952(c).
    (b) Computation of adjusted gross foreign base company income and 
adjusted gross insurance income.
    (1) De minimis and full inclusion tests.
    (i) De minimis test.
    (A) In general.
    (B) Currency translation.
    (C) Coordination with sections 864(d) and 881(c).
    (ii) Seventy percent full inclusion test.
    (2) Character of gross income included in adjusted gross foreign 
base company income.
    (3) Coordination with section 952(c).
    (4) Anti-abuse rule.
    (i) In general.
    (ii) Presumption.
    (iii) Related persons.
    (iv) Example.
    (c) Computation of net foreign base company income.
    (1) General rule.
    (i) Deductions against gross foreign base company income.
    (ii) Losses reduce subpart F income by operation of earnings and 
profits limitation.
    (iii) Items of income.
    (A) Income other than passive foreign personal holding company 
income.
    (B) Passive foreign personal holding company income.
    (2) Computation of net foreign base company income derived from same 
country insurance income.
    (d) Computation of adjusted net foreign base company income or 
adjusted net insurance income.
    (1) Application of high tax exception.
    (2) Effective rate at which taxes are imposed.
    (3) Taxes paid or accrued with respect to an item of income.
    (i) Income other than passive foreign personal holding company 
income.
    (ii) Passive foreign personal holding company income.

[[Page 240]]

    (4) Special rules.
    (i) Consistency rule.
    (ii) Coordination with earnings and profits limitation.
    (iii) Example.
    (5) Procedure.
    (6) Coordination of full inclusion and high tax exception rules.
    (7) Examples.
    (e) Character of income.
    (1) Substance of the transaction.
    (2) Separable character.
    (3) Predominant character.
    (4) Coordination of categories of gross foreign base company income 
or gross insurance income.
    (i) In general.
    (ii) Income excluded from other categories of gross foreign base 
company income.
    (f) Definition of related person.
    (1) Persons related to controlled foreign corporation.
    (i) Individuals.
    (ii) Other persons.
    (2) Control.
    (i) Corporations.
    (ii) Partnerships.
    (iii) Trusts and estates.
    (iv) Direct or indirect ownership.
Sec. 1.954-2  Foreign personal holding company income.
    (a) Computation of foreign personal holding company income.
    (1) Categories of foreign personal holding company income.
    (2) Coordination of overlapping categories under foreign personal 
holding company provisions.
    (i) In general.
    (ii) Priority of categories.
    (3) Changes in the use or purpose for which property is held.
    (i) In general.
    (ii) Special rules.
    (A) Anti-abuse rule.
    (B) Hedging transactions.
    (iii) Example.
    (4) Definitions and special rules.
    (i) Interest.
    (ii) Bona fide hedging transaction.
    (A) Definition.
    (B) Identification.
    (C) Effect of identification and non-identification.
    (1) Transactions identified.
    (2) Inadvertent identification.
    (3) Transactions not identified.
    (4) Inadvertent error.
    (5) Anti-abuse rule.
    (iii) Inventory and similar property.
    (A) Definition.
    (B) Hedging transactions.
    (iv) Regular dealer.
    (v) Dealer property.
    (A) Definition.
    (B) Securities dealers.
    (C) Hedging transactions.
    (vi) Examples.
    (vii) Debt instrument.
    (b) Dividends, interest, rents, royalties and annuities.
    (1) In general.
    (2) Exclusion of certain export financing interest.
    (i) In general.
    (ii) Exceptions.
    (iii) Conduct of a banking business.
    (iv) Examples.
    (3) Treatment of tax-exempt interest. [Reserved]
    (4) Exclusion of dividends or interest from related persons.
    (i) In general.
    (A) Corporate payor.
    (B) Payment by a partnership.
    (ii) Exceptions.
    (A) Dividends.
    (B) Interest paid out of adjusted foreign base company income or 
insurance income.
    (1) In general.
    (2) Rule for corporations that are both recipients and payors of 
interest.
    (C) Coordination with sections 864(d) and 881(c).
    (iii) Trade or business requirement.
    (iv) Substantial assets test.
    (v) Valuation of assets.
    (vi) Location of tangible property.
    (A) In general.
    (B) Exception.
    (vii) Location of intangible property.
    (A) In general.
    (B) Exception for property located in part in the payor's country of 
incorporation.
    (viii) Location of inventory and dealer property.
    (A) In general.
    (B) Inventory and dealer property located in part in the payor's 
country of incorporation.
    (ix) Location of debt instruments.
    (x) Treatment of certain stock interests.
    (xi) Treatment of banks and insurance companies. [Reserved]
    (5) Exclusion of rents and royalties derived from related persons.
    (i) In general.
    (A) Corporate payor.
    (B) Payment by a partnership.
    (ii) Exceptions.
    (A) Rents or royalties paid out of adjusted foreign base company 
income or insurance income.
    (B) Property used in part in the controlled foreign corporation's 
country of incorporation.
    (6) Exclusion of rents and royalties derived in the active conduct 
of a trade or business.
    (c) Excluded rents.
    (1) Active conduct of a trade or business.
    (2) Special rules.
    (i) Adding substantial value.

[[Page 241]]

    (ii) Substantiality of foreign organization.
    (iii) Active leasing expenses.
    (iv) Adjusted leasing profit.
    (3) Examples.
    (d) Excluded royalties.
    (1) Active conduct of a trade or business.
    (2) Special rules.
    (i) Adding substantial value.
    (ii) Substantiality of foreign organization.
    (iii) Active licensing expenses.
    (iv) Adjusted licensing profit.
    (3) Examples.
    (e) Certain property transactions.
    (1) In general.
    (i) Inclusions.
    (ii) Exceptions.
    (iii) Treatment of losses.
    (iv) Dual character property.
    (2) Property that gives rise to certain income.
    (i) In general.
    (ii) Gain or loss from the disposition of a debt instrument.
    (3) Property that does not give rise to income.
    (f) Commodities transactions.
    (1) In general.
    (i) Inclusion in foreign personal holding company income.
    (ii) Exception.
    (iii) Treatment of losses.
    (2) Definitions.
    (i) Commodity.
    (ii) Commodities transaction.
    (iii) Qualified active sale.
    (A) In general.
    (B) Active conduct of a commodities business.
    (C) Substantially all.
    (D) Activities of employees of a related entity.
    (E) Financial activities.
    (iv) Qualified hedging transaction.
    (A) In general.
    (B) Exception.
    (g) Foreign currency gain or loss.
    (1) Scope and purpose.
    (2) In general.
    (i) Inclusion.
    (ii) Exclusion for business needs.
    (A) General rule.
    (B) Business needs.
    (C) Regular dealers.
    (D) Example.
    (iii) Special rule for foreign currency gain or loss from an 
interest-bearing liability.
    (3) Election to characterize foreign currency gain or loss that 
arises from a specific category of subpart F income as gain or loss in 
that category.
    (i) In general.
    (ii) Time and manner of election.
    (iii) Revocation of election.
    (iv) Example.
    (4) Election to treat all foreign currency gains or losses as 
foreign personal holding company income.
    (i) In general.
    (ii) Time and manner of election.
    (iii) Revocation of election.
    (5) Gains and losses not subject to this paragraph.
    (i) Capital gains and losses.
    (ii) Income not subject to section 988.
    (iii) Qualified business units using the dollar approximate separate 
transactions method.
    (iv) Gain or loss allocated under Sec. 1.861-9. [Reserved]
    (h) Income equivalent to interest.
    (1) In general.
    (i) Inclusion in foreign personal holding company income.
    (ii) Exceptions.
    (A) Liability hedging transactions.
    (B) Interest.
    (2) Definition of income equivalent to interest.
    (i) In general.
    (ii) Income from the sale of property.
    (3) Notional principal contracts.
    (i) In general.
    (ii) Regular dealers.
    (4) Income equivalent to interest from factoring.
    (i) General rule.
    (ii) Exceptions.
    (iii) Factored receivable.
    (iv) Examples.
    (5) Receivables arising from performance of services.
    (6) Examples.

[T.D. 8618, 60 FR 46508, Sept. 7, 1995; T.D. 8618, 60 FR 62024, Dec. 4, 
1995]


<R05>
Sec. 1.954-1  Foreign base company income.

    (a) In general--(1) Purpose and scope. Section 954 and Secs. 1.954-1 
and 1.954-2 provide rules for computing the foreign base company income 
of a controlled foreign corporation. Foreign base company income is 
included in the subpart F income of a controlled foreign corporation 
under the rules of section 952. Subpart F income is included in the 
gross income of a United States shareholder of a controlled foreign 
corporation under the rules of section 951 and thus is subject to 
current taxation under section 1, 11 or 55 of the Internal Revenue Code. 
The determination of whether a foreign corporation is a controlled 
foreign corporation, the subpart F income of which is included currently 
in the gross income of its United States shareholders, is made under the 
rules of section 957.
    (2) Gross foreign base company income. The gross foreign base 
company income

[[Page 242]]

of a controlled foreign corporation consists of the following categories 
of gross income (determined after the application of section 952(b))--
    (i) Foreign personal holding company income, as defined in section 
954(c);
    (ii) Foreign base company sales income, as defined in section 
954(d);
    (iii) Foreign base company services income, as defined in section 
954(e);
    (iv) Foreign base company shipping income, as defined in section 
954(f); and
    (v) Foreign base company oil related income, as defined in section 
954(g).
    (3) Adjusted gross foreign base company income. The term adjusted 
gross foreign base company income means the gross foreign base company 
income of a controlled foreign corporation as adjusted by the de minimis 
and full inclusion rules of paragraph (b) of this section.
    (4) Net foreign base company income. The term net foreign base 
company income means the adjusted gross foreign base company income of a 
controlled foreign corporation reduced so as to take account of 
deductions (including taxes) properly allocable or apportionable to such 
income under the rules of section 954(b)(5) and paragraph (c) of this 
section.
    (5) Adjusted net foreign base company income. The term adjusted net 
foreign base company income means the net foreign base company income of 
a controlled foreign corporation reduced, first, by any items of net 
foreign base company income excluded from subpart F income pursuant to 
section 952(c) and, second, by any items excluded from subpart F income 
pursuant to the high tax exception of section 954(b). See paragraph 
(d)(4)(ii) of this section. The term foreign base company income as used 
in the Internal Revenue Code and elsewhere in the Income Tax Regulations 
means adjusted net foreign base company income, unless otherwise 
provided.
    (6) Insurance income. The term gross insurance income includes all 
gross income taken into account in determining insurance income under 
section 953. The term adjusted gross insurance income means gross 
insurance income as adjusted by the de minimis and full inclusion rules 
of paragraph (b) of this section. The term net insurance income means 
adjusted gross insurance income reduced under section 953 so as to take 
into account deductions (including taxes) properly allocable or 
apportionable to such income. The term adjusted net insurance income 
means net insurance income reduced by any items of net insurance income 
that are excluded from subpart F income pursuant to section 952(b) or 
pursuant to the high tax exception of section 954(b). The term insurance 
income as used in subpart F of the Internal Revenue Code and in the 
regulations under that subpart means adjusted net insurance income, 
unless otherwise provided.
    (7) Additional items of adjusted net foreign base company income or 
adjusted net insurance income by reason of section 952(c). Earnings and 
profits of the controlled foreign corporation that are recharacterized 
as foreign base company income or insurance income under section 952(c) 
are items of adjusted net foreign base company income or adjusted net 
insurance income, respectively. Amounts subject to recharacterization 
under section 952(c) are determined after adjusted net foreign base 
company income and adjusted net insurance income are otherwise 
determined under subpart F and are not again subject to any exceptions 
or special rules that would affect the amount of subpart F income. Thus, 
for example, items of gross foreign base company income or gross 
insurance income that are excluded from adjusted gross foreign base 
company income or adjusted gross insurance income because the de minimis 
test is met are subject to recharacterization under section 952(c). 
Further, the de minimis and full inclusion tests of paragraph (b) of 
this section, and the high tax exception of paragraph (d) of this 
section, for example, do not apply to such amounts.
    (b) Computation of adjusted gross foreign base company income and 
adjusted gross insurance income--(1) De minimis and full inclusion 
tests--(i) De minimis test--(A) In general. Except as provided in 
paragraph (b)(1)(i)(C) of this section, adjusted gross foreign base 
company income and adjusted gross insurance income are equal to zero if 
the sum of the gross foreign base company income and the gross insurance 
income of a

[[Page 243]]

controlled foreign corporation is less than the lesser of--
    (1) 5 percent of gross income; or
    (2) $1,000,000.
    (B) Currency translation. Controlled foreign corporations having a 
functional currency other than the United States dollar shall translate 
the $1,000,000 threshold using the exchange rate provided under section 
989(b)(3) for amounts included in income under section 951(a).
    (C) Coordination with sections 864(d) and 881(c). Adjusted gross 
foreign base company income or adjusted gross insurance income of a 
controlled foreign corporation always includes income from trade or 
service receivables described in section 864(d)(1) or (6), and portfolio 
interest described in section 881(c), even if the de minimis test of 
this paragraph (b)(1)(i) is otherwise satisfied.
    (ii) Seventy percent full inclusion test. Except as provided in 
section 953, adjusted gross foreign base company income consists of all 
gross income of the controlled foreign corporation other than gross 
insurance income and amounts described in section 952(b), and adjusted 
gross insurance income consists of all gross insurance income other than 
amounts described in section 952(b), if the sum of the gross foreign 
base company income and the gross insurance income for the taxable year 
exceeds 70 percent of gross income. See paragraph (d)(6) of this 
section, under which certain items of full inclusion foreign base 
company income may nevertheless be excluded from subpart F income.
    (2) Character of gross income included in adjusted gross foreign 
base company income. The gross income included in the adjusted gross 
foreign base company income of a controlled foreign corporation 
generally retains its character as foreign personal holding company 
income, foreign base company sales income, foreign base company services 
income, foreign base company shipping income, or foreign base company 
oil related income. However, gross income included in adjusted gross 
foreign base company income because the full inclusion test of paragraph 
(b)(1)(ii) of this section is met is termed full inclusion foreign base 
company income, and constitutes a separate category of adjusted gross 
foreign base company income for purposes of allocating and apportioning 
deductions under paragraph (c) of this section.
    (3) Coordination with section 952(c). Income that is included in 
subpart F income because the full inclusion test of paragraph (b)(1)(ii) 
of this section is met does not reduce amounts that, under section 
952(c), are subject to recharacterization.
    (4) Anti-abuse rule--(i) In general. For purposes of applying the de 
minimis test of paragraph (b)(1)(i) of this section, the income of two 
or more controlled foreign corporations shall be aggregated and treated 
as the income of a single corporation if a principal purpose for 
separately organizing, acquiring, or maintaining such multiple 
corporations is to prevent income from being treated as foreign base 
company income or insurance income under the de minimis test. A purpose 
may be a principal purpose even though it is outweighed by other 
purposes (taken together or separately).
    (ii) Presumption. Two or more controlled foreign corporations are 
presumed to have been organized, acquired or maintained to prevent 
income from being treated as foreign base company income or insurance 
income under the de minimis test of paragraph (b)(1)(i) of this section 
if the corporations are related persons, as defined in paragraph 
(b)(4)(iii) of this section, and the corporations are described in 
paragraph (b)(4)(ii)(A), (B), or (C) of this section. This presumption 
may be rebutted by proof to the contrary.
    (A) The activities carried on by the controlled foreign 
corporations, or the assets used in those activities, are substantially 
the same activities that were previously carried on, or assets that were 
previously held, by a single controlled foreign corporation. Further, 
the United States shareholders of the controlled foreign corporations or 
related persons (as determined under paragraph (b)(4)(iii) of this 
section) are substantially the same as the United States shareholders of 
the one controlled foreign corporation in a prior taxable year. A 
presumption made in connection with the requirements of

[[Page 244]]

this paragraph (b)(4)(ii)(A) may be rebutted by proof that the 
activities carried on by each controlled foreign corporation would 
constitute a separate branch under the principles of Sec. 1.367(a)-
6T(g)(2) if carried on directly by a United States person.
    (B) The controlled foreign corporations carry on a business, 
financial operation, or venture as partners directly or indirectly in a 
partnership (as defined in section 7701(a)(2) and Sec. 301.7701-3 of 
this chapter) that is a related person (as defined in paragraph 
(b)(4)(iii) of this section) with respect to each such controlled 
foreign corporation.
    (C) The activities carried on by the controlled foreign corporations 
would constitute a single branch operation under Sec. 1.367(a)-6T(g)(2) 
if carried on directly by a United States person.
    (iii) Related persons. For purposes of this paragraph (b), two or 
more persons are related persons if they are in a relationship described 
in section 267(b). In determining for purposes of this paragraph (b) 
whether two or more corporations are members of the same controlled 
group under section 267(b)(3), a person is considered to own stock owned 
directly by such person, stock owned with the application of section 
1563(e)(1), and stock owned with the application of section 267(c). In 
determining for purposes of this paragraph (b) whether a corporation is 
related to a partnership under section 267(b)(10), a person is 
considered to own the partnership interest owned directly by such person 
and the partnership interest owned with the application of section 
267(e)(3).
    (iv) Example. The following example illustrates the application of 
this paragraph (b)(4).

    Example. (i)(1) USP is the sole United States shareholder of three 
controlled foreign corporations: CFC1, CFC2 and CFC3. The three 
controlled foreign corporations all have the same taxable year. The 
three controlled foreign corporations are partners in FP, a foreign 
entity classified as a partnership under section 7701(a)(2) and 
Sec. 301.7701-3 of the regulations. For their current taxable years, 
each of the controlled foreign corporations derives all of its income 
other than foreign base company income from activities conducted through 
FP, and its foreign base company income from activities conducted both 
jointly through FP and separately without FP. Based on the facts in the 
table below, the foreign base company income derived by each controlled 
foreign corporation for its current taxable year, including income 
derived from FP, is less than five percent of the gross income of each 
controlled foreign corporation and is less than $1,000,000:

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                       CFC1            CFC2            CFC3     
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Gross income....................................................      $4,000,000      $8,000,000     $12,000,000
Five percent of gross income....................................         200,000         400,000         600,000
Foreign base company income.....................................         199,000         398,000         597,000
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (2) Thus, without the application of the anti-abuse rule of this 
paragraph (b)(4), each controlled foreign corporation would be treated 
as having no foreign base company income after the application of the de 
minimis test of section 954(b)(3)(A) and paragraph (b)(1)(i) of this 
section.
    (ii) However, under these facts, the requirements of paragraph 
(b)(4)(i) of this section are met unless the presumption of paragraph 
(b)(4)(ii) of this section is successfully rebutted. The sum of the 
foreign base company income of the controlled foreign corporations is 
$1,194,000. Thus, the amount of gross foreign base company income of 
each controlled foreign corporation will not be reduced by reason of the 
de minimis rule of section 954(b)(3)(A) and this paragraph (b).

    (c) Computation of net foreign base company income--(1) General 
rule. The net foreign base company income of a controlled foreign 
corporation (as defined in paragraph (a)(4) of this section) is computed 
under the rules of this paragraph (c)(1). The principles of Sec. 1.904-
5(k) shall apply where payments are made between controlled foreign 
corporations that are related persons (within the meaning of section 
954(d)(3)). Consistent with these principles, only payments described in 
Sec. 1.954-2(b)(4)(ii)(B)(2) may be offset as provided in Sec. 1.904-
5(k)(2).
    (i) Deductions against gross foreign base company income. The net 
foreign base company income of a controlled foreign corporation is 
computed first by taking into account deductions in the following 
manner:

[[Page 245]]

    (A) First, the gross amount of each item of income described in 
paragraph (c)(1)(iii) of this section is determined.
    (B) Second, any expenses definitely related to less than all gross 
income as a class shall be allocated and apportioned under the 
principles of sections 861, 864 and 904(d) to the gross income described 
in paragraph (c)(1)(i)(A) of this section.
    (C) Third, foreign personal holding company income that is passive 
within the meaning of section 904 (determined before the application of 
the high-taxed income rule of Sec. 1.904-4(c)) is reduced by related 
person interest expense allocable to passive income under Sec. 1.904-
5(c)(2); such interest must be further allocated and apportioned to 
items described in paragraph (c)(1)(iii)(B) of this section.
    (D) Fourth, the amount of each item of income described in paragraph 
(c)(1)(iii) of this section is reduced by other expenses allocable and 
apportionable to such income under the principles of sections 861, 864 
and 904(d).
    (ii) Losses reduce subpart F income by operation of earnings and 
profits limitation. Except as otherwise provided in Sec. 1.954-2(g)(4), 
if after applying the rules of paragraph (c)(1)(i) of this section, the 
amount remaining in any category of foreign base company income or 
foreign personal holding company income is less than zero, the loss in 
that category may not reduce any other category of foreign base company 
income or foreign personal holding company income except by operation of 
the earnings and profits limitation of section 952(c)(1).
    (iii) Items of income--(A) Income other than passive foreign 
personal holding company income. A single item of income (other than 
foreign personal holding company income that is passive) is the 
aggregate amount from all transactions that falls within a single 
separate category (as defined in Sec. 1.904-5(a)(1)), and either--
    (1) Falls within a single category of foreign personal holding 
company income as--
    (i) Dividends, interest, rents, royalties and annuities;
    (ii) Gain from certain property transactions;
    (iii) Gain from commodities transactions;
    (iv) Foreign currency gain; or
    (v) Income equivalent to interest; or
    (2) Falls within a single category of foreign base company income, 
other than foreign personal holding company income, as--
    (i) Foreign base company sales income;
    (ii) Foreign base company services income;
    (iii) Foreign base company shipping income;
    (iv) Foreign base company oil related income; or
    (v) Full inclusion foreign base company income.
    (B) Passive foreign personal holding company income. A single item 
of foreign personal holding company income that is passive is an amount 
of income that falls within a single group of passive income under the 
grouping rules of Sec. 1.904-4(c)(3), (4) and (5) and a single category 
of foreign personal holding company income described in paragraphs 
(c)(1)(iii)(A)(1) (i) through (v).
    (2) Computation of net foreign base company income derived from same 
country insurance income. Deductions relating to foreign base company 
income attributable to the issuing (or reinsuring) of any insurance or 
annuity contract in connection with risks located in the country under 
the laws of which the controlled foreign corporation is created or 
organized shall be allocated and apportioned in accordance with the 
rules set forth in section 953.
    (d) Computation of adjusted net foreign base company income or 
adjusted net insurance income--(1) Application of high tax exception. 
Adjusted net foreign base company income (or adjusted net insurance 
income) equals the net foreign base company income (or net insurance 
income) of a controlled foreign corporation, reduced by any net item of 
such income that qualifies for the high tax exception provided by 
section 954(b)(4) and this paragraph (d). Any item of income that is 
foreign base company oil related income, as defined in section 954(g), 
or portfolio interest, as described in section 881(c), does not qualify 
for the high tax exception. See paragraph (c)(1)(iii) of this section 
for

[[Page 246]]

the definition of the term item of income. For rules concerning the 
treatment for foreign tax credit purposes of amounts excluded from 
subpart F under section 954(b)(4), see Sec. 1.904-4(c). A net item of 
income qualifies for the high tax exception only if--
    (i) An election is made under section 954(b)(4) and paragraph (d)(5) 
of this section to exclude the income from the computation of subpart F 
income; and
    (ii) It is established that the net item of income was subject to 
foreign income taxes imposed by a foreign country or countries at an 
effective rate that is greater than 90 percent of the maximum rate of 
tax specified in section 11 for the taxable year of the controlled 
foreign corporation.
    (2) Effective rate at which taxes are imposed. The effective rate 
with respect to a net item of income shall be determined separately for 
each controlled foreign corporation in a chain of corporations through 
which a distribution is made. The effective rate at which taxes are 
imposed on a net item of income is--
    (i) The United States dollar amount of foreign income taxes paid or 
accrued (or deemed paid or accrued) with respect to the net item of 
income, determined under paragraph (d)(3) of this section; divided by
    (ii) The United States dollar amount of the net item of foreign base 
company income or insurance income, described in paragraph (c)(1)(iii) 
of this section, increased by the amount of foreign income taxes 
referred to in paragraph (d)(2)(i) of this section.
    (3) Taxes paid or accrued with respect to an item of income--(i) 
Income other than passive foreign personal holding company income. The 
amount of foreign income taxes paid or accrued with respect to a net 
item of income (other than an item of foreign personal holding company 
income that is passive) for purposes of section 954(b)(4) and this 
paragraph (d) is the United States dollar amount of foreign income taxes 
that would be deemed paid under section 960 with respect to that item if 
that item were included in the gross income of a United States 
shareholder under section 951(a)(1)(A) (determined, in the case of a 
United States shareholder that is an individual, as if an election under 
section 962 has been made, whether or not such election is actually 
made). For this purpose, in accordance with the regulations under 
section 960, the amounts that would be deemed paid under section 960 
shall be determined separately with respect to each controlled foreign 
corporation and without regard to the limitation applicable under 
section 904(a). The amount of foreign income taxes paid or accrued with 
respect to a net item of income, determined in the manner provided in 
this paragraph (d), will not be affected by a subsequent reduction in 
foreign income taxes attributable to a distribution to shareholders of 
all or part of such income.
    (ii) Passive foreign personal holding company income. The amount of 
income taxes paid or accrued with respect to a net item of foreign 
personal holding company income that is passive for purposes of section 
954(b)(4) and this paragraph (d) is the United States dollar amount of 
foreign income taxes that would be deemed paid under section 960 and 
that would be taken into account for purposes applying the provisions of 
Sec. 1.904-4(c) with respect to that net item of income.
    (4) Special rules--(i) Consistency rule. An election to exclude 
income from the computation of subpart F income for a taxable year must 
be made consistently with respect to all items of passive foreign 
personal holding company income eligible to be excluded for the taxable 
year. Thus, high-taxed passive foreign personal holding company income 
of a controlled foreign corporation must either be excluded in its 
entirety, or remain subject to subpart F in its entirety.
    (ii) Coordination with earnings and profits limitation. If the 
amount of income included in subpart F income for the taxable year is 
reduced by the earnings and profits limitation of section 952(c)(1), the 
amount of income that is a net item of income, within the meaning of 
paragraph (c)(1)(iii) of this section, is determined after the 
application of the rules of section 952(c)(1).
    (iii) Example. The following example illustrates the provisions of 
paragraph (d)(4)(ii) of this section. All of the taxes referred to in 
the following example

[[Page 247]]

are foreign income taxes. For simplicity, this example assumes that the 
amount of taxes that are taken into account as a deduction under section 
954(b)(5) and the amount of the gross-up required under sections 960 and 
78 are equal. Therefore, this example does not separately illustrate the 
deduction for taxes and gross-up.

    Example. During its 1995 taxable year, CFC, a controlled foreign 
corporation, earns royalty income, net of taxes, of $100 that is foreign 
personal holding company income. CFC has no expenses associated with 
this royalty income. CFC pays $50 of foreign income taxes with respect 
to the royalty income. For 1995, CFC has current earnings and profits of 
$50. CFC's subpart F income, as determined prior to the application of 
this paragraph (d), exceeds its current earnings and profits. Thus, 
under paragraph (d)(4)(ii) of this section, the amount of CFC's only net 
item of income, the royalty income, will be limited to $50. The 
remaining $50 will be subject to recharacterization in a subsequent 
taxable year under section 952(c)(2). Because the amount of foreign 
income taxes paid with respect to this net item of income is $50, the 
effective rate of tax on the item, for purposes of this paragraph (d), 
is 50 percent ($50 of taxes/$50 net item + $50 of taxes). Accordingly, 
an election under paragraph (d)(5) of this section may be made to 
exclude the item of income from the computation of subpart F income.

    (5) Procedure. An election made under the procedure provided by this 
paragraph (d)(5) is binding on all United States shareholders of the 
controlled foreign corporation and must be made--
    (i) By the controlling United States shareholders, as defined in 
Sec. 1.964-1(c)(5), by attaching a statement to such effect with their 
original or amended income tax returns, and including any additional 
information required by applicable administrative pronouncements; or
    (ii) In such other manner as may be prescribed in applicable 
administrative pronouncements.
    (6) Coordination of full inclusion and high tax exception rules. 
Notwithstanding paragraph (b)(1)(ii) of this section, full inclusion 
foreign base company income will be excluded from subpart F income if 
more than 90 percent of the adjusted gross foreign base company income 
and adjusted gross insurance company income of a controlled foreign 
corporation (determined without regard to the full inclusion test of 
paragraph (b)(1) of this section) is attributable to net amounts 
excluded from subpart F income pursuant to an election to have the high 
tax exception described in section 954(b)(4) and this paragraph (d) 
apply.
    (7) Examples. (i) The following examples illustrate the rules of 
this paragraph (d). All of the taxes referred to in the following 
examples are foreign income taxes. For simplicity, these examples assume 
that the amount of taxes that are taken into account as a deduction 
under section 954(b)(5) and the amount of the gross-up required under 
sections 960 and 78 are equal. Therefore, these examples do not 
separately illustrate the deduction for taxes and gross-up. Except as 
otherwise stated, these examples assume there are no earnings, deficits, 
or foreign income taxes in the post-1986 pools of earnings and profits 
or foreign income taxes.

    Example 1. (i) Items of income. During its 1995 taxable year, 
controlled foreign corporation CFC earns from outside its country of 
operation portfolio dividend income of $100 and interest income, net of 
taxes, of $100 (consisting of a gross payment of $150 reduced by a 
third-country withholding tax of $50). For purposes of illustration, 
assume that CFC incurs no expenses. None of the income is taxed in CFC's 
country of operation. The dividend income was not subject to third-
country withholding taxes. Pursuant to the operation of section 904, the 
interest income is high withholding tax interest and the dividend income 
is passive income. Accordingly, pursuant to paragraph (c)(1)(iii) of 
this section, CFC has two net items of income--
    (1) $100 of foreign personal holding company (FPHC)/passive income 
(the dividends); and
    (2) $100 of FPHC/high withholding tax income (the interest).
    (ii) Effective rates of tax. No foreign tax would be deemed paid 
under section 960 with respect to the net item of income described in 
paragraph (i)(1) of this Example 1. Therefore, the effective rate of 
foreign tax is 0, and the item may not be excluded from subpart F income 
under the rules of this paragraph (d). Foreign tax of $50 would be 
deemed paid under section 960 with respect to the net item of income 
described in paragraph (i)(2) of this Example 1. Therefore, the 
effective rate of foreign tax is 33 percent ($50 of creditable taxes 
paid, divided by $150, consisting

[[Page 248]]

of the net item of foreign base company income ($100) plus creditable 
taxes paid thereon ($50)). The highest rate of tax specified in section 
11 for the 1995 taxable year is 35 percent. Accordingly, the net item of 
income described in paragraph (i)(2) of this Example 1 may be excluded 
from subpart F income if an election under paragraph (d)(5) of this 
section is made, since it is subject to foreign tax at an effective rate 
that is greater than 31.5 percent (90 percent of 35 percent). However, 
for purposes of section 904(d), it remains high withholding tax 
interest.
    Example 2. (i) The facts are the same as in Example 1, except that 
CFC's country of operation imposes a tax of $50 with respect to CFC's 
dividend income (and thus CFC earns portfolio dividend income, net of 
taxes, of only $50). The interest income is still high withholding tax 
interest. The dividend income is still passive income (without regard to 
the possible applicability of the high tax exception of section 
904(d)(2)). Accordingly, CFC has two items of income for purposes of 
this paragraph (d)--
    (1) $50 of FPHC/passive income (net of the $50 foreign tax); and
    (2) $100 of FPHC/high withholding tax interest income.
    (ii) Each item is taxed at an effective rate greater than 31.5 
percent. The net item of income described in paragraph (i)(1) of this 
Example 2: foreign tax ($50) divided by sum ($100) of net item of income 
($50) plus creditable tax thereon ($50) equals 50 percent. The net item 
of income described in paragraph (i)(2) of this Example 2: foreign tax 
($50) divided by sum ($150) of income item ($100) plus creditable tax 
thereon ($50) equals 33 percent. Accordingly, an election may be made 
under paragraph (d)(5) of this section to exclude either or both of the 
net items of income described in paragraphs (i)(1) and (2) of this 
Example 2 from subpart F income. If no election is made the items would 
be included in the subpart F income of CFC.
    Example 3. (i) The facts are the same as in Example 1, except that 
the $100 of portfolio dividend income is subject to a third-country 
withholding tax of $50, and the $150 of interest income is from sources 
within CFC's country of operation, is subject to a $10 income tax 
therein, and is not subject to a withholding tax. Although the interest 
income and the dividend income are both passive income, under paragraph 
(c)(1)(iii)(B) of this section they constitute separate items of income 
pursuant to the application of the grouping rules of Sec. 1.904-4(c). 
Accordingly, CFC has two net items of income for purposes of this 
paragraph (d)--
    (1) $50 (net of $50 tax) of FPHC/non-country of operation/greater 
than 15 percent withholding tax income; and
    (2) $140 (net of $10 tax) of FPHC/country of operation income.
    (ii) The item described in paragraph (i)(1) of this Example 3 is 
taxed at an effective rate greater than 31.5 percent, but Item 2 is not. 
The net item of income described in paragraph (i)(1) of this Example 3: 
foreign tax ($50) divided by sum ($100) of net item of income ($50) plus 
creditable tax thereon ($50) equals 50 percent. The net item of income 
described in paragraph (i)(2) of this Example 3: foreign tax ($10) 
divided by sum ($150) of net item of income ($140) plus creditable tax 
thereon ($10) equals 6.67 percent. Therefore, an election may be made 
under paragraph (d)(5) of this section to exclude the net item of income 
described in paragraph (i)(1) of this Example 3 but not the net item of 
income described in paragraph (i)(2) of this Example 3 from subpart F 
income.
    Example 4. The facts are the same as in Example 3, except that the 
$150 of interest income is subject to an income tax of $50 in CFC's 
country of operation. Accordingly, CFC's items of income are the same as 
in Example 3, but both items are taxed at an effective rate greater than 
31.5 percent. The net item of income described in paragraph (i)(1) of 
Example 3: foreign tax ($50) divided by sum ($100) of net item of income 
($50) plus creditable tax thereon ($50) equals 50 percent. The net item 
of income described in paragraph (i)(2) of Example 3: foreign tax ($50) 
divided by sum ($150) of net item of income ($100) plus creditable tax 
thereon ($50) equals 33 percent. Pursuant to the consistency rule of 
paragraph (d)(4)(i) of this section, an election made by CFC's 
controlling United States shareholders must exclude from subpart F 
income both items of FPHC income under the high tax exception of section 
954(b)(4) and this paragraph (d). The election may not be made only with 
respect to one item.
    Example 5. The facts are the same as in Example 1, except that CFC 
earns $5 of portfolio dividend income and $150 of interest income. In 
addition, CFC earns $45 for performing consulting services within its 
country of operation for unrelated persons. CFC's gross foreign base 
company income for 1995 of $155 ($150 of gross interest income and $5 of 
portfolio dividend income) is greater than 70 percent of its gross 
income of $200. Therefore, under the full inclusion test of paragraph 
(b)(1)(ii) of this section, CFC's adjusted gross foreign base company 
income is $200, and under paragraph (b)(2) of this section, the $45 of 
consulting income is full inclusion foreign base company income. If CFC 
elects, under paragraph (d)(5) of this section, to exclude the interest 
income from subpart F income pursuant to the high tax exception, the $45 
of full inclusion foreign base company income will be excluded from 
subpart F income under paragraph (d)(6) of this section because the $150 
of gross interest income excluded under the high tax exception is more 
than 90

[[Page 249]]

percent of CFC's adjusted gross foreign base company income of $155.


    (ii) The following examples generally illustrate the application of 
paragraph (c) of this section and this paragraph (d). Example 1 
illustrates the order of computations. Example 2 illustrates the 
computations required by sections 952 and 954 and this Sec. 1.954-1 if 
the full inclusion test of paragraph (b)(1)(ii) of this section is met 
and the income is not excluded from subpart F income under section 
952(b). Computations in these examples involving the operation of 
section 952(c) are included for purposes of illustration only and do not 
provide substantive rules concerning the operation of that section. For 
simplicity, these examples assume that the amount of taxes that are 
taken into account as a deduction under section 954(b)(5) and the amount 
of the gross-up required under sections 960 and 78 are equal. Therefore, 
these examples do not separately illustrate the deduction for taxes and 
gross-up.


    Example 1. (i) Gross income. CFC, a controlled foreign corporation, 
has gross income of $1000 for the current taxable year. Of that $1000 of 
income, $100 is interest income that is included in the definition of 
foreign personal holding company income under section 954(c)(1)(A) and 
Sec. 1.954-2(b)(1)(ii), is not income from a trade or service receivable 
described in section 864(d)(1) or (6), or portfolio interest described 
in section 881(c), and is not excluded from foreign personal holding 
company income under any provision of section 952(b) or section 954(c). 
Another $50 is foreign base company sales income under section 954(d). 
The remaining $850 of gross income is not included in the definition of 
foreign base company income or insurance income under sections 954 (c), 
(d), (e), (f) or (g) or 953, and is foreign source general limitation 
income described in section 904(d)(1)(I).
     (ii) Expenses. For the current taxable year, CFC has expenses of 
$500. This amount includes $8 of interest paid to a related person that 
is allocable to foreign personal holding company income under section 
904, and $2 of other expense that is directly related to foreign 
personal holding company income. Another $20 of expense is directly 
related to foreign base company sales. The remaining $470 of expenses is 
allocable to general limitation income that is not foreign base company 
income or insurance income.
     (iii) Earnings and losses. CFC has earnings and profits for the 
current taxable year of $500. In the prior taxable year, CFC had losses 
with respect to income other than gross foreign base company income or 
gross insurance income. By reason of the limitation provided under 
section 952(c)(1)(A), those losses reduced the subpart F income 
(consisting entirely of foreign source general limitation income) of CFC 
by $600 for the prior taxable year.
     (iv) Taxes. Foreign income tax of $30 is considered imposed on the 
interest income under the rules of section 954(b)(4), this paragraph 
(d), and Sec. 1.904-6. Foreign income tax of $14 is considered imposed 
on the foreign base company sales income under the rules of section 
954(b)(4), paragraph (d) of this section, and Sec. 1.904-6. Foreign 
income tax of $177 is considered imposed on the remaining foreign source 
general limitation income under the rules of section 954(b)(4), this 
paragraph (d), and Sec. 1.904-6. For the taxable year of CFC, the 
maximum United States rate of taxation under section 11 is 35 percent.
    (v) Conclusion. Based on these facts, if CFC elects to exclude all 
items of income subject to a high foreign tax under section 954(b)(4) 
and this paragraph (d), it will have $500 of subpart F income as defined 
in section 952(a) (consisting entirely of foreign source general 
limitation income) determined as follows:

Step 1--Determine gross income:                                         
  (1) Gross income.............................................    $1000
Step 2--Determine gross foreign base company income and gross           
 insurance income:                                                      
  (2) Interest income included in gross foreign personal                
   holding company income under section 954(c).................      100
  (3) Gross foreign base company sales income under section             
   954(d)......................................................       50
  (4) Total gross foreign base company income and gross                 
   insurance income as defined in sections 954 (c), (d), (e),           
   (f) and (g) and 953 (line (2) plus line (3))................      150
Step 3--Compute adjusted gross foreign base company income and          
 adjusted gross insurance income:                                       
  (5) Five percent of gross income (.05  x  line (1))..........       50
  (6) Seventy percent of gross income (.70  x  line (1)).......      700
  (7) Adjusted gross foreign base company income and adjusted           
   gross insurance income after the application of the de               
   minimis test of paragraph (b) (line (4), or zero if line (4)         
   is less than the lesser of line (5) or $1,000,000) (if the           
   amount on this line 7 is zero, proceed to Step 8)...........      150

[[Page 250]]

                                                                        
  (8) Adjusted gross foreign base company income and adjusted           
   gross insurance income after the application of the full             
   inclusion test of paragraph (b) (line (4), or line (1) if            
   line (4) is greater than line (6))..........................      150
Step 4--Compute net foreign base company income:                        
  (9) Expenses directly related to adjusted gross foreign base          
   company sales income........................................       20
  (10) Expenses (other than related person interest expense)            
   directly related to adjusted gross foreign personal holding          
   company income..............................................        2
  (11) Related person interest expense allocable to adjusted            
   gross foreign personal holding company income under section          
   904.........................................................        8
  (12) Net foreign personal holding company income after                
   allocating deductions under section 954(b)(5) and paragraph          
   (c) of this section (line (2) reduced by lines (10) and              
   (11)).......................................................       90
  (13) Net foreign base company sales income after allocating           
   deductions under section 954(b)(5) and paragraph (c) of this         
   section (line (3) reduced by line (9))......................       30
  (14) Total net foreign base company income after allocating           
   deductions under section 954(b)(5) and paragraph (c) of this         
   section (line (12) plus line (13))..........................      120
Step 5--Compute net insurance income:                                   
  (15) Net insurance income under section 953..................        0
Step 6--Compute adjusted net foreign base company income:               
  (16) Foreign income tax imposed on net foreign personal               
   holding company income (as determined under section                  
   954(b)(4) and this paragraph (d))...........................       30
  (17) Foreign income tax imposed on net foreign base company           
   sales income (as determined under section 954(b)(4) and this         
   paragraph (d))..............................................       14
  (18) Ninety percent of the maximum United States corporate            
   tax rate....................................................    31.5%
  (19) Effective rate of foreign income tax imposed on net              
   foreign personal holding company income ($90 of interest)            
   under section 954(b)(4) and this paragraph (d) (line (16)            
   divided by line (12)).......................................      33%
  (20) Effective rate of foreign income tax imposed on $30 of           
   net foreign base company sales income under section                  
   954(b)(4) and this paragraph (d) (line (17) divided by line          
   (13)).......................................................      47%
  (21) Net foreign personal holding company income subject to a         
   high foreign tax under section 954(b)(4) and this paragraph          
   (d) (zero, or line (12) if line (19) is greater than line            
   (18)).......................................................       90
  (22) Net foreign base company sales income subject to a high          
   foreign tax under section 954(b)(4) and this paragraph (d)           
   (zero, or line (13) if line (20) is greater than line (18)).       30
  (23) Adjusted net foreign base company income after applying          
   section 954(b)(4) and this paragraph (d) (line (14), reduced         
   by the sum of line (21) and line (22))......................        0
Step 7--Compute adjusted net insurance income:                          
  (24) Adjusted net insurance income...........................        0
Step 8--Additions to or reduction of adjusted net foreign base          
 company income by reason of section 952(c):                            
  (25) Earnings and profits for the current year...............      500
  (26) Amount subject to being recharacterized as subpart F             
   income under section 952(c)(2) (excess of line (25) over the         
   sum of lines (23) and (24)); if there is a deficit, then the         
   limitation of section 952(c)(1) may apply for the current            
   year........................................................      500
  (27) Amount of reduction in subpart F income for prior                
   taxable years by reason of the limitation of section                 
   952(c)(1)...................................................      600
  (28) Subpart F income as defined in section 952(a), assuming          
   section 952(a)(3), (4), and (5) do not apply (the sum of             
   line (23), line (24), and the lesser of line (26) or line            
   (27)).......................................................      500
  (29) Amount of prior year's deficit to be recharacterized as          
   subpart F income in later years under section 952(c) (excess         
   of line (27) over line (26))................................      100
                                                                        

    Example 2. (i) Gross income.  CFC, a controlled foreign corporation, 
has gross income of $1000 for the current taxable year. Of that $1000 of 
income, $720 is interest income that is included in the definition of 
foreign personal holding company income under section 954(c)(1)(A) and 
Sec. 1.954-2(b)(1)(ii), is not income from trade or service receivables 
described in section 864(d)(1) or (6), or portfolio interest described 
in section 881(c), and is not excluded from foreign personal holding 
company income under any provision of section 954(c) and Sec. 1.954-2 or 
section 952(b). The

[[Page 251]]

remaining $280 is services income that is not included in the definition 
of foreign base company income or insurance income under sections 954 
(c), (d), (e), (f), or (g) or 953, and is foreign source general 
limitation income for purposes of section 904(d)(1)(I).
    (ii) Expenses. For the current taxable year, CFC has expenses of 
$650. This amount includes $350 of interest paid to related persons that 
is allocable to foreign personal holding company income under section 
904, and $50 of other expense that is directly related to foreign 
personal holding company income. The remaining $250 of expenses is 
allocable to services income other than foreign base company income or 
insurance income.
    (iii) Earnings and losses. CFC has earnings and profits for the 
current taxable year of $350. In the prior taxable year, CFC had losses 
with respect to income other than foreign base company income or 
insurance income. By reason of the limitation provided under section 
952(c)(1)(A), those losses reduced the subpart F income of CFC 
(consisting entirely of foreign source general limitation income) by 
$600 for the prior taxable year.
    (iv) Taxes. Foreign income tax of $120 is considered imposed on the 
$720 of interest income under the rules of section 954(b)(4), paragraph 
(d) of this section, and Sec. 1.904-6. Foreign income tax of $2 is 
considered imposed on the services income under the rules of section 
954(b)(4), paragraph (d) of this section, and Sec. 1.904-6. For the 
taxable year of CFC, the maximum United States rate of taxation under 
section 11 is 35 percent.
    (v) Conclusion. Based on these facts, if CFC elects to exclude all 
items of income subject to a high foreign tax under section 954(b)(4) 
and this paragraph (d), it will have $350 of subpart F income as defined 
in section 952(a), determined as follows.

Step 1--Determine gross income:                                         
  (1) Gross income.............................................    $1000
Step 2--Determine gross foreign base company income and gross           
 insurance income:                                                      
  (2) Gross foreign base company income and gross insurance             
   income as defined in sections 954 (c), (d), (e), (f) and (g)         
   and 953 (interest income)...................................      720
Step 3--Compute adjusted gross foreign base company income and          
 adjusted gross insurance income:                                       
  (3) Seventy percent of gross income (.70  x  line (1)).......      700
  (4) Adjusted gross foreign base company income and adjusted           
   gross insurance income after the application of the full             
   inclusion rule of this paragraph (b)(1) (line (2), or line           
   (1) if line (2) is greater than line (3))...................     1000
  (5) Full inclusion foreign base company income under                  
   paragraph (b)(1)(ii) (line (4) minus line (2))..............      280
Step 4--Compute net foreign base company income:                        
  (6) Expenses (other than related person interest expense)             
   directly related to adjusted gross foreign personal holding          
   company income..............................................       50
  (7) Related person interest expense allocable to adjusted             
   gross foreign personal holding company income under section          
   904.........................................................      350
  (8) Deductions allocable to full inclusion foreign base               
   company income under section 954(b)(5) and paragraph (c) of          
   this section................................................      250
  (9) Net foreign personal holding company income after                 
   allocating deductions under section 954(b)(5) and paragraph          
   (c) of this section (line (2) reduced by line (6) and line           
   (7))........................................................      320
  (10) Full inclusion foreign base company income after                 
   allocating deductions under section 954(b)(5) and paragraph          
   (c) of this section (line (5) reduced by line (8))..........       30
  (11) Total net foreign base company income after allocating           
   deductions under section 954(b)(5) and paragraph (c) of this         
   section (line (9) plus line (10))...........................      350
Step 5--Compute net insurance income:                                   
  (12) Net insurance income under section 953..................        0
Step 6--Compute adjusted net foreign base company income:               
  (13) Foreign income tax imposed on net foreign personal               
   holding company income (interest)...........................      120
  (14) Foreign income tax imposed on net full inclusion foreign         
   base company income.........................................        2
  (15) Ninety percent of the maximum United States corporate            
   tax rate....................................................    31.5%
  (16) Effective rate of foreign income tax imposed on $320 of          
   net foreign personal holding company income under section            
   954(b)(4) and this paragraph (d) (line (13) divided by line          
   (9))........................................................      38%
  (17) Effective rate of foreign income tax imposed on $30 of           
   net full inclusion foreign base company income under section         
   954(b)(4) and this paragraph (d) (line (14) divided by line          
   (10)).......................................................       7%
  (18) Net foreign personal holding company income subject to a         
   high foreign tax under section 954(b)(4) and this paragraph          
   (d) (zero, or line (9) if line (16) is greater than line             
   (15)).......................................................      320

[[Page 252]]

                                                                        
  (19) Net full inclusion foreign base company income subject           
   to a high foreign tax under section 954(b)(4) and this               
   paragraph (d) (zero, or line (10) if line (17) is greater            
   than line (15)).............................................        0
  (20) Adjusted net foreign base company income after applying          
   section 954(b)(4) and this paragraph (d) (line (11) reduced          
   by the sum of line (18) and line (19))......................       30
Step 7--Compute adjusted net insurance income:                          
  (21) Adjusted net insurance income...........................        0
Step 8--Reduction of adjusted net foreign base company income           
 or adjusted net insurance income by reason of paragraph (d)(6)         
 of this section:                                                       
  (22) Adjusted gross foreign base company income and adjusted          
   gross insurance income (determined without regard to the             
   full inclusion test of paragraph (b)(1) of this section)             
   (line (4) reduced by line (5))..............................      720
  (23) Ninety percent of adjusted gross foreign base company            
   income and adjusted gross insurance income (determined               
   without regard to the full inclusion test of paragraph               
   (b)(1)(ii) of this section) (90% of the amount on line (22))      648
  (24) Net foreign base company income and net insurance income         
   excluded from subpart F income under section 954(b)(4),              
   increased by the amount of expenses that reduced this income         
   under section 954(b)(5) and paragraph (c) of this section            
   (line (18) increased by the sum of line (6) and line (7))...      720
  (25) Adjusted net full inclusion foreign base company income          
   excluded from subpart F income under paragraph (d)(6) of             
   this section (zero, or line (10) reduced by line (19) if             
   line (24) is greater than line (23))........................       30
  (26) Adjusted net foreign base company income after                   
   application of paragraph (d)(6) of this section (line (20)           
   reduced by line (25)).......................................        0
Step 9--Additions to or reduction of subpart F income by reason         
 of section 952(c):                                                     
  (27) Earnings and profits for the current year...............      350
  (28) Amount subject to being recharacterized as subpart F             
   income under section 952(c)(2) (excess of line (27) over the         
   sum of line (21) and line (26)); if there is a deficit, then         
   the limitation of 952(c)(1) may apply for the current year..      350
  (29) Amount of reduction in subpart F income for prior                
   taxable years by reason of the limitation of section                 
   952(c)(1)...................................................      600
  (30) Subpart F income as defined in section 952(a), assuming          
   section 952(a)(3), (4), and (5) do not apply (the sum of             
   line (21) and line (26) plus the lesser of line (28) or line         
   (29)).......................................................      350
  (31) Amount of prior years' deficit remaining to be                   
   recharacterized as subpart F income in later years under             
   section 952(c) (excess of line (29) over line (28)).........      250
                                                                        

    (e) Character of income--(1) Substance of the transaction. For 
purposes of section 954, income shall be characterized in accordance 
with the substance of the transaction, and not in accordance with the 
designation applied by the parties to the transaction. For example, an 
amount that is designated as rent by the taxpayer but actually 
constitutes income from the sale of property, royalties, or income from 
services shall not be characterized as rent but shall be characterized 
as income from the sale of property, royalties or income from services, 
as the case may be. Local law shall not be controlling in characterizing 
income.
    (2) Separable character. To the extent the definitional provisions 
of section 953 or 954 describe the income or gain derived from a 
transaction, or any portion or portions thereof, that income or gain, or 
portion or portions thereof, is so characterized for purposes of subpart 
F. Thus, a single transaction may give rise to income in more than one 
category of foreign base company income described in paragraph (a)(2) of 
this section. For example, if a controlled foreign corporation, in its 
business of purchasing personal property and selling it to related 
persons outside its country of incorporation, also performs services 
outside its country of incorporation with respect to the property it 
sells, the sales income will be treated as foreign base company sales

[[Page 253]]

income and the services income will be treated as foreign base company 
services income for purposes of these rules.
    (3) Predominant character. The portion of income or gain derived 
from a transaction that is included in the computation of foreign 
personal holding company income is always separately determinable and 
thus must always be segregated from other income and separately 
classified under paragraph (e)(2) of this section. However, the portion 
of income or gain derived from a transaction that would meet a 
particular definitional provision under section 954 or 953 (other than 
the definition of foreign personal holding company income) in unusual 
circumstances may not be separately determinable. If such portion is not 
separately determinable, it must be classified in accordance with the 
predominant character of the transaction. For example, if a controlled 
foreign corporation engineers, fabricates, and installs a fixed offshore 
drilling platform as part of an integrated transaction, and the portion 
of income that relates to services is not accounted for separately from 
the portion that relates to sales, and is otherwise not separately 
determinable, then the classification of income from the transaction 
shall be made in accordance with the predominant character of the 
arrangement.
     (4) Coordination of categories of gross foreign base company income 
or gross insurance income--(i) In general. The computations of gross 
foreign base company income and gross insurance income are limited by 
the following rules:
    (A) If income is foreign base company shipping income, pursuant to 
section 954(f), it shall not be considered insurance income or income in 
any other category of foreign base company income.
    (B) If income is foreign base company oil related income, pursuant 
to section 954(g), it shall not be considered insurance income or income 
in any other category of foreign base company income, except as provided 
in paragraph (e)(4)(i)(A) of this section.
    (C) If income is insurance income, pursuant to section 953, it shall 
not be considered income in any category of foreign base company income 
except as provided in paragraph (e)(4)(i)(A) or (B) of this section.
    (D) If income is foreign personal holding company income, pursuant 
to section 954(c), it shall not be considered income in any other 
category of foreign base company income, other than as provided in 
paragraph (e)(4)(i)(A), (B) or (C) of this section.
    (ii) Income excluded from other categories of gross foreign base 
company income. Income shall not be excluded from a category of gross 
foreign base company income or gross insurance income under this 
paragraph (e)(4) by reason of being included in another category of 
gross foreign base company income or gross insurance income, if the 
income is excluded from that other category by a more specific provision 
of section 953 or 954. For example, income derived from a commodity 
transaction that is excluded from foreign personal holding company 
income under Sec. 1.954-2(f) as income from a qualified active sale may 
be included in gross foreign base company income if it also meets the 
definition of foreign base company sales income. See Sec. 1.954-2(a)(2) 
for the coordination of overlapping categories within the definition of 
foreign personal holding company income.
    (f) Definition of related person--(1) Persons related to controlled 
foreign corporation. Unless otherwise provided, for purposes of section 
954 and Secs. 1.954-1 through 1.954-8 inclusive, the following persons 
are considered under section 954(d)(3) to be related persons with 
respect to a controlled foreign corporation:
    (i) Individuals. An individual, whether or not a citizen or resident 
of the United States, who controls the controlled foreign corporation.
    (ii) Other persons. A foreign or domestic corporation, partnership, 
trust or estate that controls or is controlled by the controlled foreign 
corporation, or is controlled by the same person or persons that control 
the controlled foreign corporation.
    (2) Control--(i) Corporations. With respect to a corporation, 
control means the ownership, directly or indirectly, of stock possessing 
more than 50 percent of the total voting power of all classes

[[Page 254]]

of stock entitled to vote or of the total value of the stock of the 
corporation.
    (ii) Partnerships. With respect to a partnership, control means the 
ownership, directly or indirectly, of more than 50 percent (by value) of 
the capital or profits interest in the partnership.
    (iii) Trusts and estates. With respect to a trust or estate, control 
means the ownership, directly or indirectly, of more than 50 percent (by 
value) of the beneficial interest in the trust or estate.
    (iv) Direct or indirect ownership. For purposes of this paragraph 
(f), to determine direct or indirect ownership, the principles of 
section 958 shall be applied without regard to whether a corporation, 
partnership, trust or estate is foreign or domestic or whether or not an 
individual is a citizen or resident of the United States.

[T.D. 8618, 60 FR 46509, Sept. 7, 1995; 60 FR 62024, 62025, Dec. 4, 
1995, as amended by T.D. 8704, 62 FR 20, Jan. 2, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 1.954-2  Foreign personal holding company income.

    (a) Computation of foreign personal holding company income--(1) 
Categories of foreign personal holding company income. For purposes of 
subpart F and the regulations under that subpart, foreign personal 
holding company income consists of the following categories of income--
    (i) Dividends, interest, rents, royalties, and annuities as 
described in paragraph (b) of this section;
    (ii) Gain from certain property transactions as described in 
paragraph (e) of this section;
    (iii) Gain from commodities transactions as described in paragraph 
(f) of this section;
    (iv) Foreign currency gain as described in paragraph (g) of this 
section; and
    (v) Income equivalent to interest as described in paragraph (h) of 
this section.
    (2) Coordination of overlapping categories under foreign personal 
holding company provisions--(i) In general. If any portion of income, 
gain or loss from a transaction is described in more than one category 
of foreign personal holding company income (as described in paragraph 
(a)(2)(ii) of this section), that portion of income, gain or loss is 
treated solely as income, gain or loss from the category of foreign 
personal holding company income with the highest priority.
    (ii) Priority of categories. The categories of foreign personal 
holding company income, listed from highest priority (paragraph 
(a)(2)(ii)(A) of this section) to lowest priority (paragraph 
(a)(2)(ii)(E) of this section), are--
    (A) Dividends, interest, rents, royalties, and annuities, as 
described in paragraph (b) of this section;
    (B) Income equivalent to interest, as described in paragraph (h) of 
this section without regard to the exceptions in paragraph (h)(1)(ii)(A) 
of this section;
    (C) Foreign currency gain or loss, as described in paragraph (g) of 
this section without regard to the exclusion in paragraph (g)(2)(ii) of 
this section;
    (D) Gain or loss from commodities transactions, as described in 
paragraph (f) of this section without regard to the exclusion in 
paragraph (f)(1)(ii) of this section; and
    (E) Gain or loss from certain property transactions, as described in 
paragraph (e) of this section without regard to the exceptions in 
paragraph (e)(1)(ii) of this section.
    (3) Changes in the use or purpose for which property is held--(i) In 
general. Under paragraphs (e), (f), (g) and (h) of this section, 
transactions in certain property give rise to gain or loss included in 
the computation of foreign personal holding company income if the 
controlled foreign corporation holds that property for a particular use 
or purpose. The use or purpose for which property is held is that use or 
purpose for which it was held for more than one- half of the period 
during which the controlled foreign corporation held the property prior 
to the disposition.
    (ii) Special rules--(A) Anti-abuse rule. If a principal purpose of a 
change in use or purpose of property was to avoid including gain or loss 
in the computation of foreign personal holding company income, all the 
gain or loss from the disposition of the property is treated as foreign 
personal holding company income. A purpose may be a principal

[[Page 255]]

purpose even though it is outweighed by other purposes (taken together 
or separately).
    (B) Hedging transactions. The provisions of paragraph (a)(3)(i) of 
this section shall not apply to bona fide hedging transactions, as 
defined in paragraph (a)(4)(ii) of this section. A transaction will be 
treated as a bona fide hedging transaction only so long as it satisfies 
the requirements of paragraph (a)(4)(ii) of this section.
    (iii) Example. The following example illustrates the application of 
this paragraph (a)(3).

    Example. At the beginning of taxable year 1, CFC, a controlled 
foreign corporation, purchases a building for investment. During taxable 
years 1 and 2, CFC derives rents from the building that are included in 
the computation of foreign personal holding company income under 
paragraph (b)(1)(iii) of this section. At the beginning of taxable year 
3, CFC changes the use of the building by terminating all leases and 
using it in an active trade or business. At the beginning of taxable 
year 4, CFC sells the building at a gain. The building was not used in 
an active trade or business of CFC for more than one-half of the period 
during which it was held by CFC. Therefore, the building is considered 
to be property that gives rise to rents, as described in paragraph 
(e)(2) of this section, and gain from the sale is included in the 
computation of CFC's foreign personal holding company income under 
paragraph (e) of this section.

    (4) Definitions and special rules. The following definitions and 
special rules apply for purposes of computing foreign personal holding 
company income under this section.
    (i) Interest. The term interest includes all amounts that are 
treated as interest income (including interest on a tax-exempt 
obligation) by reason of the Internal Revenue Code or Income Tax 
Regulations or any other provision of law. For example, interest 
includes stated interest, acquisition discount, original issue discount, 
de minimis original issue discount, market discount, de minimis market 
discount, and unstated interest, as adjusted by any amortizable bond 
premium or acquisition premium.
    (ii) Bona fide hedging transaction--(A) Definition. The term bona 
fide hedging transaction means a transaction that meets the requirements 
of Sec. 1.1221-2 (a) through (c) and that is identified in accordance 
with the requirements of paragraph (a)(4)(ii)(B) of this section, except 
that in applying Sec. 1.1221-2(b)(1), the risk being hedged may be with 
respect to ordinary property, section 1231 property, or a section 988 
transaction. A transaction that hedges the liabilities, inventory or 
other assets of a related person (as defined in section 954(d)(3)), that 
is entered into to assume or reduce risks of a related person, or that 
is entered into by a person other than a person acting in its capacity 
as a regular dealer (as defined in paragraph (a)(4)(iv) of this section) 
to reduce risks assumed from a related person, will not be treated as a 
bona fide hedging transaction. For an illustration of how this rule 
applies with respect to foreign currency transactions, see paragraph 
(g)(2)(ii)(D) of this section.
    (B) Identification. The identification requirements of this section 
shall be satisfied if the taxpayer meets the identification and 
recordkeeping requirements of Sec. 1.1221-2(e). However, for bona fide 
hedging transactions entered into prior to March 7, 1996 the 
identification and recordkeeping requirements of Sec. 1.1221-2 shall not 
apply. Rather, for bona fide hedging transactions entered into on or 
after July 22, 1988 and prior to March 7, 1996 the identification and 
recordkeeping requirements shall be satisfied if such transactions are 
identified by the close of the fifth day after the day on which they are 
entered into. For bona fide hedging transactions entered into prior to 
July 22, 1988, the identification and recordkeeping requirements shall 
be satisfied if such transactions are identified reasonably 
contemporaneously with the date they are entered into, but no later than 
within the normal period prescribed under the method of accounting of 
the controlled foreign corporation used for financial reporting 
purposes.
    (C) Effect of identification and non-identification--(1) 
Transactions identified. If a taxpayer identifies a transaction as a 
bona fide hedging transaction for purposes of this section, the 
identification is binding with respect to any loss arising from such 
transaction whether or not all of the requirements of paragraph 
(a)(4)(ii)(A) of

[[Page 256]]

this section are satisfied. Accordingly, such loss will be allocated 
against income that is not subpart F income (or, in the case of an 
election under paragraph (g)(3) of this section, against the category of 
subpart F income to which it relates) and apportioned among the 
categories of income described in section 904(d)(1). If the transaction 
is not in fact a bona fide hedging transaction described in paragraph 
(a)(4)(ii)(A) of this section, however, then any gain realized with 
respect to such transaction shall not be considered as gain from a bona 
fide hedging transaction. Accordingly, such gain shall be treated as 
gain from the appropriate category of foreign personal holding company 
income. Thus, the taxpayer's identification of the transaction as a 
hedging transaction does not itself operate to exclude gain from the 
appropriate category of foreign personal holding company income.
    (2) Inadvertent identification. Notwithstanding paragraph 
(a)(4)(ii)(C)(1) of this section, if the taxpayer identifies a 
transaction as a bona fide hedging transaction for purposes of this 
section, the characterization of the loss is determined as if the 
transaction had not been identified as a bona fide hedging transaction 
if--
    (i) The transaction is not a bona fide hedging transaction (as 
defined in paragraph (a)(4)(ii)(A) of this section);
    (ii) The identification of the transaction as a bona fide hedging 
transaction was due to inadvertent error; and
    (iii) All of the taxpayer's transactions in all open years are being 
treated on either original or, if necessary, amended returns in a manner 
consistent with the principles of this section.
    (3) Transactions not identified. Except as provided in paragraphs 
(a)(4)(ii)(C)(4) and (5) of this section, the absence of an 
identification that satisfies the requirements of paragraph 
(a)(4)(ii)(B) of this section is binding and establishes that a 
transaction is not a bona fide hedging transaction. Thus, subject to the 
exceptions, the characterization of gain or loss is determined without 
reference to whether the transaction is a bona fide hedging transaction.
    (4) Inadvertent error. If a taxpayer does not make an identification 
that satisfies the requirements of paragraph (a)(4)(ii)(B) of this 
section, the taxpayer may treat gain or loss from the transaction as 
gain or loss from a bona fide hedging transaction if--
    (i) The transaction is a bona fide hedging transaction (as defined 
in paragraph (a)(4)(ii)(A) of this section);
    (ii) The failure to identify the transaction was due to inadvertent 
error; and
    (iii) All of the taxpayer's bona fide hedging transactions in all 
open years are being treated on either original or, if necessary, 
amended returns as bona fide hedging transactions in accordance with the 
rules of this section.
    (5) Anti-abuse rule. If a taxpayer does not make an identification 
that satisfies all the requirements of paragraph (a)(4)(ii)(B) of this 
section but the taxpayer has no reasonable grounds for treating the 
transaction as other than a bona fide hedging transaction, then loss 
from the transaction shall be treated as realized with respect to a bona 
fide hedging transaction. Thus, a taxpayer may not elect to exclude loss 
from its proper characterization as a bona fide hedging transaction. The 
reasonableness of the taxpayer's failure to identify a transaction is 
determined by taking into consideration not only the requirements of 
paragraph (a)(4)(ii)(A) of this section but also the taxpayer's 
treatment of the transaction for financial accounting or other purposes 
and the taxpayer's identification of similar transactions as hedging 
transactions.
    (iii) Inventory and similar property--(A) Definition. The term 
inventory and similar property (or inventory or similar property) means 
property that is stock in trade of the controlled foreign corporation or 
other property of a kind that would properly be included in the 
inventory of the controlled foreign corporation if on hand at the close 
of the taxable year (if the controlled foreign corporation were a 
domestic corporation), or property held by the controlled foreign 
corporation primarily for sale to customers in the ordinary course of 
its trade or business.
    (B) Hedging transactions. A bona fide hedging transaction with 
respect to inventory or similar property (other than a transaction 
described in section 988(c)(1) without regard to section

[[Page 257]]

988(c)(1)(D)(i)) shall be treated as a transaction in inventory or 
similar property.
    (iv) Regular dealer. The term regular dealer means a controlled 
foreign corporation that--
    (A) Regularly and actively offers to, and in fact does, purchase 
property from and sell property to customers who are not related persons 
(as defined in section 954(d)(3)) with respect to the controlled foreign 
corporation in the ordinary course of a trade or business; or
    (B) Regularly and actively offers to, and in fact does, enter into, 
assume, offset, assign or otherwise terminate positions in property with 
customers who are not related persons (as defined in section 954(d)(3)) 
with respect to the controlled foreign corporation in the ordinary 
course of a trade or business.
    (v) Dealer property--(A) Definition. Property held by a controlled 
foreign corporation is dealer property if--
    (1) The controlled foreign corporation is a regular dealer in 
property of such kind (determined under paragraph (a)(4)(iv) of this 
section); and
    (2) The property is held by the controlled foreign corporation in 
its capacity as a dealer in property of such kind without regard to 
whether the property arises from a transaction with a related person (as 
defined in section 954(d)(3)) with respect to the controlled foreign 
corporation. The property is not held by the controlled foreign 
corporation in its capacity as a dealer if the property is held for 
investment or speculation on its own behalf or on behalf of a related 
person (as defined in section 954(d)(3)).
    (B) Securities dealers. If a controlled foreign corporation is a 
licensed securities dealer, only the securities that it has identified 
as held for investment in accordance with the provisions of section 
475(b) or section 1236 will be considered to be property held for 
investment or speculation under this section. A licensed securities 
dealer is a controlled foreign corporation that is both a securities 
dealer, as defined in section 475, and a regular dealer, as defined in 
paragraph (a)(4)(iv) of this section, and that is either--
    (1) Registered as a securities dealer under section 15(a) of the 
Securities Exchange Act of 1934 or as a Government securities dealer 
under section 15C(a) of such Act; or
    (2) Licensed or authorized in the country in which it is chartered, 
incorporated, or organized to purchase and sell securities from or to 
customers who are residents of that country. The conduct of such 
securities activities must be subject to bona fide regulation, including 
appropriate reporting, monitoring, and prudential (including capital 
adequacy) requirements, by a securities regulatory authority in that 
country that regularly enforces compliance with such requirements and 
prudential standards.
    (C) Hedging transactions. A bona fide hedging transaction with 
respect to dealer property shall be treated as a transaction in dealer 
property.
    (vi) Examples. The following examples illustrate the application of 
paragraphs (a)(4)(ii), (iv) and (v) of this section.

    Example 1. (i) CFC1 and CFC2 are related controlled foreign 
corporations (within the meaning of section 954(d)(3)) located in 
Countries F and G, respectively. CFC1 and CFC2 regularly purchase 
securities from and sell securities to customers who are not related 
persons with respect to CFC1 or CFC2 (within the meaning of section 
954(d)(3)) in the ordinary course of their businesses and regularly and 
actively hold themselves out as being willing to, and in fact do, enter 
into either side of options, forward contracts, or other financial 
instruments. CFC1 uses securities that are traded in securities markets 
in Country G to hedge positions that it enters into with customers 
located in Country F. CFC1 is not a member of a securities exchange in 
Country G, so it purchases such securities from CFC2 and unrelated 
persons that are registered as securities dealers in Country G and that 
are members of Country G securities exchanges. Such hedging transactions 
qualify as bona fide hedging transactions under paragraph (a)(4)(ii) of 
this section.
    (ii) Transactions that CFC1 and CFC2 enter into with each other do 
not affect the determination of whether they are regular dealers. 
Because CFC1 and CFC2 regularly purchase securities from and sell 
securities to customers who are not related persons within the meaning 
of section 954(d)(3) in the ordinary course of their businesses and 
regularly and actively hold themselves out as being willing to, and in 
fact do, enter into either side of options, forward contracts, or other 
financial instruments, however, they qualify as regular dealers in such 
property within the meaning of paragraph (a)(4)(iv) of

[[Page 258]]

this section. Moreover, because CFC1 purchases securities from CFC2 as 
bona fide hedging transactions with respect to dealer property, the 
securities are dealer property under paragraph (a)(4)(v)(C) of this 
section. Similarly, because CFC2 sells securities to CFC1 in the 
ordinary course of its business as a dealer, the securities are dealer 
property under paragraph (a)(4)(v)(A) of this section.
    Example 2. (i) CFC is a controlled foreign corporation located in 
Country B. CFC serves as the currency coordination center for the 
controlled group, aggregating currency risks incurred by the group and 
entering into hedging transactions that transfer those risks outside of 
the group. CFC regularly and actively holds itself out as being willing 
to, and in fact does, enter into either side of options, forward 
contracts, or other financial instruments with other members of the same 
controlled group. CFC hedges risks arising from such transactions by 
entering into transactions with persons who are not related persons 
(within the meaning of section 954(d)(3)) with respect to CFC. However, 
CFC does not regularly and actively hold itself out as being willing to, 
and does not, enter into either side of transactions with unrelated 
persons.
    (ii) CFC is not a regular dealer in property under paragraph 
(a)(4)(iv) of this section and its options, forwards, and other 
financial instruments are not dealer property within the meaning of 
paragraph (a)(4)(v) of this section.

    (vii) Debt instrument. The term debt instrument includes bonds, 
debentures, notes, certificates, accounts receivable, and other 
evidences of indebtedness.
    (b) Dividends, interest, rents, royalties, and annuities--(1) In 
general. Foreign personal holding company income includes--
    (i) Dividends, except certain dividends from related persons as 
described in paragraph (b)(4) of this section and distributions of 
previously taxed income under section 959(b);
    (ii) Interest, except export financing interest as defined in 
paragraph (b)(2) of this section and certain interest received from 
related persons as described in paragraph (b)(4) of this section;
    (iii) Rents and royalties, except certain rents and royalties 
received from related persons as described in paragraph (b)(5) of this 
section and rents and royalties derived in the active conduct of a trade 
or business as defined in paragraph (b)(6) of this section; and
    (iv) Annuities.
    (2) Exclusion of certain export financing interest--(i) In general. 
Foreign personal holding company income does not include interest that 
is export financing interest. The term export financing interest means 
interest that is derived in the conduct of a banking business and is 
export financing interest as defined in section 904(d)(2)(G). Solely for 
purposes of determining whether interest is export financing interest, 
property is treated as manufactured, produced, grown, or extracted in 
the United States if it is so treated under Sec. 1.927(a)-1T(c).
    (ii) Exceptions. Export financing interest does not include income 
from related party factoring that is treated as interest under section 
864(d)(1) or (6) after the application of section 864(d)(7).
    (iii) Conduct of a banking business. For purposes of this section, 
export financing interest is considered derived in the conduct of a 
banking business if, in connection with the financing from which the 
interest is derived, the corporation, through its own officers or staff 
of employees, engages in all the activities in which banks customarily 
engage in issuing and servicing a loan.
    (iv) Examples. The following examples illustrate the application of 
this paragraph (b)(2).

    Example 1. (i) DS, a domestic corporation, manufactures property in 
the United States. In addition to selling inventory (property described 
in section 1221(1)), DS occasionally sells depreciable equipment it 
manufactures for use in its trade or business, which is property 
described in section 1221(2). Less than 50 percent of the fair market 
value, determined in accordance with section 904(d)(2)(G), of each item 
of inventory or equipment sold by DS is attributable to products 
imported into the United States. CFC, a controlled foreign corporation 
with respect to which DS is a related person (within the meaning of 
section 954(d)(3)), provides loans described in section 864(d)(6) to 
unrelated persons for the purchase of property from DS. This property is 
purchased exclusively for use or consumption outside the United States 
and outside CFC's country of incorporation.
    (ii) If, in issuing and servicing loans made with respect to 
purchases from DS of depreciable equipment used in its trade or 
business, which is property described in section 1221(2) in the hands of 
DS, CFC engages in all the activities in which banks customarily

[[Page 259]]

engage in issuing and servicing loans, the interest accrued from these 
loans would be export financing interest meeting the requirements of 
this paragraph (b)(2) and, thus, not included in foreign personal 
holding company income. However, interest from the loans made with 
respect to purchases from DS of property that is inventory in the hands 
of DS cannot be export financing interest because it is treated as 
income from a trade or service receivable under section 864(d)(6) and 
the exception under section 864(d)(7) does not apply. Thus the interest 
from loans made with respect to this inventory is included in foreign 
personal holding company income under paragraph (b)(1)(ii) of this 
section.
    Example 2. (i) DS, a domestic corporation manufactures property in 
the United States. DS wholly owns two controlled foreign corporations 
organized in Country A, CFC1 and CFC2. CFC1 has a substantial part of 
its assets used in its trade or business in Country A. CFC1 purchases 
the property that DS manufactures and sells it without further 
manufacture for use or consumption within Country A. This property is 
inventory property, as described in section 1221(1), in the hands of 
CFC1. Less than 50 percent of the fair market value, determined in 
accordance with section 904(d)(2)(G), of each item of inventory sold by 
CFC1 is attributable to products imported into the United States. CFC2 
provides loans described in section 864(d)(6) to unrelated persons in 
Country A for the purchase of the property from CFC1.
    (ii) If, in issuing and servicing loans made with respect to 
purchases from CFC1 of the inventory property, CFC2 engages in all the 
activities in which banks customarily engage in issuing and servicing 
loans, the interest accrued from these loans would be export financing 
interest meeting the requirements of paragraph (b)(2) of this section. 
It is not treated as income from a trade or service receivable under 
section 864(d)(6) because the exception under section 864(d)(7) applies. 
Thus the interest is excluded from foreign personal holding company 
income.
    Example 3. The facts are the same as in Example 2 except that the 
property sold by CFC1 is manufactured by CFC1 in Country A from 
component parts that were manufactured by DS in the United States. The 
interest accrued from the loans by CFC2 is not export financing interest 
as defined in section 904(d)(2)(G) because the property is not 
manufactured in the United States under Sec. 1.927(a)-1T(c). No portion 
of the interest is export financing interest as defined in this 
paragraph (b)(2). The full amount of the interest is, therefore, 
included in foreign personal holding company income under paragraph 
(b)(1)(ii) of this section.

    (3) Treatment of tax exempt interest. For taxable years of a 
controlled foreign corporation beginning after March 3, 1997, foreign 
personal holding company income includes all interest income, including 
interest that is described in section 103 (see Sec. 1.952-2(c)(1)).
    (4) Exclusion of dividends or interest from related persons--(i) In 
general--(A) Corporate payor. Foreign personal holding company income 
received by a controlled foreign corporation does not include dividends 
or interest if the payor--
    (1) Is a corporation that is a related person with respect to the 
controlled foreign corporation, as defined in section 954(d)(3);
    (2) Is created or organized under the laws of the same foreign 
country (the country of incorporation) as is the controlled foreign 
corporation; and
    (3) Uses a substantial part of its assets in a trade or business in 
its country of incorporation, as determined under this paragraph (b)(4).
    (B) Payment by a partnership. For purposes of this paragraph (b)(4), 
if a partnership with one or more corporate partners makes a payment of 
interest, a corporate partner will be treated as the payor of the 
interest--
    (1) If the interest payment gives rise to a partnership item of 
deduction under the Internal Revenue Code or Income Tax Regulations, to 
the extent that the item of deduction is allocable to the corporate 
partner under section 704(b); or
    (2) If the interest payment does not give rise to a partnership item 
of deduction under the Internal Revenue Code or Income Tax Regulations, 
to the extent that a partnership item reasonably related to the payment 
would be allocated to that partner under an existing allocation under 
the partnership agreement (made pursuant to section 704(b)).
    (ii) Exceptions--(A) Dividends. Dividends are excluded from foreign 
personal holding company income under this paragraph (b)(4) only to the 
extent that they are paid out of earnings and profits that are earned or 
accumulated during a period in which--
    (1) The stock on which dividends are paid with respect to which the 
exclusion is claimed was owned by the recipient controlled foreign 
corporation directly, or indirectly through a chain of

[[Page 260]]

one or more subsidiaries each of which meets the requirements of 
paragraph (b)(4)(i)(A) of this section; and
    (2) Each of the requirements of paragraph (b)(4)(i)(A) of this 
section is satisfied or, to the extent earned or accumulated during a 
taxable year of the related foreign corporation ending on or before 
December 31, 1962, during a period in which the payor was a related 
corporation as to the controlled foreign corporation and the other 
requirements of paragraph (b)(4)(i)(A) of this section were 
substantially satisfied.
    (3) This paragraph (b)(4)(ii)(A) is illustrated by the following 
example:

    Example. A, a domestic corporation, owns all of the stock of B, a 
corporation created and organized under the laws of Country Y, and C, a 
corporation created and organized under the laws of Country X. The 
taxable year of each of the corporations is the calendar year. In Year 
1, B earns $100 of income from the sale of products in Country Y that it 
manufactured in Country Y. C had no earnings and profits in Year 1. On 
January 1 of Year 2, A contributes all of the stock of B and C to Newco, 
a Country Y corporation, in exchange for all of the stock of Newco. 
Neither B nor C earns any income in Year 2, but at the end of Year 2 B 
distributes the $100 accumulated earnings and profits to Newco. Newco's 
income from the distribution, $100, is foreign personal holding company 
income because the earnings and profits distributed by B were not earned 
or accumulated during a period in which the stock of B was owned by 
Newco and in which each of the requirements of paragraph (b)(4)(i)(A) of 
this section was satisfied.

    (B) Interest paid out of adjusted foreign base company income or 
insurance income--(1) In general. Interest may not be excluded from the 
foreign personal holding company income of the recipient under this 
paragraph (b)(4) to the extent that the deduction for the interest is 
allocated under Sec. 1.954-1(a)(4) and (c) to the payor's adjusted gross 
foreign base company income (as defined in Sec. 1.954-1(a)(3)), adjusted 
gross insurance income (as defined in Sec. 1.954-1(a)(6)), or any other 
category of income included in the computation of subpart F income under 
section 952(a).
    (2) Rule for corporations that are both recipients and payors of 
interest. If a controlled foreign corporation is both a recipient and 
payor of interest, the interest that is received will be characterized 
before the interest that is paid. In addition, the amount of interest 
paid or accrued, directly or indirectly, by the controlled foreign 
corporation to a related person (as defined in section 954(d)(3)) shall 
be offset against and eliminate any interest received or accrued, 
directly or indirectly, by the controlled foreign corporation from that 
related person. In a case in which the controlled foreign corporation 
pays or accrues interest to a related person, as defined in section 
954(d)(3), and also receives or accrues interest indirectly from the 
related person, the smallest interest payment is eliminated and the 
amounts of all other interest payments are reduced by the amount of the 
smallest interest payment.
    (C) Coordination with sections 864(d) and 881(c). Income of a 
controlled foreign corporation that is treated as interest under section 
864(d)(1) or (6), or that is portfolio interest, as defined by section 
881(c), is not excluded from foreign personal holding company income 
under section 954(c)(3)(A)(i) and this paragraph (b)(4).
    (iii) Trade or business requirement. Except as otherwise provided 
under this paragraph (b)(4), the principles of section 367(a) apply for 
purposes of determining whether the payor has a trade or business in its 
country of incorporation and whether its assets are used in that trade 
or business. Property purchased or produced for use in a trade or 
business is not considered used in a trade or business before it is 
placed in service or after it is retired from service as determined in 
accordance with the principles of sections 167 and 168.
    (iv) Substantial assets test. A substantial part of the assets of 
the payor will be considered to be used in a trade or business located 
in the payor's country of incorporation for a taxable year only if the 
average value of the payor's assets for such year that are used in the 
trade or business and are located in such country equals more than 50 
percent of the average value of all the assets of the payor (including 
assets not used in a trade or business). The average value of assets for 
the taxable year is determined by averaging the values of assets at the 
close of each quarter of the taxable year. The value of assets is 
determined under paragraph (b)(4)(v) of this section, and the location 
of assets

[[Page 261]]

used in a trade or business of the payor is determined under paragraphs 
(b)(4)(vi) through (xi) of this section.
    (v) Valuation of assets. For purposes of determining whether a 
substantial part of the assets of the payor are used in a trade or 
business in its country of incorporation, the value of assets shall be 
their fair market value (not reduced by liabilities), which, in the 
absence of affirmative evidence to the contrary, shall be deemed to be 
their adjusted basis.
    (vi) Location of tangible property--(A) In general. Tangible 
property (other than inventory and similar property as defined in 
paragraph (a)(4)(iii) of this section, and dealer property as defined in 
paragraph (a)(4)(v) of this section) used in a trade or business is 
considered located in the country in which it is physically located.
    (B) Exception. An item of tangible personal property that is used in 
the trade or business of a payor in the payor's country of incorporation 
is considered located within the payor's country of incorporation while 
it is temporarily located elsewhere for inspection or repair if the 
property is not placed in service in a country other than the payor's 
country of incorporation and is not to be so placed in service following 
the inspection or repair.
    (vii) Location of intangible property--(A) In general. Intangible 
property (other than inventory and similar property as defined in 
paragraph (a)(4)(iii) of this section, dealer property as defined in 
paragraph (a)(4)(v) of this section, and debt instruments) is considered 
located entirely in the payor's country of incorporation for a quarter 
of the taxable year only if the payor conducts all of its activities in 
connection with the use or exploitation of the property in that country 
during that entire quarter. For this purpose, the country in which the 
activities connected to the use or exploitation of the property are 
conducted is the country in which the expenses associated with these 
activities are incurred. Expenses incurred in connection with the use or 
exploitation of an item of intangible property are included in the 
computation provided by this paragraph (b)(4) if they would be 
deductible under section 162 or includible in inventory costs or the 
cost of goods sold if the payor were a domestic corporation. If the 
payor conducts such activities through an agent or independent 
contractor, then the expenses incurred by the payor with respect to the 
agent or independent contractor shall be deemed to be incurred by the 
payor in the country in which the expenses of the agent or independent 
contractor were incurred by the agent or independent contractor.
    (B) Exception for property located in part in the payor's country of 
incorporation. If the payor conducts its activities in connection with 
the use or exploitation of an item of intangible property, including 
goodwill (other than inventory and similar property, dealer property and 
debt instruments) during a quarter of the taxable year both in its 
country of incorporation and elsewhere, then the value of the intangible 
considered located in the payor's country of incorporation during that 
quarter is a percentage of the value of the item as of the close of the 
quarter. That percentage equals the ratio that the expenses incurred by 
the payor (described in paragraph (b)(4)(vii)(A) of this section) during 
the entire quarter by reason of activities that are connected with the 
use or exploitation of the item of intangible property and are conducted 
in the payor's country of incorporation bear to all expenses incurred by 
the payor during the entire quarter by reason of all such activities 
worldwide.
    (viii) Location of inventory and dealer property--(A) In general. 
Inventory and similar property, as defined in paragraph (a)(4)(iii) of 
this section, and dealer property, as defined in paragraph (a)(4)(v) of 
this section, are considered located entirely in the payor's country of 
incorporation for a quarter of the taxable year only if the payor 
conducts all of its activities in connection with the production and 
sale, or purchase and resale, of such property in its country of 
incorporation during that entire quarter. If the payor conducts such 
activities through an agent or independent contractor, then the location 
of such activities is the place in which they are conducted by the agent 
or independent contractor.
    (B) Inventory and dealer property located in part in the payor's 
country of incorporation. If the payor conducts its

[[Page 262]]

activities in connection with the production and sale, or purchase and 
resale, of inventory or similar property or dealer property during a 
quarter of the taxable year both in its country of incorporation and 
elsewhere, then the value of the inventory or similar property or dealer 
property considered located in the payor's country of incorporation 
during each quarter is a percentage of the value of the inventory or 
similar property or dealer property as of the close of the quarter. That 
percentage equals the ratio that the costs and expenses incurred by the 
payor during the entire quarter by reason of activities connected with 
the production and sale, or purchase and resale, of inventory or similar 
property or dealer property that are conducted in the payor's country of 
incorporation bear to all costs or expenses incurred by the payor during 
the entire quarter by reason of all such activities worldwide. A cost 
incurred in connection with the production and sale or purchase and 
resale of inventory or similar property or dealer property is included 
in this computation if it--
    (1) Would be included in inventory costs or otherwise capitalized 
with respect to inventory or similar property or dealer property under 
section 61, 263A, 471, or 472 if the payor were a domestic corporation; 
or
    (2) Would be deductible under section 162 if the payor were a 
domestic corporation and is definitely related to gross income derived 
from such property (but not to all classes of gross income derived by 
the payor) under the principles of Sec. 1.861-8.
    (ix) Location of debt instruments. For purposes of this paragraph 
(b)(4), debt instruments, other than debt instruments that are inventory 
or similar property (as defined in paragraph (a)(4)(iii) of this 
section) or dealer property (as defined in paragraph (a)(4)(v) of this 
section) are considered to be used in a trade or business only if they 
arise from the sale of inventory or similar property or dealer property 
by the payor or from the rendition of services by the payor in the 
ordinary course of a trade or business of the payor, and only until such 
time as interest is required to be charged under section 482. Debt 
instruments that arise from the sale of inventory or similar property or 
dealer property during a quarter are treated as having the same 
location, proportionately, as the inventory or similar property or 
dealer property held during that quarter. Debt instruments arising from 
the rendition of services in the ordinary course of a trade or business 
are considered located on a proportionate basis in the countries in 
which the services to which they relate are performed.
    (x) Treatment of certain stock interests. Stock in a controlled 
foreign corporation (lower-tier corporation) that is incorporated in the 
same country as the payor and that is more than 50-percent owned, 
directly or indirectly, by the payor within the meaning of section 
958(a) shall be considered located in the payor's country of 
incorporation and, solely for purposes of section 954(c)(3), used in a 
trade or business of the payor in proportion to the value of the assets 
of the lower-tier corporation that are used in a trade or business in 
the country of incorporation. The location of assets used in a trade or 
business of the lower-tier corporation shall be determined under the 
rules of this paragraph (b)(4).
    (xi) Treatment of banks and insurance companies. [Reserved]
    (5) Exclusion of rents and royalties derived from related persons--
(i) In general--(A) Corporate payor. Foreign personal holding company 
income received by a controlled foreign corporation does not include 
rents or royalties if--
    (1) The payor is a corporation that is a related person with respect 
to the controlled foreign corporation, as defined in section 954(d)(3); 
and
    (2) The rents or royalties are for the use of, or the privilege of 
using, property within the country under the laws of which the 
controlled foreign corporation receiving the payments is created or 
organized (the country of incorporation).
    (B) Payment by a partnership. For purposes of this paragraph (b)(5), 
if a partnership with one or more corporate partners makes a payment of 
rents or royalties, a corporate partner will be treated as the payor of 
the rents or royalties--

[[Page 263]]

    (1) If the rent or royalty payment gives rise to a partnership item 
of deduction under the Internal Revenue Code or Income Tax Regulations, 
to the extent the item of deduction is allocable to the corporate 
partner under section 704(b); or
    (2) If the rent or royalty payment does not give rise to a 
partnership item of deduction under the Internal Revenue Code or Income 
Tax Regulations, to the extent that a partnership item reasonably 
related to the payment would be allocated to that partner under an 
existing allocation under the partnership agreement (made pursuant to 
section 704(b)).
    (ii) Exceptions--(A) Rents or royalties paid out of adjusted foreign 
base company income or insurance income. Rents or royalties may not be 
excluded from the foreign personal holding company income of the 
recipient under this paragraph (b)(5) to the extent that deductions for 
the payments are allocated under section 954(b)(5) and Sec. 1.954-
1(a)(4) and (c) to the payor's adjusted gross foreign base company 
income (as defined in Sec. 1.954-1(a)(3)), adjusted gross insurance 
income (as defined in Sec. 1.954-1(a)(6)), or any other category of 
income included in the computation of subpart F income under section 
952(a).
    (B) Property used in part in the controlled foreign corporation's 
country of incorporation. If the payor uses the property both in the 
controlled foreign corporation's country of incorporation and elsewhere, 
the part of the rent or royalty attributable (determined under the 
principles of section 482) to the use of, or the privilege of using, the 
property outside such country of incorporation is included in the 
computation of foreign personal holding company income under this 
paragraph (b).
    (6) Exclusion of rents and royalties derived in the active conduct 
of a trade or business. Foreign personal holding company income shall 
not include rents or royalties that are derived in the active conduct of 
a trade or business and received from a person that is not a related 
person (as defined in section 954(d)(3)) with respect to the controlled 
foreign corporation. For purposes of this section, rents or royalties 
are derived in the active conduct of a trade or business only if the 
provisions of paragraph (c) or (d) of this section are satisfied.
    (c) Excluded rents--(1) Active conduct of a trade or business. Rents 
will be considered for purposes of paragraph (b)(6) of this section to 
be derived in the active conduct of a trade or business if such rents 
are derived by the controlled foreign corporation (the lessor) from 
leasing any of the following--
    (i) Property that the lessor has manufactured or produced, or has 
acquired and added substantial value to, but only if the lessor is 
regularly engaged in the manufacture or production of, or in the 
acquisition and addition of substantial value to, property of such kind;
    (ii) Real property with respect to which the lessor, through its own 
officers or staff of employees, regularly performs active and 
substantial management and operational functions while the property is 
leased;
    (iii) Personal property ordinarily used by the lessor in the active 
conduct of a trade or business, leased temporarily during a period when 
the property would, but for such leasing, be idle; or
    (iv) Property that is leased as a result of the performance of 
marketing functions by such lessor if the lessor, through its own 
officers or staff of employees located in a foreign country, maintains 
and operates an organization in such country that is regularly engaged 
in the business of marketing, or of marketing and servicing, the leased 
property and that is substantial in relation to the amount of rents 
derived from the leasing of such property.
    (2) Special rules--(i) Adding substantial value. For purposes of 
paragraph (c)(1)(i) of this section, the performance of marketing 
functions will not be considered to add substantial value to property.
    (ii) Substantiality of foreign organization. For purposes of 
paragraph (c)(1)(iv) of this section, whether an organization in a 
foreign country is substantial in relation to the amount of rents is 
determined based on all of the facts and circumstances. However, such an 
organization will be considered substantial in relation to the amount of

[[Page 264]]

rents if active leasing expenses, as defined in paragraph (c)(2)(iii) of 
this section, equal or exceed 25 percent of the adjusted leasing profit, 
as defined in paragraph (c)(2)(iv) of this section.
    (iii) Active leasing expenses. The term active leasing expenses 
means the deductions incurred by an organization of the lessor in a 
foreign country that are properly allocable to rental income and that 
would be allowable under section 162 to the lessor if it were a domestic 
corporation, other than--
    (A) Deductions for compensation for personal services rendered by 
shareholders of, or related persons (as defined in section 954(d)(3)) 
with respect to, the lessor;
    (B) Deductions for rents paid or accrued;
    (C) Deductions that, although generally allowable under section 162, 
would be specifically allowable to the lessor (if the lessor were a 
domestic corporation) under any section of the Internal Revenue Code 
other than section 162; and
    (D) Deductions for payments made to agents or independent 
contractors with respect to the leased property other than payments for 
insurance, utilities and other expenses for like services, or for 
capitalized repairs.
    (iv) Adjusted leasing profit. The term adjusted leasing profit means 
the gross income of the lessor from rents, reduced by the sum of--
    (A) The rents paid or incurred by the lessor with respect to such 
rental income;
    (B) The amounts that would be allowable to such lessor (if the 
lessor were a domestic corporation) as deductions under sections 167 or 
168 with respect to such rental income; and
    (C) The amounts paid by the lessor to agents or independent 
contractors with respect to such rental income other than payments for 
insurance, utilities and other expenses for like services, or for 
capitalized repairs.
    (3) Examples. The application of this paragraph (c) is illustrated 
by the following examples.

    Example 1. Controlled foreign corporation A is regularly engaged in 
the production of office machines which it sells or leases to others and 
services. Under paragraph (c)(1)(i) of this section, the rental income 
of Corporation A from these leases is derived in the active conduct of a 
trade or business for purposes of section 954(c)(2)(A).
    Example 2. Controlled foreign corporation D purchases motor vehicles 
which it leases to others. In the conduct of its short-term leasing of 
such vehicles in foreign country X, Corporation D owns a large number of 
motor vehicles in country X which it services and repairs, leases motor 
vehicles to customers on an hourly, daily, or weekly basis, maintains 
offices and service facilities in country X from which to lease and 
service such vehicles, and maintains therein a sizable staff of its own 
administrative, sales, and service personnel. Corporation D also leases 
in country X on a long-term basis, generally for a term of one year, 
motor vehicles that it owns. Under the terms of the long-term leases, 
Corporation D is required to repair and service, during the term of the 
lease, the leased motor vehicles without cost to the lessee. By the 
maintenance in country X of office, sales, and service facilities and 
its complete staff of administrative, sales, and service personnel, 
Corporation D maintains and operates an organization therein that is 
regularly engaged in the business of marketing and servicing the motor 
vehicles that are leased. The deductions incurred by such organization 
satisfy the 25-percent test of paragraph (c)(2)(ii) of this section; 
thus, such organization is substantial in relation to the rents 
Corporation D receives from leasing the motor vehicles. Therefore, under 
paragraph (c)(1)(iv) of this section, such rents are derived in the 
active conduct of a trade or business for purposes of section 
954(c)(2)(A).
    Example 3. Controlled foreign corporation E owns a complex of 
apartment buildings that it has acquired by purchase. Corporation E 
engages a real estate management firm to lease the apartments, manage 
the buildings and pay over the net rents to Corporation E. The rental 
income of Corporation E from such leases is not derived in the active 
conduct of a trade or business for purposes of section 954(c)(2)(A).
    Example 4. Controlled foreign corporation F acquired by purchase a 
twenty-story office building in a foreign country, three floors of which 
it occupies and the rest of which it leases. Corporation F acts as 
rental agent for the leasing of offices in the building and employs a 
substantial staff to perform other management and maintenance functions. 
Under paragraph (c)(1)(ii) of this section, the rents received by 
Corporation F from such leasing operations are derived in the active 
conduct of a trade or business for purposes of section 954(c)(2)(A).
    Example 5. Controlled foreign corporation G owns equipment that it 
ordinarily uses to perform contracts in foreign countries to drill oil 
wells. For occasional brief and irregular periods it is unable to obtain 
contracts requiring immediate performance sufficient

[[Page 265]]

to employ all such equipment. During such a period it sometimes leases 
such idle equipment temporarily. After the expiration of such temporary 
leasing of the property, Corporation G continues the use of such 
equipment in the performance of its own drilling contracts. Under 
paragraph (c)(1)(iii) of this section, rents Corporation G receives from 
such leasing of idle equipment are derived in the active conduct of a 
trade or business for purposes of section 954(c)(2)(A).

    (d) Excluded royalties--(1) Active conduct of a trade or business. 
Royalties will be considered for purposes of paragraph (b)(6) of this 
section to be derived in the active conduct of a trade or business if 
such royalties are derived by the controlled foreign corporation (the 
licensor) from licensing--
    (i) Property that the licensor has developed, created, or produced, 
or has acquired and added substantial value to, but only so long as the 
licensor is regularly engaged in the development, creation or production 
of, or in the acquisition of and addition of substantial value to, 
property of such kind; or
    (ii) Property that is licensed as a result of the performance of 
marketing functions by such licensor if the licensor, through its own 
officers or staff of employees located in a foreign country, maintains 
and operates an organization in such country that is regularly engaged 
in the business of marketing, or of marketing and servicing, the 
licensed property and that is substantial in relation to the amount of 
royalties derived from the licensing of such property.
    (2) Special rules--(i) Adding substantial value. For purposes of 
paragraph (d)(1)(i) of this section, the performance of marketing 
functions will not be considered to add substantial value to property.
    (ii) Substantiality of foreign organization. For purposes of 
paragraph (d)(1)(ii) of this section, whether an organization in a 
foreign country is substantial in relation to the amount of royalties is 
determined based on all of the facts and circumstances. However, such an 
organization will be considered substantial in relation to the amount of 
royalties if active licensing expenses, as defined in paragraph 
(d)(2)(iii) of this section, equal or exceed 25 percent of the adjusted 
licensing profit, as defined in paragraph (d)(2)(iv) of this section.
    (iii) Active licensing expenses. The term active licensing expenses 
means the deductions incurred by an organization of the licensor in a 
foreign country that are properly allocable to royalty income and that 
would be allowable under section 162 to the licensor if it were a 
domestic corporation, other than--
    (A) Deductions for compensation for personal services rendered by 
shareholders of, or related persons (as defined in section 954(d)(3)) 
with respect to, the licensor;
    (B) Deductions for royalties paid or incurred;
    (C) Deductions that, although generally allowable under section 162, 
would be specifically allowable to the licensor (if the controlled 
foreign corporation were a domestic corporation) under any section of 
the Internal Revenue Code other than section 162; and
    (D) Deductions for payments made to agents or independent 
contractors with respect to the licensed property.
    (iv) Adjusted licensing profit. The term adjusted licensing profit 
means the gross income of the licensor from royalties, reduced by the 
sum of--
    (A) The royalties paid or incurred by the licensor with respect to 
such royalty income;
    (B) The amounts that would be allowable to such licensor as 
deductions under section 167 or 197 (if the licensor were a domestic 
corporation) with respect to such royalty income; and
    (C) The amounts paid by the licensor to agents or independent 
contractors with respect to such royalty income.
    (3) Examples. The application of this paragraph (d) is illustrated 
by the following examples.

    Example 1. Controlled foreign corporation A, through its own staff 
of employees, owns and operates a research facility in foreign country 
X. At the research facility, employees of Corporation A who are 
scientists, engineers, and technicians regularly perform experiments, 
tests, and other technical activities, that ultimately result in the 
issuance of patents that it sells or licenses. Under paragraph (d)(1)(i) 
of this section, royalties received by Corporation A for the privilege 
of using patented rights that it develops as a result of such research 
activity are derived in the active conduct of a trade or business

[[Page 266]]

for purposes of section 954(c)(2)(A), but only so long as the licensor 
is regularly engaged in the development, creation or production of, or 
in the acquisition of and addition of substantial value to, property of 
such kind.
    Example 2. Assume that Corporation A in Example 1, in addition to 
receiving royalties for the use of patents that it develops, receives 
royalties for the use of patents that it acquires by purchase and 
licenses to others without adding any value thereto. Corporation A 
generally consummates royalty agreements on such purchased patents as 
the result of inquiries received by it from prospective licensees when 
the fact becomes known in the business community, as a result of the 
filing of a patent, advertisements in trade journals, announcements, and 
contacts by employees of Corporation A, that Corporation A has acquired 
rights under a patent and is interested in licensing its rights. 
Corporation A does not, however, maintain and operate an organization in 
a foreign country that is regularly engaged in the business of marketing 
the purchased patents. The royalties received by Corporation A for the 
use of the purchased patents are not derived in the active conduct of a 
trade or business for purposes of section 954(c)(2)(A).
    Example 3. Controlled foreign corporation B receives royalties for 
the use of patents that it acquires by purchase. The primary business of 
Corporation B, operated on a regular basis, consists of licensing 
patents that it has purchased raw from inventors and, through the 
efforts of a substantial staff of employees consisting of scientists, 
engineers, and technicians, made susceptible to commercial application. 
For example, Corporation B, after purchasing patent rights covering a 
chemical process, designs specialized production equipment required for 
the commercial adaptation of the process and, by so doing, substantially 
increases the value of the patent. Under paragraph (d)(1)(i) of this 
section, royalties received by Corporation B from the use of such patent 
are derived in the active conduct of a trade or business for purposes of 
section 954(c)(2)(A).
    Example 4. Controlled foreign corporation C receives royalties for 
the use of a patent that it developed through its own staff of employees 
at its facility in country X. Corporation C has developed no other 
patents. It does not regularly employ a staff of scientists, engineers 
or technicians to create new products to be patented. Further, it does 
not purchase and license patents developed by others to which it has 
added substantial value. The royalties received by Corporation C are not 
derived from the active conduct of a trade or business for purposes of 
section 954(c)(2)(A).
    Example 5. Controlled foreign corporation D finances independent 
persons in the development of patented items in return for an ownership 
interest in such items from which it derives a percentage of royalty 
income, if any, subsequently derived from the use by others of the 
protected right. Corporation D also attempts to increase its royalty 
income from such patents by contacting prospective licensees and 
rendering to licensees advice that is intended to promote the use of the 
patented property. Corporation D does not, however, maintain and operate 
an organization in a foreign country that is regularly engaged in the 
business of marketing the patents. Royalties received by Corporation D 
for the use of such patents are not derived in the active conduct of a 
trade or business for purposes of section 954(c)(2)(A).

    (e) Certain property transactions--(1) In general--(i) Inclusions. 
Gain from certain property transactions described in section 
954(c)(1)(B) includes the excess of gains over losses from the sale or 
exchange of--
    (A) Property that gives rise to dividends, interest, rents, 
royalties or annuities, as described in paragraph (e)(2) of this 
section;
    (B) Property that is an interest in a partnership, trust or REMIC; 
and
    (C) Property that does not give rise to income, as described in 
paragraph (e)(3) of this section.
    (ii) Exceptions. Gain or loss from certain property transactions 
described in section 954(c)(1)(B) and paragraph (e)(1)(i) of this 
section does not include gain or loss from the sale or exchange of--
    (A) Inventory or similar property, as defined in paragraph 
(a)(4)(iii) of this section;
    (B) Dealer property, as defined in paragraph (a)(4)(v) of this 
section; or
    (C) Property that gives rise to rents or royalties described in 
paragraph (b)(6) of this section that are derived in the active conduct 
of a trade or business from persons that are not related persons (as 
defined in section 954(d)(3)) with respect to the controlled foreign 
corporation.
    (iii) Treatment of losses. Section 1.954-1(c)(1)(ii) provides for 
the treatment of losses in excess of gains from the sale or exchange of 
property described in paragraph (e)(1)(i) of this section.
    (iv) Dual character property. Property may, in part, constitute 
property that gives rise to certain income as described in paragraph 
(e)(2) of this section or, in part, constitute property that does not 
give rise to any income as described in paragraph (e)(3) of this

[[Page 267]]

section. However, property that is described in paragraph (e)(1)(i)(B) 
of this section cannot be dual character property. Dual character 
property must be treated as two separate properties for purposes of 
paragraph (e)(2) or (3) of this section. Accordingly, the sale or 
exchange of such dual character property will give rise to gain or loss 
that in part must be included in the computation of foreign personal 
holding company income under paragraph (e)(2) or (3) of this section, 
and in part is excluded from such computation. Gain or loss from the 
disposition of dual character property must be bifurcated under this 
paragraph (e)(1)(iv) pursuant to the method that most reasonably 
reflects the relative uses of the property. Reasonable methods may 
include comparisons in terms of gross income generated or the physical 
division of the property. In the case of real property, the physical 
division of the property will in most cases be the most reasonable 
method available. For example, if a controlled foreign corporation owns 
an office building, uses 60 percent of the building in its trade or 
business, and rents out the other 40 percent, then 40 percent of the 
gain recognized on the disposition of the property would reasonably be 
treated as gain that is included in the computation of foreign personal 
holding company income under this paragraph (e)(1). This paragraph 
(e)(1)(iv) addresses the contemporaneous use of property for dual 
purposes. For rules concerning changes in the use of property affecting 
its classification for purposes of this paragraph (e), see paragraph 
(a)(3) of this section.
    (2) Property that gives rise to certain income--(i) In general. 
Property the sale or exchange of which gives rise to foreign personal 
holding company income under this paragraph (e)(2) includes property 
that gives rise to dividends, interest, rents, royalties or annuities 
described in paragraph (b) of this section, including--
    (A) Property that gives rise to export financing interest described 
in paragraph (b)(2) of this section; and
    (B) Property that gives rise to income from related persons 
described in paragraph (b)(4) or (5) of this section.
    (ii) Gain or loss from the disposition of a debt instrument. Gain or 
loss from the sale, exchange or retirement of a debt instrument is 
included in the computation of foreign personal holding company income 
under this paragraph (e) unless--
    (A) In the case of gain--
    (1) It is interest (as defined in paragraph (a)(4)(i) of this 
section); or
    (2) It is income equivalent to interest (as described in paragraph 
(h) of this section); and
    (B) In the case of loss--
    (1) It is directly allocated to, or treated as an adjustment to, 
interest income (as described in paragraph (a)(4)(i) of this section) or 
income equivalent to interest (as defined in paragraph (h) of this 
section) under any provision of the Internal Revenue Code or Income Tax 
Regulations; or
    (2) It is required to be apportioned in the same manner as interest 
expense under section 864(e) or any other provision of the Internal 
Revenue Code or Income Tax Regulations.
    (3) Property that does not give rise to income. Except as otherwise 
provided in this paragraph (e)(3), for purposes of this section, the 
term property that does not give rise to income includes all rights and 
interests in property (whether or not a capital asset) including, for 
example, forwards, futures and options. Property that does not give rise 
to income shall not include--
    (i) Property that gives rise to dividends, interest, rents, 
royalties or annuities described in paragraph (e)(2) of this section;
    (ii) Tangible property (other than real property) used or held for 
use in the controlled foreign corporation's trade or business that is of 
a character that would be subject to the allowance for depreciation 
under section 167 or 168 and the regulations under those sections 
(including tangible property described in Sec. 1.167(a)-2);
    (iii) Real property that does not give rise to rental or similar 
income, to the extent used or held for use in the controlled foreign 
corporation's trade or business;
    (iv) Intangible property (as defined in section 936(h)(3)(B)), 
goodwill or going concern value, to the extent used or held for use in 
the controlled foreign corporation's trade or business;

[[Page 268]]

    (v) Notional principal contracts (but see paragraphs (f)(2), (g)(2) 
and (h)(3) of this section for rules that include income from certain 
notional principal contracts in gains from commodities transactions, 
foreign currency gains and income equivalent to interest, respectively); 
or
    (vi) Other property that is excepted from the general rule of this 
paragraph (e)(3) by the Commissioner in published guidance. See 
Sec. 601.601(d)(2) of this chapter.
    (f) Commodities transactions--(1) In general--(i) Inclusion in 
foreign personal holding company income. Foreign personal holding 
company income includes the excess of gains over losses from commodities 
transactions.
    (ii) Exception. Gains and losses from qualified active sales and 
qualified hedging transactions are excluded from the computation of 
foreign personal holding company income under this paragraph (f).
    (iii) Treatment of losses. Section 1.954-1(c)(1)(ii) provides for 
the treatment of losses in excess of gains from commodities 
transactions.
    (2) Definitions--(i) Commodity. For purposes of this section, the 
term commodity includes tangible personal property of a kind that is 
actively traded or with respect to which contractual interests are 
actively traded.
    (ii) Commodities transaction. The term commodities transaction means 
the purchase or sale of a commodity for immediate (spot) delivery or 
deferred (forward) delivery, or the right to purchase, sell, receive, or 
transfer a commodity, or any other right or obligation with respect to a 
commodity accomplished through a cash or off-exchange market, an 
interbank market, an organized exchange or board of trade, or an over-
the-counter market, or in a transaction effected between private parties 
outside of any market. Commodities transactions include, but are not 
limited to--
    (A) A futures or forward contract in a commodity;
    (B) A leverage contract in a commodity purchased from a leverage 
transaction merchant;
    (C) An exchange of futures for physical transaction;
    (D) A transaction, including a notional principal contract, in which 
the income or loss to the parties is measured by reference to the price 
of a commodity, a pool of commodities, or an index of commodities;
    (E) The purchase or sale of an option or other right to acquire or 
transfer a commodity, a futures contract in a commodity, or an index of 
commodities; and
    (F) The delivery of one commodity in exchange for the delivery of 
another commodity, the same commodity at another time, cash, or 
nonfunctional currency.
    (iii) Qualified active sale--(A) In general. The term qualified 
active sale means the sale of commodities in the active conduct of a 
commodities business as a producer, processor, merchant or handler of 
commodities if substantially all of the controlled foreign corporation's 
business is as an active producer, processor, merchant or handler of 
commodities. The sale of commodities held by a controlled foreign 
corporation other than in its capacity as an active producer, processor, 
merchant or handler of commodities is not a qualified active sale. For 
example, the sale by a controlled foreign corporation of commodities 
that were held for investment or speculation would not be a qualified 
active sale.
    (B) Active conduct of a commodities business. For purposes of this 
paragraph, a controlled foreign corporation is engaged in the active 
conduct of a commodities business as a producer, processor, merchant or 
handler of commodities only with respect to commodities for which each 
of the following conditions is satisfied--
    (1) It holds the commodities directly, and not through an agent or 
independent contractor, as inventory or similar property (as defined in 
paragraph (a)(4)(iii) of this section) or as dealer property (as defined 
in paragraph (a)(4)(v) of this section); and
    (2) With respect to such commodities, it incurs substantial expenses 
in the ordinary course of a commodities business from engaging in one or 
more of the following activities directly, and not through an 
independent contractor--

[[Page 269]]

    (i) Substantial activities in the production of the commodities, 
including planting, tending or harvesting crops, raising or slaughtering 
livestock, or extracting minerals;
    (ii) Substantial processing activities prior to the sale of the 
commodities, including the blending and drying of agricultural 
commodities, or the concentrating, refining, mixing, crushing, aerating 
or milling of commodities; or
    (iii) Significant activities as described in paragraph 
(f)(2)(iii)(B)(3) of this section.
    (3) For purposes of paragraph (f)(2)(iii)(B)(2)(iii) of this 
section, the significant activities must relate to--
    (i) The physical movement, handling and storage of the commodities, 
including preparation of contracts and invoices, arranging freight, 
insurance and credit, arranging for receipt, transfer or negotiation of 
shipping documents, arranging storage or warehousing, and dealing with 
quality claims;
    (ii) Owning and operating facilities for storage or warehousing; or
    (iii) Owning or chartering vessels or vehicles for the 
transportation of the commodities.
    (C) Substantially all. Substantially all of the controlled foreign 
corporation's business is as an active producer, processor, merchant or 
handler of commodities if the sum of its gross receipts from all of its 
qualified active sales (as defined in this paragraph (f)(2)(iii) without 
regard to the substantially all requirement) of commodities and its 
gross receipts from all of its qualified hedging transactions (as 
defined in paragraph (f)(2)(iv) of this section, applied without regard 
to the substantially all requirement of this paragraph (f)(2)(iii)(C)) 
equals or exceeds 85 percent of its total gross receipts for the taxable 
year (computed as though the corporation were a domestic corporation). 
In computing gross receipts, the District Director may disregard any 
sale or hedging transaction that has as a principal purpose manipulation 
of the 85 percent gross receipts test. A purpose may be a principal 
purpose even though it is outweighed by other purposes (taken together 
or separately).
    (D) Activities of employees of a related entity. For purposes of 
this paragraph (f), activities of employees of an entity related to the 
controlled foreign corporation, who are made available to and supervised 
on a day-to-day basis by, and whose salaries are paid by (or reimbursed 
to the related entity by), the controlled foreign corporation, are 
treated as activities engaged in directly by the controlled foreign 
corporation.
    (E) Financial activities. For purposes of this paragraph (f), a 
corporation is not engaged in a commodities business as a producer, 
processor, merchant or handler of commodities if its business is 
primarily financial. For example, the business of a controlled foreign 
corporation is primarily financial if its principal business is making a 
market in notional principal contracts based on a commodities index.
    (iv) Qualified hedging transaction--(A) In general. The term 
qualified hedging transaction means a bona fide hedging transaction, as 
defined in paragraph (a)(4)(ii) of this section, with respect to 
qualified active sales (other than transactions described in section 
988(c)(1) without regard to section 988(c)(1)(D)(i)).
    (B) Exception. The term qualified hedging transaction does not 
include transactions that are not reasonably necessary to the conduct of 
business of the controlled foreign corporation as a producer, processor, 
merchant or handler of a commodity in the manner in which such business 
is customarily and usually conducted by others.
    (g) Foreign currency gain or loss--(1) Scope and purpose. This 
paragraph (g) provides rules for the treatment of foreign currency gains 
and losses. Paragraph (g)(2) of this section provides the general rule. 
Paragraph (g)(3) of this section provides an election to include foreign 
currency gains or losses that would otherwise be treated as foreign 
personal holding company income under this paragraph (g) in the 
computation of another category of subpart F income. Paragraph (g)(4) of 
this section provides an alternative election to treat any net foreign 
currency gain or loss as foreign personal holding company income. 
Paragraph (g)(5) of this section provides rules for certain gains and 
losses not subject to this paragraph (g).

[[Page 270]]

    (2) In general--(i) Inclusion. Except as otherwise provided in this 
paragraph (g), foreign personal holding company income includes the 
excess of foreign currency gains over foreign currency losses 
attributable to any section 988 transactions (foreign currency gain or 
loss). Section 1.954-1(c)(1)(ii) provides rules for the treatment of 
foreign currency losses in excess of foreign currency gains. However, if 
an election is made under paragraph (g)(4) of this section, the excess 
of foreign currency losses over foreign currency gains to which the 
election would apply may be apportioned to, and offset, other categories 
of foreign personal holding company income.
    (ii) Exclusion for business needs--(A) General rule. Foreign 
currency gain or loss directly related to the business needs of the 
controlled foreign corporation is excluded from foreign personal holding 
company income.
    (B) Business needs. Foreign currency gain or loss is directly 
related to the business needs of a controlled foreign corporation if--
    (1) The foreign currency gain or loss--
    (i) Arises from a transaction (other than a hedging transaction) 
entered into, or property used or held for use, in the normal course of 
the controlled foreign corporation's trade or business, other than the 
trade or business of trading foreign currency;
    (ii) Arises from a transaction or property that does not itself (and 
could not reasonably be expected to) give rise to subpart F income other 
than foreign currency gain or loss;
    (iii) Does not arise from a transaction described in section 
988(c)(1)(B)(iii); and
    (iv) Is clearly determinable from the records of the controlled 
foreign corporation as being derived from such transaction or property; 
or
    (2) The foreign currency gain or loss arises from a bona fide 
hedging transaction, as defined in paragraph (a)(4)(ii) of this section, 
with respect to a transaction or property that satisfies the 
requirements of paragraphs (g)(2)(ii)(B)(1) (i) through (iii) of this 
section, provided that any gain or loss arising from such transaction or 
property that is attributable to changes in exchange rates is clearly 
determinable from the records of the CFC as being derived from such 
transaction or property. For purposes of this paragraph 
(g)(2)(ii)(B)(2), a hedging transaction will satisfy the aggregate 
hedging rules of Sec. 1.1221-2(c)(7) only if all (or all but a de 
minimis amount) of the aggregate risk being hedged arises in connection 
with transactions or property that satisfy the requirements of 
paragraphs (g)(2)(ii)(B)(1) (i) through (iii) of this section, provided 
that any gain or loss arising from such transactions or property that is 
attributable to changes in exchange rates is clearly determinable from 
the records of the CFC as being derived from such transactions or 
property.
    (C) Regular dealers. Transactions in dealer property (as defined in 
paragraph (a)(4)(v) of this section) described in section 988(c)(1)(B) 
or (C) that are entered into by a controlled foreign corporation that is 
a regular dealer (as defined in paragraph (a)(4)(iv) of this section) in 
such property in its capacity as a dealer will be treated as directly 
related to the business needs of the controlled foreign corporation 
under paragraph (g)(2)(ii)(A) of this section.
    (D) Example. The following example illustrates the provisions of 
this paragraph (g)(2).

    Example. (i) CFC1 and CFC2 are controlled foreign corporations 
located in Country B, and are members of the same controlled group. CFC1 
is engaged in the active conduct of a trade or business that does not 
produce any subpart F income. CFC2 serves as the currency coordination 
center for the controlled group, aggregating currency risks incurred by 
the group and entering into hedging transactions that transfer those 
risks outside of the group. Pursuant to this arrangement, and to hedge 
the currency risk on a non-interest bearing receivable incurred by CFC1 
in the normal course of its business, on Day 1 CFC1 enters into a 
forward contract to sell Japanese Yen to CFC2 in 30 days. Also on Day 1, 
CFC2 enters into a forward contract to sell Yen to unrelated Bank X on 
Day 30. CFC2 is not a regular dealer in Yen spot and forward contracts, 
and the Yen is not the functional currency for either CFC1 or CFC2.
    (ii) Because the forward contract entered into by CFC1 to sell Yen 
hedges a transaction entered into in the normal course of CFC1's 
business that does not give rise to subpart F income, it qualifies as a 
bona fide hedging transaction as defined in paragraph

[[Page 271]]

(a)(4)(ii) of this section. Therefore, CFC1's foreign exchange gain or 
loss from that forward contract will not be treated as foreign personal 
holding company income or loss under this paragraph (g).
    (iii) Because the forward contract to purchase Yen was entered into 
by CFC2 in order to assume currency risks incurred by CFC1 it does not 
qualify as a bona fide hedging transaction, as defined in paragraph 
(a)(4)(ii) of this section. Thus, foreign exchange gain or loss 
recognized by CFC2 from that forward contract will be foreign personal 
holding company income. Because CFC2 entered into the forward contract 
to sell Yen in order to hedge currency risks of CFC1, that forward 
contract also does not qualify as a bona fide hedging transaction. Thus, 
CFC2's foreign currency gain or loss arising from that forward contract 
will be foreign personal holding company income.

    (iii) Special rule for foreign currency gain or loss from an 
interest-bearing liability. Except as provided in paragraph (g)(5)(iv) 
of this section, foreign currency gain or loss arising from an interest-
bearing liability is characterized as subpart F income and non-subpart F 
income in the same manner that interest expense associated with the 
liability would be allocated and apportioned between subpart F income 
and non-subpart F income under Secs. 1.861-9T and 1.861-12T.
    (3) Election to characterize foreign currency gain or loss that 
arises from a specific category of subpart F income as gain or loss in 
that category--(i) In general. For taxable years of a controlled foreign 
corporation beginning on or after November 6, 1995, the controlling 
United States shareholders of the controlled foreign corporation may 
elect, under this paragraph (g)(3), to exclude foreign currency gain or 
loss otherwise includible in the computation of foreign personal holding 
company income under this paragraph (g) from the computation of foreign 
personal holding company income under this paragraph (g) and include 
such foreign currency gain or loss in the category (or categories) of 
subpart F income (described in section 952(a), or, in the case of 
foreign base company income, described in Sec. 1.954-1(c)(1)(iii)(A) (1) 
or (2)) to which such gain or loss relates. If an election is made under 
this paragraph (g)(3) with respect to a category (or categories) of 
subpart F income described in section 952(a), or, in the case of foreign 
base company income, described in Sec. 1.954-1(c)(1)(iii)(A) (1) or (2), 
the election shall apply to all foreign currency gain or loss that 
arises from--
    (A) A transaction (other than a hedging transaction) entered into, 
or property used or held for use, in the normal course of the controlled 
foreign corporation's trade or business that gives rise to income in 
that category (or categories) and that is clearly determinable from the 
records of the controlled foreign corporation as being derived from such 
transaction or property; and
    (B) A bona fide hedging transaction, as defined in paragraph 
(a)(4)(ii) of this section, with respect to a transaction or property 
described in paragraph (g)(3)(i)(A) of this section. For purposes of 
this paragraph (g)(3)(i)(B), a hedging transaction will satisfy the 
aggregate hedging rules of Sec. 1.1221-2(c)(7) only if all (or all but a 
de minimus amount) of the aggregate risk being hedged arises in 
connection with transactions or property that generate the same category 
of subpart F income described in section 952(a), or, in the case of 
foreign base company income, described in Sec. 1.954-1(c)(1)(iii)(A) (1) 
or (2).
    (ii) Time and manner of election. The controlling United States 
shareholders, as defined in Sec. 1.964-1(c)(5), make the election on 
behalf of the controlled foreign corporation by filing a statement with 
their original income tax returns for the taxable year of such United 
States shareholders ending with or within the taxable year of the 
controlled foreign corporation for which the election is made, clearly 
indicating that such election has been made. If the controlling United 
States shareholders elect to apply these regulations retroactively, 
under Sec. 1.954-0(a)(1)(ii), the election under this paragraph (g)(3) 
may be made by the amended return filed pursuant to the election under 
Sec. 1.954-0(a)(1)(ii). The controlling United States shareholders 
filing the election statement described in this paragraph (g)(3)(ii) 
must provide copies of the election statement to all other United States 
shareholders of the electing controlled foreign corporation. Failure to 
provide copies of such statement will not cause an election under this 
paragraph (g)(3) to be voidable by the controlled foreign corporation or

[[Page 272]]

the controlling United States shareholders. However, the District 
Director has discretion to void the election if it is determined that 
three was no reasonable cause for the failure to provide copies of such 
statement. The statement shall include the following information--
    (A) The name, address, taxpayer identification number, and taxable 
year of such United States shareholder;
    (B) The name, address, and taxable year of the controlled foreign 
corporation for which the election is effective; and
    (C) Any additional information required by the Commission by 
administrative pronouncement.
    (iii) Revocation of election. This election is effective for the 
taxable year of the controlled foreign corporation for which it is made 
and all subsequent taxable years of such corporation unless revoked by 
or with the consent of the Commissioner.
    (iv) Example. The following example illustrates the provisions of 
this paragraph (g)(3).

    Example. (i) CFC, a controlled foreign corporation, is a sales 
company that earns foreign base company sales income under section 
954(d). CFC makes an election under this paragraph (g)(3) to treat 
foreign currency gains or losses that arise from a specific category (or 
categories) of subpart F income (as described in section 952(a), or, in 
the case of foreign base company income, as described in Sec. 1.954-
1(c)(1)(iii)(A) (1) or (2)) as that type of income. CFC aggregates the 
currency risk on all of its transactions that generate foreign base 
company sales income and hedges this net currency exposure.
    (ii) Assuming no more than a de minimus amount of risk in the pool 
of risks being hedged arises from transactions or property that generate 
income other than foreign base company sales income, pursuant to its 
election under (g)(3), CFC's net foreign currency gain from the pool and 
the hedging transactions will be treated as foreign base company sales 
income under section 954(d), rather than as foreign personal holding 
company income under section 954(c)(1)(D). If the pool of risks and the 
hedging transactions generate a net foreign base company sales loss, 
however, CFC must apply the rules of Sec. 1.954-1(c)(1)(ii).

    (4) Election to treat all foreign currency gains or losses as 
foreign personal holding company income--(i) In general. If the 
controlling United States shareholders make an election under this 
paragraph (g)(4), the controlled foreign corporation shall include in 
its computation of foreign personal holding company income the excess of 
foreign currency gains over losses or the excess of foreign currency 
losses over gains attributable to any section 988 transaction (except 
those described in paragraph (g)(5) of this section) and any section 
1256 contract that would be a section 988 transaction but for section 
988(c)(1)(D). Separate elections for section 1256 contracts and section 
988 transactions are not permitted. An election under this paragraph 
(g)(4) supersedes an election under paragraph (g)(3) of this section.
    (ii) Time and manner of election. The controlling United States 
shareholders, as defined in Sec. 1.964-1(c)(5), make the election on 
behalf of the controlled foreign corporation in the same time and manner 
as provided in paragraph (g)(3)(ii) of this section.
    (iii) Revocation of election. This election is effective for the 
taxable year of the controlled foreign corporation for which it is made 
and all subsequent taxable years of such corporation unless revoked by 
or with the consent of the Commissioner.
    (5) Gains and losses not subject to this paragraph--(i) Capital 
gains and losses. Gain or loss that is treated as capital gain or loss 
under section 988(a)(1)(B) is not foreign currency gain or loss for 
purposes of this paragraph (g). Such gain or loss is treated as gain or 
loss from the sale or exchange of property that is included in the 
computation of foreign personal holding company income under paragraph 
(e)(1) of this section. Paragraph (a)(2) of this section provides other 
rules concerning income described in more than one category of foreign 
personal holding company income.
    (ii) Income not subject to section 988. Gain or loss that is not 
treated as foreign currency gain or loss by reason of section 988 (a)(2) 
or (d) is not foreign currency gain or loss for purposes of this 
paragraph (g). However, such gain or loss may be included in the 
computation of other categories of foreign personal holding company 
income in accordance with its characterization

[[Page 273]]

under section 988 (a)(2) or (d) (for example, foreign currency gain that 
is treated as interest income under section 988(a)(2) will be included 
in the computation of foreign personal holding company income under 
paragraph (b)(ii) of this section).
    (iii) Qualified business units using the dollar approximate separate 
transactions method. This paragraph (g) does not apply to any DASTM gain 
or loss computed under Sec. 1.985-3(d). Such gain or loss is allocated 
under the rules of Sec. 1.985-3 (e)(2)(iv) or (e)(3). However, the 
provisions of this paragraph (g) do apply to section 988 transactions 
denominated in a currency other than the United States dollar or the 
currency that would be the qualified business unit's functional currency 
were it not hyperinflationary.
    (iv) Gain or loss allocated under Sec. 1.861-9. [Reserved]
    (h) Income equivalent to interest--(1) In general--(i) Inclusion in 
foreign personal holding company income. Except as provided in this 
paragraph (h), foreign personal holding company income includes income 
equivalent to interest as defined in paragraph (h)(2) of this section.
    (ii) Exceptions--(A) Liability hedging transactions. Income, gain, 
deduction or loss that is allocated and apportioned in the same manner 
as interest expense under the provisions of Sec. 1.861-9T is not income 
equivalent to interest for purposes of this paragraph (h).
    (B) Interest. Amounts treated as interest under section 954(c)(1)(A) 
and paragraph (b) of this section are not income equivalent to interest 
for purposes of this paragraph (h).
    (2) Definition of income equivalent to interest--(i) In general. The 
term income equivalent to interest includes income that is derived 
from--
    (A) A transaction or series of related transactions in which the 
payments, net payments, cash flows or return predominantly reflect the 
time value of money;
    (B) Transactions in which the payments (or a predominant portion 
thereof) are, in substance, for the use or forbearance of money;
    (C) Notional principal contracts, to the extent provided in 
paragraph (h)(3) of this section;
    (D) Factoring, to the extent provided in paragraph (h)(4) of this 
section;
    (E) Conversion transactions, but only to the extent that gain 
realized with respect to such a transaction is treated as ordinary 
income under section 1258;
    (F) The performance of services, to the extent provided in paragraph 
(h)(5) of this section;
    (G) The commitment by a lender to provide financing, if any portion 
of such financing is actually provided;
    (H) Transfers of debt securities subject to section 1058; and
    (I) Other transactions, as provided by the Commissioner in published 
guidance. See Sec. 601.601(d)(2) of this chapter.
    (ii) Income from the sale of property. Income from the sale of 
property will not be treated as income equivalent to interest by reason 
of paragraph (h)(2)(i)(A) or (B) of this section. Income derived by a 
controlled foreign corporation will be treated as arising from the sale 
of property only if the corporation in substance carries out sales 
activities. Accordingly, an arrangement that is designed to lend the 
form of a sales transaction to a transaction that in substance 
constitutes an advance of funds will be disregarded. For example, if a 
controlled foreign corporation acquires property on 30-day payment terms 
from one person and sells that property to another person on 90-day 
payment terms and at prearranged prices and terms such that the foreign 
corporation bears no substantial economic risk with respect to the 
purchase and sale other than the risk of non-payment, the foreign 
corporation has not in substance derived income from the sale of 
property.
    (3) Notional principal contracts--(i) In general. Income equivalent 
to interest includes income from notional principal contracts 
denominated in the functional currency of the taxpayer (or a qualified 
business unit of the taxpayer, as defined in section 989(a)), the value 
of which is determined solely by reference to interest rates or interest 
rate indices, to the extent that the income from such transactions 
accrues on or after August 14, 1989.

[[Page 274]]

    (ii) Regular dealers. Income equivalent to interest does not include 
income earned by a regular dealer (as defined in paragraph (a)(4)(iv) of 
this section) from notional principal contracts that are dealer property 
(as defined in paragraph (a)(4)(v) of this section).
    (4) Income equivalent to interest from factoring--(i) General rule. 
Income equivalent to interest includes factoring income. Except as 
provided in paragraph (h)(4)(ii) of this section, the term factoring 
income includes any income (including any discount income or service 
fee, but excluding any stated interest) derived from the acquisition and 
collection or disposition of a factored receivable. The amount of income 
equivalent to interest realized with respect to a factored receivable is 
the difference (if a positive number) between the amount paid for the 
receivable by the foreign corporation and the amount that it collects on 
the receivable (or realizes upon its sale of the receivable). The rules 
of this paragraph (h)(4) apply only with respect to the tax treatment of 
factoring income derived from the acquisition and collection or 
disposition of a factored receivable and shall not affect the 
characterization of an expense or loss of either the person whose goods 
or services gave rise to a factored receivable or the obligor under a 
receivable.
    (ii) Exceptions. Factoring income shall not include--
    (A) Income treated as interest under section 864(d)(1) or (6) 
(relating to income derived from trade or service receivables of related 
persons), even if such income is treated as not described in section 
864(d)(1) by reason of the same-country exception of section 864(d)(7);
    (B) Income derived from a factored receivable if payment for the 
acquisition of the receivable is made on or after the date on which 
stated interest begins to accrue, but only if the rate of stated 
interest equals or exceeds 120 percent of the Federal short-term rate 
(as defined under section 1274) (or the analogous rate for a currency 
other than the dollar) as of the date on which the receivable is 
acquired by the foreign corporation; or
    (C) Income derived from a factored receivable if payment for the 
acquisition of the receivable by the foreign corporation is made only on 
or after the anticipated date of payment of all principal by the obligor 
(or the anticipated weighted average date of payment of a pool of 
purchased receivables).
    (iii) Factored receivable. For purposes of this paragraph (h)(4), 
the term factored receivable includes any account receivable or other 
evidence of indebtedness, whether or not issued at a discount and 
whether or not bearing stated interest, arising out of the disposition 
of property or the performance of services by any person, if such 
account receivable or evidence of indebtedness is acquired by a person 
other than the person who disposed of the property or provided the 
services that gave rise to the account receivable or evidence of 
indebtedness. For purposes of this paragraph (h)(4), it is immaterial 
whether the person providing the property or services agrees to transfer 
the receivable at the time of sale (as by accepting a third-party charge 
or credit card) or at a later time.
    (iv) Examples. The following examples illustrate the application of 
this paragraph (h)(4).

    Example 1. DP, a domestic corporation, owns all of the outstanding 
stock of FS, a controlled foreign corporation. FS acquires accounts 
receivable arising from the sale of property by unrelated corporation X. 
The receivables have a face amount of $100, and after 30 days bear 
stated interest equal to at least 120 percent of the applicable Federal 
short-term rate (determined as of the date the receivables are acquired 
by FS). FS purchases the receivables from X for $95 on Day 1 and 
collects $100 plus stated interest from the obligor under the 
receivables on Day 40. Income (other than stated interest) derived by FS 
from the factored receivables is factoring income within the meaning of 
paragraph (h)(4)(i) of this section and, therefore, is income equivalent 
to interest.
    Example 2. The facts are the same as in Example 1, except that, 
rather than collecting $100 plus stated interest from the obligor under 
the factored receivables on Day 40, FS sells the receivables to 
controlled foreign corporation Y on Day 15 for $97. Both the income 
derived by FS on the factored receivables and the income derived by Y 
(other than stated interest) on the receivables are factoring income 
within the meaning of paragraph (h)(4)(i) of this section, and 
therefore, constitute income equivalent to interest.

[[Page 275]]

    Example 3. The facts are the same as in Example 1, except that FS 
purchases the receivables from X for $98 on Day 30. Income derived by FS 
from the factored receivables is excluded from factoring income under 
paragraph (h)(4)(ii)(B) of this section and, therefore, does not give 
rise to income equivalent to interest.
    Example 4. The facts are the same as in Example 3, except that it is 
anticipated that all principal will be paid by the obligor of the 
receivables by Day 30. Income derived by FS from this maturity factoring 
of the receivables is excluded from factoring income under paragraph 
(h)(4)(ii)(C) of this section and, therefore, does not give rise to 
income equivalent to interest.
    Example 5. The facts are the same as in Example 4, except that FS 
sells the factored receivables to Y for $99 on Day 45, at which time 
stated interest is accruing on the unpaid balance of $100. Because 
interest was accruing at the time Y acquired the receivables at a rate 
equal to at least 120 percent of the applicable Federal short-term rate, 
income derived by Y from the factored receivables is excluded from 
factoring income under paragraph (h)(4)(ii)(B) of this section and, 
therefore, does not give rise to income equivalent to interest.
    Example 6. DP, a domestic corporation engaged in an integrated 
credit card business, owns all of the outstanding stock of FS, a 
controlled foreign corporation. On Day 1, individual A uses a credit 
card issued by DP to purchase shoes priced at $100 from X, a foreign 
corporation unrelated to DP, FS, or A. On Day 7, X transfers the 
receivable (which does not bear stated interest) arising from A's 
purchase to FS in exchange for $95. FS collects $100 from A on Day 45. 
Income derived by FS on the factored receivable is factoring income 
within the meaning of paragraph (h)(4)(i) of this section and, 
therefore, is income equivalent to interest.

    (5) Receivables arising from performance of services. If payment for 
services performed by a controlled foreign corporation is not made until 
more than 120 days after the date on which such services are performed, 
then the income derived by the controlled foreign corporation 
constitutes income equivalent to interest to the extent that interest 
income would be imputed under the principles of section 483 or the 
original issue discount provisions (sections 1271 through 1275), if--
    (i) Such provisions applied to contracts for the performance of 
services;
    (ii) The time period referred to in sections 483(c)(1) and 
1274(c)(1)(B) were 120 days rather than six months; and
    (iii) The time period referred to in section 483(c)(1)(A) were 120 
days rather than one year.
    (6) Examples. The following examples illustrate the application of 
this paragraph (h).

    Example 1. CFC, a controlled foreign corporation, promises that 
Corporation A may borrow up to $500 in principal for one year beginning 
at any time during the next three months at an interest rate of 10 
percent. In exchange, Corporation A pays CFC a commitment fee of $2. 
Pursuant to this agreement, CFC lends $80 to Corporation A. As a result, 
the entire $2 fee is included in the computation of CFC's foreign 
personal holding company income under paragraph (h)(2)(i)(G) of this 
section.
    Example 2. (i) At the beginning of its current taxable year, CFC, a 
controlled foreign corporation, purchases at face value a one-year debt 
instrument issued by Corporation A having a $100 principal amount and 
bearing a floating rate of interest set at the London Interbank Offered 
Rate (LIBOR) plus one percentage point. Contemporaneously, CFC borrows 
$100 from Corporation B for one year at a fixed interest rate of 10 
percent, using the debt instrument as security.
    (ii) During its current taxable year, CFC accrues $11 of interest 
from Corporation A on the bond. Because interest is excluded from the 
definition of income equivalent to interest under paragraph 
(h)(1)(ii)(B) of this section, the $11 is not income equivalent to 
interest.
    (iii) During its current taxable year, CFC incurs $10 of interest 
expense with respect to the borrowing from Corporation B. That expense 
is allocated and apportioned to, and reduces, subpart F income to the 
extent provided in section 954(b)(5) and Secs. 1.861-9T through 1.861-
12T and 1.954-1(c).
    Example 3. (i) On January 1, 1994, CFC, a controlled foreign 
corporation with the United States dollar as its functional currency, 
purchases at face value a 10-year debt instrument issued by Corporation 
A having a $100 principal amount and bearing a floating rate of interest 
set at LIBOR plus one percentage point payable on December 31st of each 
year. CFC subsequently determines that it would prefer receiving a fixed 
rate of return. Accordingly, on January 1, 1995, CFC enters into a 9-
year interest rate swap agreement with Corporation B whereby Corporation 
B promises to pay CFC on December 31st of each year an amount equal to 
10 percent on a notional principal amount of $100. In exchange, CFC 
promises to pay Corporation B an amount equal to LIBOR plus one 
percentage point on the notional principal amount.
    (ii) On December 31, 1995, CFC receives $9 of interest income from 
Corporation A with respect to the debt instrument. On the same

[[Page 276]]

day, CFC receives a total of $10 from Corporation B and pays $9 to 
Corporation B with respect to the interest rate swap.
    (iii) The $9 of interest income is foreign personal holding income 
under section 954(c)(1). Pursuant to Sec. 1.446-3(d), CFC recognizes $1 
of swap income for its 1995 taxable year that is also foreign personal 
holding company income because it is income equivalent to interest under 
paragraph (h)(2)(i)(C) of this section.
    Example 4. (i) CFC, a controlled foreign corporation, purchases 
commodity X on the spot market for $100 and, contemporaneously, enter 
into a 3-month forward contract to sell commodity X for $104, a price 
set by the forward market.
    (ii) Assuming that substantially all of CFC's expected return is 
attributable to the time value of the net investment, as described in 
section 1258(c)(1), the transaction is a conversion transaction under 
section 1258(c). Accordingly, any gain treated as ordinary income under 
section 1258(a) will be foreign personal holding company income because 
it is income equivalent to interest under paragraph (h)(2)(i)(E) of this 
section.

[T.D. 8618, 60 FR 46517, Sept. 7, 1995; 60 FR 58731, Nov. 28, 1995; 60 
FR 62025, 62026, Dec. 4, 1995, as amended by T.D. 8704, 62 FR 21, Jan. 
2, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 1.954-3   Foreign base company sales income.

    (a) Income included--(1) In general--(i) General rules. Foreign base 
company sales income of a controlled foreign corporation shall, except 
as provided in subparagraphs (2), (3), and (4) of this paragraph, 
consist of gross income (whether in the form of profits, commissions, 
fees, or otherwise) derived in connection with (a) the purchase of 
personal property from a related person and its sale to any person, (b) 
the sale of personal property to any person on behalf of a related 
person, (c) the purchase of personal property from any person and its 
sale to a related person, or (d) the purchase of personal property from 
any person on behalf of a related person. See section 954(d)(1). This 
section shall apply to the purchase and/or sale of personal property, 
whether or not such property was purchased and/or sold in the ordinary 
course of trade or business, except that income derived in connection 
with the sale of tangible personal property will not be considered to be 
foreign base company sales income if such property is sold to an 
unrelated person, as defined in paragraph (e)(2) of Sec. 1.954-1, after 
substantial use has been made of the property by the controlled foreign 
corporation in its trade or business. This section shall not apply to 
the excess of gains over losses from sales or exchanges of securities or 
from futures transactions, to the extent such excess gains are 
includible in foreign personal holding company income of the controlled 
foreign corporation under Sec. 1.954-2 or foreign base company shipping 
income under Sec. 1.954-6; nor shall it apply to the sale of the 
controlled foreign corporation's property (other than its stock in trade 
or other property of a kind which would properly be included in its 
inventory if on hand at the close of the taxable year, or property held 
primarily for sale to customers in the ordinary course of its trade or 
business) if substantially all the property of such corporation is sold 
pursuant to the discontinuation of the trade or business previously 
carried on by such corporation. The term ``any person'' as used in this 
subparagraph includes a related person, as defined in paragraph (e)(1) 
of Sec. 1.954-1.
    (ii) Special rule--(a) In general. The term ``personal property'' as 
used in section 954(d) and this section shall not include agricultural 
commodities which are not grown in the United States (within the meaning 
of section 7701(a)(9)) in commercially marketable quantities. All of the 
agricultural commodities listed in table I shall be considered grown in 
the United States in commercially marketable quantities. Bananas, black 
pepper, cocoa, coconut, coffee, crude rubber, and tea shall not be 
considered grown in the United States in commercially marketable 
quantities. All other agricultural commodities shall not be considered 
grown in the United States in commercially marketable quantities when, 
in consideration of all of the facts and circumstances of the individual 
case, such commodities are shown to be produced in the United States in 
insufficient quantity and quality to be marketed commercially. The term 
``agricultural commodities'' includes, but is not limited to, livestock, 
poultry, fish produced in fish farms, fruit, furbearing animals as well 
as the products of truck farms, ranches, nurseries,

[[Page 277]]

ranges, and orchards. A fish farm is an area where fish are grown or 
raised (artificially protected and cared for), as opposed to merely 
caught or harvested. However, the term ``agricultural commodities'' 
shall not include timber (either standing or felled), or any commodity 
at least 50 percent of the fair market value of which is attributable to 
manufacturing or processing, determined in a manner consistent with the 
regulations under section 993(c) (relating to the definition of export 
property). For purposes of applying such regulations, the term 
``processing'' shall be deemed not to include handling, packing, 
packaging, grading, storing, transporting, slaughtering, and harvesting. 
Subdivision (ii) shall apply in the computation of foreign base company 
sales income for taxable years of controlled foreign corporations 
beginning after December 31, 1975, and to taxable years of U.S. 
shareholders (within the meaning of section 951(b)) within which or with 
which such taxable years of such foreign corporations end.
    (b) Table.

     Table I--Agricultural Commodities Grown in the United States in    
                   Commercially Marketable Quantities                   
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                         Livestock and Products                         
                                                                        
Beeswax                              Horses                             
Cattle and calves                    Milk                               
Chickens                             Mink                               
Chicken eggs                         Mohair                             
Ducks                                Rabbits                            
Geese                                Sheep and lambs                    
Goats                                Turkeys                            
Hogs                                 Wool                               
Honey                                                                   
                                                                        
                                  Crops                                 
                                                                        
Alfalfa                              Lettuce                            
Almonds                              Lime                               
Apples                               Macadamia nuts                     
Apricots                             Maple syrup and                    
Artichokes                             sugar                            
Asparagus                            Mint                               
Avocadoes                            Mushrooms                          
Barley                               Nectarines                         
Beans                                Oats                               
Beets                                Olives                             
Blackberries                         Onions                             
Blueberries                          Oranges                            
Brussel sprouts                      Papayas                            
Broccoli                             Pecans                             
Bulbs                                Peaches                            
Cabbage                              Peanuts                            
Cantaloupes                          Pears                              
Carrots                              Peas                               
Cauliflower                          Peppers                            
Celery                               Plums and prunes                   
Cherries                             Potatoes                           
Corn                                 Potted plants                      
Cotton                               Raspberries                        
Cranberries                          Rice                               
Cucumbers                            Rhubarb                            
Cut flowers                          Rye                                
Dates                                Sorghum grain                      
Eggplant                             Soybeans                           
Escarole                             Spinach                            
Figs                                 Strawberries                       
Filberts                             Sugar beets                        
Flaxseed                             Sugarcane                          
Garlic                               Sweet potatoes                     
Grapes                               Tangelos                           
Grapefruit                           Tangerines                         
Grass seed                           Tobacco                            
Hay                                  Tomatoes                           
Honeydew melons                      Walnuts                            
Hops                                 Watermelons                        
Lemons                               Wheat                              
                                                                        

    (iii) The application of this subparagraph may be illustrated by the 
following examples:

    Example 1. Controlled foreign corporation A, incorporated under the 
laws of foreign country X, is a wholly owned subsidiary of domestic 
corporation M. Corporation A purchases from M Corporation, a related 
person, articles manufactured in the United States and sells the 
articles in the form in which purchased to P, not a related person, for 
delivery and use in foreign country Y. Gross income of A Corporation 
derived from the purchase and sale of the personal property is foreign 
base company sales income.
    Example 2. Corporation A in example 1 also purchases from P, not a 
related person, articles manufactured in country Y and sells the 
articles in the form in which purchased to foreign corporation B, a 
related person, for use in foreign country Z. Gross income of A 
Corporation derived from the purchase and sale of the personal property 
is foreign base company sales income.
    Example 3. Controlled foreign corporation C, incorporated under the 
laws of foreign country X, is a wholly owned subsidiary of domestic 
corporation N. By contract, N Corporation agrees to pay C Corporation, a 
related person, a commission equal to 6 percent of the gross selling 
price of all personal property shipped by N Corporation as the result of 
orders solicited by C Corporation in foreign countries Y and Z. In 
fulfillment of such orders, N Corporation ships products manufactured by 
it in the United States. Corporation C does not assume title to the 
property sold. Gross commissions received by C Corporation from N 
Corporation in connection with the sale of such property for use in 
countries Y and Z constitute foreign base company sales income.

[[Page 278]]

    Example 4. Controlled foreign corporation D, incorporated under the 
laws of foreign country Y, is a wholly owned subsidiary of domestic 
corporation R. In 1964, D Corporation acquires a United States 
manufactured lathe from R Corporation. In 1972, after having made 
substantial use of the lathe in its manufacturing business, D 
Corporation sells the lathe to an unrelated person for use in foreign 
country Z. Gross income from the sale of the lathe is not foreign base 
company sales income since it is sold to an unrelated person after 
substantial use has been made of it by D Corporation in its business.
    Example 5. Controlled foreign corporation E, incorporated under the 
laws of foreign country Y, is a wholly owned subsidiary of domestic 
corporation P. Corporation E purchases from P Corporation articles 
manufactured by P Corporation outside of country Y and sells the 
articles to F Corporation, an unrelated person, for use in foreign 
country Z. Corporation E finances the purchase of the articles by F 
Corporation by agreeing to accept payment over an extended period of 
time and receives not only the purchase price but also interest and 
service fees. All gross income of E Corporation derived in connection 
with the purchase and sale of the personal property, including interest 
and service fees derived from financing the sale to F Corporation, 
constitutes foreign base company sales income.

    (2) Property manufactured, produced, constructed, grown, or 
extracted within the country in which the controlled foreign corporation 
is created or organized. Foreign base company sales income does not 
include income derived in connection with the purchase and sale of 
personal property (or purchase or sale of personal property on behalf of 
a related person) in a transaction described in subparagraph (1) of this 
paragraph if the property is manufactured, produced, constructed, grown, 
or extracted in the country under the laws of which the controlled 
foreign corporation which purchases and sells the property (or acts on 
behalf of a related person) is created or organized. See section 
954(d)(1)(A). The principles set forth in subparagraph (4) of this 
paragraph with respect to the manufacture, production, or construction 
of personal property shall apply under this subparagraph in determining 
what constitutes manufacture, production, or construction of property. 
The application of this subparagraph may be illustrated by the following 
examples:

    Example 1. Controlled foreign corporation A, incorporated under the 
laws of foreign country X, is a wholly owned subsidiary of domestic 
corporation M. Corporation A purchases coffee beans grown in country X 
from foreign corporation P, a related person, and sells the beans to M 
Corporation, a related person, for use in the United States. Income from 
the purchase and sale of the coffee beans by A Corporation is not 
foreign base company sales income since the beans were grown in country 
X.
    Example 2. Controlled foreign corporation B, incorporated under the 
laws of foreign country X, is a wholly owned subsidiary of controlled 
foreign corporation C, also incorporated under the laws of country X. 
Corporation B purchases and imports into country X rough diamonds mined 
in foreign country Y; in country X it cuts, polishes, and shapes the 
diamonds in a process which constitutes manufacturing within the meaning 
of subparagraph (4) of this paragraph. Corporation B sells the finished 
diamonds to C Corporation, a related person, which in turn sells them 
for use in foreign country Z. Since for purposes of this subparagraph 
the finished diamonds are manufactured in country X, gross income 
derived by C Corporation from their sale is not foreign base company 
sales income.

    (3) Property sold for use, consumption, or disposition within the 
country in which the controlled foreign corporation is created or 
organized--(i) In general. Foreign base company sales income does not 
include income derived in connection with the purchase and sale of 
personal property (or purchase or sale of personal property on behalf of 
a related person) in a transaction described in subparagraph (1) of this 
paragraph, (a) if the property is sold for use, consumption, or 
disposition in the country under the laws of which the controlled 
foreign corporation which purchases and sells the property (or sells on 
behalf of a related person) is created or organized or (b), where the 
property is purchased by the controlled foreign corporation on behalf of 
a related person, if such property is purchased for use, consumption, or 
disposition in the country under the laws of which such controlled 
foreign corporation is created or organized. See section 954(d)(1)(B).
    (ii) Rules for determining country of use, consumption, or 
disposition. As a general rule, personal property which is sold to an 
unrelated person will be

[[Page 279]]

presumed for purposes of this subparagraph to have been sold for use, 
consumption, or disposition in the country of destination of the 
property sold; for such purpose, the occurrence in a country of a 
temporary interruption in shipment of goods shall not constitute such 
country the country of destination. However, if at the time of a sale of 
personal property to an unrelated person the controlled foreign 
corporation knew, or should have known from the facts and circumstances 
surrounding the transaction, that the property probably would not be 
used, consumed, or disposed of in the country of destination, the 
controlled foreign corporation must determine the country of ultimate 
use, consumption, or disposition of the property or the property will be 
presumed to have been used, consumed, or disposed of outside the country 
under the laws of which the controlled foreign corporation is created or 
organized. A controlled foreign corporation which sells personal 
property to a related person is presumed to sell such property for use, 
consumption, or disposition outside the country under the laws of which 
the controlled foreign corporation is created or organized unless such 
corporation establishes the use made of the property by the related 
person; once it has established that the related person has disposed of 
the property, the rules in the two preceding sentences relating to sales 
by a controlled foreign corporation to an unrelated person will apply at 
the first stage in the chain of distribution at which a sale is made by 
a related person to an unrelated person. Notwithstanding the preceding 
provisions of this subdivision, a controlled foreign corporation which 
sells personal property to any person all of whose business except for 
an insubstantial part consists of selling from inventory to retail 
customers at retail outlets all within one country may assume at the 
time of such sale to such person that such property will be used, 
consumed, or disposed of within such country.
    (iii) Fungible goods. For purposes of this subparagraph, a 
controlled foreign corporation which sells to a purchaser personal 
property which because of its fungible nature cannot reasonable be 
specifically traced to other purchasers and to the countries of ultimate 
use, consumption, or disposition shall, unless such corporation 
establishes a different disposition as being proper, treat such property 
as being sold, for ultimate use, consumption, or disposition in those 
countries, and to those other purchasers, in the same proportions in 
which property from the fungible mass of the first purchaser is sold in 
the regular course of business by such first purchaser. No apportionment 
need be made, however, on the basis of sporadic sales by the first 
purchaser. This subdivision shall apply only in a case where the 
controlled foreign corporation knew, or should have known from the facts 
and circumstances surrounding the transaction, the manner in which the 
first purchaser disposes of goods from the fungible mass.
    (iv) Illustrations. The application of this subparagraph may be 
illustrated by the following examples:

    Example 1. Controlled foreign corporation A, incorporated under the 
laws of foreign country X, and controlled foreign corporation B, 
incorporated under the laws of foreign country Y, are related persons. 
Corporation A purchases from B Corporation electric transformers 
produced by B Corporation in country Y and sells the transformers to D 
Corporation, an unrelated person, for installation in a factory building 
being constructed in country X. Since the personal property purchased 
and sold by A Corporation is to be used within the country in which A 
Corporation is incorporated, income of A Corporation derived from the 
purchase and sale of the electric transformers is not foreign base 
company sales income.
    Example 2. Controlled foreign corporation C, incorporated under the 
laws of foreign country X, is a wholly owned subsidiary of domestic 
corporation N. Corporation C purchases from N Corporation sewing 
machines manufactured in the United States by N Corporation and sells 
the sewing machines to retail department stores, unrelated persons, 
located in foreign country X. The entire activities of the department 
stores to which C Corporation sells the machines consist of selling 
goods from inventory to retail customers at retail outlets in country X. 
Under these circumstances, at the time of sale C Corporation may assume 
the sewing machines will be used, consumed, or disposed of in country X, 
and no attempt need be made by C Corporation to determine where the 
sewing machines will ultimately be used by the customers of the retail 
department stores. Gross income of C Corporation derived from the

[[Page 280]]

sales to the department stores located in country X is not foreign base 
company sales income.
    Example 3. Controlled foreign corporation D, incorporated under the 
laws of foreign country Y, and controlled foreign corporation E, 
incorporated under the laws of foreign country X, are related persons. 
Corporation D purchases from E Corporation sulphur extracted by E 
Corporation from deposits located in country X. Corporation D sells the 
sulphur to F Corporation, an unrelated person, for delivery to F 
Corporation's storage facilities located in country Y. At the time of 
the sale of the sulphur from D Corporation to F Corporation, D 
Corporation knows that F Corporation is actively engaged in the business 
of selling a large amount of sulphur in country Y but also that F 
Corporation sells, in the normal course of its business, 25 percent of 
its sulphur for ultimate consumption in foreign country Z. However, D 
Corporation has no knowledge at the time of sale whether any portion of 
the particular shipment it sells to F Corporation will be resold by F 
Corporation for ultimate use, consumption, or disposition outside 
country Y. Moreover, delivery of the sulphur to F Corporation's storage 
facilities constitutes more than a temporary interruption in the 
shipment of the sulphur. Under such circumstances, D Corporation may, 
but is not required to, trace the ultimate disposition by F Corporation 
of the personal property sold to F Corporation; however, if D 
Corporation does not trace the ultimate disposition and if it does not 
establish a different disposition as being proper, 25 percent of the 
sulphur sold by D Corporation to F Corporation will be treated as being 
sold for consumption in country Z and 25 percent of the gross income 
from the sale of sulphur by D Corporation to F Corporation will be 
treated as foreign base company sales income.
    Example 4. Controlled foreign corporation G, incorporated under the 
laws of foreign country X, is a wholly owned subsidiary of domestic 
corporation P. Corporation G purchases from P Corporation toys 
manufactured in the United States by P Corporation and sells the toys to 
R, an unrelated person, for delivery to a duty-free port in country X. 
Instructions for the assembly and operation of the toys are printed in a 
language which is not commonly used in country X. From the facts and 
circumstances surrounding the sales to R, G Corporation knows, or should 
know, that the toys will probably not be used, consumed, or disposed of 
within country X. Therefore, unless G Corporation determines the use to 
be made of the toys by R, such property will be presumed to have been 
sold by R for use, consumption, or disposition outside of country X, and 
the entire gross income of G Corporation derived from the sales will be 
considered foreign base company sales income.

    (4) Property manufactured or produced by the controlled foreign 
corporation--(i) In general. Foreign base company sales income does not 
include income of a controlled foreign corporation derived in connection 
with the sale of personal property manufactured, produced, or 
constructed by such corporation in whole or in part from personal 
property which it has purchased. A foreign corporation will be 
considered, for purposes of this subparagraph, to have manufactured, 
produced, or constructed personal property which it sells if the 
property sold is in effect not the property which it purchased. In the 
case of the manufacture, production, or construction of personal 
property, the property sold will be considered, for purposes of this 
subparagraph, as not being the property which is purchased if the 
provisions of subdivision (ii) or (iii) of this subparagraph are 
satisfied. For rules of apportionment in determining foreign base 
company sales income derived from the sale of personal property 
purchased and used as a component part of property which is not 
manufactured, produced, or constructed, see subparagraph (5) of this 
paragraph.
    (ii) Substantial transformation of property. If purchased personal 
property is substantially transformed prior to sale, the property sold 
will be treated as having been manufactured, produced, or constructed by 
the selling corporation. The application of this subdivision may be 
illustrated by the following examples:

    Example 1. Controlled foreign corporation A, incorporated under the 
laws of foreign country X, operates a paper factory in foreign country 
Y. Corporation A purchases from a related person wood pulp grown in 
country Y. Corporation A, by a series of processes, converts the wood 
pulp to paper which it sells for use in foreign country Z. The 
transformation of wood pulp to paper constitutes the manufacture or 
production of property for purposes of this subparagraph.
    Example 2. Controlled foreign corporation B, incorporated under the 
laws of foreign country X, purchases steel rods from a related person 
which produces the steel in foreign country Y. Corporation B operates a 
machining plant in country X in which it utilizes the purchased steel 
rods to make screws and bolts. The transformation of steel rods to

[[Page 281]]

screws and bolts constitutes the manufacture or production of property 
for purposes of this subparagraph.
    Example 3. Controlled foreign corporation C, incorporated under the 
laws of foreign country X, purchases tuna fish from unrelated persons 
who own fishing boats which catch such fish on the high seas. 
Corporation C receives such fish in country X in the condition in which 
taken from the fishing boats and in such country processes, cans, and 
sells the fish to related person D, incorporated under the laws of 
foreign country Y, for consumption in foreign country Z. The 
transformation of such fish into canned fish constitutes the manufacture 
or production of property for purposes of this subparagraph.

    (iii) Manufacture of a product when purchased components constitute 
part of the property sold. If purchased property is used as a component 
part of personal property which is sold, the sale of the property will 
be treated as the sale of a manufactured product, rather than the sale 
of component parts, if the operations conducted by the selling 
corporation in connection with the property purchased and sold are 
substantial in nature and are generally considered to constitute the 
manufacture, production, or construction of property. Without limiting 
this substantive test, which is dependent on the facts and circumstances 
of each case, the operations of the selling corporation in connection 
with the use of the purchased property as a component part of the 
personal property which is sold will be considered to constitute the 
manufacture of a product if in connection with such property conversion 
costs (direct labor and factory burden) of such corporation account for 
20 percent or more of the total cost of goods sold. In no event, 
however, will packaging, repackaging, labeling, or minor assembly 
operations constitute the manufacture, production, or construction of 
property for purposes of section 954(d)(1). The application of this 
subdivision may be illustrated by the following examples:

    Example 1. Controlled foreign corporation A, incorporated under the 
laws of foreign country X, sells industrial engines for use, 
consumption, and disposition outside country X. Corporation A, in 
connection with the assembly of such engines, performs machining and 
assembly operations. In addition, A Corporation purchases, from related 
and unrelated persons, components manufactured in foreign country Y. On 
a per unit basis, A Corporation's selling price and costs of such 
engines are as follows:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
Selling price...................................  ......  ......    $400
Cost of goods sold:                                                     
  Material--                                                            
    Acquired from related persons...............    $100                
    Acquired from others........................      40                
                                                 --------               
      Total material............................  ......    $140        
Conversion costs (direct labor and factory burden)......      70        
                                                 --------               
Total cost of goods sold........................  ......     210        
                                                         ---------      
Gross profit....................................  ......     190        
Administrative and selling expenses.............  ......      50        
                                                         =========      
Taxable income..................................  ......     140        
                                                                        

The conversion costs incurred by A Corporation are more than 20 percent 
of total costs of goods sold ($70/$210 or 33 percent). Although the 
product sold, an engine, is not sufficiently distinguishable from the 
components to constitute a substantial transformation of the purchased 
parts within the meaning of subdivision (ii) of this subparagraph, A 
Corporation will be considered under this subdivision to have 
manufactured the product it sells.
    Example 2. Controlled foreign corporation B, incorporated under the 
laws of foreign country X, operates an automobile assembly plant. In 
connection with such activity, B Corporation purchases from related 
persons assembled engines, transmissions, and certain other components, 
all of which are manufactured outside of country X; purchases additional 
components from unrelated persons; conducts stamping, machining, and 
subassembly operations; and has a substantial investment in tools, jigs, 
welding equipment, and other machinery and equipment used in the 
assembly of an automobile. On a per unit basis, B Corporation's selling 
price and costs of such automobiles are as follows:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
Selling price..........................  .........  .........     $2,500
Cost of goods sold:                                                     
  Material--                                                            
    Acquired from related persons......     $1,200                      
    Acquired from others...............        275                      
                                        -----------                     
      Total material...................                $1,475           
Conversion costs (direct labor and factory burden)         25           
                                        -----------                     
      Total cost of goods sold....................  .........      1,800
                                                   ------------         
Gross profit......................................  .........        700
Administrative and selling expenses...............  .........        300
                                                   ------------         
      Taxable income..............................  .........        400
                                                   ============         
                                                                        


[[Page 282]]

The product sold, an automobile, is not sufficiently distinguishable 
from the components purchased (the engine, transmission, etc.) to 
constitute a substantial transformation of purchased parts within the 
meaning of subdivision (ii) of this subparagraph. Although conversion 
costs of B Corporation are less than 20 percent of total cost of goods 
sold ($325/$1800 or 18 percent), the operations conducted by B 
Corporation in connection with the property purchased and sold are 
substantial in nature and are generally considered to constitute the 
manufacture of a product. Corporation B will be considered under this 
subdivision to have manufactured the product it sells.
    Example 3. Controlled foreign corporation C, incorporated under the 
laws of foreign country X, purchases from related persons radio parts 
manufactured in foreign country Y. Corporation C designs radio kits, 
packages component parts required for assembly of such kits, and sells 
the parts in a knocked-down condition to unrelated persons for use 
outside country X. These packaging operations of C Corporation do not 
constitute the manufacture, production, or construction of personal 
property for purposes of section 954(d)(1).

    (5) Rules for apportionment of income derived from the sale of 
purchased components used in property not manufactured, produced, or 
constructed. The foreign base company sales income derived by a 
controlled foreign corporation for the taxable year from sales of 
personal property purchased and used as a component part of property 
which is not manufactured, produced, or constructed by such corporation 
within the meaning of subparagraph (4) of this paragraph shall, unless 
the records of the controlled foreign corporation show that a different 
apportionment of income is proper or unless all the income from such 
sales is treated as foreign base company sales income, be determined by 
first making for such year the following separate classifications and 
subclassifications with respect to the property which is sold and then 
by apportioning the income for such year from such sales in accordance 
with the rules of this subparagraph:
    (i) A classification of the cost of components used in the property 
which is sold into two classes consisting of the cost of components 
manufactured, produced, constructed, grown, or extracted--
    (a) Within the country under the laws of which the controlled 
foreign corporation is created or organized, and
    (b) Outside such country;
    (ii) A subclassification of the class described in subdivision (i) 
(b) of this subparagraph into--
    (a) The cost of such components purchased from unrelated persons, 
and
    (b) The cost of such components purchased from related persons;
    (iii) A classification of the income derived from such sales into 
two classes consisting of income derived from sales for use, 
consumption, or disposition--
    (a) Within the country under the laws of which the controlled 
foreign corporation is created or organized, and
    (b) Outside such country; and
    (iv) A subclassification of the class described in subdivision (iii) 
(b) of this subparagraph into income from--
    (a) Sales to unrelated persons, and
    (b) Sales to related persons.

The foreign base company sales income for the taxable year from 
purchases of the property from related persons and sales to unrelated 
persons shall be the amount which bears to the amount described in 
subdivision (iv) (a) of this subparagraph the same ratio that the amount 
described in subdivision (ii) (b) of this subparagraph bears to the 
total cost of components used in the product which is sold. The foreign 
base company sales income for the taxable year from purchases of the 
property from related persons and sales to related persons is the amount 
which bears to the amount described in subdivision (iv) (b) of this 
subparagraph the same ratio that the amount described in subdivision 
(ii) (b) of this subparagraph bears to the total cost of components used 
in the product which is sold.

The foreign base company sales income for the taxable year from 
purchases of the property from unrelated persons and sales to related 
persons is the amount which bears to the amount described in subdivision 
(iv) (b) of this subparagraph the same ratio that the amount described 
in subdivision (ii) (a) of this subparagraph bears to the total cost of 
components used in the product which is sold. The application of this

[[Page 283]]

subparagraph may be illustrated by the following examples:

    Example 1. Controlled foreign corporation C, which is incorporated 
under the laws of foreign country X, uses the calendar year as the 
taxable year. For 1964, C Corporation purchases radio parts of which 
some are manufactured in foreign country Y; and others, in country X. 
Some of the parts manufactured in country Y are purchased from related 
persons. Corporation C uses the purchased parts in radio kits which it 
designs and sells for assembly by its customers, unrelated persons, some 
of whom use the kits outside country X. Unless the records of C 
Corporation show that a different apportionment of income is proper, the 
foreign base company sales income for 1964 is determined in the 
following manner upon the basis of the following factual classifications 
for such year:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
Cost of components purchased from all persons:                          
  Manufactured within country X..................................    $20
  Manufactured outside country X.................................     40
                                                           --------     
    Total cost...................................................     60
                                                           ========     
Cost of components manufactured outside country X:                      
  Purchased from unrelated persons...............................     10
  Purchased from related persons.................................     30
                                                           --------     
    Total cost...................................................     40
                                                           ========     
Gross income from sales:                                                
  Gross receipts from sales......................................    120
  Cost of goods sold:                                                   
    Components............................................    $60       
    Direct labor and factory burden.......................     10     70
                                                           -------------
      Gross income...............................................     50
                                                           ========     
Gross income from sales:                                                
  For use within country X.......................................     26
  For use outside country X......................................     24
                                                           --------     
    Gross income.................................................     50
                                                           ========     
Foreign base company sales income from purchases from related           
 persons and sales to unrelated persons ($24 x $30/$60)..........     12
                                                           ========     
                                                                        

    Example 2. The facts are the same as in example 1 except that none 
of the purchases are from related persons and some of the sales for use 
outside country X are to related persons. Unless the records of C 
Corporation show that a different apportionment of income is proper, the 
foreign base company sales income for 1964 is determined in the 
following manner upon the basis of the following additional factual 
classification for such year:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
Gross income from sales for use outside country X--                     
  To unrelated persons........................................        $8
  To related persons..........................................        16
                                                               ---------
    Total gross income........................................        24
                                                               =========
Foreign base company sales income from purchases from                   
 unrelated persons and sales to related persons ($16 x $40/             
 $60).........................................................     10.67
                                                               =========
                                                                        

    Example 3. The facts are the same as in example 1 except that some 
of the sales for use outside country X are to related persons as in 
example 2. Unless the records of C Corporation show that a different 
apportionment of income is proper, the foreign base company sales income 
for 1964 is determined in the following manner:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
Foreign base company sales income from purchases from related           
 persons and sales to unrelated persons ($8 x $30/$60)........     $4.00
Foreign base company sales income from purchases from related           
 persons and sales to related persons ($16 x $30/$60).........      8.00
Foreign base company sales income from purchases from                   
 unrelated persons and sales to related persons ($16 x $10/             
 $60).........................................................      2.67
                                                               ---------
  Total foreign base company sales income.....................     14.67
                                                               =========
                                                                        

    (b) Branches of controlled foreign corporation treated as separate 
corporations--(1) General rules for determining when to apply separate 
treatment--(i) Sales or purchase branch--(a) In general. If a controlled 
foreign corporation carries on purchasing or selling activities by or 
through a branch or similar establishment located outside the country 
under the laws of which such corporation is created or organized and the 
use of the branch or similar establishment for such activities has 
substantially the same tax effect as if the branch or similar 
establishment were a wholly owned subsidiary corporation of such 
controlled foreign corporation, the branch or similar establishment and 
the remainder of the controlled foreign corporation will be treated as 
separate corporations for purposes of determining foreign base company 
sales income of such corporation. See section 954(d)(2).
    (b) Allocation of income and comparison of effective rates of tax. 
The determination as to whether such use of the branch or similar 
establishment has the same tax effect as if it were a wholly owned 
subsidiary corporation of the controlled foreign corporation shall be 
made by allocating to such branch or similar establishment only that 
income derived by the branch or establishment which, when the special 
rules of subparagraph (2)(i) of this paragraph

[[Page 284]]

are applied, is described in paragraph (a) of this section (but 
determined without applying subparagraphs (2), (3), and (4) of such 
paragraph). The use of the branch or similar establishment for such 
activities will be considered to have substantially the same tax effect 
as if it were a wholly owned subsidiary corporation of the controlled 
foreign corporation if the income allocated to the branch or similar 
establishment under the immediately preceding sentence is, by statute, 
treaty obligation, or otherwise, taxed in the year when earned at an 
effective rate of tax that is less than 90 percent of, and at least 5 
percentage points less than, the effective rate of tax which would apply 
to such income under the laws of the country in which the controlled 
foreign corporation is created or organized, if, under the laws of such 
country, the entire income of the controlled foreign corporation were 
considered derived by the corporation from sources within such country 
from doing business through a permanent establishment therein, received 
in such country, and allocable to such permanent establishment, and the 
corporation were managed and controlled in such country.
    (c) Use of more than one branch. If a controlled foreign corporation 
carries on purchasing or selling activities by or through more than one 
branch or similar establishment located outside the country under the 
laws of which such corporation is created or organized, or by or through 
one or more such branches or similar establishments in a case where 
subdivision (ii) of this subparagraph also applies, then (b) of this 
subdivision shall be applied separately to the income derived by each 
such branch or similar establishment (by treating such purchasing or 
selling branch or similar establishment as if it were the only branch or 
similar establishment of the controlled foreign corporation and as if 
any such other branches or similar establishments were separate 
corporations) in determining whether the use of such branch or similar 
establishment has substantially the same tax effect as if such branch or 
similar establishment were a wholly owned subsidiary corporation of the 
controlled foreign corporation.
    (ii) Manufacturing branch--(a) In general. If a controlled foreign 
corporation carries on manufacturing, producing, constructing, growing, 
or extracting activities by or through a branch or similar establishment 
located outside the country under the laws of which such corporation is 
created or organized and the use of the branch or similar establishment 
for such activities with respect to personal property purchased or sold 
by or through the remainder of the controlled foreign corporation has 
substantially the same tax effect as if the branch or similar 
establishment were a wholly owned subsidiary corporation of such 
controlled foreign corporation, the branch or similar establishment and 
the remainder of the controlled foreign corporation will be treated as 
separate corporations for purposes of determining foreign base company 
sales income of such corporation. See section 954(d)(2).
    (b) Allocation of income and comparison of effective rates of tax. 
The determination as to whether such use of the branch or similar 
establishment has substantially the same tax effect as if the branch or 
similar establishment were a wholly owned subsidiary corporation of the 
controlled foreign corporation shall be made by allocating to the 
remainder of such controlled foreign corporation only that income 
derived by the remainder of such corporation, which, when the special 
rules of subparagraph (2)(i) of this paragraph are applied, is described 
in paragraph (a) of this section (but determined without applying 
subparagraphs (2), (3), and (4) of such paragraph). The use of the 
branch or similar establishment for such activities will be considered 
to have substantially the same tax effect as if it were a wholly owned 
subsidiary corporation of the controlled foreign corporation if income 
allocated to the remainder of the controlled foreign corporation under 
the immediately preceding sentence is, by statute, treaty obligation, or 
otherwise, taxed in the year when earned at an effective rate of tax 
that is less than 90 percent of, and at least 5 percentage points less 
than, the effective rate of tax which would apply to such income under 
the laws of the country in which the

[[Page 285]]

branch or similar establishment is located, if, under the laws of such 
country, the entire income of the controlled foreign corporation were 
considered derived by such corporation from sources within such country 
from doing business through a permanent establishment therein, received 
in such country, and allocable to such permanent establishment, and the 
corporation were created or organized under the laws of, and managed and 
controlled in, such country.
    (c) Use of one or more sales or purchase branches in addition to a 
manufacturing branch. If, with respect to personal property 
manufactured, produced, constructed, grown, or extracted by or through a 
branch or similar establishment located outside the country under the 
laws of which the controlled foreign corporation is created or 
organized, purchasing or selling activities are carried on by or through 
more than one branch or similar establishment, or by or through one or 
more branches or similar establishments located outside such country, of 
such corporation, then (b) of this subdivision shall be applied 
separately to the income derived by each such purchasing or selling 
branch or similar establishment (by treating such purchasing or selling 
branch or similar establishment as though it alone were the remainder of 
the controlled foreign corporation) for purposes of determining whether 
the use of such manufacturing, producing, constructing, growing, or 
extracting branch or similar establishment has substantially the same 
tax effect as if such branch or similar establishment were a wholly 
owned subsidiary corporation of the controlled foreign corporation.
    (2) Special rules--(i) Determination of treatment as a wholly owned 
subsidiary corporation. For purposes of determining under this paragraph 
whether the use of a branch or similar establishment which is treated as 
a separate corporation has substantially the same tax effect as if the 
branch or similar establishment were a wholly owned subsidiary 
corporation of a controlled foreign corporation--
    (a) Treatment as separate corporations. The branch or similar 
establishment will be treated as a wholly owned subsidiary corporation 
of the controlled foreign corporation, and such branch or similar 
establishment will be deemed to be incorporated in the country in which 
it is located.
    (b) Activities treated as performed on behalf of remainder of 
corporation. With respect to purchasing or selling activities performed 
by or through the branch or similar establishment, such purchasing or 
selling activities shall--
    (1) With respect to personal property manufactured, produced, 
constructed, grown, or extracted by the controlled foreign corporation, 
or
    (2) With respect to personal property (other than property described 
in (1) of this subdivision (b)) purchased or sold, or purchased and 
sold, by the controlled foreign corporation,

be treated as performed on behalf of the controlled foreign corporation.
    (c) Activities treated as performed on behalf of branch. With 
respect to manufacturing, producing, constructing, growing, or 
extracting activities performed by or through the branch or similar 
establishment, purchasing or selling activities performed by or through 
the remainder of the controlled foreign corporation with respect to the 
personal property manufactured, produced, constructed, grown, or 
extracted by or through the branch or similar establishment shall be 
treated as performed on behalf of the branch or similar establishment.
    (d) Determination of hypothetical tax. To the extent applicable, the 
principles of paragraph (b)(4)(ii) of Sec. 1.954-1 shall be used in 
determining, under subdivision (i) of subparagraph (1) of this 
paragraph, the effective rate of tax which would apply to the income of 
the branch or similar establishment under the laws of the country in 
which the controlled foreign corporation is created or organized, or in 
determining, under subdivision (ii) of such subparagraph, the effective 
rate of tax which would apply to the income of the branch or similar 
establishment under the laws of the country in which the manufacturing, 
producing, constructing, growing, or extracting branch or similar 
establishment is located.
    (e) Tax laws to be taken into account. Tax determinations shall be 
made by taking into account only the income,

[[Page 286]]

war profits, excess profits, or similar tax laws (or the absence of such 
laws) of the countries involved.
    (ii) Determination of foreign base company sales income. Once it has 
been determined under subparagraph (1) of this paragraph that a branch 
or similar establishment and the remainder of the controlled foreign 
corporation are to be treated as separate corporations, the 
determination of whether such branch or similar establishment, or the 
remainder of the controlled foreign corporation, as the case may be, has 
foreign base company sales income shall be made by applying the 
following rules:
    (a) Treatment as separate corporations. The branch or similar 
establishment will be treated as a wholly owned subsidiary corporation 
of the controlled foreign corporation, and such branch or similar 
establishment will be deemed to be incorporated in the country in which 
it is located.
    (b) Activities treated as performed on behalf of remainder of 
corporation. With respect to purchasing or selling activities performed 
by or through the branch or similar establishment, such purchasing or 
selling activities shall--
    (1) With respect to personal property manufactured, produced, 
constructed, grown, or extracted by the controlled foreign corporation, 
or
    (2) With respect to personal property (other than property described 
in (1) of this subdivision (b)) purchased or sold, or purchased and 
sold, by the controlled foreign corporation,

be treated as performed on behalf of the controlled foreign corporation.
    (c) Activities treated as performed on behalf of branch. With 
respect to manufacturing, producing, constructing, growing, or 
extracting activities performed by or through the branch or similar 
establishment, purchasing or selling activities performed by or through 
the remainder of the controlled foreign corporation with respect to the 
personal property manufactured, produced, constructed, grown, or 
extracted by or through the branch or similar establishment shall be 
treated as performed on behalf of the branch or similar establishment.
    (d) Items not to be twice included in income. Income which is 
classified as foreign base company sales income as a result of the 
application of subdivision (i) of subparagraph (1) of this paragraph 
shall not be again classified as foreign base company sales income as a 
result of the application of subdivision (ii) of such subparagraph.
    (e) Comparison with ordinary treatment. Income derived by the branch 
or similar establishment, or by the remainder of the controlled foreign 
corporation, shall not be considered foreign base company sales income 
if the income would not be so considered if it were derived by a 
separate controlled foreign corporation under like circumstances.
    (f) Priority of application. If income derived by the branch or 
similar establishment, or by the remainder of the controlled foreign 
corporation, from a transaction would be classified as foreign base 
company sales income of such controlled foreign corporation under 
section 954(d)(1) and paragraph (a) of this section, the income shall, 
notwithstanding this paragraph, be treated as foreign base company sales 
income under paragraph (a) of this section and the branch or similar 
establishment shall not be treated as a separate corporation with 
respect to such income.
    (3) Inclusion of amounts in gross income of United States 
shareholders. A branch or similar establishment of a controlled foreign 
corporation and the remainder of such corporation shall be treated as 
separate corporations under this paragraph solely for purposes of 
determining the foreign base company sales income of each such 
corporation and for purposes of including an amount in subpart F income 
of the controlled foreign corporation under section 953(a). See section 
954(b)(3) and paragraph (d)(4) of Sec. 1.954-1 for rules relating to the 
treatment of a branch or similar establishment of a controlled foreign 
corporation and the remainder of such corporation as separate 
corporations for purposes of independently determining if the foreign 
base company income of each such corporation is less than 10 percent, or 
more than 70 percent, of its gross income. For all other purposes, 
however, a branch or similar establishment of a controlled foreign 
corporation and the remainder

[[Page 287]]

of such corporation shall not be treated as separate corporations. For 
example, if the controlled foreign corporation has a deficit in earnings 
and profits to which section 952(c) applies, the limitation of such 
section on the amount includable in the subpart F income of such 
corporation will apply. Moreover, income, war profits, or excess profits 
taxes paid by a branch or similar establishment to a foreign country 
will be treated as having been paid by the controlled foreign 
corporation for purposes of section 960 (relating to special rules for 
foreign tax credit) and the regulations thereunder. Also, income of a 
branch or similar establishment, treated as a separate corporation under 
this paragraph, will not be treated as dividend income of the controlled 
foreign corporation of which it is a branch or similar establishment.
    (4) Illustrations. The application of this paragraph may be 
illustrated by the following examples:

    Example 1. Controlled foreign corporation A, incorporated under the 
laws of foreign country X, is engaged in the manufacturing business in 
such country. Corporation A negotiates sales of its products for use 
outside of country X through a sales office, branch B, maintained in 
foreign country Y. These activities constitute the only activities of A 
Corporation. Country X levies an income tax at an effective rate of 50 
percent on the income of A Corporation derived by the manufacturing 
plant in country X but does not tax the sales income of A Corporation 
derived by branch B in country Y. Country Y levies an income tax at an 
effective rate of 10 percent on the sales income derived by branch B but 
does not tax the income of A Corporation derived by the manufacturing 
plant in country X. If the sales income derived by branch B were, under 
the laws of country X, derived from sources within country X by A 
Corporation, such income would be taxed by such country at an effective 
rate of 50 percent. In determining foreign base company sales income of 
A Corporation, branch B is treated as a separate wholly owned subsidiary 
corporation of A Corporation, the 10 percent rate of tax on branch B's 
income being less than 90 percent of, and at least 5 percentage points 
less than, the 50 percent rate. Income derived by branch B, treated as a 
separate corporation, from the sale by or through it for use, 
consumption, or disposition outside country Y of the personal property 
produced in country X is treated as income from the sale of personal 
property on behalf of A Corporation, a related person, and constitutes 
foreign base company sales income. The remainder of A Corporation, 
treated as a separate corporation, derives no foreign base company sales 
income since it produces the product which is sold.
    Example 2. Controlled foreign corporation C is incorporated under 
the laws of foreign country X. Corporation C maintains branch B in 
foreign country Y. Branch B manufactures articles in country Y which are 
sold through the sales offices of C Corporation located in country X. 
These activities constitute the only activities of C Corporation. 
Country Y levies an income tax at an effective rate of 30 percent on the 
manufacturing profit of C Corporation derived by branch B but does not 
tax the sales income of C Corporation derived by the sales offices in 
country X. Country X does not impose an income, war profits, excess 
profits, or similar tax, and no tax is paid to any foreign country with 
respect to income of C Corporation which is not derived by branch B. If 
C Corporation were incorporated under the laws of country Y, the sales 
income of the sales offices in country X would be taxed by country Y at 
an effective rate of 30 percent. In determining foreign base company 
sales income of C Corporation, branch B is treated as a separate wholly 
owned subsidiary corporation of C Corporation, the zero rate of tax on 
the income derived by the remainder of C Corporation being less than 90 
percent of, and at least 5 percentage points less than, the 30 percent 
rate. Branch B, treated as a separate corporation, derives no foreign 
base company sales income since it produces the product which is sold. 
Income derived by the remainder of C Corporation, treated as a separate 
corporation, from the sale by or through it for use, consumption, or 
disposition outside country X of the personal property produced in 
country Y is treated as income from the sale of personal property on 
behalf of branch B, a related person, and constitutes foreign base 
company sales income.
    Example 3. Controlled foreign corporation E, incorporated under the 
laws of foreign country X, is a wholly owned subsidiary of controlled 
foreign corporation D, also incorporated under the laws of country X. 
Corporation E maintains branch B in foreign country Y. Both corporations 
use the calendar year as the taxable year. In 1964, E Corporation's sole 
activity, carried on through branch B, consists of the purchase of 
articles manufactured in country X by D Corporation, a related person, 
and the sale of the articles through branch B for use outside country X. 
The income of E Corporation derived by branch B from such transactions 
is taxed to E Corporation by country X only at the time E Corporation 
distributes such income to D Corporation and is then taxed on the basis 
of what the tax (a 40 percent effective rate) would have been if the 
income had been derived in 1964 by E Corporation from

[[Page 288]]

sources within country X from doing business through a permanent 
establishment therein. Country Y levies an income tax at an effective 
rate of 50 percent on income derived from sources within such country, 
but the income of branch B for 1964 is effectively taxed by country Y at 
a 5 percent rate since, under the laws of such country, only 10 percent 
of branch B's income is derived from sources within such country. 
Corporation E makes no distributions to D Corporation in 1964. In 
determining foreign base company sales income of E Corporation for 1964, 
branch B is treated as a separate wholly owned subsidiary corporation of 
E Corporation, the 5 percent rate of tax on branch B's income being less 
than 90 percent of, and at least 5 percentage points less than, the 40 
percent rate. Income derived by branch B, treated as a separate 
corporation, from the sale by or through it for use, consumption, or 
disposition outside country Y of the personal property produced in 
country X is treated as income from the sale of personal property on 
behalf of E Corporation, a related person, and constitutes foreign base 
company sales income.
    Example 4. Controlled foreign corporation F, incorporated under the 
laws of foreign country X, is a wholly owned subsidiary of domestic 
corporation M. Corporation F, through its branch B in foreign country Y, 
purchases from controlled foreign corporation G, a wholly owned 
subsidiary of M Corporation incorporated under the laws of foreign 
country Z, personal property which G Corporation manufactures in country 
Z. Corporation F sells such property for use in foreign country W. Since 
the income of F Corporation from such purchases and sales is classified 
as foreign base company sales income under section 954(d)(1) and 
paragraph (a) of this section, branch B will not be treated as a 
separate corporation with respect to such income even if the tax 
differential between countries X and Y would otherwise justify such 
treatment.
    Example 5. Controlled foreign corporation A, incorporated under the 
laws of foreign country X, is engaged in manufacturing articles through 
its home office, located in country X, and selling such articles through 
branch B, located in foreign country Y, and through branch C, located in 
foreign country Z, for use outside country X. These activities 
constitute the only activities of A Corporation for its taxable year 
1963. Each such country levies an income tax on only the income derived 
from sources within such country, and all income derived in 1963 by the 
home office, branch B, and branch C, respectively, is derived from 
sources within countries X, Y, and Z, respectively. The income and 
income taxes of A Corporation for 1963 are as follows:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                    X Country    Y Country    Z Country 
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Income of:                                                              
  Home office....................     $200,000  ...........  ...........
  Branch B.......................  ...........     $100,000  ...........
  Branch C.......................  ...........  ...........     $100,000
Income tax.......................     $100,000      $20,000      $20,000
Effective rate of tax............          50%          20%          20%
------------------------------------------------------------------------

By applying subparagraph (1)(i) of this paragraph and by treating branch 
B as though it were the only branch of A Corporation, branch B is 
treated as a separate wholly owned subsidiary corporation of A 
Corporation in determining foreign base company sales income of A 
Corporation for 1963, the 20 percent rate of tax on the income of such 
branch being less than 90 percent of, and at least 5 percentage points 
less than, the 50 percent rate of tax which would apply to the income of 
branch B under the laws of country X if, under the laws of such country, 
all the income of A Corporation for 1963 derived through the home office 
and branch B were derived from sources within country X. Moreover, by 
applying subparagraph (1)(i) of this paragraph and by treating branch C 
as though it were the only branch of A Corporation, branch C is treated 
as a separate wholly owned subsidiary corporation of A Corporation, the 
20 percent rate of tax on the income of such branch being less than 90 
percent of, and at least 5 percentage points less than, the 50 percent 
rate of tax which would apply to the income of branch C under the laws 
of country X if, under the laws of such country, all the income of A 
Corporation for 1963 derived through the home office and branch C were 
derived from sources within country X. The income derived by branch B 
and branch C, respectively, each treated as a separate corporation, from 
the sale by or through each of them for use, consumption, or disposition 
outside country Y and country Z, respectively, is treated as income from 
the sale of personal property on behalf of A Corporation, a related 
person, and constitutes foreign base company sales income for 1963. The 
home office of A Corporation, treated as a separate corporation, derives 
no foreign base company sales income for 1963 since it produces the 
articles which are sold.
    Example 6. Controlled foreign corporation A, incorporated under the 
laws of foreign country X is engaged in manufacturing articles through 
branch B, located in foreign country Y, and selling such articles 
through branch C, located in foreign country Z, and through its home 
office, located in country X, for use outside country X. These 
activities constitute the only activities of A Corporation for its 
taxable year 1963. Each such country levies an income tax on only the 
income derived from sources within such country, and all income derived 
in 1963 by the

[[Page 289]]

home office, branch B, and branch C, respectively, is derived from 
sources within countries X, Y, and Z, respectively. The income and 
income taxes of A Corporation for 1963 are as follows:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                    X Country    Y Country    Z Country 
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Income of:                                                              
  Home office....................     $100,000  ...........  ...........
  Branch B.......................  ...........     $200,000  ...........
  Branch C.......................  ...........  ...........     $100,000
Income tax.......................      $20,000     $100,000      $20,000
Effective rate of tax............          20%          50%          20%
------------------------------------------------------------------------

In determining foreign base company sales income of A Corporation for 
1963 neither branch B nor branch C is treated, by applying subparagraph 
(1)(i) of this paragraph, as a separate wholly owned subsidiary 
corporation of A Corporation since branch B derives no income from the 
purchase or sale of personal property and since, in the case of branch C 
treated as though it were the only branch of A Corporation, the 20 
percent rate of tax on the income of branch C is not less than 90 
percent of, and not as much as 5 percentage points less than, the 20 
percent rate of tax which would apply to the income of branch C under 
the laws of country X if, under the laws of such country, all the income 
of A Corporation for 1963 derived through the home office and branch C 
were derived from sources within country X. However, by applying 
subparagraph (1)(ii) of this paragraph and by treating the home office 
in country X as though it alone were the remainder of A Corporation, 
branch B is treated as a separate wholly owned subsidiary corporation of 
A Corporation, the 20 percent rate of tax on the income of the home 
office 
being less than 90 percent of, and at least 5 percentage points less 
than, the 50 percent rate of tax which would apply to the income of the 
home office under the laws of country Y if, under the laws of such 
country, all the income of A Corporation for 1963 derived through the 
home office and branch B were derived from sources within country Y. 
Moreover, by applying subparagraph (1)(ii) of this paragraph and by 
treating branch C as though it alone were the remainder of A 
Corporation, branch B and branch C are treated as separate wholly owned 
subsidiary corporations of A Corporation, the 20 percent rate of tax on 
the income of branch C being less than 90 percent of, and at least 5 
percentage points less than, the 50 percent rate of tax which would 
apply to the income of branch C under the laws of country Y if, under 
the laws of such country, all the income of A Corporation for 1963 
derived through branch B and branch C were derived from sources within 
country Y. The income derived by the home office and branch C, 
respectively, each treated as a separate corporation, from the sale by 
or through each of them for use, consumption, or disposition outside 
country X and country Z, respectively, is treated as income from the 
sale of personal property on behalf of branch B, a related person, and 
constitutes foreign base company sales income for 1963. Branch B, 
treated as a separate corporation, derives no foreign base company sales 
income since it produces the articles which are sold.
    Example 7. Controlled foreign corporation A, incorporated under the 
laws of foreign country X, is engaged in manufacturing articles through 
branch B, located in foreign country Y, and selling such articles 
through the home office, located in country X, and 

[[Page 290]]

through branch C, located in foreign country Z, for use outside country 
X. These activities constitute the only activities of A Corporation for 
its taxable year 1963. Each such country levies an income tax on only 
the income derived from sources within such country, and all income 
derived in 1963 by the home office, branch B, and branch C, 
respectively, is derived from sources within countries X, Y, and Z, 
respectively. The income and income taxes of A Corporation for 1963 are 
as follows:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                    X Country    Y Country    Z Country 
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Income of:                                                              
  Home office....................     $100,000  ...........  ...........
  Branch B.......................  ...........     $200,000  ...........
  Branch C.......................  ...........  ...........     $100,000
Income tax.......................      $40,000     $100,000      $20,000
Effective rate of tax............          40%          50%          20%
------------------------------------------------------------------------

By applying subparagraph (1)(i) of this paragraph and by treating branch 
C as though it were the only branch of A Corporation, branch C is 
treated as a separate wholly owned subsidiary corporation of A 
Corporation in determining foreign base company sales income of A 
Corporation for 1963, the 20 percent rate of tax on the income of branch 
C being less than 90 percent of, and at least 5 percentage points less 
than, the 40 percent rate of tax which would apply to the income of 
branch C under the laws of country X if, under the laws of such country, 
all the income of A Corporation for 1963 derived through the home office 
and branch C were derived from sources within country X. In addition, by 
applying subparagraph (1)(ii) of this paragraph and by treating the home 
office in country X as though it alone were the remainder of A 
Corporation, branch B is treated as a separate wholly owned subsidiary 
corporation of A Corporation, the 40 per- 
cent rate of tax on the income of the home office being less than 90 
percent of, and at least 5 percentage points less than, the 50 percent 
rate of tax which would apply to the income of the home office under the 
laws of country Y if, under the laws of such country, all the income of 
A Corporation for 1963 derived through the home office and branch B were 
derived from sources within country Y. Moreover, by applying 
subparagraph (1)(ii) of this paragraph and by treating branch C as 
though it alone were the remainder of A Corporation, branch B and branch 
C would again be treated as separate wholly owned subsidiary 
corporations of A Corporation, the 20 percent rate of tax on the income 
of branch C being less than 90 percent of, and at least 5 percentage 
points less than, the 50 percent rate of tax which would apply to the 
income of branch C under the laws of country Y if, under the laws of 
such country, all the income of A Corporation for 1963 derived through 
branch B and branch C were derived from sources within country Y; 
however, for purposes of determining foreign base company sales income 
of A Corporation for 1963, only the classification under subparagraph 
(1)(i) of this paragraph shall, by reason of the application of 
subparagraph (2)(ii)(d) of this paragraph, be applied with respect to 
the income derived by branch C. The income derived by the home office 
and branch C, respectively, each treated as a separate corporation, from 
the sale by or through each of them for use, consumption, or disposition 
outside country X and country Z, respectively, is treated as income from 
the sale of personal property on behalf of branch B, a related person, 
and constitutes foreign base company sales income for 1963. Branch B, 
treated as a separate corporation, derives no foreign base company sales 
income since it produces the articles which are sold.

[[Page 291]]

    (c) Shipping income for taxable years beginning after December 31, 
1975. For taxable years beginning after December 31, 1975, foreign base 
company shipping income (as determined under Sec. 1.954-6) of a 
controlled foreign corporation shall not also be considered foreign base 
company sales income of that controlled foreign corporation.

[T.D. 6734, 29 FR 6392, May 15, 1964, as amended by T.D. 7545, 43 FR 
32754, May 8, 1978; T.D. 7893, 48 FR 22508, May 19, 1983; T.D. 7894, 48 
FR 22523, May 19, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 1.954-4   Foreign base company services income.

    (a) Items included. Except as provided in paragraph (d) of this 
section, foreign base company services income means income of a 
controlled foreign corporation, whether in the form of compensation, 
commissions, fees, or otherwise, derived in connection with the 
performance of technical, managerial, engineering, architectural, 
scientific, skilled, industrial, commercial, or like services which--
    (1) Are performed for, or on behalf of a related person, as defined 
in paragraph (e)(1) of Sec. 1.954-1, and
    (2) Are performed outside the country under the laws of which the 
controlled foreign corporation is created or organized.
    (b) Services performed for, or on behalf of, a related person--(1) 
Specific cases. For purposes of paragraph (a)(1) of this section, 
``services which are performed for, or on behalf of, a related person'' 
include (but are not limited to) services performed by a controlled 
foreign corporation in a case where--
    (i) The controlled foreign corporation is paid or reimbursed by, is 
released from an obligation to, or otherwise receives substantial 
financial benefit from, a related person for performing such services;
    (ii) The controlled foreign corporation performs services (whether 
or not with respect to property sold by a related person) which a 
related person is, or has been, obligated to perform;
    (iii) The controlled foreign corporation performs services with 
respect to property sold by a related person and the performance of such 
services constitutes a condition or a material term of such sale; or
    (iv) Substantial assistance contributing to the performance of such 
services has been furnished by a related person or persons.
    (2) Special rules--(i) Guaranty of performance. Subparagraph (1)(ii) 
of this paragraph shall not apply with respect to services performed by 
a controlled foreign corporation pursuant to a contract the performance 
of which is guaranteed by a related person, if (a) the related person's 
sole obligation with respect to the contract is to guarantee performance 
of such services, (b) the controlled foreign corporation is fully 
obligated to perform the services under the contract, and (c) the 
related person (or any other person related to the controlled foreign 
corporation) does not in fact (1) pay for performance of, or perform, 
any of such services the performance of which is so guaranteed or (2) 
pay for performance of, or perform, any significant services related to 
such services. If the related person (or any other person related to the 
controlled foreign corporation) does in fact pay for performance of, or 
perform, any of such services or any significant services related to 
such services, subparagraph (1)(ii) of this paragraph shall apply with 
respect to the services performed by the controlled foreign corporation 
pursuant to the contract the performance of which is guaranteed by the 
related person, even though such payment or performance is not 
considered to be substantial assistance for purposes of subparagraph 
(1)(iv) of this paragraph. For purposes of this subdivision, a related 
person shall be considered to guarantee performance of the services by 
the controlled foreign corporation whether it guarantees performance of 
such services by a separate contract of guaranty or enters into a 
service contract solely for purposes of guaranteeing performance of such 
services and immediately thereafter assigns the entire contract to the 
controlled foreign corporation for execution.
    (ii) Application of substantial assistance test. For purposes of 
subparagraph (1)(iv) of this paragraph--
    (a) Assistance furnished by a related person or persons to the 
controlled foreign corporation shall include, but

[[Page 292]]

shall not be limited to, direction, supervision, services, know-how, 
financial assistance (other than contributions to capital), and 
equipment, material, or supplies.
    (b) Assistance furnished by a related person or persons to a 
controlled foreign corporation in the form of direction, supervision, 
services, or know-how shall not be considered substantial unless either 
(1) the assistance so furnished provides the controlled foreign 
corporation with skills which are a principal element in producing the 
income from the performance of such services by such corporation or (2) 
the cost to the controlled foreign corporation of the assistance so 
furnished equals 50 percent or more of the total cost to the controlled 
foreign corporation of performing the services performed by such 
corporation. The term ``cost'', as used in this subdivision (b), shall 
be determined after taking into account adjustments, if any, made under 
section 482.
    (c) Financial assistance (other than contributions to capital), 
equipment, material, or supplies furnished by a related person to a 
controlled foreign corporation shall be considered assistance only in 
that amount by which the consideration actually paid by the controlled 
foreign corporation for the purchase or use of such item is less than 
the arm's length charge for such purchase or use. The total of such 
amounts so considered to be assistance in the case of financial 
assistance, equipment, material, and supplies furnished by all related 
persons shall be compared with the profits derived by the controlled 
foreign corporation from the performance of the services to determine 
whether the financial assistance, equipment, material, and supplies 
furnished by a related person or persons are by themselves substantial 
assistance contributing to the performance of such services. For 
purposes of this subdivision (c), determinations shall be made after 
taking into account adjustments, if any, made under section 482 and the 
term ``consideration actually paid'' shall include any amount which is 
deemed paid by the controlled foreign corporation pursuant to such an 
adjustment.
    (d) Even though assistance furnished by a related person or persons 
to a controlled foreign corporation in the form of direction, 
supervision, services, or know-how is not considered to be substantial 
under (b) of this subdivision and assistance furnished by a related 
person or persons in the form of financial assistance (other than 
contributions to capital), equipment, material, or supplies is not 
considered to be substantial under (c) of this subdivision, such 
assistance may nevertheless constitute substantial assistance when taken 
together or in combination with other assistance furnished by a related 
person or persons which in itself is not considered to be substantial.
    (e) Assistance furnished by a related person or persons to a 
controlled foreign corporation in the form of direction, supervision, 
services, or know-how shall not be taken into account under (b) or (d) 
of this subdivision unless the assistance so furnished assists the 
controlled foreign corporation directly in the performance of the 
services performed by such corporation.
    (3) Illustrations. The application of this paragraph may be 
illustrated by the following examples:

    Example 1. Controlled foreign corporation A is paid by related 
corporation M for the installation and maintenance of industrial 
machines which M Corporation manufactures and sells to B Corporation. 
Such installation and maintenance services by A Corporation are 
performed for, or on behalf of, M Corporation for purposes of section 
954(e).
    Example 2. Controlled foreign corporation B enters into a contract 
with an unrelated person to drill an oil well in a foreign country. 
Domestic corporation M owns all the outstanding stock of B Corporation. 
Corporation B employs a relatively small clerical and administrative 
staff and owns the necessary well-drilling equipment. Most of the 
technical and supervisory personnel who oversee the drilling of the oil 
well by B Corporation are regular employees of M Corporation who are 
temporarily employed by B Corporation. In addition, B Corporation hires 
on the open market unskilled and semiskilled laborers to work on the 
drilling project. The services performed by B Corporation under the 
well-drilling contract are performed for, or on behalf of, a related 
person for purposes of section 954(e) because the services of the 
technical and supervisory personnel which are provided by M Corporation 
are of substantial

[[Page 293]]

assistance in the performance of such contract in that they assist B 
Corporation directly in the execution of the contract and provide B 
Corporation with skills which are a principal element in producing the 
income from the performance of such contract.
    Example 3. Controlled foreign corporation F enters into a contract 
with an unrelated person to construct a dam in a foreign country. 
Domestic corporation M owns all the outstanding stock of F Corporation. 
Corporation F leases or buys from M Corporation, on an arm's length 
basis, the equipment and material necessary for the construction of the 
dam. The technical and supervisory personnel who design and oversee the 
construction of the dam are regular full-time employees of F Corporation 
who are not on loan from any related person. The principal clerical 
work, and the financial accounting, required in connection with the 
construction of the dam by F Corporation are performed, on a remunerated 
basis, by full-time employees of M Corporation. All other assistance F 
Corporation requires in completing the construction of the dam is paid 
for by that corporation and furnished by unrelated persons. The services 
performed by F Corporation under the contract for the construction of 
the dam are not performed for, or on behalf of, a related person for 
purposes of section 954(e) because the clerical and accounting services 
furnished by M Corporation do not assist F Corporation directly in the 
performance of the contract.
    Example 4. Controlled foreign corporation D, a wholly owned 
subsidiary of domestic corporation M, procures and enters a contract 
with an unrelated person to construct a superhighway in a foreign 
country, but such person enters the contract only on the condition that 
M Corporation agrees to perform, or to pay for the performance by some 
person other than D Corporation of, the services called for by the 
contract if D Corporation should fail to complete their performance. 
Corporation D is capable of performing such contract. No related person 
as to D Corporation pays for, or performs, any services called for by 
the contract, or pays for, or performs, any significant services related 
to such services. The construction of the superhighway by D Corporation 
is not considered for purposes of section 954(e) to be the performance 
of services for, or on behalf of M Corporation.
    Example 5. Domestic corporation M is obligated under a contract with 
an unrelated person to construct a superhighway in a foreign country. At 
a later date M Corporation assigns the entire contract to its wholly 
owned subsidiary, controlled foreign corporation C, and the unrelated 
person releases M Corporation from any obligation under the contract. 
The construction of such highway by C Corporation is considered for 
purposes of section 954(e) to be the performance of services for, or on 
behalf of, M Corporation.
    Example 6. Domestic corporation M enters a contract with an 
unrelated person to construct a superhighway in a foreign country. 
Corporation M immediately assigns the entire contract to its wholly 
owned subsidiary, controlled foreign corporation C. The unrelated person 
does not release M Corporation of its obligation under the contract, the 
sole purpose of these arrangements being to have M Corporation guarantee 
performance of the contract by C Corporation. Corporation C is capable 
of performing the construction contract. Neither M Corporation nor any 
other person related to C Corporation pays for, or performs, any 
services called for by the construction contract or at any time pays 
for, or performs, any significant services related to the services 
performed under such contract. The construction of the superhighway by C 
Corporation is not considered for purposes of section 954(e) to be the 
performance of services for, or on behalf of, M Corporation.
    Example 7. The facts are the same as in example 6 except that M 
Corporation, preparatory to entering the construction contract, prepares 
plans and specifications which enable the submission of bids for the 
contract. Since M Corporation has performed significant services related 
to the services the performance of which it has guaranteed, the 
construction of such highway by C Corporation is considered for purposes 
of section 954(e) to be the performance of services for, or on behalf 
of, M Corporation.
    Example 8. Domestic corporation M manufactures an industrial machine 
which requires specialized installation. Corporation M sells the 
machines for a basic price if the contract of sale contains no provision 
for installation. If, however, the customer agrees to employ controlled 
foreign corporation E, a wholly owned subsidiary of M Corporation, to 
install the machine and to pay E Corporation a specified installation 
charge, M Corporation sells the machine at a price which is less than 
the basic price. The installation services performed by E Corporation 
for customers of M Corporation purchasing the machine at the reduced 
price are considered for purposes of section 954(e) to be performed for, 
or on behalf of, M Corporation.
    Example 9. Domestic corporation M manufactures and sells industrial 
machines with a warranty as to their performance conditional upon their 
installation and maintenance by a factory-authorized service agency. 
Controlled foreign corporation F, a wholly owned subsidiary of M 
Corporation, is the only authorized service agency. Any installation or 
maintenance services performed by F Corporation on such machines are 
considered for purposes of section 954(e) to be performed for, or on 
behalf of, M Corporation.

[[Page 294]]

    Example 10. Domestic corporation M manufactures electric office 
machines which it sells at a basic price without any provision for, or 
understanding as to, adjustment or maintenance of the machines. The 
machines require constant adjustment and maintenance services which M 
Corporation, certain wholly owned subsidiaries of M Corporation, and 
certain unrelated persons throughout the world are qualified to perform. 
From among the numerous persons qualified and available to perform 
adjustment and maintenance services with respect to such office 
machines, foreign corporation B, a customer of M Corporation, employs 
controlled foreign corporation G, a wholly owned subsidiary of M 
Corporation, to adjust and maintain the office machines which B 
Corporation purchases from M Corporation. The adjustment and maintenance 
services performed by G Corporation for B Corporation are not considered 
for purposes of section 954(e) to be performed for, or on behalf of, M 
Corporation.

    (c) Place where services are performed. The place where services 
will be considered to have been performed for purposes of paragraph 
(a)(2) of this section will depend on the facts and circumstances of 
each case. As a general rule, services will be considered performed 
where the persons performing services for the controlled foreign 
corporation which derives income in connection with the performance of 
technical, managerial, architectural, engineering, scientific, skilled, 
industrial, commercial, or like services are physically located when 
they perform their duties in the execution of the service activity 
resulting in such income. Therefore, in many cases, total gross income 
of a controlled foreign corporation derived in connection with each 
service contract or arrangement performed for or on behalf of a related 
person must be apportioned, between income which is not foreign base 
company services income and that which is foreign base company services 
income, on a basis of employee-time spent within the foreign country 
under the laws of which the controlled foreign corporation is created or 
organized and employee-time spent without the foreign country under the 
laws of which such corporation is created or organized. In allocating 
time spent within and without the foreign country under the laws of 
which the controlled foreign corporation is created or organized, 
relative weight must also be given to the value of the various functions 
performed by persons in fulfillment of the service contract or 
arrangement. For example, clerical work will ordinarily be assigned 
little value, while services performed by technical, highly skilled, and 
managerial personnel will be assigned greater values in relation to the 
type of function performed by each individual.
    (d) Items excluded. Foreign base company services income does not 
include--
    (1) Income derived in connection with the performance of services by 
a controlled foreign corporation if--
    (i) The services directly relate to the sale or exchange of personal 
property by the controlled foreign corporation,
    (ii) The property sold or exchanged was manufactured, produced, 
grown, or extracted by such controlled foreign corporation, and
    (iii) The services were performed before the sale or exchange of 
such property by the controlled foreign corporation;
    (2) Income derived in connection with the performance of services by 
a controlled foreign corporation if the services directly relate to an 
offer or effort to sell or exchange personal property which was, or 
would have been, manufactured, produced, grown, or extracted by such 
controlled foreign corporation whether or not a sale or exchange of such 
property was in fact consummated; or
    (3) For taxable years beginning after December 31, 1975, foreign 
base company shipping income (as determined under Sec. 1.954-6).

[T.D. 6734, 29 FR 6399, May 15, 1964, as amended by T.D. 6981, 33 FR 
16497, Nov. 13, 1968; T.D. 7893, 48 FR 22523, May 19, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 1.954-5  Increase in qualified investments in less developed countries; taxable years of controlled foreign corporations beginning before January 1, 1976.

    For rules applicable to taxable years of controlled foreign 
corporations beginning before January 1, 1976, see section 954(b)(1) (as 
in effect before the enactment of the Tax Reduction Act of

[[Page 295]]

1975) and 26 CFR 1.954-5 (Revised as of April 1, 1975).

[T.D. 7893, 48 FR 22508, May 19, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 1.954-6  Foreign base company shipping income.

    (a) Scope--(1) In general. This section prescribes rules for 
determining foreign base company shipping income under the provisions of 
section 954(f), as amended by the Tax Reduction Act of 1975.
    (2) Effective date. (i) The rules prescribed in this section apply 
to taxable years of foreign corporations beginning after December 31, 
1975, and to taxable years of United States shareholders (as defined in 
section 951 (b)) within which or with which such taxable years of such 
foreign corporations end.
    (ii) Except as described in paragraph (b)(1)(viii) of this section, 
foreign base company shipping income does not include amounts earned by 
a foreign corporation in a taxable year of such corporation beginning 
before January 1, 1976. See example 1 of paragraph (g)(2) of this 
section for an illustration of the effect of this subparagraph on 
partnership income. See example 3 of paragraph (f)(4)(ii) of this 
section for an illustration of the effect of this subparagraph on 
certain dividend income. See paragraph (f)(5)(iii) of this section for 
the effect of this subparagraph on certain interest and gains.
    (b) Definitions--(1) Foreign base company shipping income. The term 
``foreign base company shipping income'' means--
    (i) Gross income derived from, or in connection with, the use (or 
hiring or leasing for use) of any aircraft or vessel in foreign commerce 
(see paragraph (c) of this section),
    (ii) Gross income derived from, or in connection with, the 
performance of services directly related to the use of any aircraft or 
vessel in foreign commerce (see paragraph (d) of this section),
    (iii) Gross income incidental to income described in subdivisions 
(i) and (ii) of this subparagraph, as provided in paragraph (e) of this 
section,
    (iv) Gross income derived from the sale, exchange, or other 
disposition of any aircraft or vessel used or held for use (by the 
seller or by a person related to the seller) in foreign commerce,
    (v) In the case of a controlled foreign corporation, dividends, 
interest, and gains described in paragraph (f) of this section,
    (vi) Income described in paragraph (g) of this section (relating to 
partnerships, trusts, etc.),
    (vii) Exchange gain, to the extent allocable to foreign base company 
shipping income (see Sec. 1.952-2(c)(2)(v)(b), and
    (viii) In the case of a controlled foreign corporation and at its 
option, dividends, interest, and gains attributable to income derived 
from aircraft and vessels (as defined in 26 CFR 1.954-1(b)(2) (Revised 
as of April 1, 1975)) by a less developed country shipping company 
(described in Sec. 1.955-5(b)) in taxable years beginning after December 
31, 1962, and before January 1, 1976. The portion of a dividend, 
interest, or gain attributable to such income shall be determined by the 
same method as that for determining the portion of a dividend, interest, 
or gain attributable to foreign base company shipping income under 
paragraphs (f)(4), (5), and (6) of this section, but without regard to 
paragraphs (f)(6)(ii) and (iv)(B).
    (2) Foreign base company shipping operations. For purposes of 
sections 951 through 964, the term ``foreign base company shipping 
operations'' means the trade or business from which gross income 
described in subparagraph (1)(i) and (ii) of this paragraph is derived.
    (3) Foreign commerce. For purposes of sections 951 through 964--
    (i) An aircraft or vessel is used in foreign commerce to the extent 
it is used in transportation of property or passengers--
    (A) Between a port (or airport) in the United States or possession 
of the United States and a port (or airport) in a foreign country, or
    (B) Between a port (or airport) in a foreign country and another in 
the same country or between a port (or airport) in a foreign country and 
one in another foreign country.

Thus, for example, a trawler, a factory ship, and an oil drilling ship 
are not considered to be used in foreign commerce. On the other hand, a 
cruise ship which visits one or more foreign ports

[[Page 296]]

is considered to be so used. Notwithstanding subdivision (i)(B) of this 
paragraph (b)(3), foreign base company income does not include income 
derived from, or in connection with, the use of an aircraft or vessel in 
transportation of property or passengers between a port (or airport) in 
a foreign country and another port (or airport) in the same country if 
both the foreign corporation is created or organized and the aircraft or 
vessel is registered in that country.
    (ii) The term vessel includes all water craft and other artificial 
contrivances of whatever description and at whatever stage of 
construction, whether on the stocks or launched, which are used or are 
capable of being used or are intended to be used as a means of 
transportation on water. This definition does not apply for purposes of 
section 956(b)(2)(G) and Sec. 1.956-2(b)(1)(ix).
    (iii) The term port means any place (whether on or off shore) where 
aircraft or vessels are accustomed to load or unload goods or to take on 
or let off passengers.
    (iv) Any vessel (such as a lighter or beacon lightship) which serves 
other vessels used in foreign commerce (within the meaning of 
subdivision (i) of this subparagraph) shall, to the extent so used, also 
be considered to be used in foreign commerce.
    (v) For the meaning of the term ``foreign country'', see section 
638(2).
    (4) Use in foreign commerce. For purposes of sections 951 through 
964, the use of an aircraft or vessel in foreign commerce includes the 
hiring or leasing (or subleasing) of an aircraft or vessel to another 
for use in foreign commerce. Thus, for example, an aircraft or vessel is 
``used in foreign commerce'' within the meaning of section 955(b)(1)(A) 
if such aircraft or vessel is chartered (whether pursuant to a bareboat 
charter, time charter, or otherwise) to another for use in foreign 
commerce.
    (5) Related person. With respect to a controlled foreign 
corporation, the term ``related person'' means a related person as 
defined in Sec. 1.954-1(e)(1), and the term ``unrelated person'' means 
an unrelated person as defined in Sec. 1.954-1(e)(2).
    (c) Aircraft or vessel income--(1) In general. The term ``income 
derived from, or in connection with, the use (or hiring or leasing for 
use) of any aircraft or vessel in foreign commerce'' as used in 
paragraph (b)(1)(i) of this section means--
    (i) Income derived from transporting passengers or property by 
aircraft or vessel in foreign commerce and
    (ii) Income derived from hiring or leasing an aircraft or vessel to 
another for use in foreign commerce.
    (2) Illustrations. The application of this paragraph may be 
illustrated by the following examples:

    Example 1. Foreign corporation C owns a foreign flag vessel which it 
charters under a long-term charter to foreign corporation D. The vessel 
is used by D as a tramp which has no fixed or regular schedule. The 
vessel carries bulk and packaged cargoes, as well as occasional 
passengers, under charter parties, contracts of affreightment, or other 
contracts of carriage. The carriage of cargoes and passengers is between 
a port in the United States and a port in a foreign country or between a 
port in one foreign country and another port in the same or a different 
foreign country. The charter hire paid to C by D constitutes income 
derived from the use of the vessel in foreign commerce, but is not 
foreign base company income to the extent the charter hire is allocable 
to income derived from the use of the vessel between ports in the same 
foreign country in which both C is incorporated and the vessel is 
registered. The charter hire and freight and passenger revenue 
(including demurrage and dead freight) derived by D also constitute 
income derived from the use of the vessel in foreign commerce, but is 
not foreign base company income to the extent the charter hire and 
freight and passenger revenue are allocable to the use of the vessel 
between ports in the same foreign country in which both D is 
incorporated and the vessel is registered.
    Example 2. (a) Foreign corporation E owns a foreign flag tanker 
which it charters under a long-term bareboat charter to foreign 
corporation F for use in foreign commerce. F produces oil in a foreign 
country and ships the oil to other foreign countries and to the United 
States. The vessel, when not engaged in carrying F's oil, is used to 
carry bulk cargoes for unrelated persons in foreign commerce as 
opportunity offers. The charger hire received by E constitutes income 
derived from the use of the vessel in foreign commerce. The income 
derived by F from carrying bulk cargoes for unrelated persons also 
constitutes income derived from the use of the vessel in foreign 
commerce.

[[Page 297]]

    (b) F is forced to lay up the vessel as a result of adverse market 
developments. Pursuant to the terms of the charter, F continues to pay 
charter hire to E during the period of lay-up. The charter hire received 
by E during the period of lay-up constitutes income derived from the use 
of the vessel in foreign commerce.
    Example 3. (a) A shipment of cheese is loaded into a container owned 
by controlled foreign corporation S at the consignor's place of business 
in Hamar, Norway. The cheese is transported to Milan, Italy, by the 
following routings:
    (1) Overland by road from Hamar, Norway, to Gothenburg, Sweden, by 
unrelated motor carriers via Oslo, Norway,
    (2) By sea from Gothenburg to Rotterdam, Netherlands, by feeder 
vessel under foreign flag, time chartered to S by unrelated owner,
    (3) By sea from Rotterdam to Algeciras, Spain, by feeder vessel 
under foreign flag, time chartered to S by unrelated owner.
    (4) By sea from Algeciras to Genoa, Italy, by line-haul vessel under 
U.S. flag, chartered by S from related company, and
    (5) Overland from Genoa to Milan, Italy, by unrelated motor carrier.
    (b) The consignor pays S total charges of $1,710, and S pays $676 to 
unrelated third parties, which amounts may be broken down as follows:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                     Revenue     Costs  
                                           Amount   collected   paid to 
                                         billed to   by S on   unrelated
         Description of charges           customer  behalf of   3d party
                                            and         an        and   
                                         collected  unrelated   absorbed
                                            by S      party       by S  
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Ocean freight..........................     $1,420  .........  .........
Trucking charge of empty equipment to                                   
 shipper's facility....................         50        $50  .........
Trucking charges Hamar to Oslo.........         60         60  .........
Trucking charges Oslo to Gothenburg....  .........  .........       $315
Trucking charges Genoa to Milan........        180        180  .........
Brokerage Commission in Europe.........  .........  .........         71
                                        --------------------------------
    Total..............................      1,710        290        386
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (c) Of the $1,710 amount billed to the consignor and collected by S, 
$290 is collected by S on behalf of unrelated third parties. This $290 
amount is not includable in S's gross income, and is therefore not 
includable in S's foreign base company shipping income. The remaining 
$1,420 amount (i.e., $1,710-$290) is includable in S's foreign base 
company shipping income. The $386 amount paid by S to unrelated third 
parties and absorbed by S is deductible from foreign base company 
shipping income under Sec. 1.954-1(c).

    (d) Services directly related--(1) In general. The term ``income 
derived from, or in connection with, the performance of services 
directly related to the use of an aircraft or vessel in foreign 
commerce'', as used in paragraph (b)(1)(ii) of this section, means--
    (i) Income derived from, or in connection with, the performance of 
services described in subparagraph (2) or (3) of this paragraph, and
    (ii) Income treated as foreign base company shipping income under 
subparagraph (4) of this paragraph.
    (2) Intragroup services. The services described in this subparagraph 
are services performed for a person who is the owner, lessor, lessee or 
operator of an aircraft or vessel used in foreign commerce, by such 
person or by a person related to such person, and which fall into one or 
more of the following categories:
    (i) Terminal services, such as dockage, wharfage, storage, lights, 
water, refrigeration, and similar services;
    (ii) Stevedoring and other cargo handling services;
    (iii) Container related services (including the rental of containers 
and related equipment) performed either in connection with the local 
drayage or inland haulage of cargo or in the course of transportation in 
foreign commerce;
    (iv) Services performed by tugs, lighters, barges, scows, launches, 
floating cranes, and other similar equipment;
    (v) Maintenance and repairs;
    (vi) Training of pilots and crews;
    (vii) Licensing of patents, know-how, and similar intangible 
property developed and used in the course of foreign base company 
shipping operations;
    (viii) Services performed by a booking, operating, or managing 
agent; and
    (ix) Any service performed in the course of the actual 
transportation of passengers or property.
    (3) Services for passenger, consignor, or consignee. The services 
described in this subparagraph are services provided by the operator (or 
person related to the operator) of an aircraft or vessel in foreign 
commerce for the passenger, consignor, or consignee, such as--

[[Page 298]]

    (i) Services described in one or more of the categories set out in 
subparagraphs (2)(i) through (iv) and (ix) of this paragraph,
    (ii) The rental of staterooms, berths, or living accommodations and 
the furnishing of meals,
    (iii) Barber shop and other services to passengers aboard vessels,
    (iv) Excess baggage, and
    (v) Demurrage, dispatch, and dead freight.
    (4) The 70-percent test. At the option of the foreign corporation 
all the gross income for a taxable year derived by a foreign corporation 
from any facility used in connection with the performance of services 
described in one or more of the categories set out in subparagraph 
(2)(i) through (ix) of this paragraph is foreign base company shipping 
income if more than 70 percent of such gross income for either--
    (i) Such taxable year, or
    (ii) Such taxable year and the two preceding taxable years,
is foreign base company shipping income (determined without regard to 
this subparagraph). Thus, for example, if 80 percent of the gross income 
derived by a controlled foreign corporation at a stevedoring facility is 
treated as foreign base company shipping income under subparagraph (2) 
of this paragraph, then the remaining 20 percent is treated as foreign 
base company shipping income under this subparagraph.
    (5) Rules for applying subparagraph (4). (i) Solely for purposes of 
applying subparagraphs (4) of this paragraph, foreign base company 
shipping income and gross income shall be deemed to include an arm's 
length charge (see paragraph (h)(5) of this section) for services 
performed by the foreign corporation for itself.
    (ii) In determining whether services performed by a foreign 
corporation are performed at a single facility or at two or more 
different facilities, all of the facts and circumstances involved will 
be taken into account. Ordinarily, all services performed by a foreign 
corporation within a single port area will be considered performed at a 
single facility.
    (iii) The application of this subparagraph and subparagraph (4) of 
this paragraph may be illustrated by the following example in which it 
is assumed that the foreign corporation has chosen to apply the 70-
percent test of subparagraph (4):

    Example. (a) Controlled foreign corporation X uses the calendar year 
as the taxable year. For 1976, X is divided into two operating 
divisions, A and B. Division A operates a number of vessels in foreign 
commerce. Division B operates a terminal facility at which it performs 
services described in subparagraph (2)(i) of this paragraph for vessels 
some of which are operated by division A, some of which are operated by 
persons related to X, and some of which are operated by persons 
unrelated to X. For 1976, X includes under subparagraph (5) as foreign 
base company shipping income and gross income, for purposes of 
subparagraph (4), an arm's length charge for services performed for 
itself. For 1976, the gross income derived by division B is 
reconstructed for purposes of subparagraph (4) of this paragraph as 
follows, based on the facts shown in the following table:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
(1) Gross income derived from persons unrelated to X...........      $20
(2) Gross income derived from persons related to X.............       10
                                                                --------
(3) Actual gross income (line (1) plus line (2))...............       30
(4) Hypothetical gross income derived from division A                   
 (determined by the application of subdivision (i) of this              
 subparagraph).................................................       70
                                                                --------
(5) Total reconstructed gross income (line (3) plus line (4))..      100
                                                                ========
                                                                        

    (b) Since 80 percent of the reconstructed gross income derived by 
division B would be treated as foreign base company shipping income 
under subparagraph (2) of this paragraph, the entire $30 amount of the 
gross income actually derived by division B is treated as foreign base 
company shipping income under subparagraph (4) of this paragraph.

    (6) Arm's length charge. For purposes of this section, the arm's 
length charge for services performed by a foreign corporation for itself 
shall be determined by applying the principles of section 482 and the 
regulations thereunder as if the party for whom the services are 
performed and the party by whom the services are performed were not the 
same person, but were controlled taxpayers within the meaning of 
Sec. 1.482-1(a)(4).

[[Page 299]]

    (7) Illustrations. The application of this paragraph may be 
illustrated by the following examples:

    Example 1. Controlled foreign corporation A acts as a managing agent 
for foreign corporation B, a related person which contracts to construct 
and charter a foreign flag vessel for use in foreign commerce. As 
managing agent for B, A performs a broad range of services relating to 
the use of the vessel, including arranging for, and supervising of, 
construction and chartering of the vessel, and handling of operating 
services after construction is completed. The income derived by A from 
its management and operating services constitutes income derived in 
connection with the performance of services directly related to the use 
of the vessel in foreign commerce.
    Example 2. Controlled foreign corporation C uses the calendar year 
as the taxable year. During 1976, C is engaged in the trade or business 
of acting as a steamship agent solely for unrelated persons. C's 
activities as steamship agent range from ``husbanding'' (i.e., arranging 
for fuel, supplies and port services, and attending to crew and customs 
matters) to the solicitation and booking of cargo at a number of foreign 
ports. None of C's other gross income for 1976 is foreign base company 
shipping income. Under these circumstances, C's gross income derived 
from its steamship agency does not constitute foreign base company 
shipping income.

    (e) Incidental income--(1) In general. Foreign base company shipping 
income includes all incidental income derived by a foreign corporation 
in the course of its active conduct of foreign base company shipping 
operations.
    (2) Examples. Examples of incidental income derived in the course of 
the active conduct of foreign base company shipping operations include--
    (i) Gain from the sale, exchange or other disposition of assets 
which are related shipping assets within the meaning of Sec. 1.955A-
2(b),
    (ii) Income derived from temporary investments described in 
Sec. 1.955A-2(b)(2)(i) and (iii),
    (iii) Interest on accounts receivable and evidences of indebtedness 
described in Sec. 1.955A-2(b)(2)(ii),
    (iv) Income derived from granting concessions to others aboard 
aircraft or vessels used in foreign commerce,
    (v) Income derived from stock and currency futures described in 
Sec. 1.955A-2(b)(2)(vii) and (viii),
    (vi) Income derived by the lessor of an aircraft or vessel used in 
foreign commerce from additional rentals for the use of related 
equipment (such as a complement of containers), and
    (vii) Interest derived by the seller from a purchase money mortgage 
loan in respect of the sale of an aircraft or vessel described in 
Sec. 1.955A-2(a)(1)(i).
    (f) Certain dividends, interest, and gain--(1) In general. (i) The 
foreign base company shipping income of a controlled foreign corporation 
(referred to in subdivision (ii)(A) of this paragraph (f)(1) as ``first 
corporation'') includes--
    (A) Dividends and interest received from foreign corporations listed 
in subdivision (ii) of this paragraph (f)(1), and
    (B) Gain recognized from the sale, exchange, or other disposition of 
stock or obligations of foreign corporations listed in subdivision (ii) 
of this paragraph (f)(1),

but only to the extent that such dividends, interest, and gains are 
attributable to foreign base company shipping income of the foreign 
corporations listed in subdivision (ii) of this paragraph (f)(1).
    (ii) The foreign corporations referred to in subdivision (i) of this 
paragraph (f)(1) are--
    (A) Foreign corporations with respect to which the first corporation 
(see subdivision (i) of this paragraph (f)(1)) would be deemed under 
section 902(b) to pay taxes,
    (B) Controlled foreign corporations which are related persons 
(within the meaning of section 954(d)(3)), and
    (C) Less developed country shipping companies described in 
Sec. 1.955-5(b).
    (2) Corporation deemed to pay taxes. (i) For purposes of this 
paragraph, a controlled foreign corporation would be deemed under 
section 902(b) to pay taxes in respect of any other foreign corporation 
if such controlled foreign corporation would be deemed, for purposes of 
applying section 902(a) to any United States shareholder of such 
controlled foreign corporation, to pay taxes in respect of dividends 
which were received from such other foreign corporation (whether or not 
such other foreign corporation actually pays any taxes or dividends). 
Solely for purposes of this subdivision, each United States

[[Page 300]]

shareholder (within the meaning of section 951(b)) shall be deemed to be 
a domestic corporation.
    (ii) The application of subdivision (i) of this subparagraph may be 
illustrated by the following examples:

    Example 1. Domestic corporation M owns 100 percent of the one class 
of stock of controlled foreign corporation X, which in turn owns 40 
percent of the one class of stock of foreign corporation Y. Y is not a 
controlled foreign corporation. For purposes of subdivision (1) of this 
subparagraph, X is deemed to pay taxes in respect of Y.
    Example 2. The facts are the same as in example 1, except that 
United States shareholder A, an individual, owns 80 percent of the stock 
of corporation X, and United States shareholders B and C, parent and 
child, own the other 20 percent in equal shares. For purposes of 
applying this paragraph to all three United States shareholders (A, B, 
and C), X is deemed to pay taxes in respect of Y.

    (3) Obligation defined. For purposes of this section, the term 
``obligation'' means any bond, note, debenture, certificate, or other 
evidence of indebtedness, and a debt recorded in the books of account of 
both the creditor and the debtor. In the absence of legal, governmental, 
or business reasons to the contrary, the indebtedness must bear interest 
or be issued at a discount.
    (4) Dividends. (i) For purposes of this paragraph and Sec. 1.954-
1(b)(2), the portion of a dividend which is attributable to foreign base 
company shipping income is that amount which bears the same ratio to the 
total dividend received as the earnings and profits out of which such 
dividend is paid that are attributable to foreign base company shipping 
income bears to the total earnings and profits out of which such 
dividend is paid. For purposes of this subdivision, the source of the 
earnings and profits out of which a distribution is made shall be 
determined under section 316(a), except that the source of the earnings 
and profits out of which a distribution is made by a controlled foreign 
corporation with respect to stock owned (within the meaning of section 
958(a)) by a United States shareholder of such controlled foreign 
corporation shall be determined under Sec. 1.959-3.
    (ii) The application of this subparagraph may be illustrated by the 
following examples:

    Example 1. Domestic corporation M owns 100 percent of the one class 
of stock of controlled foreign corporation X, which in turn owns 40 
percent of the one class of stock of foreign corporation Y. Y, which is 
not (and has not been) either a controlled foreign corporation or a less 
developed country shipping company, makes a distribution of $100 to X. 
Under section 316(a), such distribution is made out of Y's earnings and 
profits for 1978. Sixty percent of Y's earnings and profits for 1978 are 
attributable to foreign base company shipping income. As a result, $60 
of the $100 distribution constitutes foreign base company shipping 
income to X under subdivision (i) of this subparagraph.
    Example 2. The facts are the same as in example 1, except that under 
section 316(a) $20 of the $100 dividend is paid out of Y's earnings and 
profits for 1979, and the other $80 is paid out of Y's earnings and 
profits for 1978. Thirty percent of Y's earnings and profits for 1979 
are attributable to foreign base company shipping income. Since 60 
percent of Y's earnings and profits for 1978 are also attributable to 
foreign base company shipping income, $54, i.e. (.60 x $80)+(.30 x $20), 
of the $100 distribution constitutes foreign base company shipping 
income to X under subdivision (i) of this subparagraph.
    Example 3. The facts are the same as in example 1 except that under 
section 316(a) the $100 dividend is made out of Y's earnings and profits 
for 1972. Since under paragraph (a)(2)(ii) of this section foreign base 
company shipping income does not include amounts earned by a foreign 
corporation (not a less developed country shipping company) in a taxable 
year beginning before January 1, 1978, no amount of such $100 
distribution constitutes foreign base company shipping income to X under 
subdivision (i) of this subparagraph.
    Example 4. Domestic corporation N owns 100 percent of the one class 
of stock of controlled foreign corporation S, which in turn owns 100 
percent of the one class of stock of controlled foreign corporation T. T 
makes a distribution of $100 to S, of which $80 is allocable under 
Sec. 1.959-3 to earnings and profits for 1977 which are described in 
Sec. 1.959-3(b)(2), and $20 is allocable to earnings and profits for 
1978 which are described in Sec. 1.959-3(b)(3). The $80 amount is 
excluded from S's gross income under section 959(b) and therefore is not 
included in S's foreign base company shipping income. One hundred 
percent of T's earnings and profits for 1978 described in Sec. 1.959-
3(b)(3) were attributable to reinvested foreign base company shipping 
income. As a result, the entire $20 amount is included in S's foreign 
base company shipping income under this paragraph. See Sec. 1.954-
1(b)(2) for

[[Page 301]]

the rule that such $20 amount may be excluded from the foreign base 
company income of S.

    (5) Interest and gain. (i) Except as provided in subdivisions (ii) 
and (iii) of this subparagraph, the portion of any interest paid by a 
foreign corporation, or gain recognized from the sale, exchange, or 
other disposition of stock or obligations of a foreign corporation, 
which is attributable to the foreign base company shipping income of 
such foreign corporation is that amount which bears the same ratio to 
such interest or gain as the foreign base company shipping income of 
such corporation for the period described in subparagraph (6) of this 
paragraph bears to its gross income for such period.
    (ii) Interest which is paid by a controlled foreign corporation is 
attributable to such corporation's foreign base company shipping income 
to the same extent that such interest is allocable (under the principles 
of Sec. 1.954-1(c)) to its foreign base company shipping income.
    (iii) If interest is paid by a foreign corporation, or if stock 
obligations of a foreign corporation are sold, exchanged, or otherwise 
disposed of, during a taxable year of such foreign corporation beginning 
before January 1, 1976, then no portion of such interest or gain is 
attributable to foreign base company shipping income.
    (iv) Solely for purposes of subdivision (i) of this subparagraph, if 
a controlled foreign corporation (the ``first corporation'') owns more 
than 10 percent of the stock of another controlled foreign corporation 
(the ``second corporation''), then
    (A) The gross income of the first corporation for any taxable year 
shall be--
    (1) Increased by its pro rata share of the gross income of the 
second corporation for the taxable year which ends with or within such 
taxable year of the first corporation, and
    (2) Decreased by the amount of any dividends received from the 
second corporation; and
    (B) The foreign base company shipping income of the first 
corporation for any taxable year shall be--
    (1) Increased by its pro rata share of the foreign base company 
shipping income of the second corporation for the taxable year which 
ends with or within such taxable year of the first corporation, and
    (2) Decreased by the amount of any dividends received from the 
second corporation which constitute foreign base company income.
    (v) Solely for purposes of applying subdivision (i) of this 
subparagraph, the district director shall make such other adjustments to 
the gross income and the foreign base company shipping income of any 
foreign corporation as are necessary to properly determine the extent to 
which any interest or gain is attributable to foreign base company 
shipping income, including proper adjustments to reflect any transaction 
during the test period described in subparagraph (6) of this paragraph 
to which section 332, 351, 354, 355, 356, or 361 applies.
    (6) Test period. (i) Except as provided in subdivisions (ii) and 
(iii) of this subparagraph the period described in this subparagraph 
with respect to any foreign corporation is the 3-year period ending with 
the close of such corporation's taxable year preceding the year during 
which interest was paid or stock or obligations were sold, exchanged, or 
otherwise disposed of, or such part of such period as such corporation 
was in existence.
    (ii) The period described in this paragraph shall not include any 
part of a taxable year beginning before January 1, 1976.
    (iii) If interest is paid by a foreign corporation, or if stock or 
obligations of a foreign corporation are sold, exchanged, or otherwise 
disposed of during its first taxable year, then the period described in 
this paragraph shall be such first taxable year.
    (iv) For purposes of subdivision (iii) of this subparagraph, the 
first taxable year of a foreign corporation is the later of--
    (A) The first taxable year of its existence, or
    (B) Its first taxable year beginning after December 31, 1975.
    (g) Income from partnerships, trusts, etc.--(1) In general. The 
foreign base company shipping income of any foreign corporation 
includes--
    (i) Its distributive share of the gross income of any partnership, 
and

[[Page 302]]

    (ii) Any amounts includible in its gross income under section 
652(a), 662(a), 671, or 691(a),

to the extent that such items would have been includible in its foreign 
base company shipping income had they been realized by it directly.
    (2) Illustrations. The application of subparagraph (1) of this 
paragraph may be illustrated by the following examples:

    Example 1. Controlled foreign corporations X and Y are equal 
partners in partnership P. The taxable years end on December 31 for X, 
June 30 for Y, and March 31 for P. In the fiscal year ending March 31, 
1976, P's sole business activity is the use of a vessel in foreign 
commerce. P derives gross income of $200 from the use of the vessel, and 
incurs expenses, taxes, and other deductions of $160. Assume X's 
distributive share of such
$200 of P's gross income is $100, all of which is includible in X's 
gross income. If X had realized its distributive share of $100 directly, 
then the amount which would have been includible in X's foreign base 
company shipping income under this paragraph is the portion allocable to 
the months of January, February, and March of 1976. Such amount, $25 
(i.e., \1/2\  x  $200  x  3 months/12 months), is included in X's 
foreign base company shipping income for its taxable year ending 
December 31, 1976. Similarly, X is entitled under this paragraph to a 
deduction from foreign base company shipping income of $20 (i.e., \1/2\ 
x  $160  x  3 months/12 months). Since foreign base company shipping 
income does not include amounts earned by a foreign corporation (not a 
less developed country shipping corporation) in a taxable year beginning 
before January 1, 1976, Y has no foreign base company shipping income 
(under this paragraph or otherwise) for its taxable year beginning on 
July 1, 1975.
    Example 2. The facts are the same as in example 1, except that P 
incurs expenses, taxes, and deductions of $240 in its taxable year 
ending on March 31, 1976. Accordingly, $25 is includible in X's foreign 
base company shipping income, and the amount deductible therefrom under 
this paragraph is $30 (i.e., \1/2\  x  $240  x  3 months/12 months).

    (3) Other income. Except as expressly provided in subparagraph (1) 
of this paragraph, foreign base company shipping income does not include 
any amount includible in the gross income of a controlled foreign 
corporation under part I of subchapter J (section 641 and following, 
relating to estates, trusts, and beneficiaries), and gains from the sale 
or other disposition of any interest in an estate or trust.
    (h) Additional rules--(1) Gross income. For purposes of this section 
and Sec. 1.955A-2, the gross income of a foreign corporation (whether or 
not a controlled foreign corporation) shall be determined in accordance 
with the provisions of section 952 and Sec. 1.952-2. Thus, for example, 
section 883 (relating to exclusions from gross income of foreign 
corporations) is inapplicable under Sec. 1.952-2 (a)(1) and (c)(1). In 
addition, the gross income of a controlled foreign corporation shall be 
determined, with respect to a United States shareholder of such 
controlled foreign corporation, by excluding distributions received by 
such corporation which are excluded from gross income under section 
959(b) with respect to such shareholder.
    (2) Earnings and profits. For purposes of this section, the earnings 
and profits of a foreign corporation (whether or not a controlled 
foreign corporation) shall be determined in accordance with the 
provisions of section 964 and the regulations thereunder.
    (3) No double counting. No item of gross income shall be counted as 
foreign base company shipping income under more than one provision of 
this section. For example, If $200 of gross income derived from the use 
of a lighter is treated as foreign base company shipping income under 
both paragraphs (b)(1)(i) and (ii) of this section, then such $200 is 
counted only once as foreign base company shipping income. A taxpayer 
may choose under which provision to include an item of income.
    (4) Losses. (i) Generally, if a controlled foreign corporation has 
losses which are properly allocable to foreign base company shipping 
income, the extent to which such losses are deductible from such income 
shall be determined by treating such foreign corporation as a domestic 
corporation and applying the principles of section 63. See Secs. 1.954-
1(c) and 1.952-2(b). Thus for example, losses from sales or exchanges of 
capital assets are allowable only to the extent of gains from such sales 
or exchanges.
    (ii) If gain from the sale, exchange, or other disposition of any 
stock or obligation would be treated (to any extent)

[[Page 303]]

as foreign base company shipping income, then loss from such sale, 
exchange, or other disposition is properly allocable to foreign base 
company shipping income (to the same extent).
    (iii) In determining the extent to which any loss on the disposition 
of a qualified investment in foreign base company shipping operations is 
deductible from foreign base company shipping income, it is immaterial 
that such loss is taken into account under Sec. 1.955A-1(b)(1)(ii) as a 
reduction in the amount of the decrease in (withdrawal from) qualified 
investments in foreign base company shipping operations.
    (5) Hypothetical charges. Under paragraph (d)(5)(i) of this section 
and Sec. 1.955A-2(a)(4)(ii)(A), gross income may be deemed to include 
hypothetical arm's length charges for services performed by a controlled 
foreign corporation for itself. Under paragraph (d)(2) of this section, 
certain of these hypothetical charges may be treated as foreign based 
company shipping income. Such hypothetical charges are deemed to be 
income solely for purposes of applying the ``extent of use'' tests 
prescribed by paragraph (d)(4) of this section and Sec. 1.955A-2(a)(4). 
Charges for services performed by a controlled foreign corporation for 
itself shall in no event be included in income for any other purposes.

[T.D. 7894, 48 FR 22523, May 19, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 1.954-7  Increase in qualified investments in foreign base company shipping operations.

    (a) Determination of investments at close of taxable year--(1) In 
general. Under section 954(g), the increase in qualified investments in 
foreign base company shipping operations, for purposes of section 
954(b)(2) and paragraph (b)(1) of Sec. 1.954-1, of any controlled 
foreign corporation for any taxable year is, except as provided in 
paragraph (b) of this section, the amount by which--
    (i) The controlled foreign corporation's qualified investments in 
foreign base company shipping operations at the close of the taxable 
year, exceed
    (ii) Its qualified investments in foreign base company shipping 
operations at the close of the preceding taxable year.
    (2) Preceding taxable year. For purposes of this section, a taxable 
year which begins before January 1, 1976, may be a preceding taxable 
year.
    (3) Cross-reference. See section 955 (b) and Sec. 1.955A-2 for the 
definition of the term ``qualified investments in foreign base company 
shipping operations''.
    (b) Election to determine investments at close of following taxable 
year--(1) General rule. In lieu of determining an increase in qualified 
investments in foreign base company shipping operations for a taxable 
year in the manner provided in paragraph (a) of this section, a United 
States shareholder of a controlled foreign corporation may make an 
election under section 955(b)(3) to determine the increase for the 
corporation's taxable year by ascertaining the amount by which--
    (i) Such corporation's qualified investments in foreign base company 
shipping operations at the close of the taxable year immediately 
following such taxable year, exceed
    (ii) Its qualified investments in foreign base company shipping 
operations at the close of the taxable year immediately preceding such 
following taxable year.
    (2) Election with respect to first taxable year. Notwithstanding 
subparagraph (1) of this paragraph, if an election is made without 
consent by a United States shareholder under Sec. 1.955A-4 (b)(1) with 
respect to a controlled foreign corporation, the increase in such 
controlled foreign corporation's qualified investments in foreign base 
company shipping operations for the first taxable year to which such 
election applies shall be the amount by which--
    (i) Such corporation's qualified investments in foreign base company 
shipping operations at the close of the taxable year immediately 
following such first taxable year, exceed
    (ii) Its qualified investments in foreign base company shipping 
operations at the close of the taxable year immediately preceding such 
first taxable year.
    (3) Manner of making election. For the manner of making an election 
under section 955(b)(3), and for rules pertaining to the revocation of 
such an election, see Sec. 1.955A-4.

[[Page 304]]

    (4) Coordination with prior law. If a United States shareholder 
makes an election without consent under Sec. 1.955A-4(b)(1) with respect 
to a controlled foreign corporation, then such corporation's increase in 
qualified investments in foreign base company shipping operations for 
the first taxable year to which such election applies shall be 
determined by disregarding any change which occurs during such taxable 
year in the amount of such corporation's investments in stock or 
obligations of a less developed country shipping company described in 
Sec. 1.955-5 (b) if both of the following conditions exist:
    (i) Such taxable year is the first taxable year of such corporation 
which begins after December 31, 1975, and
    (ii) Such United States shareholder has elected to determine the 
change in such corporation's qualified investments in less developed 
countries for its last taxable year beginning before January 1, 1976, 
under Sec. 1.954-5(b) or Sec. 1.955-3.
    (5) Illustrations. The application of this paragraph may be 
illustrated by the following examples:

    Example 1. (a) Controlled foreign corporation X is a wholly owned 
subsidiary of domestic corporation M. X uses the calendar year as the 
taxable year. The amounts of X's qualified investments in foreign base 
company shipping operations at the close of 1975 through 1979 are as 
follows:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
Qualified investments at December 31, 1975.................      $16,000
Qualified investments at December 31, 1976.................       17,000
Qualified investments at December 31, 1977.................       23,000
Qualified investments at December 31, 1978.................       28,000
Qualified investments at December 31, 1979.................       30,000
                                                                        

    (b) Assume that M properly files without consent a timely election 
under Sec. 1.955A-4(b)(1) to determine X's increase for 1976 in 
qualified investments in foreign base company shipping operations 
pursuant to this paragraph, and that the election remains in force 
through 1978. Then X's increases for 1976 through 1978 in qualified 
investments in foreign base company shipping operations are as follows:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
Increase for 1976 ($23,000 minus $16,000).....................    $7,000
Increase for 1977 ($28,000 minus $23,000).....................     5,000
Increase for 1978 ($30,000 minus $28,000).....................     2,000
                                                                        

    Example 2. Assume the same facts as in example 1, except that M 
never files an election under Sec. 1.955A-4(b)(1). X's increases for 
1976 through 1978 in qualified investments in foreign base company 
shipping operations are as follows:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
Increase for 1976 ($17,000 minus $16,000).....................    $1,000
Increase for 1977 ($23,000 minus $17,000).....................     6,000
Increase for 1978 ($28,000 minus $23,000).....................     5,000
                                                                        

    Example 3. The facts are the same as in example 1, except that X's 
qualified investments in foreign base company shipping operations 
include an investment in less developed country shipping companies 
described in Sec. 1.955-5(b) of $500 on December 31, 1975, and $750 on 
December 31, 1976. Assume further that M has made an election under 
section 955(b)(3) (as in effect before the enactment of the Tax 
Reduction Act of 1975) with respect to X's taxable year 1975. Then X's 
increase in qualified investments in foreign base company shipping 
operations for 1976 is $6,750 (i.e., $7,000-$250).

    (c) Illustration. The application of this section may be illustrated 
by the following example:

    Example. (a) Controlled foreign corporation X uses the calendar year 
as the taxable year. On December 31, 1975, X's qualified investments in 
foreign base company shipping operations (determined as provided in 
Sec. 1.955A-2(g)) consist of the following amounts:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
Cash.........................................................     $6,000
Readily marketable securities................................      1,000
Stock of related controlled foreign corporations.............      4,000
Traffic and other receivables................................     14,000
Marine insurance claims receivables..........................      1,000
Foreign income tax refunds receivable........................      1,000
Prepaid shipping expenses and shipping inventories ashore....      1,000
Vessel construction funds....................................          0
Vessels......................................................    123,000
Vessel plans and construction in progress....................      3,000
Containers and chassis.......................................          0
Terminal property and equipment..............................      2,000
Shipping office (land and building)..........................      1,000
Vessel spare parts ashore....................................      1,000
Performance deposits.........................................      2,000
Deferred charges.............................................      2,000
Stock of less developed country shipping company described in           
 Sec.  1-955-5(b) ...........................................     10,000
                                                              ----------
                                                                 172,000
                                                              ==========
                                                                        


[[Page 305]]

    (b) On December 31, 1976, X's qualified investments in foreign base 
company shipping operations (determined as provided in Sec. 1.955A-2(g)) 
consists of the following amounts:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
Cash.........................................................     $5,000
Readily marketable securities................................      2,000
Stock of related controlled foreign corporations.............      4,000
Traffic and other receivables................................     16,000
Foreign income tax refunds receivable........................      3,000
Prepaid shipping expenses and shipping inventories ashore....      2,000
Vessel construction funds....................................      1,000
Vessels......................................................    117,000
Vessel plans and construction in progress....................     12,000
Containers and chassis.......................................      4,000
Terminal property and equipment..............................      2,000
Shipping office (land and building)..........................      1,000
Vessel spare parts ashore....................................      1,000
Performance deposits.........................................      2,000
Deferred charges.............................................      2,000
Stock of less developed country shipping company described in           
 Sec.  1.955-5(b)............................................          0
                                                              ----------
                                                                 174,000
                                                              ==========
                                                                        

    (c) For 1976, X's increase in qualified investments in foreign base 
company shipping operations is $2,000, which amount is determined as 
follows:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
Qualified investments at Dec. 31, 1976.......................   $174,000
Qualified investments at Dec. 31, 1975.......................    172,000
                                                              ----------
    Increase for 1976........................................      2,000
                                                                        

[T.D. 7894, 48 FR 22528, May 19, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 1.954-8  Foreign base company oil related income.

    (a) Foreign base company oil related income--(1) In general. Under 
section 954(g), the foreign base company oil related income of a 
controlled foreign corporation (except as provided under paragraph (b) 
of this section) consists of the items of foreign oil related income 
(``FORI'') described in section 907(c)(2) and (3), other than such 
income derived from a source within a foreign country in connection 
with--
    (i) Oil or gas which was extracted from an oil or gas well located 
in that foreign country (``extraction exception''), or
    (ii) Oil, gas, or a primary product of oil or gas which is sold by 
the controlled foreign corporation or a related person for use or 
consumption within that country or is loaded in that country on a vessel 
or aircraft as fuel for the vessel or aircraft (``use or consumption 
exception'').

A taxpayer claiming the use or consumption exception must establish its 
applicability on the basis of facts and circumstances. For special rules 
for applying the extraction exception, see paragraph (c) of this 
section.
    (2) Source of income. The source of foreign base company oil related 
income is determined generally under the principles of Secs. 1.861-1 to 
1.863-5. See Sec. 1.863-6. Thus, income from the performance of a 
service generally is sourced in the country where the service is 
performed. See Sec. 1.861-4. Underwriting income from insuring a foreign 
oil related activity is sourced at the location of the risk. See section 
861(a)(7) and Sec. 1.953-2.
    (3) Primary product. The term ``primary product'' of oil or gas has 
the meaning given this term by Sec. 1.907(c)-1(d)(5) and (6).
    (4) Vessel. For the definition of the term ``vessel'', see 
Sec. 1.954-6(b)(3)(ii).
    (5) Foreign country. For purposes of this section, the term 
``foreign country'' has the same meaning as in section 638 (relating to 
continental shelf areas). Thus, for example, oil or gas extracted from a 
sea area will be deemed to be extracted in the country which has 
exclusive rights of exploitation of natural resources with respect to 
that area if the other conditions of section 638 are met.
    (6) Country of use or consumption. For rules for determining the 
country of use or consumption, see Sec. 1.954-3(a)(3)(ii).
    (7) Insurance income. For purposes of this section, income derived 
from or attributable to insurance of section 907(c)(2) activities means 
taxable income as defined in section 832(a) and as modified by the 
principles of Sec. 1.953-4 (other than as the section is applied to life 
insurance).
    (8) Fuel product. For purposes of this section, the term ``fuel 
product'' means oil, gas or a primary product of oil or gas.
    (9) Effective date. The provisions of section 954(g) and this 
section are applicable to taxable years of foreign corporations 
beginning on or after January 1, 1983, and to taxable years of

[[Page 306]]

United States shareholders in which or with which those taxable years of 
foreign corporations end.
    (b) Exemption for small oil producers--(1) In general. Foreign base 
company oil related income does not include any income of a foreign 
corporation which is not a large oil producer.
    (2) Large oil producer. A corporation is a large oil producer 
(within the meaning of section 954(g)(2)) if the average daily 
production (extraction) of foreign crude oil and natural gas by the 
related group which includes the corporation and related persons (within 
the meaning of section 954(d)(3)) for the taxable year or immediately 
preceding taxable year is 1,000 or more barrels. The average daily 
production of foreign crude oil or natural gas for any taxable year (and 
the conversion of cubic feet of natural gas into barrels) is determined 
under rules similar to the rules of section 613A, except that only crude 
oil or natural gas from a well located outside the United States is 
taken into account.
    (c) Special rules for applying the extraction exception of paragraph 
(a)(1)(i) of this section--(1) Refining income described in section 
907(c)(2)(A). With regard to a controlled foreign corporation's refining 
income from the processing of minerals extracted (by the taxpayer or by 
any other person) from oil or gas wells into their primary products, as 
described in section 907(c)(2)(A), a pro rata method will be applied for 
purposes of determining the part of the refining income that qualifies 
for the extraction exception of paragraph (a)(1)(i) of this section. The 
pro rata method will be based on the proportion that the barrels of the 
fuel product extracted in the country of processing bears to the total 
barrels of the fuel product processed in that country and will apply 
regardless of the country of sale of the primary product.
    (2) Marketing income described in section 907(c)(2)(C). With regard 
to a controlled foreign corporation's marketing income from the 
distribution or sale of minerals extracted from oil or gas wells or of 
primary products, as described in section 907(c)(2)(C), a pro rata 
method will be applied for purposes of determining the part of the 
marketing income that qualifies for the extraction exception of 
paragraph (a)(1)(i) of this section. When applying the pro rata method 
to the sale of a fuel product other than a primary product, the pro rata 
method will be based on the proportion that the barrels of the fuel 
product extracted in the country of sale bears to the total barrels of 
the fuel product sold in that country. When applying the pro rata method 
to the sale of primary products, the method will be based on the 
proportion that the barrels of the fuel product extracted in the country 
of sale bears to the total barrels of the fuel product processed. For 
purposes of applying the pro rata method, data of the controlled foreign 
corporation's related group (as defined in section 954(g)(2)(C)) will be 
taken into account. The pro rata method will not apply, however, if the 
mineral or primary product is purchased by the controlled foreign 
corporation from a person not within the controlled foreign 
corporation's related group. In that situation, the marketing income 
will be presumed to qualify for the extraction exception if the country 
of the source of the marketing income is a net exporter of crude oil or 
gas, whichever is relevant. If the country of the source of the 
marketing income is not a net exporter of crude oil or gas, whichever is 
relevant, the marketing income will be presumed not to qualify for the 
extraction exception. The controlled foreign corporation may, however, 
rebut this latter presumption by demonstrating on the basis of all the 
facts and circumstances that its marketing income does qualify for the 
extraction exception. If a primary product that is acquired from a 
person within the controlled foreign corporation's related group is 
commingled with like products acquired from persons not within that 
related group, the pro rata method based on the proportion that the 
barrels of the fuel product extracted in the country of sale bears to 
the total barrels of the fuel product processed will be applied to that 
portion of the total products sold that was purchased from persons 
within the related group, to the extent that that person did not

[[Page 307]]

sell product purchased from an unrelated person, and either the 
presumption or facts and circumstances will determine the 
characterization of the remainder.
    (3) Transportation income described in section 907(c)(2)(B). With 
regard to a controlled foreign corporation's income from the 
transportation of minerals from oil and gas wells or of primary 
products, as described in section 907(c)(2)(B), the rules set forth in 
paragraph (c)(2) of this section will apply for purposes of determining 
the part of the transportation income that qualifies for the extraction 
exception of paragraph (a)(1)(i) of this section.
    (4) Illustrations. The following examples illustrate the application 
of this paragraph.

    Example 1. Controlled foreign corporation M has a refinery in 
foreign country A that refines 250x barrels of oil during its taxable 
year beginning in 1984. It is determined that 125x barrels of its 250x 
barrels were extracted in country A. M sold 150x barrels of its 250x 
barrels in country A for consumption in country A which resulted in 
$225x of income from refining and $225x of marketing income, as 
described in section 907(c)(2)(C). M also sold within foreign country B, 
for consumption in country B, 100x barrels of its 250x barrels which 
resulted in an additional $150x of income from refining for M and $170x 
of marketing income for M. The 100x barrels sold by M within country B, 
a contiguous country, were transported from M's refinery in country A to 
country B by a pipeline which is owned by M, and M recognized a total of 
$10x of income from the transportation of the 100x barrels. Of this 
$10x, $8x was recognized in country A and $2x was recognized in country 
B. Under the source of income rules of paragraph (a)(2) of this section, 
income from refining is considered derived from the country in which the 
refining occurs and not from the country where the sale of the refined 
product occurs.
    (i) M's refining income. M has $75x of foreign base company oil 
related income with respect to its refining of the 250x barrels, 
determined as follows:
(A) Total amount of income from refining attributable to oil refined in 
country A by M.....................................................$375x
(B) Amount of income from refining with respect to oil sold for 
consumption ($225x) in country A (use or consumption exception under 
paragraph (a)(1)(ii) of this section..............................(225x)
(C) Pro rate amount of income from refining attributable to sales in 
country B considered extracted from country A ($150x times 125x barrels/
250x barrels) (extraction exception under paragraph (a)(1)(i) of this 
section..........................................................(75x)..
(D) Foreign base company oil related income.......................$75x..
    (ii) M's marketing income. M does not have foreign base company oil 
related income with respect to its sale of the 100x barrels in country B 
and 150x barrels in country A because the $170x and $225x, respectively, 
of marketing income was derived from the country in which the oil was 
sold for consumption (an exception under paragraph (a)(1)(ii) of this 
section).
    (iii) M's transportation income. M does not have foreign base 
company oil related income with respect to its $2x of pipeline 
transportation income recognized in country B because the income was 
derived from the country in which the 100x barrels were sold for 
consumption, an exception under paragraph (a)(1)(ii) of this section. 
With regard to the $8x of pipeline transportation income recognized in 
country A, however, M has $4x of foreign base company oil related income 
since of the total barrels refined in country A (250x) only one-half 
were extracted in that country. Therefore, only one-half of the 
transportation income qualifies for the extraction exception of 
paragraph (a)(1)(i) of this section.
    (iv) M's extraction income. M does not have foreign base company oil 
related income for its extraction activity because extraction income is 
excluded in all events. See section 954(g)(1)(A).
    Example 2. Assume the same facts as in Example 1 except that M sold 
all of the 250x barrels of refined oil in country A. In addition, assume 
that country A is a net exporter of crude oil. As in Example 1, M sold 
150x barrels for consumption in country A with the same resulting 
income. M sold in country A the remaining 100x barrels to unrelated 
controlled foreign corporation N which resulted in an additional $150x 
of income from refining for M and $170x of marketing income for M. N 
immediately resold in country A for export those 100x barrels. N did not 
commingle the 100x barrels with any other refined oil. N earned $10x of 
marketing income on that sale.
    (i) M's refining income. M has $75x foreign base company oil related 
income with respect to its refining of the 250x barrels determined as 
follows:
(A) Total amount of income from refining attributable to oil refined in 
country A by M.....................................................$375x
(B) Amount of income from refining with respect to oil sold for 
consumption ($225x) in country A (use or consumption exception under 
paragraph (a)(1)(ii) of this section).............................(225x)
(C) Pro rata amount of income from

[[Page 308]]

refining attributable to sales in country A (for consumption outside of 
country A) considered extracted from country A ($150x times 125x 
barrels/250x barrels) (extraction exception under paragraph (a)(1)(i) of 
this section).....................................................(75x).
(D) Foreign base company oil related income........................$75x.
    (ii) M's marketing income. M does not have foreign base company oil 
related income with respect to its marketing income from the sale of the 
150x barrels in country A because the $225x of marketing income was 
derived from the country in which the oil was sold for consumption (an 
exception under paragraph (a)(1)(ii) of this section). M has $85x of 
foreign base company oil related income with respect to its marketing 
income from sale to N of the 100x barrels, determined as follows:
(A) Total amount of marketing income from the sale.................$170x
(B) Pro rata amount of marketing income attributable to oil product 
considered extracted in country A ($170x times 125x barrels/250x 
barrels) (extraction exception under paragraph (a)(1)(i) of this 
section)..........................................................(85x).
(C) Foreign base company oil related income........................$85x.
    (iii) N's marketing income. N is not related to M. Therefore, since 
N sold the 100x barrels in country A, a net exporter of crude oil, and 
since N did not commingle the 100x barrels with other refined products, 
it is presumed that all of the 100x barrels were extracted in country A. 
Accordingly, all of N's $10x of marketing income is excepted under 
paragraph (a)(1)(i) of this section.
    Example 3. Assume the same facts as in Example 2 except that N is 
related to M. Characterization of M's income remains the same as in 
Example 2. N will have, however, $5x of foreign base company oil related 
income with regard to its marketing income, determined as follows:
(i) Total amount of marketing income from the sale..................$10x
(ii) Pro rata amount of marketing income considered extracted from 
country A ($10x times 125x barrels/250x barrels) (extraction exception 
under paragraph (a)(1)(i) of this section)...........................5x.
(iii) Foreign base company oil related income.......................$5x.
    Example 4. Assume that controlled foreign corporation M has a 
refinery in foreign country A that refines 200x barrels of oil during 
its taxable year beginning in 1984. It is determined that 100x barrels 
of that oil were extracted in country A and that the other 100x barrels 
were extracted in country B. Neither country A nor country B is a net 
exporter of crude oil. In addition, M purchased from an unrelated 
country A refiner 100x barrels of already refined oil. M does not know 
where this oil was extracted. These 100x barrels of purchased refined 
oil were commingled with the 200x barrels of refined oil from M's 
refinery. M sold 225x barrels of refined oil in country A for 
consumption in country A which resulted in $250x of income from refining 
and $225x of marketing income. M sold within foreign country B for 
consumption outside of country B 75x barrels of refined oil which 
resulted in $100x of income from refining and $75x of marketing income. 
The refined product was transported between country A and country B by 
an unrelated person.
    (i) M's refining income. With regard to the sales in country A, M 
has $50x of foreign base company oil related income with respect to its 
refining of the 100x barrels, determined as follows:
(A) Total amount of income from refining attributable to oil refined in 
country A by M.....................................................$350x
(B) Amount of income from refining with respect to oil sold for 
consumption in country A ($250x) (use or consumption exception under 
paragraph (a)(1)(ii) of this section).............................(250x)
(C) Pro rata amount of income from refining attributable to sales in 
country B considered extracted from country A ($100x times 100x barrels/
200x barrels) (extraction exception under paragraph (a)(1)(i) of this 
section)..........................................................(50x).
(D) Foreign base company oil related income........................$50x.
    (ii) M's marketing income. Since the barrels from M's refinery and 
those that M purchased were commingled, a portion, as follows, of the 
marketing income is deemed to derive from both purchased and refined 
products. Since M refined 200x barrels and purchased 100x barrels, its 
marketing income of $225x from the sale of the 225x barrels in country A 
for consumption in country A will be deemed to consist of $150x (200x/
300x  x  $225x) from the sale of products refined by M and $75x (100x/
300x  x  $225x) from the sale of purchased products. Likewise, its 
marketing income of $75x from the sale of the 75x barrels in country B 
for consumption outside of country B will be deemed to consist of $50x 
(200x/300x  x  $75x) from the sale of products refined by M and $25x 
(100x/300x  x  $75x) from the sale of purchased products.
    (A) Purchased products. M is considered as having $75x of marketing 
income from the sale of purchased products in country A for consumption 
in country A. None of this marketing income is foreign base company oil 
related income since the marketing income is earned in country A, the 
country of consumption. See paragraph (a)(1)(ii) of this section. All of 
the $25x of M's marketing income

[[Page 309]]

from the sale of purchased products in country B will be foreign base 
company oil related income. The exception at paragraph (a)(1)(ii) of 
this section does not apply since the refined oil is not sold for use or 
consumption in country B. Likewise, the extraction exception under 
paragraph (a)(1)(i) of this section does not apply. The purchased 
product cannot be presumed to be extracted in country B since country B 
is not a net exporter of crude oil. In addition, M cannot show, on a 
facts and circumstances basis, that purchased products were refined from 
crude oil extracted in country B.
    (B) Products refined by M. With regard to M's marketing income 
attributable to the sale of products refined by M, M does not have any 
foreign base company oil related income with regard to its $150x of 
marketing income in country A since that income was derived from the 
country in which the oil was sold for consumption (the use or 
consumption exception under paragraph (a)(1)(ii) of this section). M has 
$25x of foreign base company oil related income with regard to its $50x 
of marketing income in country B determined as follows:
(1) Total amount of income from marketing attributable to oil refined by 
M and sold in country B.............................................$50x
(2) Pro rata amount of income from marketing attributable to sales in 
country B considered extracted from country B ($50x times 100x barrels/
200x barrels) (extraction exception under paragraph (a)(1)(i) of this 
section)..........................................................(25x).
(3) Foreign base company oil related income........................$25x.

[T.D. 8331, 56 FR 2847, Jan. 25, 1991; 56 FR 11511, Mar. 19, 1991]


<R05>
Sec. 1.955-0  Effective dates.

    (a) Section 955 as in effect before the enactment of the Tax 
Reduction Act of 1975--(1) In general. In general, Secs. 1.955-1 through 
1.955-6 are applicable with respect to withdrawals of previously 
excluded subpart F income from qualified investment in less developed 
countries for taxable years of foreign corporations beginning after 
December 31, 1962, and to taxable years of United States shareholders 
(as defined in section 951(b)) within which or with which such taxable 
years of such foreign corporations end. However, such sections are 
effective with respect to withdrawals of amounts invested in less 
developed country shipping companies described in section 955(c)(2) (as 
in effect before the enactment of the Tax Reduction Act of 1975) only 
for taxable years of foreign corporations beginning before January 1, 
1976, and for taxable years of United States shareholders (as defined in 
section 951(b)) within which or with which such taxable years of such 
foreign corporations end. For rules applicable to withdrawals of amounts 
invested in less developed country shipping companies described in 
section 955(c)(2) (as in effect before such enactment), in taxable years 
of foreign corporations beginning after December 31, 1975, see section 
955(b)(5) (as amended by such Act) and Secs. 1.955A-1 through 1.955A-4.
    (2) References. Except as otherwise provided therein, all references 
contained in Secs. 1.955-1 through 1.955-6 to section 954 or 955 or to 
the regulations under section 954 are to those sections and regulations 
as in effect before the enactment of the Tax Reduction Act of 1975. For 
regulations under section 954 (as in effect before such enactment), see 
26 CFR Sec. 1.954-1 through 1.954-5 (Revised as of April 1, 1975). For 
taxable years of foreign corporations beginning after December 31, 1975, 
and for taxable years of United States shareholders (as described in 
section 951(b)) within which or with which such taxable years of such 
foreign corporations end, the definitions of less developed countries 
and less developed country corporations contained in section 902(d) (as 
amended by such Act) and Sec. 1.902-2 apply for purposes of determining 
the credit for corporate stockholders in foreign corporations under 
section 902.
    (b) Section 955 as amended by the Tax Reduction Act of 1975. Except 
as otherwise provided therein, Secs. 1.955A-1 through 1.955A-4 are 
applicable to taxable years of foreign corporations beginning after 
December 31, 1975, and to taxable years of United States shareholders 
(as defined in section 951(b)) within which or with which such taxable 
years of such foreign corporations end.

[T.D. 7893, 48 FR 22508, May 19, 1983, as amended by T.D. 7894, 48 FR 
22529, May 19, 1983]

[[Page 310]]


<R05>
Sec. 1.955-1  Shareholder's pro rata share of amount of previously excluded subpart F income withdrawn from investment in less developed countries.

    (a) In general. Pursuant to section 951(a)(1)(A)(ii) and the 
regulations thereunder, a United States shareholder of a controlled 
foreign corporation must include in its gross income its pro rata share 
(as determined in accordance with paragraph (c) of this section) of the 
amount of such controlled foreign corporation's previously excluded 
subpart F income which is withdrawn for any taxable year from investment 
in less developed countries. Section 955 provides rules for determining 
the amount of a controlled foreign corporation's previously excluded 
subpart F income for any taxable year of the corporation beginning after 
December 31, 1962, that is withdrawn from investment in less developed 
countries for any taxable year of the corporation beginning before 
January 1, 1976. Except for investment in less developed country 
shipping companies, section 955 also provides rules for determining the 
amount of a controlled foreign corporation's previously excluded subpart 
F income for any taxable year of the corporation beginning after 
December 31, 1962, which is withdrawn from investment in less developed 
countries in taxable years of the corporation beginning after December 
31, 1975. To determine the amount of a controlled foreign corporation's 
previously excluded subpart F income withdrawn from investment in less 
developed country shipping companies described in section 955(c)(2) in 
taxable years of a controlled foreign corporation beginning after 
December 31, 1975, see section 955(b)(5) (as in effect after amendment 
by the Tax Reduction Act of 1975) and Secs. 1.955A-1 through 1.955A-4. 
For effective dates, see Sec. 1.955-0.
    (b) Amount withdrawn by controlled foreign corporation--(1) In 
general. For purposes of sections 951 through 964, the amount of a 
controlled foreign corporation's previously excluded subpart F income 
which is withdrawn for any taxable year from investment in less 
developed countries is an amount equal to the decrease for such year in 
such corporation's qualified investments in less developed countries. 
Such decrease is, except as provided in Sec. 1.955-3--
    (i) An amount equal to the excess of the amount of its qualified 
investments in less developed countries at the close of the preceding 
taxable year over the amount of its qualified investments in less 
developed countries at the close of the taxable year, minus
    (ii) The amount (if any) by which recognized losses on sales or 
exchanges by such corporation during the taxable year of qualified 
investments in less developed countries exceed its recognized gains on 
sales or exchanges during such year of qualified investments in less 
developed countries,

but only to the extent that the net amount so determined does not exceed 
the limitation determined under subparagraph (2) of this paragraph. See 
Sec. 1.955-2 for determining the amount of qualified investments in less 
developed countries.
    (2) Limitations applicable in determining decreases--(i) General. 
The limitation referred to in subparagraph (1) of this paragraph for any 
taxable year of a controlled foreign corporation shall be the lesser of 
the following two limitations:
    (a) The sum of the controlled foreign corporation's earnings and 
profits (or deficit in earnings and profits) for the taxable year, 
computed as of the close of the taxable year without diminution by 
reason of any distributions made during the taxable year, plus the sum 
of its earnings and profits (or deficits in earnings and profits) 
accumulated for prior taxable years beginning after December 31, 1962, 
(including prior taxable years beginning after December 31, 1975) or,
    (b) The sum of the amounts excluded under section 954(b)(1) and 
paragraph (b)(1) of Sec. 1.954-1 from the foreign base company income of 
such corporation for all prior taxable years, minus the sum of the 
amounts (determined under this paragraph) of its previously excluded 
subpart F income withdrawn from investment in less developed countries 
for all prior taxable years.
    (ii) Treatment of earnings and profits. For purposes of determining 
earnings and profits of a controlled foreign corporation under 
subdivision (i)(a) of this

[[Page 311]]

subparagraph, such earnings and profits shall be considered not to 
include any amounts which are attributable to--
    (a)(1) Amounts which, for the current taxable year, are included in 
the gross income of a United States shareholder of such controlled 
foreign corporation under section 951(a)(1)(A)(i) or (iii), or
    (2) Amounts which, for any prior taxable year, have been included in 
the gross income of a United States shareholder of such controlled 
foreign corporation under section 951(a) and have not been distributed; 
or
    (b)(1) Amounts which, for the current taxable year, are included in 
the gross income of a United States shareholder of such controlled 
foreign corporation under section 551(b) or would be so included under 
such section but for the fact that such amounts were distributed to such 
shareholder during the taxable year, or
    (2) Amounts which, for any prior taxable year, have been included in 
the gross income of a United States shareholder of such controlled 
foreign corporation under section 551(b) and have not been distributed.

The rules of this subdivision apply only in determining the limitation 
on a controlled foreign corporation's decrease in qualified investments 
in less developed countries. See section 959 and the regulations 
thereunder for limitations on the exclusion from gross income of 
previously taxed earnings and profits.
    (3) Taxable years beginning after December 31, 1975. (i) In the case 
of a taxable year of a controlled foreign corporation beginning after 
December 31, 1975, Sec. 1.955-2(b)(5) must be applied in determining the 
amount of its qualified investments in less developed countries on both 
of the determination dates applicable to such taxable year.
    (ii) The application of this subparagraph may be illustrated by the 
following examples:

    Example 1. (a) Controlled foreign corporation M uses the calendar 
year as the taxable year. Throughout 1974 through 1976, M owns 100 
percent of the only class of stock of foreign corporation N, a less 
developed country shipping company described in Sec. 1.955-5(b), and M 
owns no other stock or obligations. The amount taken into account under 
Sec. 1.955-2(d) with respect to the stock of N is $10,000 at the close 
of 1974, 1975, and 1976. The amount of M's previously excluded subpart F 
income which is withdrawn for 1975 (a year to which Sec. 1.955-2(b)(5) 
does not apply) from investment in less developed countries is zero, 
determined as follows:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
(1) Qualified investments in less developed countries at the            
 close of 1974...............................................    $10,000
(2) Less: qualified investments in less developed countries             
 at the close of 1975........................................     10,000
                                                              ----------
(3) Balance..................................................          0
                                                              ==========
                                                                        

(Further computations similar to those set out in lines (iv) through 
(ix) of example 1 of paragraph (d) of this section are unnecessary 
because the balance in line (3) of this example is zero.)
    (b) As a result of Sec. 1.955-2(b)(5)(ii), the amount of M's 
previously excluded subpart F income which is withdrawn for 1976 from 
investment in less developed countries is zero, determined as follows:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
(1) Qualified investments in less developed countries at the close      
 of 1975...........................................................   $0
(2) Less: qualified investments in less developed countries at the      
 close of 1976.....................................................    0
                                                                    ----
(3) Balance........................................................    0
                                                                    ====
                                                                        

    Example 2. The facts are the same as in example 1, except that 
foreign corporation N is a less developed country corporation described 
in Sec. 1.955-5(a). The amount of M's previously excluded subpart F 
income withdrawn for 1976 from investment in less developed countries is 
zero, determined as follows:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
(1) Qualified investments in less developed countries at the            
 close of 1975...............................................    $10,000
(2) Less: qualified investments in less developed countries             
 at the close of 1976........................................     10,000
                                                              ----------
(3) Balance..................................................          0
                                                              ==========
                                                                        

    (c) Shareholder's pro rata share of amount withdrawn by controlled 
foreign corporation--(1) In general. A United States shareholder's pro 
rata share of a controlled foreign corporation's previously excluded 
subpart F income withdrawn for any taxable year from

[[Page 312]]

investment in less developed countries is his pro rata share of the 
amount withdrawn for such year by such corporation, as determined under 
paragraph (b) of this section. See section 955(a)(3).
    (2) Special rule. A United States shareholder's pro rata share of 
the net amount determined under paragraph (b)(2)(i)(b) of this section 
with respect to any stock of the controlled foreign corporation owned by 
such shareholder shall be determined without taking into account any 
amount attributable to a period prior to the date on which such 
shareholder acquired such stock. See section 1248 and the regulations 
thereunder for rules governing treatment of gain from sales or exchanges 
of stock in certain foreign corporations.
    (d) Illustrations. The application of this section may be 
illustrated by the following examples:

    Example 1. A, a United States shareholder, owns 60 percent of the 
only class of stock of M Corporation, a controlled foreign corporation 
throughout the entire period here involved. Both A and M Corporation use 
the calendar year as a taxable year. Corporation M's qualified 
investments in less developed countries at the close of 1964 amount to 
$125,000; and, at the close of 1965, to $75,000. During 1965, M 
Corporation realizes recognized gains of $5,000 and recognized losses of 
$15,000, on sales of qualified investments in less developed countries. 
Corporation M's earnings and profits for 1965 and its accumulated 
earnings and profits for 1963 and 1964 amount to $45,000, as determined 
under paragraph (b)(2) of this section. The amount excluded under 
section 954(b)(1) for 1963 from its foreign base company income is 
$75,000, and the amount of its previously excluded subpart F income 
withdrawn for 1964 from investment in less developed countries is 
$25,000. The amount of M Corporation's previously excluded subpart F 
income withdrawn for 1965 from investment in less developed countries is 
$40,000, and A's pro rata share of such amount is $24,000, determined as 
follows:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
(i) Qualified investments in less developed countries at the            
 close of 1964...............................................   $125,000
(ii) Less: Qualified investments in less developed countries            
 at the close of 1965........................................     75,000
                                                              ----------
(iii) Balance................................................     50,000
(iv) Less: Excess of recognized losses over recognized gains            
 on sales during 1965 of qualified investments in less                  
 developed countries ($15,000 less $5,000)...................     10,000
                                                              ----------
(v) Tentative decrease in qualified investments in less                 
 developed countries for 1965................................     40,000
                                                              ==========
(vi) Earnings and profits for 1963, 1964, and 1965...........     45,000
                                                              ----------
(vii) Excess of amount excluded under section 954(b)(1) from            
 foreign base company income for 1963 ($75,000 over amount of           
 previously excluded subpart F income withdrawn for 1964 from           
 investment in less developed countries ($25,000)............     50,000
                                                              ----------
(viii) M Corporation's amount of previously excluded subpart            
 F income withdrawn for 1965 from investment in less                    
 developed countries (item (v), but not to exceed the lesser            
 of item (vi) or item (vii)).................................     40,000
                                                              ----------
(ix) A's pro rata share of M Corporation's amount of                    
 previously excluded subpart F income withdrawn for 1965 from           
 investment in less developed countries (60 percent of                  
 $40,000)....................................................    $24,000
                                                              ==========
                                                                        

    Example 2. The facts are the same as in example 1, except that M 
Corporation's earnings and profits (determined under paragraph (b)(2) of 
this section) for 1963, 1964, and 1965 (item (vi)) are $30,000 instead 
of $45,000. Corporation M's amount of previously excluded subpart F 
income withdrawn for 1965 from investment in less developed countries is 
$30,000. A's pro rata share of such amount is $18,000 (60 percent of 
$30,000).
    Example 3. The facts are the same as in example 1, except that the 
excess of the amount excluded under section 954(b)(1) for 1963 from M 
Corporation's foreign base company income over the amount of its 
previously excluded subpart F income withdrawn for 1964 from investment 
in less developed countries (item (vii)) is $20,000 instead of $50,000. 
Corporation M's amount of previously excluded subpart F income withdrawn 
for 1965 from investment in less developed countries is $20,000. A's pro 
rata share of such amount is $12,000 (60 percent of $20,000).

[T.D. 6683, 28 FR 11178, Oct. 18, 1963, as amended by T.D. 6795, 30 FR 
942, Jan. 29, 1965; T.D. 7893, 48 FR 22509, May 19, 1983; T.D. 7894, 48 
FR 22529, May 19, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 1.955-2   Amount of a controlled foreign corporation's qualified investments in less developed countries.

    (a) Included property. For purposes of sections 951 through 964, a 
controlled foreign corporation's ``qualified investments in less 
developed countries'' are items of property (other than property 
excluded under paragraph (b)(1) of this section) owned directly by such 
corporation on the applicable determination date for purposes of section 
954(f) or section 955(a)(2) and consisting of one or more of the 
following:

[[Page 313]]

    (1) Stock of a less developed country corporation if the controlled 
foreign corporation owns (within the meaning of paragraph (b)(2) of this 
section) on the applicable determination date 10 percent or more of the 
total combined voting power of all classes of stock of such less 
developed country corporation;
    (2) An obligation (as defined in paragraph (b)(3) of this section) 
of a less developed country corporation which, at the time of 
acquisition (as defined in paragraph (b)(4) of this section) of such 
obligation by the controlled foreign corporation, has a maturity of one 
year or more, but only if the controlled foreign corporation owns 
(within the meaning of paragraph (b)(2) of this section) on the 
applicable determination date 10 percent or more of the total combined 
voting power of all classes of stock of such less developed country 
corporation; and
    (3) An obligation (as defined in paragraph (b)(3) of this section) 
of a less developed country, including obligations issued or guaranteed 
by the government of such country or of a political subdivision thereof 
and obligations of any agency or instrumentality of such country, in 
which such country is financially committed. The application of this 
subparagraph may be illustrated by the following example:

    Example. A, a political subdivision of foreign country X, constructs 
and operates a toll bridge. Country X is a less developed country 
throughout the period here involved. A issues bonds under an indenture 
which provides for amortization of the principal and interest of such 
bonds only out of the net revenues derived from operation of the bridge. 
The bonds of A are obligations in which X country is financially 
committed and, in the hands of a controlled foreign corporation, are 
qualified investments in less developed countries.

    (b) Special rules--(1) Excluded property. For purposes of paragraph 
(a) of this section, property which is disposed of within 6 months after 
the date of its acquisition shall be excluded from a controlled foreign 
corporation's qualified investments in less developed countries. 
However, the fact that property acquired by a controlled foreign 
corporation has not been held on an applicable determination date for 
more than 6 months after the date of its acquisition shall not prevent 
such property from being included in the controlled foreign 
corporation's qualified investments in less developed countries on such 
date. Proper adjustments shall be made subsequently, however, to exclude 
any item of property so included, if the property is in fact disposed of 
within 6 months after the date of its acquisition. See section 
955(b)(4).
    (2) Determination of stock ownership. In determining for purposes of 
paragraphs (a)(1) and (2) of this section whether a controlled foreign 
corporation owns 10 percent or more of the total combined voting power 
of all classes of stock of a less developed country corporation, only 
stock owned directly by such controlled foreign corporation shall be 
taken into account and the provisions of section 958 and the regulations 
thereunder shall not apply. See section 958(a)(1).
    (3) Obligation defined. For purposes of paragraphs (a)(2) and (3) of 
this section, the term ``obligation'' means any bond, note, debenture, 
certificate, or other evidence of indebtedness. In the absence of legal, 
governmental, or business reasons to the contrary, the indebtedness must 
bear interest or be issued at a discount.
    (4) Date of acquisition. For purposes of paragraphs (a)(2) and 
(b)(5)(i) of this section, stock or an obligation shall be considered 
acquired by a foreign corporation as of the date such corporation 
acquires an adjusted basis in the stock or obligation. For this purpose, 
in a case in which a foreign corporation acquires stock or an obligation 
in a transaction (other than a reorganization of the type described in 
section 368(a)(1)(E) or (F)) in which no gain or loss would be 
recognized had the transaction been between two domestic corporations, 
such corporation will be considered to have acquired an adjusted basis 
in such stock or obligation as of the date such transaction occurs.
    (5) Taxable years beginning after December 31, 1975. For taxable 
years beginning after December 31, 1975, qualified investments in less 
developed countries do not include--
    (i) Any property acquired after the latest determination date 
applicable to a taxable year beginning before December 31, 1975,

[[Page 314]]

    (ii) Stock or obligations of a less developed country shipping 
company described in Sec. 1.955-5(b), and
    (iii) Stock or obligations which were not treated as qualified 
investments in less developed countries on the later of the two 
determination dates applicable to the preceding taxable year.

See Sec. 1.955-1(b)(3) for rules relating to the application of this 
subparagraph. See Sec. 1.955A-2(h) for rules relating to the treatment 
of investments in stock or obligations described in subdivision (ii) of 
this subparagraph as qualified investments in foreign base company 
shipping operations.
    (6) Determination dates. For purposes of subparagraph (5) of this 
paragraph and Sec. 1.955-1(b)(3), the determination dates applicable to 
a taxable year of a controlled foreign corporation are--
    (i) Except as provided in subdivision (ii) of this subparagraph, the 
close of such taxable year and the close of the preceding taxable year, 
and
    (ii) With respect to a United States shareholder who has made an 
election under section 955(b)(3) to determine such corporation's 
increase in qualified investments in less developed countries at the 
close of the following taxable year, the close of such taxable year and 
the close of the taxable year immediately following such taxable year.
    (c) Termination of designation as a less developed country. For 
purposes of sections 951 through 964, property which would constitute a 
qualified investment in a less developed country but for the fact that a 
foreign country or United States possession has, after the acquisition 
of such property by the controlled foreign corporation, ceased to be a 
less developed country shall be treated as a qualified investment in a 
less developed country. The application of this paragraph may be 
illustrated by the following example:

    Example. On December 31, 1969, in accordance with the provisions of 
Sec. 1.955-4, the designation of the foreign country X as an 
economically less developed country is terminated. Corporation M, a 
controlled foreign corporation, has $50,000 of qualified investments in 
country X acquired before December 31, 1969. After 1969 such investments 
are treated as qualified investments in a less developed country 
notwithstanding the termination of the status of X Country as an 
economically less developed country. However, if such qualified 
investments of M Corporation are reduced to $40,000, each United States 
shareholder of M Corporation is required, subject to the provisions of 
Sec. 1.955-1, to include his pro rata share of the $10,000 decrease in 
his gross income under section 951(a)(1)(A)(ii) and the regulations 
thereunder.

    (d) Amount attributable to property--(1) General rule. For purposes 
of this section, the amount taken into account with respect to any 
property which constitutes a qualified investment in a less developed 
country shall be its adjusted basis as of the applicable determination 
date, reduced by any liability (other than a liability described in 
subparagraph (2) of this paragraph) to which such property is subject on 
such date. To be taken into account under this subparagraph, a liability 
must constitute a specific charge against the property involved. Thus, a 
liability evidenced by an open account or a liability secured only by 
the general credit of the controlled foreign corporation will not be 
taken into account. On the other hand, if a liability constitutes a 
specific charge against several items of property and cannot definitely 
be allocated to any single item of property, the liability shall be 
apportioned against each of such items of property in that ratio which 
the adjusted basis of such item on the applicable determination date 
bears to the adjusted basis of all such items at such time. A liability 
in excess of the adjusted basis of the property which is subject to such 
liability shall not be taken into account for the purpose of reducing 
the adjusted basis of other property which is not subject to such 
liability.
    (2) Excluded charges. For purposes of subparagraph (1) of this 
paragraph, a specific charge created with respect to any item of 
property principally for the purpose of artificially increasing or 
decreasing the amount of a controlled foreign corporation's qualified 
investments in less developed countries will not be recognized; whether 
a specific charge is created principally for such purpose will depend 
upon all the facts and circumstances of each case. One of the factors 
that will be considered in making such a determination with respect to a 
loan is whether the loan is

[[Page 315]]

from a related person, as defined in section 954(d)(3) and paragraph (e) 
of Sec. 1.954-1.
    (3) Statement required. If for purposes of this section a United 
States shareholder of a controlled foreign corporation reduces the 
adjusted basis of property which constitutes a qualified investment in a 
less developed country on the ground that such property is subject to a 
liability, he shall attach to his return a statement setting forth the 
adjusted basis of the property before the reduction and the amount and 
nature of the reduction.
    (4) Taxable years beginning after December 31, 1975. For taxable 
years beginning after December 31, 1975, the amount taken into account 
under subparagraph (1) of this paragraph with respect to any property 
which constitutes a qualified investment in less developed countries 
shall not exceed the amount taken into account with respect to such 
property at the close of the preceding taxable year.

[T.D. 6683, 28 FR 11179, Oct. 18, 1963, as amended by T.D. 7894, 48 FR 
22529, May 19, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 1.955-3   Election as to date of determining qualified investments in less developed countries.

    (a) Nature of election. In lieu of determining the increase for a 
taxable year of a foreign corporation beginning before January 1, 1976, 
under the provisions of section 954(f) and paragraph (a) of Sec. 1.954-
5, or the decrease under the provisions of section 955(a)(2) and 
paragraph (b) of Sec. 1.955-1, in a controlled foreign corporation's 
qualified investments in less developed countries for a taxable year in 
the manner provided in such provisions, a United States shareholder of 
such controlled foreign corporation may elect, under the provisions of 
section 955(b)(3) and this section, to determine such increase in 
accordance with the provisions of paragraph (b) of Sec. 1.954-5 and to 
determine such decrease by ascertaining the amount by which--
    (1) Such controlled foreign corporation's qualified investments in 
less developed countries at the close of such taxable year exceed its 
qualified investments in less developed countries at the close of the 
taxable year immediately following such taxable year, and reducing such 
excess by
    (2) The amount determined under paragraph (b)(1)(ii) of Sec. 1.955-1 
for such taxable year,

subject to the limitation provided in paragraph (b)(2) of Sec. 1.955-1 
for such taxable year. An election under this section may be made with 
respect to each controlled foreign corporation with respect to which a 
person is a United States shareholder within the meaning of section 
951(b), but the election may not be exercised separately with respect to 
the increases and the decreases of such controlled foreign corporation. 
If an election is made under this section to determine the increase of a 
controlled foreign corporation in accordance with the provisions of 
paragraph (b) of Sec. 1.954-5, subsequent decreases of such controlled 
foreign corporation shall be determined in accordance with this 
paragraph and not in accordance with paragraph (b) of Sec. 1.955-1.
    (b) Time and manner of making election--(1) Without consent. An 
election under this section with respect to a controlled foreign 
corporation shall be made without the consent of the Commissioner by a 
United States shareholder's filing a statement to such effect with his 
return for his taxable year in which or with which ends the first 
taxable year of such controlled foreign corporation in which--
    (i) Such shareholder owns, within the meaning of section 958(a), or 
is considered as owning by applying the rules of ownership of section 
958(b), 10 percent or more of the total combined voting power of all 
classes of stock entitled to vote of such controlled foreign 
corporation, and
    (ii) Such controlled foreign corporation realizes foreign base 
company income from which amounts are excluded under section 954(b)(1) 
and paragraph (b)(1) of Sec. 1.954-1.

The statement shall contain the name and address of the controlled 
foreign corporation and identification of such first taxable year of 
such corporation. For taxable years of a foreign corporation beginning 
after December 31, 1975,

[[Page 316]]

no election under this section with respect to a controlled foreign 
corporation may be made without the consent of the Commissioner.
    (2) With consent. An election under this section with respect to a 
controlled foreign corporation may be made by a United States 
shareholder at any time with the consent of the Commissioner. Consent 
will not be granted unless the United States shareholder and the 
Commissioner agree to the terms, conditions, and adjustments under which 
the election will be effected. Consent will not be granted if the first 
taxable year of the controlled foreign corporation with respect to which 
the shareholder desires to compute an amount described in section 
954(b)(1) in accordance with the election provided in this section 
begins after December 31, 1975. The application for consent to elect 
shall be made by the United States shareholder's mailing a letter for 
such purpose to the Commissioner of Internal Revenue, Washington, DC 
20224. The application shall be mailed before the close of the first 
taxable year of the controlled foreign corporation with respect to which 
the shareholder desires to compute an amount described in section 
954(b)(1) in accordance with the election provided in this section. The 
application shall include the following information:
    (i) The name, address, and taxable year of the United States 
shareholder;
    (ii) The name and address of the controlled foreign corporation;
    (iii) The first taxable year of the controlled foreign corporation 
for which income is to be computed under the election;
    (iv) The amount of the controlled foreign corporation's qualified 
investments in less developed countries at the close of its preceding 
taxable year; and
    (v) The sum of the amounts excluded under section 954(b)(1) and 
paragraph (b)(1) of Sec. 1.954-1 from the foreign base company income of 
the controlled foreign corporation for all prior taxable years during 
which such shareholder was a United States shareholder of such 
corporation and the sum of the amounts of its previously excluded 
subpart F income withdrawn from investment in less developed countries 
for all prior taxable years during which such shareholder was a United 
States shareholder of such corporation.
    (c) Effect of election--(1) General. Except as provided in 
subparagraphs (3) and (4) of this paragraph, an election under this 
section with respect to a controlled foreign corporation shall be 
binding on the United States shareholder and shall apply to all 
qualified investments in less developed countries acquired, or disposed 
of, by such controlled foreign corporation during the taxable year 
following its taxable year for which income is first computed under the 
election and during all succeeding taxable years of such corporation.
    (2) Returns. Any return of a United States shareholder required to 
be filed before the completion of a period with respect to which 
determinations are to be made as to a controlled foreign corporation's 
qualified investments in less developed countries for purposes of 
computing such shareholder's taxable income shall be filed on the basis 
of an estimate of the amount of the controlled foreign corporation's 
qualified investments in less developed countries at the close of the 
period. If the actual amount of such investments is not the same as the 
amount of the estimate, the United States shareholder shall immediately 
notify the Commissioner. The Commissioner will thereupon redetermine the 
amount of tax of such United States shareholder for the year or years 
with respect to which the incorrect amount was taken into account. The 
amount of tax, if any, due upon such redetermination shall be paid by 
the United States shareholder upon notice and demand by the district 
director. The amount of tax, if any, shown by such redetermination to 
have been overpaid shall be credited or refunded to the United States 
shareholder in accordance with the provisions of sections 6402 and 6511 
and the regulations thereunder.
    (3) Revocation. Upon application by the United States shareholder, 
the election made under this section may, subject to the approval of the 
Commissioner, be revoked. Approval will not be granted unless the United 
States shareholder and the Commissioner

[[Page 317]]

agree to the terms, conditions, and adjustments under which the rev- 
ocation will be effected. Unless such agreement provides otherwise, the 
change in the controlled foreign corporation's qualified investments in 
less developed countries for its first taxable year for which income is 
computed without regard to the election previously made will be 
considered to be zero for purposes of effectuating the revocation. The 
application for consent to revocation shall be made by the United States 
shareholder's mailing a letter for such purpose to the Commissioner of 
Internal Revenue, Washington, DC 20224. The application shall be mailed 
before the close of the first taxable year of the controlled foreign 
corporation with respect to which the shareholder desires to compute the 
amounts described in section 954(b)(1) or 955(a) without regard to the 
election provided in this section. The application may also be filed in 
a taxable year beginning after December 31, 1975. The application shall 
include the following information:
    (i) The name, address, and taxpayer identification number of the 
United States shareholder;
    (ii) The name and address of the controlled foreign corporation;
    (iii) The taxable year of the controlled foreign corporation for 
which such amounts are to be so computed;
    (iv) The amount of the controlled foreign corporation's qualified 
investments in less developed countries at the close of its preceding 
taxable year;
    (v) The sum of the amounts excluded under section 954(b)(1) and 
paragraph (b)(1) of Sec. 1.954-1 from the foreign base company income of 
the controlled foreign corporation for all prior taxable years during 
which such shareholder was a United States shareholder of such 
corporation and the sum of the amounts of its previously excluded 
subpart F income withdrawn from investment in less developed countries 
for all prior taxable years during which such shareholder was a United 
States shareholder of such corporation; and
    (vi) The reasons for the request for consent to revocation.
    (4) Transfer of stock. If during any taxable year of a controlled 
foreign corporation--
    (i) A United States shareholder who has made an election under this 
section with respect to such controlled foreign corporation sells, 
exchanges, or otherwise disposes of all or part of his stock in such 
controlled foreign corporation, and
    (ii) The foreign corporation is a controlled foreign corporation 
immediately after the sale, exchange, or other disposition,

then, with respect to the stock so sold, exchanged, or disposed of, the 
controlled foreign corporation's acquisitions and dispositions of 
qualified investments in less developed countries for such taxable year 
shall be considered to be zero. If the United States shareholder's 
successor in interest is entitled to and does make an election under 
paragraph (b)(1) of this section to determine the controlled foreign 
corporation's increase in qualified investments in less developed 
countries for the taxable year in which he acquires such stock, such 
increase with respect to the stock so acquired shall be determined in 
accordance with the provisions of paragraph (b)(1) of Sec. 1.954-5. If 
the controlled foreign corporation realizes no foreign base company 
income from which amounts are excluded under section 954(b)(1) and 
paragraph (b)(1) of Sec. 1.954-1 for the taxable year in which the 
United States shareholder's successor in interest acquires such stock 
and such successor in interest makes an election under paragraph (b)(1) 
of this section with respect to a subsequent taxable year of such 
controlled foreign corporation, the increase in the controlled foreign 
corporation's qualified investments in less developed countries for such 
subsequent taxable year shall be determined in accordance with the 
provisions of paragraph (b)(2) of Sec. 1.954-5.
    (d) Illustrations. The application of this section may be 
illustrated by the following examples:

    Example 1. Foreign corporation A is a wholly owned subsidiary of 
domestic corporation M. Both corporations use the calendar year as a 
taxable year. In a statement filed with its return for 1963, M 
Corporation makes an election under section 955(b)(3) and the election 
remains in force for the taxable year 1964. At December 31, 1964, A 
Corporation's

[[Page 318]]

qualified investments in less developed countries amount to $100,000; 
and, at December 31, 1965, to $80,000. For purposes of paragraph (a)(1) 
of this section, A Corporation's decrease in qualified investments in 
less developed countries for the taxable year 1964 is $20,000 and is 
determined by ascertaining the amount by which A Corporation's qualified 
investments in less developed countries at December 31, 1964 ($100,000) 
exceed its qualified investments in less developed countries at December 
31, 1965 ($80,000).
    Example 2. The facts are the same as in example 1 except that A 
Corporation experiences no changes in qualified investments in less 
developed countries during its taxable years 1966 and 1967. If M 
Corporation's election were to remain in force, A Corporation's 
acquisitions and dispositions of qualified investments in less developed 
countries during A Corporation's taxable year 1968 would be taken into 
account in determining whether A Corporation has experienced an increase 
or a decrease in qualified investments in less developed countries for 
its taxable year 1967. However, M Corporation duly files before the 
close of A Corporation's taxable year 1967 an application for consent to 
revocation of M Corporation's election under section 955(b)(3), and, 
pursuant to an agreement between the Commissioner and M Corporation, 
consent is granted by the Commissioner. Assuming such agreement does not 
provide otherwise, A Corporation's change in qualified investments in 
less developed countries for its taxable year 1967 is zero because the 
effect of the revocation of the election is to treat acquisitions and 
dispositions of qualified investments in less developed countries 
actually occurring in 1968 as having occurred in such year rather than 
in 1967.
    Example 3. The facts are the same as in example 2 except that A 
Corporation's qualified investments in less developed countries at 
December 31, 1968, amount to $70,000. For purposes of paragraph 
(b)(1)(i) of Sec. 1.955-1, the decrease in A Corporation's qualified 
investments in less developed countries for the taxable year 1968 is 
$10,000 and is determined by ascertaining the amount by which A 
Corporation's qualified investments in less developed countries at 
December 31, 1967 ($80,000) exceed its qualified investments in less 
developed countries at December 31, 1968 ($70,000).
    Example 4. The facts are the same as in example 1 except that on 
September 30, 1965, M Corporation sells 40 percent of the only class of 
stock of A Corporation to N Corporation, a domestic corporation. Cor- 
poration N uses the calendar year as a taxable year. Corporation A 
remains a controlled foreign corporation immediately after such sale of 
its stock. Corporation A's qualified investments in less developed 
countries at December 31, 1966, amount to $90,000. The changes in A 
Corporation's qualified investments in less developed countries 
occurring in its taxable year 1965 are considered to be zero with 
respect to the 40-percent stock interest acquired by N Corporation. The 
entire $20,000 reduction in A Corporation's qualified investments in 
less developed countries which occurs during the taxable year 1965 is 
taken into account by M Corporation for purposes of paragraph (a)(1) of 
this section in determining its tax liability for the taxable year 1964. 
Corporation A's increase in qualified investments in less developed 
countries for the taxable year 1965 with respect to the 60-percent stock 
interest retained by M Corporation is $6,000 and is determined by 
ascertaining M Corporation's pro rata share (60 percent) of the amount 
by which A Corporation's qualified investments in less developed 
countries at December 31, 1968 ($90,000) exceed its qualified 
investments in less developed countries at December 31, 1965 ($80,000). 
Corporation N does not make an election under section 955(b)(3) in its 
return for its taxable year 1966. Corporation A's increase in qualified 
investments in less developed countries for the taxable year 1966 with 
respect to the 40-percent stock interest acquired by N Corporation is 
$4,000.

[T.D. 6683, 28 FR 11180, Oct. 18, 1963, as amended by T.D. 7893, 48 FR 
22509, May 19, 1983; T.D. 7894, 48 FR 22530, May 19, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 1.955-4   Definition of less developed country.

    (a) Designation by Executive order. For purposes of sections 951 
through 964, the term ``less developed country'' means any foreign 
country (other than an area within the Sino-Soviet bloc) or any 
possession of the United States with respect to which, on the first day 
of the foreign corporation's taxable year, there is in effect an 
Executive order by the President of the United States designating such 
country or possession as an economically less developed country for 
purposes of such sections. Each territory, department, province, or 
possession of any foreign country other than a country within the Sino-
Soviet bloc may be treated as a separate foreign country for purposes of 
such designation if the territory, department, province, or possession 
is overseas from the country of which it is a territory, department, 
province, or possession. Thus, for example, an overseas possession of a 
foreign country may be designated by Executive order as an economically 
less developed country even though the foreign country itself has not 
been designated as an economically less developed country;

[[Page 319]]

or the foreign country may be so designated even though the overseas 
possessions of such country have not been designated as economically 
less developed countries. The term ``possession of the United States'', 
for purposes of section 955(c)(3) and this section, shall be construed 
to have the same meaning as that contained in paragraph (b)(2) of 
Sec. 1.957-3.
    (b) Countries not eligible for designation. Section 955(c)(3) 
provides that no designation by Executive order may be made under 
section 955(c)(3) and paragraph (a) of this section with respect to--

Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, France, Germany (Federal 
Republic), Hong Kong, Italy, Japan, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Monaco, 
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Union of South Africa, San Marino, 
Sweden, Switzerland, United Kingdom.

    (c) Termination of designation. Section 955(c)(3) provides that, 
after the President has designated any foreign country or possession of 
the United States as an economically less developed country for purposes 
of sections 951 through 964, he may not terminate such designation 
(either by issuing an Executive order for the purpose of terminating 
such designation or by issuing an Executive order which has the effect 
of terminating such designation) unless, at least 30 days prior to such 
termination, he has notified the Senate and the House of Representatives 
of his intention to terminate such designation. If such 30-day notice is 
given, no action by the Congress of the United States is necessary to 
effectuate the termination. The requirement for giving 30-day notice to 
the Senate and House of Representatives applies also to the termination 
of a designation with respect to an overseas territory, department, 
province, or possession of a foreign country. See paragraph (c) of 
Sec. 1.955-2 for the effect of a termination of a Presidential 
designation upon property which would be a qualified investment in a 
less developed country but for the fact of such termination.

[T.D. 6683, 28 FR 11182, Oct. 18, 1963]


<R05>
Sec. 1.955-5   Definition of less developed country corporation.

    (a) Less developed country corporation--(1) In general. For purposes 
of sections 951 through 964, the term ``less developed country 
corporation'' means a foreign corporation described in paragraph (b) of 
this section and also any foreign corporation--
    (i) Which is engaged in the active conduct of one or more trades or 
businesses during the entire taxable year;
    (ii) Which derives 80 percent or more of its gross income, if any, 
for such taxable year from sources within less developed countries, as 
determined under the provisions of Sec. 1.955-6; and
    (iii) Which has 80 percent or more in value (within the meaning of 
paragraph (d) of this section) of its assets on each day of such taxable 
year consisting of one or more of the following items of property:
    (a) Property (other than property described in (b) through (h) of 
this subdivision) which is used, or held for use, in such trades or 
businesses and is located in one or more less developed countries;
    (b) Money;
    (c) Deposits with persons carrying on the banking business;
    (d) Stock of any other less developed country corporation;
    (e) Obligations (within the meaning of paragraph (b)(3) of 
Sec. 1.955-2) of another less developed country corporation which at the 
time of their acquisition (within the meaning of paragraph (b)(4) of 
Sec. 1.955-2) by the foreign corporation have a maturity of one year or 
more;
    (f) Obligations (within the meaning of paragraph (b)(3) of 
Sec. 1.955-2) of any less developed country;
    (g) Investments which are required to be made or held because of 
restrictions imposed by the government of any less developed country; 
and
    (h) Property described in section 956(b)(2).

For purposes of this subparagraph, if a foreign corporation is a partner 
in a foreign partnership, as defined in section 7701(a)(2) and (5) and 
the regulations thereunder, such corporation will be considered to be 
engaged in the active conduct of a trade or business to the extent and 
in the manner in which

[[Page 320]]

the partnership is so engaged and to own directly its proportionate 
share of each of the assets of the partnership. For purposes of 
subdivision (i) of this subparagraph, a newly-organized foreign 
corporation will be considered engaged in the active conduct of a trade 
or business from the date of its organization if such corporation 
commences business operations as soon as practicable after such 
organization. In the absence of affirmative evidence showing that the 
80-percent requirement of subdivision (iii) of this subparagraph has not 
been satisfied on each day of the taxable year, such requirement will be 
considered satisfied if it is established to the satisfaction of the 
district director that such requirement has been satisfied on the last 
day of each quarter of the taxable year of the foreign corporation. For 
purposes of subdivision (iii) of this subparagraph, property (other than 
stock in trade or other property of a kind which would properly be 
included in inventory of the foreign corporation if on hand at the close 
of the taxable year, or property held primarily for sale to customers in 
the ordinary course of the trade or business of the foreign corporation) 
purchased for use in a trade or business and temporarily located outside 
less developed countries will be considered located in less developed 
countries if, but only if, such property is shipped to and received in 
less developed countries promptly after such purchase.
    (2) Special rules. For purposes of subparagraph (1)(iii)(a) of this 
paragraph--
    (i) Treatment of receivables. Bills receivable, accounts receivable, 
notes receivable and open accounts shall be considered to be used in the 
trade or business and located in less developed countries if, but only 
if--
    (a) Such obligations arise out of the rental of property located in 
less developed countries, the performance of services within less 
developed countries, or the sale of property manufactured, produced, 
grown, or extracted in less developed countries, but only to the extent 
that the aggregate amount of such obligations at any time during the 
taxable year does not exceed an amount which is ordinary and necessary 
to carry on the business of both parties to the transactions if such 
transactions are between unrelated persons or, if such transactions are 
between related persons, an amount which would be ordinary and necessary 
to carry on the business of both parties to the transactions if such 
transactions were between unrelated persons;
    (b) In the case of bills receivable, accounts receivable, notes 
receivable, and open accounts arising out of transactions other than 
those referred to in (a) of this subdivision--
    (1) If the obligor is an individual such individual is a resident of 
one or more less developed countries and of no other country which is 
not a less developed country;
    (2) If the obligor is a corporation which as to the foreign 
corporation is a related person as defined in section 954(d)(3) and 
paragraph (e) of Sec. 1.954-1, such obligor meets, with respect to the 
period ending with the close of its annual accounting period in which 
occurs the date on which the obligation is incurred, the 80-percent 
gross income requirement of paragraph (b)(1)(ii) of Sec. 1.955-6.
    (3) If the obligor is a corporation which as to the foreign 
corporation is not a related person as defined in section 954(d)(3) and 
paragraph (e) of Sec. 1.954-1, it is reasonable, on the basis of 
ascertainable facts, for the obligee to believe that the obligor meets, 
with respect to such period, the 80-percent gross income requirement of 
paragraph (b)(1)(ii) of Sec. 1.955-6.
    (ii) Location of interests in real estate. Interests in real estate 
such as leaseholds of land or improvements thereon, mortgages on real 
property (including interests in mortgages on leaseholds of land or 
improvements thereon), and mineral, oil, or gas interests shall be 
considered located in less developed countries if, but only if, the 
underlying real estate is located in less developed countries.
    (iii) Location of certain other intangibles. Intangible property 
(other than any such property described in subdivision (i) or (ii) of 
this subparagraph) used in the trade or business of the foreign 
corporation shall be considered to be located in less developed 
countries in the same ratio that the amount of

[[Page 321]]

the foreign corporation's tangible property and property described in 
subdivision (i) or (ii) of this subparagraph used in its trades or 
businesses and located or deemed located in less developed countries 
bears to the total amount of its tangible property and property 
described in subdivision (i) or (ii) of this subparagraph used in its 
trades or businesses.
    (3) Illustration. The provisions of subparagraph (1) of this 
paragraph may be illustrated by the following example:

    Example. Foreign corporation A is formed on November 1, 1963, to 
engage in the business of manufacturing and selling radios in Brazil, a 
less developed country as of November 1, 1963. Corporation A uses the 
calendar year as a taxable year. Shortly after it is formed, A 
Corporation acquires a plant site and begins construction of a plant 
which is completed on August 1, 1964. Corporation A commences business 
operations as soon as practicable and continues such operations through 
December 31, 1964, and thereafter. Corporation A will be considered for 
purposes of subparagraph (1)(i) of this paragraph to be engaged in the 
active conduct of a trade or business for its entire taxable years 
ending on December 31, 1963, and 1964. The plant site and the plant 
(while under construction and after completion) will be considered to be 
property held during such taxable years for use in A Corporation's trade 
or business.

    (b) Shipping companies. For purposes of sections 951 through 964, 
the term ``less developed country corporation'' also means any foreign 
corporation--
    (1) Which has 80 percent or more of its gross income, if any, for 
the taxable year consisting of one or more of--
    (i) Gross income derived--
    (a) From, or in connection with, the using (or hiring or leasing for 
use) in foreign commerce of aircraft or vessels registered under the 
laws of a less developed country,
    (b) From, or in connection with, the performance of services 
directly related to the use in foreign commerce of aircraft or vessels 
registered under the laws of a less developed country, or
    (c) From the sale or exchange of aircraft or vessels registered 
under the laws of a less developed country and used in foreign commerce 
by such foreign corporation;
    (ii) Dividends and interest received or accrued from other foreign 
corporations which are less developed country corporations within the 
meaning of this paragraph and 10 percent or more of the total combined 
voting power of all classes of stock of which is owned at the time such 
dividends and interest are so received or accrued by such foreign 
corporation; and
    (iii) Gain from the sale or exchange of stock or obligations of 
other foreign corporations which are less developed country corporations 
within the meaning of this paragraph and 10 percent or more of the total 
combined voting power of all classes of stock of which is owned by such 
foreign corporation immediately before such sale or exchange; and
    (2) Which has 80 percent or more in value (within the meaning of 
paragraph (d) of this section) of its assets on each day of the taxable 
year consisting of--
    (i) Assets used, or held for use, for the production of income 
described in subparagraph (1) of this paragraph, or in connection with 
the production of such income, whether or not such income is received 
during the taxable year, and
    (ii) Property described in section 956(b)(2).

In the absence of affirmative evidence showing that the 80-percent 
requirement of this subparagraph has not been satisfied on each day of 
the taxable year such requirement will be considered satisfied if it is 
established to the satisfaction of the district director that such 
requirement has been satisfied on the last day of each quarter of the 
taxable year of the foreign corporation. The provisions of this 
subparagraph may be illustrated by the following example:

    Example. Foreign corporation A is formed on November 1, 1963, for 
the purpose of constructing and operating a vessel and, on that date, 
enters a charter agreement which provides that such vessel will be 
registered under the laws of Liberia, a less developed country as of 
November 1, 1963, and operated between South American and European 
ports. Corporation A uses the calendar year as a taxable year. 
Construction of the vessel is completed on September 1, 1965, and the 
vessel is registered under the laws of Liberia and operated between 
South American and European ports through December 31, 1965, and 
thereafter. The charter and the vessel (while under construction and 
after completion), or any interest of A Corporation in such assets, will 
be considered assets which

[[Page 322]]

are held by A Corporation during its taxable years ending on December 
31, 1963, 1964, and 1965, for use in the production of income described 
in subparagraph (1) of this paragraph.

    (c) Determination of stock ownership. In determining for purposes of 
paragraph (b)(1)(ii) and (iii) of this section whether a foreign 
corporation owns 10 percent or more of the total combined voting power 
of all classes of stock of a less developed country corporation, only 
stock owned directly by such foreign corporation shall be taken into 
account and the provisions of section 958 and the regulations thereunder 
shall not apply. See section 958(a)(1).
    (d) Determination of value. For purposes of paragraphs (a)(1)(iii) 
and (b)(2) of this section--
    (1) General. Except as provided in subparagraph (2) of this 
paragraph, the value at which property shall be taken into account is 
its actual value (not reduced by liabilities) which, in the absence of 
affirmative evidence to the contrary, shall be deemed to be its adjusted 
basis.
    (2) Treatment of certain receivables. The value at which receivables 
described in paragraph (a)(2)(i) of this section and held by a foreign 
corporation using the cash receipts and disbursements method of 
accounting shall be taken into account is their actual value (not 
reduced by liabilities) which, in the absence of affirmative evidence to 
the contrary, shall be deemed to be their face value.

[T.D. 6683, 28 FR 11182, Oct. 18, 1963]


<R05>
Sec. 1.955-6  Gross income from sources within less developed countries.

    (a) General. For purposes of paragraph (a)(1)(ii) of Sec. 1.955.5, 
the determination whether a foreign corporation has derived 80 percent 
or more of its gross income from sources within less developed countries 
for any taxable year shall be made by the application of the provisions 
of sections 861 through 864, and Secs. 1.861-1 through 1.863-5, in 
application of which the name of a less developed country shall be 
substituted for ``the United States'', except that if income is derived 
by the foreign corporation from--
    (1) Interest (other than interest to which subparagraph (3) of this 
paragraph applies), the rules set forth in paragraph (b) of this section 
shall apply;
    (2) Dividends, the rules set forth in paragraph (c) of this section 
shall apply; or
    (3) Income (including interest) derived in connection with the sale 
of tangible personal property, the rules set forth in paragraph (d) of 
this section shall apply.

The source of income described in subparagraph (1), (2), or (3) of this 
paragraph shall be determined solely under the rules of this section and 
without regard to the rules of sections 861 through 864, and the 
regulations thereunder.
    (b) Interest--(1) In general. Except as provided in subparagraph (2) 
of this paragraph and paragraph (d) of this section, gross income 
derived by the foreign corporation from interest on any indebtedness--
    (i) Of an individual shall be treated as income from sources within 
a less developed country if, but only if, such individual is a resident 
of one or more less developed countries and of no other country which is 
not a less developed country.
    (ii) Of a corporation shall be treated as income from sources within 
less developed countries if, but only if, 80 percent or more of the 
gross income of the payer corporation for the 3-year period ending with 
the close of its annual accounting period in which such interest is 
paid, or for such part of such 3-year period as such corporation has 
been in existence, or for such part of such 3-year period as occurs on 
and after the beginning of such corporation's first annual accounting 
period beginning after December 31, 1962, whichever period is shortest, 
was derived from sources within less developed countries as determined 
in accordance with the principles of this section; or
    (iii) Of a less developed country, including obligations issued or 
guaranteed by the government of such country or of a political 
subdivision thereof and obligations of any agency or instrumentality of 
such country, in which such country is financially committed shall be 
treated as income from sources within such country.

[[Page 323]]

    (2) Special rule. Gross income derived by the foreign corporation 
from interest on obligations of the United States shall be treated as 
income from sources within less developed countries without regard to 
the provisions of subparagraph (1) of this paragraph.
    (3) Payers other than related persons. For purposes of subparagraph 
(1)(ii) of this paragraph, a payer corporation which as to the recipient 
corporation is not a related person as defined in section 954(d)(3) and 
paragraph (e) of Sec. 1.954-1 shall be deemed to have satisfied the 80-
percent gross income requirement if, on the basis of ascertainable 
facts, it is reasonable for the recipient corporation to believe that 
such requirement is satisfied.
    (c) Dividends--(1) In general. Gross income derived by the foreign 
corporation from dividends, as defined in section 316 and the 
regulations thereunder, shall be treated as income from sources within 
less developed countries if, but only if, 80 percent or more of the 
gross income of the payer corporation for the 3-year period ending with 
the close of its annual accounting period in which such dividends are 
distributed, or for such part of such 3-year period as such corporation 
has been in existence, or for such part of such 3-year period as occurs 
on and after the beginning of such corporation's first annual accounting 
period beginning after December 31, 1962, whichever period is shortest, 
was derived from sources within less developed countries as determined 
in accordance with the principles of this section.
    (2) Payers other than related persons. See paragraph (b)(3) of this 
section for rule governing satisfaction of the 80-percent gross income 
requirement by payers other than related persons.
    (d) Sale of tangible personal property--(1) In general. Income 
(whether in the form of profits, commissions, fees, interest, or 
otherwise) derived by the foreign corporation in connection with the 
sale of tangible personal property shall be treated as income from 
sources within less developed countries if, but only if--
    (i) Such property is produced (within the meaning of subparagraph 
(2) of this paragraph) within less developed countries; or
    (ii) Such property is sold for use, consumption, or disposition 
within less developed countries even though produced outside less 
developed countries and the selling corporation is engaged within less 
developed countries, in connection with sales of such property, in 
continuous operational activities which are substantial in relation to 
such sales, as evidenced, for example, by the maintenance within less 
developed countries of a substantial sales or service organization or 
substantial facilities for the storage, handling, transportation, 
assembly, packaging, or servicing of such property.
    (2) Production defined. For purposes of this paragraph, the term 
``produced'' means manufactured, grown, extracted, or constructed and 
includes a substantial transformation of property purchased for resale 
or the manufacture of a product when purchased components constitute 
part of the property which is sold. See paragraph (a)(4)(ii) and (iii) 
of Sec. 1.954-3 for a statement and illustration of the principles set 
forth in the preceding sentence.

[T.D. 6683, 28 FR 11183, Oct. 18, 1963, as amended by T.D. 6688, 28 FR 
11632, Oct. 31, 1963]


<R05>
Sec. 1.955A-1  Shareholder's pro rata share of amount of previously excluded subpart F income withdrawn from investment in foreign base company shipping 
          operations.

    (a) In general. Section 955 provides rules for determining the 
amount of a controlled foreign corporation's previously excluded subpart 
F income which is withdrawn for any taxable year beginning after 
December 31, 1975, from investment in foreign base company shipping 
operations. Pursuant to section 951(a)(1)(A)(iii) and the regulations 
thereunder, a United States shareholder of such controlled foreign 
corporation must include in his gross income his pro rata share of such 
amount as determined in accordance with paragraph (c) of this section.
    (b) Amount withdrawn by controlled foreign corporation--(1) In 
general. For purposes of sections 951 through 964, the amount of a 
controlled foreign corporation's previously excluded subpart F income 
which is withdrawn for any

[[Page 324]]

taxable year from investment in foreign base company shipping operations 
is an amount equal to the decrease for such year in such corporation's 
qualified investments in foreign base company shipping operations. Such 
decrease is, except as provided in Sec. 1.955A-4--
    (i) An amount equal to the excess of the amount of its qualified 
investments in foreign base company shipping operations at the close of 
the preceding taxable year over the amount of its qualified investments 
in foreign base company shipping operations at the close of the taxable 
year, minus
    (ii) The amount (if any) by which recognized losses on sales or 
exchanges by such corporation during the taxable year of qualified 
investments in foreign base company shipping operations exceed its 
recognized gains on sales or exchanges during such year of qualified 
investments in foreign base company shipping operations,

but only to the extent that the net amount so determined does not exceed 
the limitation determined under subparagraph (2) of this paragraph. See 
Sec. 1.955A-2 for determining the amount of qualified investments in 
foreign base company shipping operations.
    (2) Limitation applicable in determining decreases--(i) In general. 
The limitation referred to in subparagraph (i) of this paragraph for any 
taxable year of a controlled foreign corporation shall be the lesser of 
the following two limitations:
    (A) The sum of (1) the controlled foreign corporation's earnings and 
profits (or deficit in earnings and profits) for the taxable year, 
computed as of the close of the taxable year without diminution by 
reason of any distribution made during the taxable year, (2) the sum of 
its earnings and profits (or deficits in earnings and profits) 
accumulated for prior taxable years beginning after December 31, 1975, 
and (3) the amount described in subparagraph (3) of this paragraph; or
    (B) The sum of the amounts excluded under section 954(b)(2) (see 
subparagraph (4) of this paragraph) from the foreign base company income 
of such corporation for all prior taxable years beginning after December 
31, 1975, minus the sum of the amounts (determined under this paragraph) 
of its previously excluded subpart F income withdrawn from investment in 
foreign base company shipping operations for all such prior taxable 
years.
    (C) For purposes of the immediately preceding subparagrah (B), the 
amount excluded under section 954(b)(2) for a taxable year of a 
controlled foreign corporation (the ``first corporation'') includes (1) 
an amount excluded under section 954(b)(2) by another corporation which 
is a member of a related group (as defined in Sec. 1.955A-3(b)(1)) 
attributable to the first corporation's excess investment (see 
Sec. 1.955A-3(c)(4)) for a taxable year beginning after December 31, 
1983, (2) an amount excluded by a corporation under Sec. 1.954-
1(b)(4)(ii)(b) by reason of the application of the carryover rule there 
set forth, and (3) an amount equal to the first corporation's pro rata 
share of a group excess deduction (see Sec. 1.955A-3(c)(2)) of a related 
group for a taxable year beginning after December 31, 1983 (but not in 
excess of that portion of such pro rata share which would reduce the 
first corporation's foreign base company shipping income to zero). Such 
amounts will not be treated as excluded under section 954(b)(2) by any 
other corporation.
    (ii) Certain exclusions from earnings and profits. For purposes of 
determining the earnings and profits of a controlled foreign corporation 
under subdivision (i)(A)(1) and (2) of this subparagraph, such earnings 
and profits shall be considered not to include any amounts which are 
attributable to--
    (A)(1) Amounts which, for the current taxable year, are included in 
the gross income of a United States shareholder of such controlled 
foreign corporation under section 951(a)(1)(A)(i), or
    (2) Amounts which, for any prior taxable year, have been included in 
the gross income of a United States shareholder of such controlled 
foreign corporation under section 951(a) and have not been distributed; 
or
    (B)(1) Amounts which, for the current taxable year, are included in 
the gross income of a United States shareholder of such controlled 
foreign corporation under section 551(b) or would be so included under 
such section but for the

[[Page 325]]

fact that such amounts were distributed to such shareholder during the 
taxable year, or
    (2) Amounts which, for any prior taxable year, have been included in 
the gross income of a United States shareholder of such controlled 
foreign corporation under section 551(b) and have not been distributed.
The rules of this subdivision apply only in determining the limitation 
on a controlled foreign corporation's decrease in qualified investments 
in foreign base company shipping operations. See section 959 and the 
regulations thereunder for rules relating to the exclusion from gross 
income of previously taxed earnings and profits.
    (3) Carryover of amounts relating to investments in less developed 
country shipping companies--(i) In general. The amount described in this 
subparagraph for any taxable year of a controlled foreign corporation 
beginning after December 31, 1975, is the lesser of--
    (A) The excess of the amount described in subdivision (ii) of this 
subparagraph, over the amount described in subdivision (iii) of this 
subparagraph, or
    (B) The limitation determined under subdivision (iv) of this 
subparagraph.
    (ii) Previously excluded subpart F income invested in less developed 
country shipping companies. The amount described in this subdivision for 
all taxable years of a controlled foreign corporation beginning after 
December 31, 1975, is the lesser of--
    (A) The amount of such corporation's qualified investments 
(determined under Sec. 1.955-2 other than paragraph (b)(5) thereof) in 
less developed country shipping companies described in Sec. 1.955-5(b) 
at the close of the last taxable year of such corporation beginning 
before January 1, 1976, or
    (B) The limitation determined under Sec. 1.955-1(b)(2)(i)(b) 
(relating to previously excluded subpart F income) for the first taxable 
year of such corporation beginning after January 1, 1976.
    (iii) Amounts previously carried over. The amount described in this 
subdivision for any taxable year of a controlled foreign corporation 
shall be the sum of the excesses determined for each prior taxable year 
beginning after December 31, 1976, of--
    (A) The amount (determined under this paragraph) of such 
corporation's previously excluded subpart F income withdrawn from 
investment in foreign base company shipping operations, over
    (B) The sum of the earnings and profits determined under 
subparagraph (2)(i)(A)(1) and (2) of this paragraph.
    (iv) Extent attributable to accumulated earnings and profits. The 
limitation determined under this subdivision for any taxable year of a 
controlled foreign corporation is the sum of such controlled foreign 
corporation's earnings and profits (or deficits in earnings and profits) 
accumulated for taxable years beginning after December 31, 1962, and 
before January 1, 1976. For purposes of the preceding sentence, earnings 
and profits shall be determined by excluding the amounts described in 
subparagraph (2)(ii)(A) and (B) of this paragraph.
    (v) Illustration. The application of this subparagraph may be 
illustrated by the following example:

    Example. (a) Throughout the period here involved, A is a United 
States shareholder of controlled foreign corporation M. M is not a 
foreign personal holding company, and M uses the calendar year as the 
taxable year.

    (b) The amount described in this subparagraph for M's taxable year 
1978 with respect to A is determined as follows, based on the facts 
shown in the following table:


                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
(1) Investment in less developed country shipping companies             
 on December 31, 1975 (subdivision (ii)(A) amount).........      $10,000
(2) Sec.  1.955-1(b)(2)(i)(b) limitation for 1976                       
 (previously excluded subpart F income not withdrawn from               
 investment in less developed countries) (subdivision                   
 (ii)(B) amount)...........................................       50,000
(3) Subdivision (ii) amount (lesser of lines (1) and (2))..       10,000
(4) Subdivision (iii) amount: Excess for 1977 of M's                    
 previously excluded subpart F income withdrawn from                    
 investment in foreign base country shipping operations,                
 $3,000, over the sum of the amounts determined under                   
 subparagraphs (2)(i)(A)(1) and (2) of this paragraph,                  
 $1,000....................................................        2,000
                                                            ------------
(5) Excess of line (3) over line (4).......................        8,000
                                                            ============
(6) Sum of M's earnings and profits accumulated for 1962                
 through 1975, determined on December 31, 1978.............       26,000
(7) Amount described in this subparagraph for 1978 (lesser              
 of line (5) and line (6)).................................        8,000
                                                            ============
                                                                        


[[Page 326]]

    (c) For 1978, M's earnings and profits (reduced as provided in 
Sec. 1.955-1(b)(2)(ii)(a)(1)) are $19,000, and the amount of M's 
previously excluded subpart F income withdrawn from investment in less 
developed countries determined under Sec. 1.955-1(b)) is $42,000. 
Consequently, $23,000 of M's earnings and profits accumulated for 1962 
through 1975 are attributable to such $42,000 amount, and will therefore 
be excluded under subparagraph (2)(ii))(A)(2) of this paragraph from M's 
earnings and profits accumulated for 1962 through 1975, determined as of 
December 31, 1979. No other portion of M's earnings and profits 
accumulated for 1962 through 1975 is distributed or included in the 
gross income of a United States shareholder in 1978.
    (d) The amount described in this subparagraph for M's taxable year 
1979 with respect to A is determined as follows, based on the additional 
facts shown in the following table:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
(1) Subdivision (ii) amount (line (3) from paragraph (b) of             
 this example).............................................      $10,000
(2) Subdivision (iii) amount: (i) Excess for 1977 from line             
 (4) of paragraph (b) of this example......................        2,000
                                                                        


                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
  (ii) Plus: excess for 1978 of M's previously excluded                 
   subpart F income withdrawn from investment in foreign                
   base country shipping operations, $6,000, over the                   
   sum of the amounts determined under subparagraphs                    
   (2)(i)(A)(1) and (2) of this paragraph, $25,000......      0         
                                                         -------        
                                                                        


                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
  (iii) Subdivision (iii) amount...........................        2,000
                                                            ------------
(3) Excess of line (1) over line (2)(iii)..................        8,000
                                                            ============
(4) Sum of M's earnings and profits accumulated for 1962                
 through 1975, determined on December 31, 1979 ($26,000                 
 minus $23,000)............................................        3,000
(5) Amount described in this subparagraph for 1979 (lesser              
 of line (3) and line (4)).................................        3,000
                                                            ============
                                                                        

    (4) Amount excluded. For purposes of subparagraph (2)(i)(B) of this 
paragraph, the amount excluded under section 954(b)(2) from the foreign 
base company income of a controlled foreign corporation for any taxable 
year beginning after December 31, 1975, is the excess of--
    (i) The amount which would have been equal to the subpart F income 
of such corporation for such taxable year if such corporation had had no 
increase in qualified investments in foreign base company shipping 
operations for such taxable year, over
    (ii) The subpart F income of such corporation for such taxable year.
    (c) Shareholder's pro rata share of amount withdrawn by controlled 
foreign corporation--(1) In general. A United States shareholder's pro 
rata share of a controlled foreign corporation's previously excluded 
subpart F income withdrawn for any taxable year from investment in 
foreign base company shipping operations is his pro rata share of the 
amount withdrawn for such year by such corporation, as determined under 
paragraph (b) of this section. See section 955(a)(3). Such pro rata 
share shall be determined in accordance with the principles of 
Sec. 1.195-1(e).
    (2) Special rule. A United States shareholder's pro rata share of 
the net amount determined under paragraph (b)(2)(i)(B) of this section 
with respect to any stock of the controlled foreign corporation owned by 
such shareholder shall be determined without taking into account any 
amount attributable to a period prior to the date on which such 
shareholder acquired such stock. See section 1248 and the regulations 
thereunder for rules governing treatment of gain from sales or exchanges 
of stock in certain foreign corporations.
    (d) Illustrations. The application of this section may be 
illustrated by the following examples:

    Example 1 A, a United States shareholder, owns 60 percent of the 
only class of stock of M Corporation, a controlled foreign coporation 
throughout the entire period here involved. Both A and M use the 
calendar year as a taxable year. The amount of M's previously excluded 
subpart F income withdrawn for 1978 from investment in foreign base 
company shipping operations is $40,000, and A's pro rata share of such 
amount is $24,000 determined as follows based on the facts shown in the 
following table:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
(a) Qualified investments in foreign base company shipping              
 operations at the close of 1977...........................     $125,000
(b) Less: qualified investments in foreign base company                 
 shipping operations at the close of 1978..................       75,000
                                                            ------------
(c) Balance................................................       50,000

[[Page 327]]

                                                                        
(d) Less: excess of recognized losses ($15,000) over                    
 recognized gains ($5,000) on sales during 1978 of                      
 qualified investments in foreign base company shipping                 
 operations................................................       10,000
                                                            ------------
(e) Tentative decrease in qualified investment in foreign               
 base company shipping operations for 1978.................       40,000
                                                            ============
(f) Earnings and profits for 1976, 1977, and 1978..........       45,000
(g) Plus: amount determined under paragraph (b)(3) of this              
 section...................................................            0
                                                            ------------
(h) Earnings and profits limitation........................       45,000
                                                            ============
(i) Excess of amount excluded under section 954(b)(2) from              
 foreign base company income for 1976 ($75,000) over amount             
 of previously excluded subpart F income withdrawn for 1977             
 from investment in foreign base company shipping                       
 operations ($25,000)......................................       50,000
(j) M's amount of previously excluded subpart F income                  
 withdrawn for 1978 from investment in foreign base company             
 shipping operations (item (e), but not to exceed the                   
 lesser of item (h) or item (i)............................       40,000
(k) A's pro rata share of M Corporation's amount of                     
 previously excluded subpart F in come withdrawn for 1978               
 from investment in foreign base company shipping                       
 operations (60 percent of $40,000)........................       24,000
                                                            ============
                                                                        

    Example 2. The facts are the same as in example 1, except that M's 
earnings and profits (determined under paragraph (b)(2) of this section) 
for 1976, 1977, and 1978 (item (f)) are $30,000 instead of $45,000. M's 
amount of previously excluded subpart F income withdrawn for 1978 from 
investment in foreign base company shipping operations is $30,000. A's 
pro rata share of such amount is $18,000 (60 percent of $30,000).
    Example 3. The facts are the same as in example 1, except that the 
excess of the amount excluded under section 954(b)(2) for 1976 from M 
Corporation's foreign base company income over the amount of its 
previously excluded subpart F income withdrawn for 1977 from investment 
in foreign base company shipping operations (item (i)) is $20,000 
instead of $50,000. M's amount of previously excluded subpart F income 
withdrawn for 1978 from investment in foreign base company shipping 
operations is $20,000. A's pro rata share of such amount is $12,000 (60 
percent of $20,000).

[T.D. 7894, 48 FR 22530, May 19, 1983; 48 FR 40888, Sept. 12, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 1.955A-2  Amount of a controlled foreign corporation's qualified investments in foreign base company shipping operations.

    (a) Qualified investments--(1) In general. Under section 955(b), for 
purposes of sections 951 through 964, a controlled foreign corporation's 
``qualified investments in foreign base company shipping operations'' 
are investments in--
    (i) Any aircraft or vessel, to the extent that such aircraft or 
vessel is used (or hired or leased for use) in foreign commerce,
    (ii) Related shipping assets (within the meaning of paragraph (b) of 
this section),
    (iii) Stock or obligations of a related controlled foreign 
corporation, to the extent provided in paragraph (c) of this section,
    (iv) A partnership, to the extent provided in paragraph (d) of this 
section, and
    (v) Stock or obligations of a less developed country shipping 
company described in Sec. 1.955-5(b), as provided in paragraph (h) of 
this section.
    (2) Coordination of provisions. No amount shall be counted as a 
qualified investment in foreign base company shipping operations under 
more than one provision of this section. Thus, for example, if a $10,000 
investment in stock of a controlled foreign corporation is treated as a 
qualified investment in foreign base company shipping operations under 
both subparagraphs (1)(iii) and (v) of this paragraph, then such $10,000 
is counted only once as a qualified investment in foreign base company 
shipping operations.
    (3) Definitions. If the meaning of any term is defined or explained 
in Sec. 1.954-6, then such term shall have the same meaning when used in 
this section.
    (4) Extent of use. (i) For purposes of subparagraph (1)(i) of this 
paragraph and paragraph (b)(1) of this section, the extent to which an 
asset of a controlled foreign corporation is used during a taxable year 
in foreign base company

[[Page 328]]

shipping operations shall be determined on the basis of the proportion 
for such year which the foreign base company shipping income derived 
from the use of such asset bears to the total gross income derived from 
the use of such asset.
    (ii) For purposes of determining under subdivision (i) of this 
subparagraph the amounts of foreign base company shipping income and 
gross income of a controlled foreign corporation--
    (A) Such amounts shall be deemed to include an arm's length charge 
(see Sec. 1.954-6(h)(5)) for services performed by such corporation for 
itself,
    (B) Such amounts shall be deemed to include an arm's length charge 
for the use of an asset (such as a vessel under construction or laid up 
for repairs) which is held for use in foreign base company shipping 
operations, but is not actually so used,
    (C) Foreign base company shipping income shall be deemed to include 
amounts earned in taxable years beginning before January 1, 1976, and
    (D) The district director shall make such other adjustments to such 
amounts as are necessary to properly determine the extent to which any 
asset is used in foreign base company shipping operations.
    (b) Related shipping assets--(1) In general. For purposes of this 
section, the term ``related shipping asset'' means any asset which is 
used (or held for use) for or in connection with the production of 
income described in Sec. 1.954-6(b)(1)(i) or (ii), but only to the 
extent that such asset is so used (or is so held for use).
    (2) Examples. Examples of assets of a controlled foreign corporation 
which are used (or held for use) for or in connection with the 
production of income described in subparagraph (1) of this paragraph 
include--
    (i) Money, bank deposits, and other temporary investments which are 
reasonably necessary to meet the working capital requirements of such 
corporation in its conduct of foreign base company shipping operations,
    (ii) Accounts receivable and evidences of indebtedness which arise 
from the conduct of foreign base company shipping operations by such 
corporation or by a related person,
    (iii) Amounts (other than amounts described in subdivision (i) of 
this subparagraph) deposited in bank accounts or invested in readily 
marketable securities pursuant to a specific, definite, and feasible 
plan to purchase any tangible asset for use in foreign base company 
shipping operations,
    (iv) Amounts paid into escrow to secure the payment of (A) charter 
hire for an aircraft, vessel, or other asset used in foreign base 
company shipping operations or (B) a debt which constitutes a specific 
charge against such an asset,
    (v) Capitalized expenditures (such as progress payments) made under 
a contract to purchase any asset for use in foreign base company 
shipping operations,
    (vi) Prepaid expense and deferred charges incurred in the course of 
foreign base company shipping operations,
    (vii) Stock acquired and retained to insure a source of supplies or 
services used in the conduct of foreign base company shipping 
operations, and
    (viii) Currency futures acquired and retained as a hedge against 
international currency fluctuations in connection with foreign base 
company shipping operations.
    (3) Limitations--(i) Vessels generally. Notwithstanding any other 
provision of this paragraph, the term ``related shipping assets'' does 
not include any money or other intangible assets of a controlled foreign 
corporation, to the extent that such assets are permitted to accumulate 
in excess of the reasonably anticipated needs of the business.
    (ii) Safe harbor. If a controlled foreign corporation accumulates 
money or other intangible assets pursuant to a plan to purchase one or 
more vessels for use in foreign commerce, and if--
    (A) The amount so accumulated, plus
    (B) The sum of the amounts accumulated by other controlled foreign 
corporations which are related persons (within the meaning of section 
954(d)(3)) pursuant to similar plans, does not exceed 110 percent of a 
reasonable down payment on each vessel planned to be purchased within a 
reasonable period, then such plan will be considered to be feasible. For 
purposes of the preceding sentence, a reasonable

[[Page 329]]

down payment shall not exceed 28 percent of the total cost of 
acquisition. The determination dates applicable to the taxable year of a 
controlled foreign corporation are those set forth in paragraph 
(c)(2)(ii) of this section. In the case of accumulation of assets which 
do not come within the safe harbor limitation of this subdivision (ii), 
in determining whether such assets have accumulated beyond the 
reasonably anticipated needs of the business, factors to be taken into 
account include, but are not limited to, the availability of financing 
to purchase a vessel and the availability of a vessel suitable for the 
purposes to which the vessel is to be put.
    (iii) Other assets. In determining whether a plan to purchase any 
asset other than a vessel for use in foreign base company shipping 
operations is feasible, principles similar to those stated in 
subdivision (ii) of this subparagraph shall be applied.
    (4) Cross-reference. See Sec. 1.954-7(c) for additional 
illustrations bearing on the application of this paragraph.
    (c) Stock and obligations--(1) In general. Investments by a 
controlled foreign corporation (the ``first corporation'') in stock or 
obligations of a second controlled foreign corporation which is a 
related person (within the meaning of section 954(d)(3) are considered 
to be qualified investments in foreign base company shipping operations 
to the extent that the assets of such second corporation are used (or 
held for use) in foreign base company shipping operations. See 
subparagraph (2) of this paragraph. However, an investment in an 
obligation of the second corporation will not be considered a qualified 
investment in foreign base company shipping operations if the obligation 
represents a liability which constitutes a specific charge (nonrecourse 
or otherwise) against an asset of the second corporation which is not 
either--
    (i) An aircraft or vessel used (or held for use) to some extent in 
foreign commerce, or
    (ii) An asset described in paragraphs (a)(1)(ii) through (v) of this 
section.
    (2) Extent of use. On any determination date applicable to a taxable 
year of the first corporation, the extent to which the assets of the 
second corporation are used in foreign base company shipping operations 
shall be determined on the basis of the proportion which the amount of 
such second corporation's qualified investments in foreign base company 
shipping operations bears to its net worth, such proportion to be 
determined at the close of the second corporation's last taxable year 
which ends on or before such determination date. For purposes of the 
preceding sentence--
    (i) A controlled foreign corporation's net worth is the total 
adjusted basis of the corporate assets reduced by the total outstanding 
principal amount of the corporate liabilities, and
    (ii) The determination dates applicable to a taxable year of a 
controlled foreign corporation are--
    (A) Except as provided in (B) of this subdivision, the close of such 
taxable year and the close of the preceding taxable year, and
    (B) With respect to a United States shareholder who has made an 
election under section 955(b)(3) to determine such corporation's 
increase in qualified investments in foreign base company shipping 
operations at the close of the following taxable year, the close of such 
taxable year and the close of the taxable year immediately following 
such taxable year.
    (3) Illustrations. The application of this paragraph may be 
illustrated by the following examples:

    Example 1. On December 31, 1976, controlled foreign corporation X 
owns 100 percent of the single class of stock of controlled foreign 
corporation Y. X and Y both use the calendar year as the taxable year. 
On December 31, 1976, Y's assets consist of a vessel used in foreign 
commerce, related shipping assets, and other assets unrelated to its 
foreign base company shipping operations. On such date Y has qualified 
investments in foreign base company shipping operations (determined 
under paragraph (g) of this section) of $60,000, and a net worth of 
$100,000. If X's investment in the stock of Y is $50,000, then $30,000 
of such amount, i.e.,
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC09OC91.012

is a qualified investment in foreign base company shipping operations.
    Example 2. The facts are the same as in example 1, except that on 
December 31, 1976, Y's assets consist entirely of a vessel used in

[[Page 330]]

foreign commerce and related shipping assets, Y has qualified 
investments in foreign base company shipping operations (determined 
under paragraph (g) of this section) of $16,000 and (therefore) a net 
worth of $16,000. If X's investment in the stock of Y is $50,000, then 
the entire $50,000, i.e.,
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC09OC91.013

is a qualified investment in foreign base company shipping operations.
    Example 3. On December 31, 1980, controlled foreign corporation J 
owns two notes of controlled foreign corporation K, which is a related 
person (within the meaning of section 954(d)(3)). Both J and K use the 
calendar year as the taxable year. J's adjusted basis in each of the two 
notes is $100,000. The first note is secured only by the general credit 
of K. The second note is secured by (and, therefore, constitutes a 
specific charge on) a hotel owned by K in a foreign country. On December 
31, 1980, K has qualified investments in foreign base company shipping 
operation with an adjusted basis of $500,000 (before applying the rules 
of paragraph (g) of this section). The adjusted basis of all of K's 
corporate assets is $1,100,000. K's only liabilities are the two notes. 
The amount of K's qualified investments in foreign base company shipping 
operations (determined under paragraph (g) of this section) is $450,000. 
K's net worth is $900,000. The amount of J's qualified investment in 
foreign base company shipping operations in respect of the first note is 
$50,000, i.e.,

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC09OC91.014


The amount of J's qualified investment in respect of the second note is 
zero (see the last sentence of paragraph (c)(1) of this section).

    (d) Partnerships--(1) In general. A controlled foreign corporation's 
investment in a partnership at the close of any taxable year of such 
corporation shall be considered a qualified investment in foreign base 
company shipping operations to the extent of the proportion which such 
corporation's foreign base company shipping income for such taxable year 
would bear to its gross income for such taxable year if--
    (i) Such corporation had realized no income other than its 
distributive share of the partnership gross income, and
    (ii) Such corporation's income were adjusted in accordance with the 
rules stated in paragraphs (a)(4)(ii)(B) and (D) of this section.
    (2) Transitional rule. For purposes of subparagraph (1)(i) of this 
paragraph, the controlled foreign corporation's distributive share of 
the partnership gross income shall not include any amount attributable 
to income earned by the partnership before the first day of such 
corporation's first taxable year beginning after December 31, 1975.
    (3) Cross-reference. See paragraph (g)(4) of this section for rules 
relating to the determination of the amount of a controlled foreign 
corporation's investment in a partnership.
    (e) Trusts--(1) In general. An investment in a trust is not a 
qualified investment in a foreign base company shipping operations.
    (2) Grantor trusts. Notwithstanding subparagraph (1) of this 
pargraph, if a controlled foreign corporation is treated as the owner of 
any portion of a trust under subpart E of part I of subchapter J 
(relating to grantors and others treated as substantial owners), then 
for purposes of this section such controlled foreign corporation is 
deemed to be the actual owner of such portion of the assets of the 
trust. Accordingly, its investments in such assets (as determined under 
paragraph (g)(5) of this section) may be treated as a qualified 
investment in foreign base company shipping operations.
    (3) Definitions. For purposes of this section, the term ``trust'' 
means a trust as defined in Sec. 301.7701-4.
    (f) Excluded property. For purposes of paragraph (a) of this 
section, property acquired principally for the purpose of artificially 
increasing the amount of a controlled foreign corporation's qualified 
investments in foreign base company shipping operations will not be 
recognized; whether an item of property is acquired principally for such 
purpose will depend upon all the facts and circumstances of each case. 
One of the factors that will be considered in making such a 
determination with respect to an item of property is whether the item is 
disposed of within 6 months after the date of its acquisition.

[[Page 331]]

    (g) Amount attributable to property--(1) General rule. For purposes 
of this section, the amount taken into account under section 955(b)(4) 
with respect to any property which constitutes a qualified investment in 
foreign base company shipping operations shall be its adjusted basis as 
of the applicable determination date, reduced by the outstanding 
principal amount of any liability (other than a liability described in 
subparagraph (2) of this paragraph) to which such property is subject on 
such date including a liability secured only by the general credit of 
the controlled foreign corporation. Liabilities shall be taken into 
account in the following order:
    (i) The adjusted basis of each and every item of corporate property 
shall be reduced by any specific charge (non-recourse or otherwise) to 
which such item is subject. For this purpose, if a liability constitutes 
a specific charge against several items of property and cannot 
definitely be allocated to any single item of property, the specific 
charge shall be apportioned against each of such items of property in 
that ratio which the adjusted basis of such item on the applicable 
determination date bears to the adjusted basis of all such items on such 
date. The excess against property over the adjusted basis of such 
property shall be taken into account as a liability secured only by the 
general credit of the corporation.
    (ii) A liability which is evidenced by an open account or which is 
secured only by the general credit of the controlled foreign corporation 
shall be apportioned against each and every item of corporate property 
in that ratio which the adjusted basis of such item on the applicable 
determination date (reduced as provided in subdivision (i) of this 
subparagraph) bears to the adjusted basis of all the corporate property 
on such date (reduced as provided in subdivision (i) of this 
subparagraph); provided that no liability shall be apportioned under 
this subdivision against any stock or obligations described in paragraph 
(h)(1) of this section.
    (2) Excluded charges. For purposes of subparagraph (1) of this 
paragraph, a liability created principally for the purpose of 
artificially increasing or decreasing the amount of a controlled foreign 
corporation's qualified investments in foreign base company shipping 
operations will not be recognized. Whether a liability is created 
principally for such purpose will depend upon all the facts and 
circumstances of each case. One of the factors that will be considered 
in making such a determination with respect to a loan is whether the 
loan was both created after November 20, 1974, and is from a related 
person, as defined in section 954(d)(3) and paragraph (e) of Sec. 1.954-
1. Another such factor is whether the liability was created after March 
29, 1975, in a taxable year beginning before January 1, 1976. For 
purposes of this paragraph (g)(2), payments on liabilities which are 
represented by an open account are credited against the account 
transactions arising earliest in time.
    (3) Statement required. If for purposes of this section the adjusted 
basis of property which constitutes a qualified investment in foreign 
base company shipping operations by a controlled foreign corporation is 
reduced on the ground that such property is subject to a liability, each 
United States shareholder shall attach to his return a statement setting 
forth the adjusted basis of the property before the reduction and the 
amount and nature of the reduction.
    (4) Partnership interest. If a controlled foreign corporation is a 
partner in a partnership, its investment in the partnership taken into 
account under section 955(b)(4) shall be its adjusted basis in the 
partnership determined under section 722 or 742, adjusted as provided in 
section 705, and reduced as provided in subparagraph (1) of this 
paragraph. (However, if the partnership is not engaged solely in the 
conduct of foreign base company shipping operations, such amount shall 
be taken into account only to the extent provided in paragraph (d)(1) of 
this section).
    (5) Grantor trust. If a controlled foreign corporation is deemed to 
own a portion of the assets of a trust under paragraph (e)(2) of this 
section then the amount taken into account under section 955 (b)(4) with 
respect to such assets shall be determined as provided in

[[Page 332]]

subparagraph (1) of this paragraph by the application of the following 
rules:
    (i) Such controlled foreign corporation's adjusted basis in such 
assets shall be deemed to be a proportionate share of the trust's 
adjusted basis in such assets, and
    (ii) A proportionate share of the liabilities of the trust shall be 
deemed to be liabilities of such controlled foreign corporation and to 
constitute specific charges against such assets.
    (6) Translation into United States dollars. The amounts determined 
in accordance with this paragraph shall be translated into United States 
dollars in accordance with the principles of Sec. 1.964-1(e)(4).
    (h) Investments in shipping companies under prior law--(1)  In 
general. If an amount invested in stock or obligations of a less 
developed country shipping company described in Sec. 1.955-5(b) is 
treated as a qualified investment in less developed countries under 
Sec. 1.955-2 (applied without regard to paragraph (b)(5)(ii) thereof) on 
the applicable determination date for purposes of section 954(g) or 
section 955(a)(2) with respect to a taxable year beginning after 
December 31, 1975, then such amount shall be treated as a qualified 
investment in foreign base company shipping operations on such 
determination date. See section 955(b)(5).
    (2) Effect on prior law. See Sec. 1.955-2(b)(5)(ii) for the rule 
that investments which are treated as qualified investments in foreign 
base company shipping operations under subparagraph (1) of this 
paragraph shall not be treated as qualified investments in less 
developed countries for purposes of section 951(a)(1)(A)(ii).
    (3) Illustration. The application of this paragraph may be 
illustrated by the following example:

     Example. (a) Throughout the period here involved, controlled 
foreign corporation X owns 100 percent of the single class of stock of 
controlled foreign corporation Y, X and Y each use the calendar years as 
the taxable year. At the close of 1975, X's $50,000 investment in the 
stock of Y is treated as a qualified investment in less developed 
countries under Sec. 1.955-2 (applied without regard to Sec. 1.955-
2(b)(5)(ii), and Y is a less developed country shipping company 
described in Sec. 1.955-5(b).
    (b) On December 31, 1976, Y is still a less developed country 
shipping company and X's $50,000 investment in the stock of Y is still 
treated as a qualified investment in less developed countries under 
Sec. 1.955-2 (applied without regard to Sec. 1.955-2(b)(5)(ii). Under 
subparagraph (1) of this paragraph X's entire $50,000 investment in the 
stock of Y is treated as a qualified investment in foreign base company 
shipping operations.
    (c) For 1977, Y's gross income is $10,000 and Y's foreign base 
company shipping income is $7,500. Since Y fails to meet the 80-percent 
income test of Sec. 1.955-5(b)(1), Y is no longer a less developed 
country shipping company described in Sec. 1-955-5(b), and X's 
investment in the stock of Y is no longer treated as a qualified 
investment in less developed countries under Sec. 1.955-2 (applied 
without regard to Sec. 1.955-2(b)(5)(ii). However, assume that on 
December 31, 1977, Y's net worth (as defined in paragraph (c)(2)(1) of 
this section) is $100,000, that Y's qualified investments in foreign 
base company shipping operations (determined under this section) on 
December 31, 1977, are $75,000, and that X's investment in the stock of 
Y (as determined under paragraph (g) of this section) continues to be 
$50,000. Then $67,500, i.e.,
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC09OC91.015

of X's $50.000 investment in the stock of Y is treated as a qualified 
investment in foreign company shipping operations under paragraph (c) of 
this section.
    (d) For 1978, all of Y's gross income is foreign base company 
shipping income. Although Y is again a less developed country shipping 
company described in Sec. 1.955-5(b), X's investment in the stock of Y 
is no longer treated as a qualified investment in less developed 
countries under Sec. 1.955-2(b)(5)(iii). Thus, X's investment in the 
stock of Y is not treated as a qualified investment in foreign base 
company shipping operations under subparagraph (1) of this paragraph. 
However, X's investment in the stock of Y may be so treated under 
another provision of this section, as was the case in item (c) of this 
example.

(Secs. 955 (b)(2) and 7805 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954 (89 
Stat. 63; 26 U.S.C. 955(b)(2), and 68A Stat. 917; 26 U.S.C. 7805))

[T.D. 7894, 48 FR 22532, May 19, 1983; 48 FR 40888, Sept. 12, 1983, as 
amended by T.D. 7959, 49 FR 22280, May 29, 1984]


<R05>
Sec. 1.955A-3  Election as to qualified investments by related persons.

    (a) In general. If a United States shareholder elects the benefits 
of section 955(b) 2 with respect to a related

[[Page 333]]

group (as defined in paragraph (b)(1) of this section) of controlled 
foreign corporations, then an investment in foreign base company 
shipping operation made by one member of such group will be treated as 
having been made by another member to the extent provided in paragraph 
(c)(4) of this section, and each member will be subject to the other 
provisions of paragraph (c) of this section. An election once made shall 
apply for the taxable year for which it is made and for all subsequent 
years unless the election is revoked or a new election is made to add 
one or more controlled foreign corporations to election coverage. For 
the manner of making an election under section 955(b)(2), and for rules 
relating to the revocation of such an election, see paragraph (d) of 
this section. For rules relating to the coordination of sections 
955(b)(2) and 955(b)(3), see paragraph (e) of this section.
    (b) Related group--(1) Related group defined. The term ``related 
group'' means two or more controlled foreign corporations, but only if 
all of the following requirements are met:
    (i) All such corporations use the same taxable year.
    (ii) The same United States shareholder controls each such 
corporation within the meaning of section 954(d)(3) at the end of such 
taxable year, and
    (iii) Such United States shareholder elects to treat such 
corporations as a related group.
    (iv) If any of the corporations is on a 52-53 week taxable year and 
if all of the taxable years of the corporations end within the same 7-
day period, the rule of paragraph (b)(1)(i) of this section shall be 
deemed satisfied.
    (v) An election under paragraph (b)(1)(iii) of this section will not 
be valid in the case of an election by a U.S. shareholder (the ``first 
U.S. shareholder'') if--
    (A) The first U.S. shareholder controls a second U.S. shareholder,
    (B) The second U.S. shareholder controls one or more controlled 
foreign corporations, and
    (C) Any of the controlled foreign corporations are the subject of 
the election by the first U.S. shareholder,

unless the second U.S. shareholder consents to the election by the first 
U.S. shareholder.
    (2) Group taxable years defined. The ``group taxable year'' is the 
common taxable year of a related group.
    (3) Limitation. If a United States shareholder elects to treat two 
or more corporations as a related group for a group taxable year (the 
``first group taxable year''), then such United States shareholder (and 
any other United States shareholder which is controlled by such 
shareholder) may not also elect to treat two or more other corporations 
as a related group for a group taxable year any day of which falls 
within the first group taxable year.
    (4) Illustrations. The application of this paragraph may be 
illustrated by the following examples:

    Example 1. Domestic corporation M owns 100 percent of the only class 
of stock of controlled foreign corporations A, B, C, D, and E. A, B, and 
C use the calendar year as the taxable year. D and E use the fiscal year 
ending on June 30 as the taxable year. M may elect to treat A, B and C 
as a related group. However, M may not elect to treat C, D, and E as a 
related group.
    Example 2. The facts are the same as in example 1. In addition, M 
elects to treat A, B, and C as a related group for the group taxable 
year which ends on December 31, 1976. M may not also elect to treat D 
and E as a related group for the group taxable year ending on June 30, 
1977.
    Example 3. United States shareholder A owns 60 percent of the only 
class of stock of controlled foreign corporation X and 40 percent of the 
only class of stock of controlled foreign corporation Y. United States 
shareholder B owns the other 40 percent of the stock of X and the other 
60 percent of the stock of Y. Neither A nor B (nor both together) may 
elect to treat X and Y as a related group.

    (c) Effect of election. If a United States shareholder elects to 
treat two or more controlled foreign corporations as a related group for 
any group taxable year then, for purposes of determining the foreign 
base company income (see Sec. 1.954-1) and the increase or decrease in 
qualified investments in foreign base company shipping operations (see 
Secs. 1.954-7. 1.955A-1, and 1.955A-4) of each member of such group for 
such year, the following rules shall apply:

[[Page 334]]

    (1) Intragroup dividends. The gross income of each member of the 
related group shall be deemed not to include dividends received from any 
other member of such group, to the extent that such dividends are 
attributable (within the meaning of Sec. 1.954-6(f)(4)) to foreign base 
company shipping income. In determining net foreign base company 
shipping income, deductions allocable to intragroup dividends 
attributable to foreign base company shipping income shall not be 
allowed.
    (2) Group excess deduction. (i) The deductions allocable under 
Sec. 1.954-1(c) to the foreign base company shipping income of each 
member of the related group shall be deemed to include such member's pro 
rata share of the group excess deduction.
    (ii) The group excess deduction for the group taxable year is the 
sum of the excesses for each member of the related group (having an 
excess) of--
    (A) The member's deductions (determined without regard to this 
subparagraph) allocable to foreign base company shipping income for such 
year, over
    (B) The member's foreign base company shipping income for such year.
    (iii) A member's pro rata share of the group excess deduction is the 
amount which bears the same ratio to such group excess deduction as--
    (A) The excess of such member's foreign base company shipping income 
over the deductions (so determined) allocable thereto, bears to
    (B) The sum of such excesses for each member of the related group 
having an excess.
    (iv) For purposes of this subparagraph, ``foreign base company 
shipping income'' means foreign base company shipping income (as defined 
in Sec. 1.954-6), reduced by excluding therefrom all amounts which are--
    (A) Excluded from subpart F income under section 952(b) (relating to 
exclusion of United States income) or
    (B) Excluded from foreign base company income under section 
954(b)(4) (relating to exception for foreign corporation not availed of 
to reduce taxes).
    (v) The application of this subparagraph may be illustrated by the 
following example:

    Example. Controlled foreign corporations X, Y, and Z are a related 
group for calendar year 1976. The excess group deduction for 1976 is $9, 
X's pro rata share of the group excess deduction is $6, and Y's pro rata 
share is $3, determined as follows on the basis of the facts shown in 
the following table:

                                                                        
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                               X      Y      Z     Group
------------------------------------------------------------------------
(1) Gross shipping income.................    $100    $90    $90  ......
(2) Shipping deductions...................      60     70     80  ......
(3) Net shipping income...................      40     20    (9)  ......
(4) Group excess deduction................  ......  .....  .....      80
(5) X's pro rata share of group excess                                  
 deduction ($9 x $40/$60).................       6  .....  .....  ......
(6) Y's pro rata share of group excess                                  
 deduction ($9 x $20/$60).................  ......      3  .....  ......
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (3) Intragroup investments. On both of the determination dates 
applicable to the group taxable year for purposes of section 954(g) or 
section 955(a)(2), the qualified investments in foreign base company 
shipping operations of each member of the related group shall be deemed 
not to include stock of any other member of the related group. In 
addition, neither the gains nor the losses on dispositions of such stock 
during the group taxable year shall be taken into account under 
Sec. 1.955A-1(b)(1)(ii) in determining the decrease in qualified 
investments in foreign base company shipping operations of any member of 
such related group.
    (4) Group excess investment. (i) On the later (and only the later) 
of the two determination dates applicable to the group taxable year for 
purposes of section 954(g) or section 955(a)(2), the qualified 
investments in foreign base company shipping operations of each member 
of the related group shall be deemed to include such member's pro rata 
share of the group excess investment.
    (ii) The group excess investment for the group taxable year is the 
sum of the excess for each member of the related group (having an 
excess) of--
    (A) The member's increase in qualified investments in foreign base 
company shipping operations (determined under Sec. 1.954-7 after the 
application of subparagraph (3) of this paragraph) for such year, over
    (B) The member's foreign base company shipping income for such year.

[[Page 335]]

    (iii) A member's pro rata share of the group excess investment is 
the amount which bears the same ratio to such group excess investment 
as--
    (A) Such member's shortfall, in qualified investments bears to
    (B) the sum of the shortfalls in qualified investments of each 
member of such related group having a shortfall.
    (iv) If a member has an increase in qualified investments in foreign 
base company shipping operations (determined as provided in Sec. 1.954-7 
after the application of subparagraph (3) of this paragraph) for the 
group taxable year, then such member's ``shortfall in qualified 
investments'' is the excess of--
    (A) Such member's foreign base company shipping income for such 
year, over
    (B) Such increase.
    (v) If a member has a decrease in qualified investments in foreign 
base company shipping operations (determined under Sec. 1.955A-1(b)(1) 
or Sec. 1.955A-4(a), whichever is applicable, after the application of 
subparagraph (3) of this paragraph) for the group taxable year, then 
such member's ``shortfall in qualified investments'' is the sum of--
    (A) Such member's foreign base company shipping income for such year 
and
    (B) Such decrease.
    (vi) For purposes of this subparagraph, ``foreign base company 
shipping income'' means foreign base company shipping income (as defined 
in subparagraph (2)(iv) of this paragraph), reduced by the deductions 
allocable thereto under Sec. 1.954-1(c) (including the additional 
deductions described in subparagraph (2) of this paragraph).
    (vii) The application of paragraphs (c)(1), (3), and (4) of this 
section may be illustrated by the following example:

    Example. (a) Controlled foreign corporations R, S, and T are a 
related group for calendar year 1977. R and S do not own the stock of 
any member of the related group.
    (b) On December 31, 1977, T has qualified investments in foreign 
base company shipping operations (determined without regard to 
paragraphs (c)(3) and (4)) of $105, of which $15 consists of stock of S. 
After application of paragraph (c)(3) (but before application of 
paragraph (c)(4)), on December 31, 1977, T has qualified investments in 
foreign base company shipping operations of $90, determined as follows:


                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
(1) Qualified investments (determined without regard to                 
 paragraph (c)(3)) on December 31, 1977.........................    $105
(2) Less: Qualified investments in stock of another member of a         
 related group (as required by paragraph (c)(3))................      15
                                                                 -------
(3) Balance.....................................................      90
                                                                        

    (c) During 1977, T's foreign base company shipping income is $180, 
determined without regard to paragraph (c)(1). Included in the $180 is 
$5 in dividends in respect of T's stock in S. During 1977, T has 
shipping deductions of $91. Of T's shipping deductions, $1 is allocable 
to the dividends from S. After application of paragraph (c)(1), T's net 
shipping income during 1977 is $85, determined as follows:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
(1) Foreign base company shipping income.................  .....    $180
(2) Less: intragroup dividends (as required by paragraph                
 (c)(1)).................................................  .....       5
                                                                 -------
(3) Balance..............................................  .....     175
(4) Shipping deductions..................................    $91  ......
(5) Less: deductions allocable to intragroup dividends                  
 (as required by paragraph (c)(1)).......................      1  ......
                                                          -------       
(6) Balance..............................................     90  ......
(7) Net shipping income (line (3) minus line (6))........  .....      85
                                                                        

    (d) During 1977 (without regard to paragraph (c)(4)), R's increase 
in qualified investments in foreign base company shipping operations is 
$120; S's decrease is $55; and T's increase is $35, determined on the 
basis of the facts shown in the following table. In all cases, the 
listed amounts of qualified investments on December 31, 1976, reflect 
any adjustments required by paragraph (c)(3) for 1976, but not any 
adjustment required by paragraph (c)(4) for 1976 (see Secs. 1.955A-3 
(c)(3) and (4)(i)).

                                                                        
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                       R      S      T  
------------------------------------------------------------------------
(1) Qualified investments on December 31, 1977 (in                      
 the case of T, taken from line (3) of part (b) of                      
 this example).....................................   $220   $150    $90
(2) Qualified investments on December 31, 1976.....    100    205     55
                                                    --------------------
(3) Increase (decrease) (line (1) minus line (2))..    120   (55)     35
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (e) In 1977, R's net shipping income is $100; S's is $95; and T's is 
$85, determined as follows:

[[Page 336]]



                                                                        
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                       R      S      T  
------------------------------------------------------------------------
(1) Gross foreign base company shipping income (in                      
 the case of T, taken from line (3) of part (c) of                      
 this example).....................................   $200   $180   $175
(2) Shipping deductions (in the case of T, taken                        
 from line (6) of part (c) of this example)........    100     85     90
                                                    --------------------
(3) Net shipping income (line (1) minus line (2))..    100     95     85
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (f) By application of paragraph (c)(4) for 1977, S's pro rata share 
of the group excess investment is $15, and T's pro rata share is $5, 
determined as follows:

                                                                        
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                               R      S      T     Group
------------------------------------------------------------------------
(1) Net shipping income (taken from line                                
 (3) of part (e) of this example).........    $100    $95    $85  ......
(2) Increase (decrease) in qualified                                    
 investments (taken from line (3) of part                               
 (d) of this example).....................     120   (55)     35  ......
(3) Excess investment.....................      20  .....  .....     $20
(4) Shortfall.............................  ......    150     50     200
(5) S's pro rata share of group excess                                  
 investment ($20 x $150/$200).............  ......     15  .....  ......
(6) T's pro rata share of group excess                                  
 investment ($20 x $50/$200)..............  ......  .....      5  ......
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (g) After application of paragraph (c)(4), for purposes of 
determining their increase or decrease in qualified investments in 
foreign base company shipping operations for 1977, on December 31, 1977, 
the amount of R's qualified investments is $200; the amount of S's is 
$165; and the amount of T's is $95, determined as follows:

                                                                        
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                       R      S      T  
------------------------------------------------------------------------
(1) Qualified investments on December 31, 1977                          
 (taken from line (1) of part (d) of this example).   $220   $150    $90
(2) Plus: pro rata share of group excess investment                     
 (as required by paragraph (c)(4)) (taken from                          
 lines (5) and (6) of part (f) of this example)....  .....     15      5
(3) Minus: Excess investment treated as investments                     
 of related group members (taken from line (3) of                       
 part (f) of this example).........................     20  .....  .....
                                                    --------------------
(4) Total qualified investments....................    200    165     95
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (h) After application of paragraph (c)(1), (3), and (4), during 
1977, R's increase in qualified investments in foreign base company 
shipping operations is $100; S's decrease is $40; and T's increase is 
$40, determined as set forth in the table below. In all cases, the 
listed amounts of qualified investments on December 31, 1976, reflect 
any similar adjustments required by paragraph (c)(3) for 1976, but not 
any adjustment required by paragraph (c)(4) for 1976 (see Sec. 1.955A-
3(c)(3) and (4)(i)).

                                                                        
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                       R      S      T  
------------------------------------------------------------------------
(1) Qualified investments on December 31, 1977                          
 (taken from line (4) of part (g) of this example).   $200   $165    $95
(2) Qualified investments on December 31, 1976 (see                     
 line (2) of part (d) of this example).............    100    205     55
                                                    --------------------
(3) Increase (decrease) (line (1) minus line (2))..    100   (40)     40
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (5) Collateral effect. (i) An election under this section by a 
United States shareholder to treat two or more controlled foreign 
corporations as a related group for a group taxable year shall have no 
effect on--
    (A) Any other United States shareholder (including a minority 
shareholder of a member of such related group).
    (B) Any other controlled foreign corporation, and
    (C) The foreign personal holding company income, foreign base 
company sales income, and foreign base company services income, and the 
deductions allocable under Sec. 1.954-1(c) thereto, of any member of 
such related group.
    (ii) See Sec. 1.952-1(c)(2)(ii) for the effect of an election under 
this section on the computation of earnings and profits and deficits in 
earnings and profits under section 952 (c) and (d).
    (iii) The application of this subparagraph may be illustrated by the 
following example:

    Example. United States shareholder A owns 80 percent of the only 
class of stock of controlled foreign corporations X and Y. United States 
shareholder B owns the other 20 percent of the stock of X and Y. X and Y 
both use the calendar year as the taxable year. A elects to treat X and 
Y as a related group for 1977. For purposes of determining the amounts 
includible in B's gross income under section 951(a) in respect of X and 
Y, the election made by A shall be disregarded and all of B's 
computations shall be made without regard to this section, as 
illustrated in Sec. 1.952-3(d).


[[Page 337]]


    (d) Procedure--(1) Time and manner of making election. A United 
States shareholder shall make an election under this section to treat 
two or more controlled foreign corporations as a related group for a 
group taxable year and subsequent years by filing a statement to such 
effect with the return for the taxable year within which or with which 
such group taxable year ends. The statement shall include the following 
information:
    (i) The name, address, taxpayer identification number, and taxable 
year of the United States shareholder;
    (ii) The name, address, and taxable year of each controlled foreign 
corporation which is a member of the related group and is to be subject 
to the election; and
    (iii) A schedule showing the calculations by which the amounts 
described in this section have been determined for the taxable year for 
which the election is first effective. With respect to each subsequent 
taxable year to which the election applies, a new schedule showing 
calculations of such amounts for that taxable year must be filed with 
the return for that taxable year. A consent to an election required by 
paragraph (b)(1)(v) of this section shall include the same information 
required for the election statement.
    (2) Revocation. (i) Except as provided in subdivision (ii) of this 
subparagraph, an election under this section by a United States 
shareholder shall be binding for the group taxable year for which it is 
made and for subsequent years.
    (ii) Upon application by the United States shareholder (and any 
other United States shareholder controlled by such shareholder which 
consented under paragraph (b)(1)(v) of this section to the election), an 
election made under this section may, subject to the approval of the 
Commissioner, be revoked. An application to revoke the election, as of a 
specified group taxable year, with respect to one or more (but not all) 
controlled foreign corporations, subject to an election shall be deemed 
to be an application to revoke the election. Approval will not be 
granted unless a material and substantial change in circumstances occurs 
which could not have been anticipated when the election was made. The 
application for consent to revocation shall be made by mailing a letter 
for such purpose to Commissioner of Internal Revenue, Attention: T:C:C, 
Washington, DC 20224, containing a statement of the facts which justify 
such consent. If a member of a related group subject to an election 
ceases to meet the requirements of paragraph (b) of this section for 
membership in the group by reason of any action taken by it or any 
member of the group or the electing United States shareholder, then the 
election will be deemed to be revoked as of the beginning of the taxable 
year in which such action occurred. If such action is taken principally 
for the purpose of revoking the election without applying for and 
obtaining the approval of the Commissioner to the revocation, then no 
further election covering any member of that related group may be made 
by any United States shareholder for the remainder of the taxable year 
in which the action occurred and the five succeeding taxable years.
    (e) Coordination with section 955(b)(3). If a United States 
shareholder elects under this section to treat two or more controlled 
foreign corporations as a related group for any taxable year, and if 
such United States shareholder is required under Sec. 1.955A-4(c)(2) for 
purposes of filing any return to estimate the qualified investments in 
foreign base company shipping operations of any member of such group, 
then such United States shareholder shall, for purposes of filing such 
return, determine the amount includible in his gross income in respect 
of each member of such related group on the basis of such estimate. If 
the actual amount of such investments is not the same as the amount of 
the estimate, the United States shareholder shall immediately notify the 
Commissioner. The Commissioner will thereupon redetermine the amount of 
tax of such United States shareholder for the year or years with respect 
to which the incorrect amount was taken into account. The amount of tax, 
if any, due upon such redetermination shall be paid by the United States 
shareholder upon notice and demand by the district director. The amount 
of

[[Page 338]]

tax, if any, shown by such redetermination to have been overpaid shall 
be credited or refunded to the United States shareholder in accordance 
with the provisions of sections 6402 and 6511 and the regulations 
thereunder. If a United States shareholder elects under this section and 
if the United States shareholder has made an election under section 
955(b)(3) as to at least one member of the related group, then the 
qualified investment amounts necessary for the calculations of 
paragraphs (c)(3) and (4) of this section shall be obtained, for each 
member of the related group, as of the determination dates applicable to 
each of the members.
    (f) Illustrations. The application of this section may be 
illustrated by the following examples:

    Example 1. (a) Controlled foreign corporations X and Y are wholly 
owned subsidiaries of domestic corporation M, X and Y use the calendar 
year as the taxable year. For 1977, X and Y are not export trade 
corporations (as defined in section 971(a)), nor have they any income 
derived from the insurance of United States risks (within the meaning of 
section 963(a)). M does not elect to treat X and Y as a related group 
for 1977.
    (b) For 1977, X and Y each have gross income (determined as provided 
in Sec. 1.951-6(h)(1)) of $1,000. X's foreign base company income is $20 
and Y's foreign base company imcome is $0, determined as follows, based 
on the facts shown in the following table:

                                                                        
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                          X         Y   
------------------------------------------------------------------------
(1) Foreign lease company shipping income...........    $1,000    $1,000
(2) Less: amounts excluded from subpart F income                        
 under section 952(b) (relating to U.S. income) and                     
 amounts excluded from foreign base company income                      
 under section 945(b)(4) (relating to corporation                       
 not availed of to reduce taxes)....................         0         0
                                                     -------------------
(3) Balance.........................................     1,000     1,000
(4) Less: deductions allocable under Sec.  1.954-                       
 1(c) to balance....................................       800     1,040
                                                     -------------------
(5) Remaining balance...............................       200         0
                                                     ===================
(6) Less: Increase in qualified investments in                          
 foreign base company shipping operations...........       180  ........
                                                     -------------------
(7) Foreign base company income.....................        20  ........
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (c) For 1977, Y has a withdrawal of previously excluded Subpart F 
income from investment in foreign base company shipping operations of 
$20, determined as follows, on the basis of the facts shown in the 
following table:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
(1) Qualified investments in foreign base company shipping              
 operations at December 31, 1976..............................    $1,210
(2) Less: qualified investments in foreign base company                 
 shipping operations at December 31, 1977.....................     1,170
                                                               ---------
(3) Balance...................................................        40
(4) Less: excess of recognized losses over recognized gains on          
 sales during 1977 of qualified investments in foreign base             
 company shipping operations..................................        20
                                                               ---------
(5) Tentative decrease in qualified investments in foreign              
 base company shipping operations for 1977....................        20
                                                               =========
(6) Limitation described in Sec.  1.955A-1(b)(2)..............       160
(7) Y's amount of previously excluded subpart F income                  
 withdrawn from investment in foreign base company shipping             
 operations (lesser of lines (5) and (6)).....................        20
                                                               =========
                                                                        

    Example 2. (a) The facts are the same as in example 1, except that M 
does elect to treat X and Y as a related group for 1977.
    (b) The group excess deduction, which is solely attributable to Y's 
net shipping loss, is $40 (i.e., $1,040-$1,000). Since X is the only 
member of the related group with net shipping income, X's pro rata share 
of the group excess deduction is the entire $40 amount.
    (c) X's foreign base company income for 1977 is zero, determined as 
follows:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
(1) Preliminary net foreign base company shipping income (line          
 (b)(5) of example 1).........................................      $200
(2) Less: X's pro rata share of group excess deduction........        40
                                                               ---------
(3) Remaining balance.........................................       160
(4) Less: increase in qualified investments in foreign base             
 company shipping operations..................................       180
                                                               ---------
(5) Foreign base company income...............................         0
                                                               =========
                                                                        

    (d) The group excess investment, which is solely attributable to X's 
excess investment, is $20 (i.e., $180 minus $160). Since Y is the only 
member of the related group with a shortfall in qualified investments, 
Y's share of the group excess investment is the entire $20 amount.
    (e) During 1976 and 1977, Y owns no stock of X. Y's withdrawal of 
previously excluded subpart F income from investment in foreign base 
company shipping operations for 1977 is zero, determined as follows:

[[Page 339]]



                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
(1) Qualified investments at December 31, 1976................    $1,210
(2)(i) Qualified investments at December 31, 1977 (determined           
 without regard to paragraph (c)(4) of this section)..........     1,170
  (ii) Y's pro rata share of group excess investment..........        20
                                                               ---------
  (iii) Total qualified investments at December 31, 1977 (Line          
   (i) plus line (ii).........................................     1,190
                                                               ---------
(3) Balance (line (1) minus line (2)(iii).....................        20
(4) Less: excess of recognized losses over recognized gains on          
 sales during 1977 of qualified investments in foreign base             
 company shipping operations..................................        20
                                                               ---------
(5) Decrease in qualified investments for 1977................         0
                                                               =========
                                                                        


(Secs. 955 (b)(2) and 7805 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954 (89 
Stat. 63; 26 U.S.C. 955(b)(2), and 68A Stat. 917; 26 U.S.C. 7805))

[T.D. 7894, 48 FR 22535, May 19, 1983; 48 FR 40888, Sept. 12, 1983, as 
amended by T.D. 7959, 49 FR 22280, May 29, 1984]


<R05>
Sec. 1.955A-4  Election as to date of determining qualified investment in foreign base company shipping operations.

    (a) Nature of election. In lieu of determining the increase under 
the provisions of section 954(g) and Sec. 1.954-7(a) or the decrease 
under the provisions of section 955(a)(2) and Sec. 1.955A-1(b) in a 
controlled foreign corporation's qualified investments in foreign base 
company shipping operations for a taxable year in the manner provided in 
such provisions, a United States shareholder of such controlled foreign 
corporation may elect, under the provisions of section 955(b)(3) and 
this section, to determine such increase in accordance with the 
provisions of Sec. 1.954-7(b) and to determine such decrease by 
ascertaining the amount by which--
    (1) Such controlled foreign corporation's qualified investments in 
foreign base company shipping operations at the close of such taxable 
year exceed its qualified investments in foreign base company shipping 
operations at the close of the taxable year immediately following such 
taxable year, and reducing such excess by
    (2) The amount determined under Sec. 1.955A-1(b)(1)(ii) for such 
taxable year subject to the limitation provided in Sec. 1.995A-1(b)(2) 
for such taxable year. An election under this section may be made with 
respect to each controlled foreign corporation with respect to which a 
person is a United States shareholder within the meaning of section 
951(b), but the election may not be exercised separately with respect to 
the increases and the decreases of such controlled foreign corporation. 
If an election is made under this section to determine the increase of a 
controlled foreign corporation in accordance with the provisions of 
Sec. 1.954-7(b), subsequent decreases of such controlled foreign 
corporation shall be determined in accordance with this paragraph and 
not in accordance with Sec. 1.955A-1(b).
    (b) Time and manner of making election--(1) Without consent. An 
election under this section with respect to a controlled foreign 
corporation shall be made without the consent of the Commissioner by a 
United States shareholder's filing a statement to such effect with his 
return for his taxable year in which or with which ends the first 
taxable year of such controlled foreign corporation in which--
    (i) Such shareholder is a United States shareholder, and
    (ii) Such controlled foreign corporation realizes foreign base 
company shipping income, as defined in Sec. 1.954-6.

The statement shall contain the name and address of the controlled 
foreign corporation and identification of such first taxable year of 
such corporation.
    (2) With consent. An election under this section with respect to a 
controlled foreign corporation may be made by a United States 
shareholder at any time with the consent of the Commissioner. Consent 
will not be granted unless the United States shareholder and the 
Commissioner agree to the terms, conditions, and adjustments under which 
the election will be effected. The application for consent to elect 
shall be made by the United States shareholder's mailing a letter for 
such purpose to the Commissioner of Internal Revenue, Washington, DC 
20224. The application shall be mailed before the close of the first 
taxable year of the controlled foreign corporation with respect to which 
the shareholder desires to compute an amount described in section 
954(b)(2) in accordance with the election provided in this

[[Page 340]]

section. The application shall include the following information.
    (i) The name, address, and taxpayer identification number, and 
taxable year of the United States shareholder;
    (ii) The name and address of the controlled foreign corporation;
    (iii) The first taxable year of the controlled foreign corporation 
for which income is to be computed under the election;
    (iv) The amount of the controlled foreign corporation's qualified 
investments in foreign base company shipping operations at the close of 
its preceding taxable year; and
    (v) The sum of the amounts excluded under section 954(b)(2) and 
Sec. 1.954-1(b)(1) from the foreign base company income of the 
controlled foreign corporation for all prior taxable years during which 
such shareholder was a United States shareholder of such corporation and 
the sum of the amounts of its previously excluded subpart F income 
withdrawn from investment in foreign base company shipping operations 
for all prior taxable years during which such shareholder was a United 
States shareholder of such corporation.
    (c) Effect of election--(1) General. Except as provided in 
subparagraphs (3) and (4) of this paragraph, an election under this 
section with respect to a controlled foreign corporation shall be 
binding on the United States shareholder and shall apply to all 
qualified investments in foreign base company shipping operations 
acquired, or disposed of, by such controlled foreign corporation during 
the taxable year following its taxable year for which income is first 
computed under the election and during all succeeding taxable years of 
such corporation.
    (2) Returns. Any return of a United States shareholder required to 
be filed before the completion of a period with respect to which 
determinations are to be made as to a controlled foreign corporation's 
qualified investments in foreign base company shipping operations for 
purposes of computing such shareholder's taxable income shall be filed 
on the basis of an estimate of the amount of the controlled foreign 
corporation's qualified investments in foreign base company shipping 
operations at the close of the period. If the actual amount of such 
investments is not the same as the amount of the estimate, the United 
States shareholder shall immediately notify the Commissioner. The 
Commissioner will thereupon redetermine the amount of tax of such United 
States shareholder for the year or years with respect to which the 
incorrect amount was taken into account. The amount of tax, if any, due 
upon such redetermination shall be paid by the United States shareholder 
upon notice and demand by the district director. The amount of tax, if 
any, shown by such redetermination to have been overpaid shall be 
credited or refunded to the United States shareholder in accordance with 
the provisions of sections 6402 and 6511 and the regulations thereunder.
    (3) Revocation. Upon application by the United States shareholder, 
the election made under this section may, subject to the approval of the 
Commissioner, be revoked. Approval will not be granted unless the United 
States shareholder and the Commissioner agree to the terms, conditions, 
and adjustments under which the revocation will be effected. Unless such 
agreement provides otherwise, the change in the controlled foreign 
corporation's qualified investments in foreign base company shipping 
operations for its first taxable year for which income is computed 
without regard to the election previously made will be considered to be 
zero for purposes of effectuating the revocation. The application for 
consent to revocation shall be made by the United States shareholder's 
mailing a letter for such purpose to the Commissioner of Internal 
Revenue, Washington, DC 20224. The application shall be mailed before 
the close of the first taxable year of the controlled foreign 
corporation with respect to which the shareholder desires to compute the 
amounts described in section 954(b)(2) or 955(a) without regard to the 
election provided in this section. The application shall include the 
following information:
    (i) The name, address, and taxpayer identification number of the 
United States shareholder:
    (ii) The name and address of the controlled foreign corporation;

[[Page 341]]

    (iii) The taxable year of the controlled foreign corporation for 
which such amounts are to be computed;
    (iv) The amount of the controlled foreign corporation's qualified 
investments in foreign base company shipping operations at the close of 
its preceding taxable year;
    (v) The sum of the amounts excluded under section 954(b)(2) and 
Sec. 1.954-1(b)(1) from the foreign base company income of the 
controlled foreign corporation for all prior taxable years during which 
such shareholder was a United States shareholder of such corporation and 
the sum of the amounts of its previously excluded subpart F income 
withdrawn from investment in foreign base company shipping operations 
for all prior taxable years during which such shareholder was a United 
States shareholder of such corporation; and
    (vi) The reasons for the request for consent to revocation.
    (4) Transfer of stock. If during any taxable year of a controlled 
foreign corporation--
    (i) A United States shareholder who has made an election under this 
section with respect to such controlled foreign corporation sells, 
exchanges, or otherwise disposes of all or part of his stock in such 
controlled foreign corporation, and
    (ii) The foreign corporation is a controlled foreign corporation 
immediately after the sale, exchange, or other disposition,

then, with respect to the stock so sold, exchanged, or disposed of, the 
change in the controlled foreign corporation's qualified investments in 
foreign base company shipping operations for such taxable year shall be 
considered to be zero. If the United States shareholder's successor in 
interest is entitled to and does make an election under paragraph (b)(1) 
of this section to determine the controlled foreign corporation's 
increase in qualified investments in foreign base company shipping 
operations for the taxable year in which he acquires such stock, such 
increase with respect to the stock so acquired shall be determined in 
accordance with the provisions of Sec. 1.954-7(b)(1). If the controlled 
foreign corporation realizes no foreign base company income from which 
amounts are excluded under section 954(b)(2) and Sec. 1.954-1(b)(1) for 
the taxable year in which the United States shareholder's successor in 
interest acquires such stock and such successor in interest makes an 
election under paragraph (b)(1) of this section with respect to a 
subsequent taxable year of such controlled foreign corporation, the 
increase in the controlled foreign corporation's qualified investments 
in foreign base company shipping operations for such subsequent taxable 
year shall be determined in accordance with the provisions of 
Sec. 1.954-7(b)(2).
    (d) Illustrations. The application of this section may be 
illustrated by the following examples:

    Example 1. Foreign corporation A is a wholly owned subsidiary of 
domestic corporation M. Both corporations use the calendar year as a 
taxable year. In a statement filed with its return for 1977, M makes an 
election under section 955(b)(3) and the election remains in force for 
the taxable year 1978. At December 31, 1978, A's qualified investments 
in foreign base company shipping operations amount to $100,000; and, at 
December 31, 1979, to $80,000. For purposes of paragraph (a)(1) of this 
section, A Corporation's decrease in qualified investments in foreign 
base company shipping operations for the taxable year 1978 is $20,000 
and is determined by ascertaining the amount by which A Corporation's 
qualified investments in foreign base company shipping operations at 
December 31, 1978 ($100,000) exceed its qualified investments in foreign 
base company shipping operations at December 31, 1979 ($80,000).
    Example 2. The facts are the same as in example 1 except that A 
experiences no changes in qualified investments in foreign base company 
shipping operations during its taxable years 1980 and 1981. If M's 
election were to remain in force, A's acquisitions and dispositions of 
qualified investments in foreign base company shipping operations during 
A's taxable year 1982 would be taken into account in determining whether 
A has experienced an increase or a decrease in qualified investments in 
foreign base company shipping operations for its taxable year 1981. 
However, M duly files before the close of A's taxable year 1981 as 
application for consent to revocation of M Corporation's election under 
section 955(b)(3), and, pursuant to an agreement between the 
Commissioner and M, consent is granted by the Commissioner. Assuming 
such agreement does not provide otherwise, A's change in qualifed 
investments in foreign base company shipping operations for its taxable 
year 1981 is zero because the effect of the revocation of the election 
is to treat acquisitions and dispositions

[[Page 342]]

of qualified investments in foreign base company shipping operations 
actually occurring in 1982 as having occurred in such year rather than 
in 1981.
    Example 3. The facts are the same as in example 2 except that A's 
qualified investments in foreign base company shipping operations at 
December 31, 1982, amount to $70,000. For purposes of paragraph 
(b)(1)(i) of Sec. 1.955A-1, the decrease in A's qualified investments in 
foreign base company shipping operations for the taxable year 1982 is 
$10,000 and is determined by ascertaining the amount by which A's 
qualified investments in foreign base company shipping operations at 
December 31, 1981 ($80,000) exceed its qualified investments in foreign 
base company shipping operations at December 31, 1982 ($70,000).
    Example 4. The facts are the same as in example 1. Assume further 
that on September 30, 1979, M sells 40 percent of the only class of 
stock of A to N Corporation, a domestic corporation. N uses the calendar 
year as a taxable year. A remains a controlled foreign corporation 
immediately after such sale of its stock. A's qualified investments in 
foreign base company shipping operations at December 31, 1980, amount to 
$90,000. The changes in A Corporation's qualified investments in foreign 
base company shipping operations occurring in its taxable year 1979 are 
considered to be zero with respect to the 40-percent stock interest 
acquired by N Corporation. The entire $20,000 reduction in A 
Corporation's qualified investments in foreign base company shipping 
operations which occurs during the taxable year 1979 is taken into 
account by M for purposes of paragraph (c)(1) of this section in 
determining its tax liability for the taxable year 1978. A's increase in 
qualified investments in foreign base company shipping operations for 
the taxable year 1979 with respect to the 60-percent stock interest 
retained by M is $6,000 and is determined by ascertaining M's pro rata 
share (60 percent) of the amount by which A's qualified investments in 
foreign base company shipping operations at December 31, 1980 ($90,000) 
exceed its qualified investments in foreign base company shipping 
operations at December 31, 1979 ($80,000). N does not make an election 
under section 955(b)(3) in its return for its taxable year 1980. 
Corporation A's increase in qualified investments in foreign base 
company shipping operations for the taxable year 1980 with respect to 
the 40-percent stock interest acquired by N is $4,000.

[T.D. 7894, 48 FR 22539, May 19, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 1.956-1   Shareholder's pro rata share of a controlled foreign corporation's increase in earnings invested in United States property.

    (a) In general. Section 956(a)(1) and paragraph (b) of this section 
provide rules for determining the amount of a controlled foreign 
corporation's earnings invested in United States property at the close 
of any taxable year. Such amount is the aggregate amount invested in 
United States property to the extent such amount would have constituted 
a dividend if it had been distributed on such date. Subject to the 
provisions of section 951(a)(4) and the regulations thereunder, a United 
States shareholder of a controlled foreign corporation is required to 
include in his gross income his pro rata share, as determined in 
accordance with paragraph (c) of this section, of the controlled foreign 
corporation's increase for any taxable year in earnings invested in 
United States property but only to the extent such share is not 
excludable from his gross income under the provisions of section 
959(a)(2) and the regulations thereunder.
    (b) Amount of a controlled foreign corporation's investment of 
earnings in United States property--(1) Dividend limitation. The amount 
of a controlled foreign corporation's earnings invested at the close of 
its taxable year in United States property is the aggregate amount of 
such property held, directly or indirectly, by such corporation at the 
close of its taxable year to the extent such amount would have 
constituted a dividend under section 316 and Secs. 1.316-1 and 1.316-2 
(determined after the application of section 955(a)) if it had been 
distributed on such closing day. For purposes of this subparagraph, the 
determination of whether an amount would have constituted a dividend if 
distributed shall be made without regard to the provisions of section 
959(d) and the regulations thereunder.
    (2) Aggregate amount of United States property. For purposes of 
determining an increase in earnings invested in United States property 
for any taxable year beginning after December 31, 1975, the aggregate 
amount of United States

[[Page 343]]

property held by a controlled foreign corporation at the close of--
    (i) Any taxable year beginning after December 31, 1975, and
    (ii) The last taxable year beginning before January 1, 1976 does not 
include stock or obligations of a domestic corporation described in 
section 956(b)(2)(F) or movable property described in section 
956(b)(2)(G).
    (3) Treatment of earnings and profits. For purposes of making the 
determination under subparagraph (1) of this paragraph as to whether an 
amount of investment would have constituted a dividend if distributed at 
the close of any taxable year of a controlled foreign corporation, 
earnings and profits of the controlled foreign corporation shall be 
considered not to include any amounts which are attributable to--
    (i) Amounts which have been included in the gross income of a United 
States shareholder of such controlled foreign corporation under section 
951(a)(1)(B) (or which would have been so included but for section 
959(a)(2)) and have not been distributed, or
    (ii)(a) Amounts which are included in the gross income of a United 
States shareholder of such controlled foreign corporation under section 
551(b) or would be so included under such section but for the fact that 
such amounts were distributed to such shareholder during the taxable 
year, or
    (b) Amounts which, for any prior taxable year, have been included in 
the gross income of a United States shareholder of such controlled 
foreign corporation under section 551(b) and have not been distributed.

The rules of this subparagraph apply only in determining the limitation 
on a controlled foreign corporation's increase in earnings invested in 
United States property. See section 959 and the regulations thereunder 
for limitations on the exclusion from gross income of previously taxed 
earnings and profits.
    (4) [Reserved]
    (c) Shareholder's pro rata share of increase--(1) General rule. A 
United States shareholder's pro rata share of a controlled foreign 
corporation's increase for any taxable year in earnings invested in 
United States property is the amount determined by subtracting the 
shareholder's pro rata share of--
    (i) The controlled foreign corporation's earnings invested in United 
States property at the close of its preceding taxable year, as 
determined under paragraph (b) of this section, reduced by amounts paid 
by such corporation during such preceding taxable year to which section 
959(c)(1) and the regulations thereunder apply, from his pro rata share 
of
    (ii) The controlled foreign corporation's earnings invested in 
United States property at the close of its current taxable year, as 
determined under paragraph (b) of this section.
    (2) Illustration. The application of this paragraph may be 
illustrated by the following examples:

    Example 1. A is a United States shareholder and direct owner of 60 
percent of the only class of stock of R Corporation, a controlled 
foreign corporation during the entire period here involved. Both A and R 
Corporation use the calendar year as a taxable year. Corporation R's 
aggregate investment in United States property on December 31, 1964, 
which would constitute a dividend (as determined under paragraph (b) of 
this section) if distributed on such date is $150,000. During the 
taxable year 1964, R Corporation distributed $50,000 to which section 
959(c)(1) applies. Corporation R's aggregate investment in United States 
property on December 31, 1965, is $250,000; and R Corporation's current 
and accumulated earnings and profits on such date (determined as 
provided in paragraph (b) of this section) are $225,000. A's pro rata 
share of R Corporation's increase for 1965 in earnings invested in 
United States property is $75,000, determined as follows:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
(i) Aggregate investment in United States property on                   
 December 31, 1965...........................................   $250,000
                                                   ------------         
(ii) Current and accumulated earnings and profits on December           
 31, 1965....................................................    225,000
                                                   ------------         
(iii) Amount of earnings invested in United States property             
 on December 31, 1965, which would constitute a dividend if             
 distributed on such date (lesser of item (i) or item (ii))..    225,000
(iv) Aggregate investment in United States                              
 property on December 31, 1964, which would                             
 constitute a dividend if distributed on such date   $150,000           
  Less: Amounts distributed during 1964 to which                        
   section 959(c)(1) applies......................     50,000    100,000
                                                   ------------         
(v) R Corporation's increase for 1965 in earnings invested in           
 United States property (item (iii) minus item (iv)).........    125,000
                                                   ============         

[[Page 344]]

                                                                        
(vi) A's pro rata share of R Corporation's increase for 1965            
 in earnings invested in United States property (item (v)               
 times 60 percent)...........................................     75,000
                                                                        

    Example 2. The facts are the same as in example 1, except that R 
Corporation's current and accumulated earnings and profits on December 
31, 1965, are $100,000 instead of $225,000. Accordingly, even through R 
Corporation's aggregate investment in United States property on December 
31, 1965, of $250,000 exceeds the net amount ($100,000) taken into 
account under subparagraph (1)(i) of this paragraph as of December 31, 
1964, by $150,000, there is no increase for taxable year 1965 in 
earnings invested in United States property because of the dividend 
limitation of paragraph (b)(1) of this section. Corporation R's 
aggregate investment in United States property on December 31, 1966, is 
unchanged ($250,000) Corporation R's current and accumulated earnings 
and profits on December 31, 1966, are $175,000, and, as a consequence, 
its aggregate investment in United States property which would 
constitute a dividend if distributed on that date is $175,000. 
Corporation R pays no amount during 1965 to which section 959(c)(1) 
applies. Corporation R's increase for the taxable year 1966 in earnings 
invested in United States property is $75,000, and A's pro rata share of 
that amount is $45,000 ($75,000 times 60 percent).

    (d) Date and basis of determinations. The determinations made under 
paragraph (c)(1)(i) of this section with respect to the close of the 
preceding taxable year of a controlled foreign corporation and under 
paragraph (c)(1)(ii) with respect to the close of the current taxable 
year of such controlled foreign corporation, for purposes of determining 
the United States shareholder's pro rata share of such corporation's 
increased investment of earnings in United States property for the 
current taxable year, shall be made as of the last day of the current 
taxable year of such corporation but on the basis of stock owned, within 
the meaning of section 958(a) and the regulations thereunder, by such 
United States shareholder on the last day of the current taxable year of 
the foreign corporation on which such corporation is a controlled 
foreign corporation. See the last sentence of section 956(a)(2). The 
application of this paragraph may be illustrated from the following 
example:

    Example. Domestic corporation M owns 60 percent of the only class of 
stock of A Corporation, a controlled foreign corporation during the 
entire period here involved. Both M Corporation and A Corporation use 
the calendar year as a taxable year. Corporation A's investment of 
earnings in United States property at the close of the taxable year 1963 
is $100,000, as determined under paragraph (b) of this section, and M 
Corporation includes its pro rata share of such amount ($60,000) in 
gross income for its taxable year 1963. On June 1, 1964, M Corporation 
acquires an additional 25 percent of A Corporation's outstanding stock 
from a person who is not a United States person as defined in section 
957(d). Corporation A's investment of earnings in United States property 
at the close of the taxable year 1964, as determined under paragraph (b) 
of this section, is unchanged ($100,000). Corporation A pays no amount 
during 1963 to which section 959(c)(1) applies. Corporation M is not 
required, by reason of the acquisition in 1964 of A Corporation's stock, 
to include an additional amount in its gross income with respect to A 
Corporation's investment of earnings in United States property even 
though the earnings invested in United States property by A Corporation 
attributable to the stock acquired by M Corporation were not previously 
taxed. The determination made under paragraph (c)(1)(i) of this section 
as well as the determination made under paragraph (c)(1)(ii) of this 
section with respect to A Corporation's investment for 1964 of earnings 
in United States property are made on the basis of stock owned by M 
Corporation (85 percent) at the close of 1964.

    (e) Amount attributable to property--(1) General rule. Except as 
provided in subparagraph (2) of this paragraph, for purposes of 
paragraph (b)(1) of this section the amount taken into account with 
respect to any United States property shall be its adjusted basis, as of 
the applicable determination date, reduced by any liability (other than 
a liability described in subparagraph (3) of this paragraph) to which 
such property is subject on such date. To be taken into account under 
this subparagraph, a liability must constitute a specific charge against 
the property involved. Thus, a liability evidenced by an open account or 
a liability secured only by the general credit of the controlled foreign 
corporation will not be taken into account. On the other hand, if a 
liability constitutes a specific charge against several items of 
property and cannot definitely be allocated to any single item of 
property, the liability shall be apportioned against each of such items 
of property in that ratio which the adjusted basis of such item on the 
applicable determination date

[[Page 345]]

bears to the adjusted basis of all such items at such time. A liability 
in excess of the adjusted basis of the property which is subject to such 
liability shall not be taken into account for the purpose of reducing 
the adjusted basis of other property which is not subject to such 
liability.
    (2) Rule for pledges and guarantees. For purposes of this section 
the amount taken into account with respect to any pledge or guarantee 
described in paragraph (c)(1) of Sec. 1.956-2 shall be the unpaid 
principal amount on the applicable determination date of the obligation 
with respect to which the controlled foreign corporation is a pledgor or 
guarantor.
    (3) Excluded charges. For purposes of subparagraph (1) of this 
paragraph, a specific charge created with respect to any item of 
property principally for the purpose of artificially increasing or 
decreasing the amount of a controlled foreign corporation's investment 
of earnings in United States property will not be recognized; whether a 
specific charge is created principally for such purpose will depend upon 
all the facts and circumstances of each case. One of the factors that 
will be considered in making such a determination with respect to a loan 
is whether the loan is from a related person, as defined in section 954 
(d)(3) and paragraph (e) of Sec. 1.954-1.
    (4) Statement required. If for purposes of this section a United 
States shareholder of a controlled foreign corporation reduces the 
adjusted basis of property which constitutes United States property on 
the ground that such property is subject to a liability, he shall attach 
to his return a statement setting forth the adjusted basis of the 
property before the reduction and the amount and nature of the 
reduction.

(Secs. 956(c), 7805, Internal Revenue Code of 1954 (76 Stat. 1017, 68A 
Stat. 917; (26 U.S.C. 956(c) and 7805 respectively)))

[T.D. 6704, 29 FR 2600, Feb. 20, 1964, as amended by T.D. 6795, 30 FR 
942, Jan. 29, 1965; T.D. 7712, 45 FR 52374, Aug. 7, 1980; T.D. 8209, 53 
FR 22171, June 14, 1988]


<R05>
Sec. 1.956-1T   Shareholder's pro rata share of a controlled foreign corporation's increase in earnings invested in United States property (temporary).

    (a) [Reserved]
    (b)(1)-(3) [Reserved]
    (4) Treatment of certain investments of earnings in United States 
Property--(i) Special rule. For purposes of Sec. 1.956-1(b)(1) of the 
regulations, a controlled foreign corporation will be considered to hold 
indirectly (A) the investments in United States property held on its 
behalf by a trustee or a nominee or (B) at the discretion of the 
District Director, investments in U.S. property acquired by any other 
foreign corporation that is controlled by the controlled foreign 
corporation, if one of the principal purposes for creating, organizing, 
or funding (through capital contributions or debt) such other foreign 
corporation is to avoid the application of section 956 with respect to 
the controlled foreign corporation. For purposes of this paragraph (b), 
a foreign corporation will be controlled by the controlled foreign 
corporation if the foreign corporation and the controlled foreign 
corporation are related parties under section 267(b). In determining for 
purposes of this paragraph (b) whether two or more corporations are 
members of the same controlled group under section 267(b)(3), a person 
is considered to own stock owned directly by such person, stock owned 
with the application of section 1563(e)(1), and stock owned with the 
application of section 267(c). The following examples illustrate the 
application of this paragraph.

    Example 1. P, a domestic corporation, owns all of the outstanding 
stock of FS1, a controlled foreign corporation, and all of the 
outstanding stock of FS2, also a controlled foreign corporation. FS1 
sells products to FS2 in exchange for trade receivables due in 60 days. 
FS2 has no earnings and profits. FS1 has substantial accumulated 
earnings and profits. FS2 loans to P an amount equal to the debt it owes 
FS1. FS2 pays the trade receivables according to the terms of the 
receivables. FS1 will not be considered to hold indirectly the 
investment in United States property under this paragraph (b)(4), 
because there was no transfer of funds to FS2.

[[Page 346]]

    Example 2. The facts are the same as in Example 1, except that FS2 
does not pay the receivables. FS1 is considered to hold indirectly the 
investment in United States property under this paragraph (b)(4), 
because there was a transfer of funds to FS2, a principal purpose of 
which was to avoid the application of section 956 to FS1.

    (ii) Effective date. This section is effective June 14, 1988, with 
respect to investments made on or after June 14, 1988.
    (c)-(d) [Reserved]
    (e)(1)-(4) [Reserved]
    (e)(5) Excluded charges--(i) Special rule. For purposes of 
Sec. 1.956-1(e)(1) of the regulations, in the case of an investment in 
United States property consisting of an obligation of a related person, 
as defined in section 954(d)(3) and paragraph (e) of Sec. 1.954-1, a 
liability will not be recognized as a specific charge if the liability 
representing the charge is with recourse with respect to the general 
credit or other assets of the investing controlled foreign corporation.
    (ii) Effective date. This section is effective June 14, 1988, with 
respect to investments made on or after June 14, 1988.

[T.D. 8209, 53 FR 22171, June 14, 1988]


<R05>
Sec. 1.956-2   Definition of United States property.

    (a) Included property--(1) In general. For purposes of section 
956(a) and Sec. 1.956-1, United States property is (except as provided 
in paragraph (b) of this section) any property acquired (within the 
meaning of paragraph (d)(1) of this section) by a foreign corporation 
(whether or not a controlled foreign corporation at the time) during any 
taxable year of such foreign corporation beginning after December 31, 
1962, which is--
    (i) Tangible property (real or personal) located in the United 
States;
    (ii) Stock of a domestic corporation;
    (iii) An obligation (as defined in paragraph (d)(2) of this section) 
of a United States person (as defined in section 957(d)); or
    (iv) Any right to the use in the United States of--
    (a) A patent or copyright,
    (b) An invention, model, or design (whether or not patented),
    (c) A secret formula or process, or
    (d) Any other similar property right, which is acquired or developed 
by the foreign corporation for use in the United States by any person. 
Whether a right described in this subdivision has been acquired or 
developed for use in the United States by any person is to be determined 
from all the facts and circumstances of each case. As a general rule, a 
right actually used principally in the United States will be considered 
to have been acquired or developed for use in the United States in the 
absence of affirmative evidence showing that the right was not so 
acquired or developed for such use.
    (2) Illustrations. The application of the provisions of this 
paragraph may be illustrated by the following examples:
    Example 1. Foreign corporation R uses as a taxable year a fiscal 
year ending on June 30. Corporation R acquires on June 1, 1963, and 
holds on June 30, 1963, $100,000 of tangible property (not described in 
section 956(b)(2)) located in the United States. Corporation R's 
aggregate investment in United States property at the close of its 
taxable year ending June 30, 1963, is zero since the property which is 
acquired on June 1, 1963, is not acquired during a taxable year of R 
Corporation beginning after December 31, 1962. Assuming no change in R 
Corporation's aggregate investment in United States property during its 
taxable year ending June 30, 1964, R Corporation's increase in earnings 
invested in United States property for such taxable year is zero.
    Example 2. Foreign corporation S uses the calendar year as a taxable 
year and is a controlled foreign corporation for its entire taxable year 
1965. Corporation S is not a controlled foreign corporation at any time 
during its taxable years 1963 and 1964. Corporation S owns on December 
31, 1964, $100,000 of tangible property (not described in section 
956(b)(2)) located in the United States which it acquires during taxable 
years beginning after December 31, 1962. Corporation S's aggregate 
investment in United States property on December 31, 1964, is $100,000. 
Corporation S's current and accumulated earnings and profits (determined 
as provided in paragraph (b) of Sec. 1.956-1) as of December 31, 1964, 
are in excess of $100,000. Assuming no change in S Corporation's 
aggregate investment in United States property during its taxable year 
1965, S Corporation's increase in earnings invested in United States 
property for such taxable year is zero.

[[Page 347]]

    Example 3. Foreign corporation T uses the calendar year as a taxable 
year and is a controlled foreign corporation for its entire taxable 
years 1963, 1964, and 1966. At December 31, 1964, T Corporation's 
investment in United States property is $100,000. Corporation T is not a 
controlled foreign corporation at any time during its taxable year 1965 
in which it acquires $25,000 of tangible property (not described in 
section 956(b)(2)) located in the United States. On December 31, 1965, T 
Corporation holds the United States property of $100,000 which it held 
on December 31, 1964, and, in addition, the United States property 
acquired in 1965. Corporation T's aggregate investment in United States 
property at December 31, 1965, is $125,000. Corporation T's current and 
accumulated earnings and profits (determined as provided in paragraph 
(b) of Sec. 1.956-1) as of December 31, 1965, are in excess of $125,000, 
and T Corporation pays no amount during 1965 to which section 959 (c)(1) 
applies. Assuming no change in T Corporation's aggregate investment in 
United States property during its taxable year 1966, T Corporation's 
increase in earnings invested in United States property for such taxable 
year is zero.

    (b) Exceptions--(1) Excluded property. For purposes of section 
956(a) and paragraph (a) of this section, United States property does 
not include the following types of property held by a foreign 
corporation:
    (i) Obligations of the United States.
    (ii) Money.
    (iii) Deposits with persons carrying on the banking business, unless 
the deposits serve directly or indirectly as a pledge or guarantee 
within the meaning of paragraph (c) of this section. See paragraph 
(e)(2) of Sec. 1.956-1.
    (iv) Property located in the United States which is purchased in the 
United States for export to, or use in, foreign countries. For purposes 
of this subdivision, property to be used outside the United States will 
be considered property to be used in a foreign country. Whether property 
is of a type described in this subdivision is to be determined from all 
the facts and circumstances in each case. Property which constitutes 
export trade assets within the meaning of section 971(c)(2) and 
paragraph (c)(3) of Sec. 1.971-1 will be considered property of a type 
described in this subdivision.
    (v) Any obligation (as defined in paragraph (d)(2) of this section) 
of a United States person (as defined in section 957(d)) arising in 
connection with the sale or processing of property if the amount of such 
obligation outstanding at any time during the taxable year of the 
foreign corporation does not exceed an amount which is ordinary and 
necessary to carry on the trade or business of both the other party to 
the sale or processing transaction and the United States person, or, if 
the sale or processing transaction occurs between related persons, would 
be ordinary and necessary to carry on the trade or business of both the 
other party to the sale or processing transaction and the United States 
person if such persons were unrelated persons. Whether the amount of an 
obligation described in this subdivision is ordinary and necessary is to 
be determined from all the facts and circumstances in each case.
    (vi) Any aircraft, railroad rolling stock, vessel, motor vehicle, or 
container used in the transportation of persons or property in foreign 
commerce and used predominantly outside the United States. Whether 
transportation property described in this subdivision is used in foreign 
commerce and predominantly outside the United States is to be determined 
from all the facts and circumstances in each case. As a general rule, 
such transportation property will be considered to be used predominantly 
outside the United States if 70 percent or more of the miles traversed 
(during the taxable year at the close of which a determination is made 
under section 956(a)(2)) in the use of such property are traversed 
outside the United States or if such property is located outside the 
United States 70 percent of the time during such taxable year.
    (vii) An amount of assets described in paragraph (a) of this section 
of an insurance company equivalent to the unearned premiums or reserves 
which are ordinary and necessary for the proper conduct of that part of 
its insurance business which is attributable to contracts other than 
those described in section 953(a)(1) and the regulations thereunder. For 
purposes of this subdivision, a reserve will be considered ordinary and 
necessary for the proper conduct of an insurance business if, under the 
principles of paragraph (c) of Sec. 1.953-4, such reserve would qualify 
as

[[Page 348]]

a reserve required by law. See paragraph (d)(3) of Sec. 1.954-2 for 
determining, for purposes of this subdivision, the meaning of insurance 
company and of unearned premiums.
    (viii) For taxable years beginning after December 31, 1975, the 
voting or nonvoting stock or obligations of an unrelated domestic 
corporation. For purposes of this subdivision, an unrelated domestic 
corporation is a domestic corporation which is neither a United States 
shareholder (as defined in section 951(b)) of the controlled foreign 
corporation making the investment, nor a corporation 25 percent or more 
of whose total combined voting power of all classes of stock entitled to 
vote is owned or considered as owned (within the meaning of section 958 
(b)) by United States shareholders of the controlled foreign corporation 
making the investment. The determination of whether a domestic 
corporation is an unrelated corporation is made immediately after each 
acquisition of stock or obligations by the controlled foreign 
corporations.
    (ix) For taxable years beginning after December 31, 1975, movable 
drilling rigs or barges and other movable exploration and exploitation 
equipment (other than a vessel or an aircraft) when used on the 
Continental Shelf (as defined in section 638) of the United States in 
the exploration for, development, removal, or transportation of natural 
resources from or under ocean waters. Property used on the Continental 
Shelf includes property located in the United States which is being 
constructed or is in storage or in transit within the United States for 
use on the Continental Shelf. In general, the type of property which 
qualifies for the exception under this subdivision includes any movable 
property which would be entitled to the investment credit if used 
outside the United States in certain geographical areas of the Western 
Hemisphere pursuant to section 48(a)(2)(B)(x) (without reference to 
sections 49 and 50).
    (x) An amount of--
    (a) A controlled foreign corporation's assets described in paragraph 
(a) of this section equivalent to its earnings and profits which are 
accumulated after December 31, 1962, and are attributable to items of 
income described in section 952(b) and the regulations thereunder, 
reduced by the amount of
    (b) The earnings and profits of such corporation which are applied 
in a taxable year of such corporation beginning after December 31, 1962, 
to discharge a liability on property, but only if the liability was in 
existence at the close of such corporation's taxable year immediately 
preceding its first taxable year beginning after December 31, 1962, and 
the property would have been United States property if it had been 
acquired by such corporation immediately before such discharge.

For purposes of this subdivision, distributions made by such corporation 
for any taxable year shall be considered first made out of earnings and 
profits for such year other than earnings and profits referred to in (a) 
of this subdivision.
    (2) Statement required. If a United States shareholder of a 
controlled foreign corporation excludes any property from the United 
States property of such controlled foreign corporation on the ground 
that section 956(b)(2) applies to such excluded property, he shall 
attach to his return a statement setting forth, by categories described 
in paragraph (a)(1) of this section, the amount of United States 
property of the controlled foreign corporation and, by categories 
described in subparagraph (1) of this paragraph, the amount of such 
property which is excluded.
    (c) Treatment of pledges and guarantees--(1) General rule. Except as 
provided in subparagraph (4) of this paragraph, any obligation (as 
defined in paragraph (d)(2) of this section) of a United States person 
(as defined in section 957(d)) with respect to which a controlled 
foreign corporation is a pledgor or guarantor shall be considered for 
purposes of section 956(a) and paragraph (a) of this section to be 
United States property held by such controlled foreign corporation.
    (2) Indirect pledge or guarantee. If the assets of a controlled 
foreign corporation serve at any time, even though indirectly, as 
security for the performance of an obligation of a United States person, 
then, for purposes of paragraph (c)(1) of this section, the controlled 
foreign corporation will be

[[Page 349]]

considered a pledgor or guarantor of that obligation. For this purpose 
the pledge of stock of a controlled foreign corporation will be 
considered as the indirect pledge of the assets of the corporation if at 
least 66 2/3 percent of the total combined voting power of all classes 
of stock entitled to vote is pledged and if the pledge of stock is 
accompanied by one or more negative covenants or similar restrictions on 
the shareholder effectively limiting the corporation's discretion with 
respect to the disposition of assets and the incurrence of liabilities 
other than in the ordinary course of business. This paragraph (c)(2) 
applies only to pledges and guarantees which are made after September 8, 
1980. For purposes of this paragraph (c)(2) a refinancing shall be 
considered as a new pledge or guarantee.
    (3) Illustrations. The following examples illustrate the application 
of this paragraph (c):

    Example 1. A, a United States person, borrows $100,000 from a bank 
in foreign country X on December 31, 1964. On the same date controlled 
foreign corporation R pledges its assets as security for A's performance 
of A's obligation to repay such loan. The place at which or manner in 
which A uses the money is not material. For purposes of paragraph (b) of 
Sec. 1.956-1, R Corporation will be considered to hold A's obligation to 
repay the bank $100,000, and, under the provisions of paragraph (e)(2) 
of Sec. 1.956-1, the amount taken into account in computing R 
Corporation's aggregate investment in United States property on December 
31, 1964, is the unpaid principal amount of the obligation on that date 
($100,000).
    Example 2. The facts are the same as in example 1, except that R 
Corporation participates in the transaction, not by pledging its assets 
as security for A's performance of A's obligation to repay the loan, but 
by agreeing to buy for $1,00,000 at maturity the note representing A's 
obligation if A does not repay the loan. Separate arrangements are made 
with respect to the payment of the interest on the loan. The agreement 
of R Corporation to buy the note constitutes a guarantee of A's 
obligation. For purposes of paragraph (b) of Sec. 1.956-1, R Corporation 
will be considered to hold A's obligation to repay the bank $100,000, 
and, under the provisions of paragraph (e)(2) of Sec. 1.956-1, the 
amount taken into account in computing R Corporation's aggregate 
investment in United States property on December 31, 1964, is the unpaid 
principal amount of the obligation on that date ($100,000).
    Example 3. A, a United States person, borrows $100,000 from a bank 
on December 10, 1981, pledging 70 percent of the stock of X, a 
controlled foreign corporation, as collateral for the loan. A and X use 
the calendar year as their taxable year. in the loan agreement, among 
other things, A agrees not to cause or permit X Corporation to do any of 
the following without the consent of the bank:
    (a) Borrow money or pledge assets, except as to borrowings in the 
ordinary course of business of X Corporation;
    (b) Guarantee, assume, or become liable on the obligation of 
another, or invest in or lend funds to another;
    (c) Merge or consolidate with any other corporation or transfer 
shares of any controlled subsidiary;
    (d) Sell or lease (other than in the ordinary course of business) or 
otherwise dispose of any substantial part of its assets;
    (e) Pay or secure any debt owing by X Corporation to A; and
    (f) Pay any dividends, except in such amounts as may be required to 
make interest or principal payments on A's loan from the bank.
    A retains the right to vote the stock unless a default occurs by A. 
Under paragraph (c)(2) of this section, the assets of X Corporation 
serve indirectly as security for A's performance of A's obligation to 
repay the loan and X Corporation will be considered a pledgor or 
guarantor with respect to that obligation. For purposes of paragraph (b) 
of Sec. 1.956-1, X Corporation will be considered to hold A's obligation 
to repay the bank $100,000 and under paragraph (e)(2) of Sec. 1.956-1, 
the amount taken into account in computing X Corporation's aggregate 
investment in United States property on December 31, 1981, is the unpaid 
principal amount of the obligation on that date.

    (4) Special rule for certain conduit financing arrangements. The 
rule contained in subparagraph (1) of this paragraph shall not apply to 
a pledge or a guarantee by a controlled foreign corporation to secure 
the obligation of a United States person if such United States person is 
a mere conduit in a financing arrangement. Whether the United States 
person is a mere conduit in a financing arrangement will depend upon all 
the facts and circumstances in each case. A United States person will be 
considered a mere conduit in a financing arrangement in a case in which 
a controlled foreign corporation pledges stock of its subsidiary 
corporation, which is also a controlled foreign corporation, to secure 
the obligation of such United States person, where the following 
conditions are satisfied:

[[Page 350]]

    (i) Such United States person is a domestic corporation which is not 
engaged in the active conduct of a trade or business and has no 
substantial assets other than those arising out of its relending of the 
funds borrowed by it on such obligation to the controlled foreign 
corporation whose stock is pledged; and
    (ii) The assets of such United States person are at all times 
substantially offset by its obligation to the lender.
    (d) Definitions--(1) Meaning of ``acquired''--(i) Applicable rules. 
For purposes of this section--
    (a) Property shall be considered acquired by a foreign corporation 
when such corporation acquires an adjusted basis in the property;
    (b) Property which is an obligation of a United States person with 
respect to which a controlled foreign corporation is a pledgor or 
guarantor (within the meaning of paragraph (c) of this section) shall be 
considered acquired when the corporation becomes liable as a pledgor or 
guarantor or is otherwise considered a pledgor or guarantor (within the 
meaning of paragraph (c)(2) of this section); and
    (c) Property shall not be considered acquired by a foreign 
corporation if--
    (1) Such property is acquired in a transaction in which gain or loss 
would not be recognized under this chapter to such corporation if such 
corporation were a domestic corporation;
    (2) The basis of the property acquired by the foreign corporation is 
the same as the basis of the property exchanged by such corporation; and
    (3) The property exchanged by the foreign corporation was not United 
States property (as defined in paragraph (a)(1) of this section) but 
would have been such property if it had been acquired by such 
corporation immediately before such exchange.
    (ii) Illustrations. The application of this subparagraph may be 
illustrated by the following examples:

    Example 1. Foreign corporation R uses the calendar year as a taxable 
year and acquires before January 1, 1963, stock of domestic corporation 
M having as to R Corporation an adjusted basis of $10,000. The stock of 
M Corporation is not United States property of R Corporation on December 
31, 1962, since it is not acquired in a taxable year of R Corporation 
beginning on or after Janury 1, 1963. On June 30, 1963, R Corporation 
sells the M Corporation stock for $15,000 in cash and expends such 
amount in acquiring stock of domestic corporation N which has as to R 
Corporation an adjusted basis of $15,000. For purposes of determining R 
Corporation's aggregate investment in United States property on December 
31, 1963, R Corporation has, by virtue of acquiring the stock of N 
Corporation, acquired $15,000 of United States property.
    Example 2. Foreign corporation S, a controlled foreign corporation 
for the entire period here involved, uses the calendar year as a taxable 
year and purchases for $100,000 on December 31, 1963, tangible property 
(not described in section 956(b)(2)) located in the United States and 
having a remaining estimated useful life of 10 years, subject to a 
mortgage of $80,000 payable in 5 annual installments. The property 
constitutes United States property as of December 31, 1963, and the 
amount taken into account for purposes of determining the aggregate 
amount of S Corporation's investment in United States property under 
paragraph (b) of Sec. 1.956-1 is $20,000. No depreciation is sustained 
with respect to the property during the taxable year 1963. During the 
taxable year 1964, S Corporation pays $16,000 on the mortgage and 
sustains $10,000 of depreciation with respect to the property. As of 
December 31, 1964, the amount taken into account with respect to the 
property for purposes of determining the aggregate amount of S 
Corporation's investment in United States property under paragraph (b) 
of Sec. 1.956-1 is $26,000, computed as follows:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
Cost of property.............................................   $100,000
  Less: Reserve for depreciation.............................     10,000
                                                    -----------         
    Adjusted basis of property...............................     90,000
  Less: Liability to which property is subject:                         
    Gross amount of mortgage.......................   $80,000           
    Payment during 1964............................    16,000           
                                                    ----------          
                                                                  64,000
                                                              ----------
Amount taken into account (12-31-64).........................    26,000 
                                                                        

    Example 3. Controlled foreign corporation T uses the calendar year 
as a taxable year and acquires on December 31, 1963, $10,000 of United 
States property not described in section 956(b)(2); no depreciation is 
sustained with respect to the property during 1963. Corporation T's 
current and accumulated earnings and profits (determined as provided in 
paragraph (b) of Sec. 1.956-1) as of December 31, 1963, are in excess of 
$10,000, and T Corporation's United States shareholders include in their 
gross income under section 951(a)(1)(B) their pro rata share of T 
Corporation's increase ($10,000) for 1963 in earnings invested in United 
States property. On January 1, 1964, T Corporation acquires an 
additional $10,000 of

[[Page 351]]

United States property not described in section 956(b)(2). Each of the 
two items of property has an estimated useful life of 5 years, and T 
Corporation sustains $4,000 of depreciation with respect to such 
properties during its taxable year 1964. Corporation T's current and 
accumulated earnings and profits as of December 31, 1964, exceed 
$16,000, determined as provided in paragraph (b) of Sec. 1.956-1. 
Corporation T pays no amounts during 1963 to which section 959(c)(1) 
applies. Corporation T's investment of earnings in United States 
property at December 31, 1964, is $16,000, and its increase for 1964 in 
earnings invested in United States property is $6,000.
    Example 4. Foreign corporation U uses the calendar year as a taxable 
year and acquires before January 1, 1963, stock in domestic corporation 
M having as to U Corporation an adjusted basis of $10,000. On December 
1, 1964, pursuant to a statutory merger described in section 368(a)(1), 
M Corporation merges into domestic corporation N, and U Corporation 
receives on such date one share of stock in N Corporation, the surviving 
corporation, for each share of stock it held in M Corporation. Pursuant 
to section 354 no gain or loss is recognized to U Corporation, and 
pursuant to section 358 the basis of the property received (stock of N 
Corporation) is the same as that of the property exchanged (stock of M 
Corporation). Corporation U is not considered for purposes of section 
956 to have acquired United States property by reason of its receipt of 
the stock in N Corporation.
    Example 5. The facts are the same as in example 4, except that U 
Corporation acquires the stock of M Corporation on February 1, 1963, 
rather than before January 1, 1963. For purposes of determining U 
Corporation's aggregate investment in United States property on December 
31, 1963, U Corporation has, by virtue of acquiring the stock of M 
Corporation, acquired $10,000 of United States property. Corporation U 
pays no amount during 1963 to which section 959(c)(1) applies. The 
reorganization and resulting acquisition on December 1, 1964, by U 
Corporation of N Corporation's stock also represents an acquisition of 
United States property; however, assuming no other change in U 
Corporation's aggregate investment in United States property during 
1964, U Corporation's increase for such year in earnings invested in 
United States property is zero.

    (2) [Reserved]

(Secs. 956(c), 7805, Internal Revenue Code of 1954 (76 Stat. 1017, 68A 
Stat. 917; (26 U.S.C. 956(c) and 7805 respectively)))

[T.D. 6704, 29 FR 2601, Feb. 20, 1964, as amended by T.D. 7712, 45 FR 
52374, Aug. 7, 1980; T.D. 7797, 46 FR 57675, Nov. 25, 1981; T.D. 8209, 
53 FR 22171, June 14, 1988]


<R05>
Sec. 1.956-2T   Definition of United States Property (temporary).

    (a)--(c) [Reserved]
    (d)(1) [Reserved]
    (2) Obligation defined--(i) Rule. For purposes of Sec. 1.956-2 of 
the regulations, the term ``obligation'' includes any bond, note, 
debenture, certificate, bill receivable, account receivable, note 
receivable, open account, or other indebtedness, whether or not issued 
at a discount and whether or not bearing interest, except that such term 
shall not include:
    (A) Any indebtedness arising out of the involuntary conversion of 
property which is not United States property within the meaning of 
paragraph (a)(1) of Sec. 1.956-2, or
    (B) Any obligation of a United States person (as defined in section 
957(c)) arising in connection with the provision of services by a 
controlled foreign corporation to the United States person if the amount 
of such obligation outstanding at any time during the taxable year of 
the controlled foreign corporation does not exceed an amount which would 
be ordinary and necessary to carry on the trade or business of the 
controlled foreign corporation and the United States person if they were 
unrelated. The amount of such obligations shall be considered to be 
ordinary and necessary to the extent of such receivables that are paid 
within 60 days.

See Sec. 1.956-2(b)(1)(v) for the exclusion from United States property 
of obligations arising in connection with the sale or processing of 
property where such obligations are ordinary and necessary as to amount.
    (ii) Effective date. This section is effective June 14, 1988, with 
respect to investments made on or after June 14, 1988.

[T.D. 8209, 53 FR 22171, June 14, 1988]


<R05>
Sec. 1.956-3T   Certain trade or service receivables acquired from United States persons (temporary).

    (a) In general. For purposes of section 956(a) and Sec. 1.956-1, the 
term ``United States property'' also includes any trade or service 
receivable if the trade or service receivable is acquired (directly or 
indirectly) after March 1, 1984, from a related person who is a

[[Page 352]]

United States person (as defined in section 7701(a)(30)) (hereinafter 
referred to as a ``related United States person'') and the obligor under 
the receivable is a United States person. A trade or service receivable 
described in this paragraph shall be considered to be United States 
property notwithstanding the exceptions (other than subparagraph (H)) 
contained in section 956(b)(2). The terms ``trade or service 
receivable'' and ``related person'' have the respective meanings given 
to such terms by section 864(d) and the regulations thereunder. For 
purposes of this section, the exception contained in Sec. 1.956-
2T(d)(2)(i)(B) for short-term obligations shall not apply to service 
receivables described in this paragraph.
    (b) Acquisition of a trade or service receivable--(1) General rule. 
The rules of Sec. 1.864-8T(c)(1) shall be applied to determine whether a 
controlled foreign corporation has acquired a trade or service 
receivable.
    (2) Indirect acquisitions--(i) Acquisition through unrelated person. 
A trade or service receivable will be considered to be acquired from a 
related person if it is acquired from an unrelated person who acquired 
(directly or indirectly) such receivable from a person who is a related 
person to the acquiring person.
    (ii) Acquisition by nominee or pass-through entity. A controlled 
foreign corporation will be considered to have acquired a trade or 
service receivable of a related United States person held on its behalf:
    (A) By a nominee or by a partnership, simple trust, S corporation or 
other pass-through entity to the extent the controlled foreign 
corporation owns (directly or indirectly) a beneficial interest in such 
partnership or other pass-through entity; or
    (B) By another foreign corporation that is controlled by the 
controlled foreign corporation, if one of the principal purposes for 
creating, organizing, or funding such other foreign corporation (through 
capital contributions or debt) is to avoid the application of section 
956. See Sec. 1.956-1T.

The rule of this paragraph (b)(2)(ii) does not limit the application of 
paragraph (b)(2)(iii) of this section regarding the characterization of 
trade or service receivables of unrelated persons acquired pursuant to 
certain swap or pooling arrangements. The following examples illustrate 
the application of this paragraph (b)(2)(ii).

    Example 1. FS1, a controlled foreign corporation with substantial 
accumulated earnings and profits, contributes $2,000,000 to PS, a 
partnership, in exchange for a 20 percent limited partnership interest 
in PS. PS purchases trade or service receivables of FS1's domestic 
parent, P. The obligors under the receivables are United States persons. 
PS does not purchase receivables of any person who is related to any 
other partner in PS. Under paragraph (b)(2)(ii)(A) of this section, 
there is an investment of the earnings of FS1 in United States property 
equal to 20 percent of PS's basis in the receivables of P.
    Example 2. FS1, a controlled foreign corporation, has accumulated 
more than $3,000,000 in earnings and profits. It organizes a wholly-
owned foreign corporation, FS2, with a $2,000,000 equity contribution. 
FS2 has no earnings and profits. FS2 uses the funds to purchase trade or 
service receivables of FS1's domestic parent, P. The obligors under the 
receivables are United States persons. Under paragraph (b)(2)(ii)(B) of 
this section, there is an investment of the earnings of FS1 in United 
States property equal to $2,000,000.

    (iii) Swap or pooling arrangements. A trade or service receivable of 
an unrelated person will be considered to be a trade or service 
receivable acquired from a related United States person and subject to 
the rules of this section if it is acquired in accordance with an 
arrangement that involves two or more groups of related persons that are 
unrelated to each other and the effect of the arrangement is that one or 
more related persons in each group acquire (directly or indirectly) 
trade or service receivables of one or more unrelated United States 
persons who are also parties to the arrangement, in exchange for 
reciprocal purchases of receivables of United States persons in the 
first group. The following example illustrates the application of this 
paragraph (b)(2)(iii).

    Example. Controlled foreign corporations A, B, C, and D are wholly-
owned subsidiaries of domestic corporations M, N, O, and P, 
respectively. M, N, O, and P are not related persons. According to a 
prearranged plan, A, B, C, and D each acquire trade or service 
receivables of M, N, O, and/or P. The obligors under some or all of the 
receivables acquired by each of A, B, C, and D are United States 
persons. Because the effect of this arrangement is that the unrelated 
groups acquire

[[Page 353]]

each other's trade or service receivables of United States persons 
pursuant to the arrangement, there is an investment of the earnings of 
each of A, B, C, and D in United States property to the extent of the 
purchase price of those receivables under which the obligors are United 
States persons.

    (iv) Financing arrangements. If a controlled foreign corporation 
participates (directly or indirectly) in a lending transaction that 
results in a loan to a United States person who purchases property 
described in section 1221(1) (hereinafter referred to as ``inventory 
property'') or services of a related United States person, or to any 
person who purchases trade or service receivables of a related United 
States person under which the obligor is a United States person, or to a 
person who is related to any such purchaser, and if the loan would not 
have been made or maintained on the same terms but for the corresponding 
purchase, then the controlled foreign corporation shall be considered to 
have indirectly acquired a trade or service receivable described in 
paragraph (a) of this section. For purposes of this paragraph 
(b)(2)(iv), it is immaterial that the sums lent are not, in fact, the 
sums used to finance the purchase of the inventory property or services 
or trade or service receivables of a related United States person. The 
amount to be taken into account with respect to the controlled foreign 
corporation's investment in United States property (resulting from 
application of this paragraph (b)(2)(iv)) shall be the amount lent 
pursuant to a lending transaction described in this paragraph 
(b)(2)(iv), if the amount lent is equal to or less than the purchase 
price of the inventory property, services, or trade or service 
receivables. If the amount lent is greater than the purchase price of 
the inventory property, services or receivables, the amount to be taken 
into account shall be the purchase price. The following examples 
illustrate the application of this paragraph (b)(2)(iv).

    Example 1. P, a domestic corporation, owns all of the outstanding 
stock of FS1, a controlled foreign corporation. P sells equipment for 
$2,000,000 to X, an unrelated United States person. FS1 makes a 
$1,000,000 short-term loan to X, which loan would not have been made or 
maintained on the same terms but for X's purchase of P's equipment. 
Because FS1 directly participates in a lending transaction described in 
this paragraph (b)(2)(iv), FS1 is considered to have acquired the 
receivable of a related United States person. Thus, there is an 
investment of FS1's earnings and profits in United States property in 
the amount of $1,000,000.
    Example 2. The facts are the same as in Example 1, except that 
instead of loaning money to X directly, FS1 deposits $3,000,000 with an 
unrelated financial institution that loans $2,000,000 to X in order for 
X to purchase P's equipment. The loan would not have been made or 
maintained on the same terms but for the corresponding deposit. 
Accordingly, the deposit and the loan are treated as a direct loan from 
FS1 to X. See Rev. Rul. 87-89, 1987-37 I.R.B. 16. Because FS1 indirectly 
participates in a lending transaction described in this paragraph 
(b)(2)(iv), FS1 is considered to have acquired the receivable of a 
related United States person. Thus, there is an investment of FS1's 
earnings and profits in United States property in the amount of 
$2,000,000.
    Example 3. P, a domestic corporation, owns all of the outstanding 
stock of FS1, a controlled foreign corporation. FS1 makes a $3,000,000 
loan to U, an unrelated foreign corporation, in connection with U's 
purchase for $2,000,000 of receivables from the sale of inventory 
property by P to United States obligors. Because FS1 directly 
participates in a lending transaction described in this paragraph 
(b)(2)(iv), FS1 is considered to have acquired receivables of a related 
United States person. Thus, there is an investment of FS1's earnings and 
profits in United States property in the amount of $2,000,000.

    (c) Substitution of obligor. For purposes of this section, the 
substitution of another person for a United States obligor may be 
disregarded. Thus, if a purchaser who is a United States person arranges 
for a foreign person to pay a United States seller of inventory property 
or services and the seller transfers by sale or otherwise to its own 
controlled foreign corporation the foreign person's obligation for 
payment, then the acquisition of the foreign person's obligation shall 
constitute an investment in United States property by the seller's 
controlled foreign corporation, unless it can be demonstrated by the 
parties to the transaction that the primary purpose for the arrangement 
was not the avoidance of section 956. The following example illustrates 
the application of this paragraph.


[[Page 354]]


    Example. P, a domestic corporation, owns all of the outstanding 
stock of FS1, a controlled foreign corporation with substantial 
accumulated earnings and profits. P sells equipment to X, a domestic 
corporation unrelated to P. To pay for the equipment, X arranges for a 
foreign financing entity to issue a note to P. P then sells the note to 
FS1. FS1 has made an investment in United States property in the amount 
of the purchase price of the note.

[T.D. 8209, 53 FR 22169, June 14, 1988]


<R05>
Sec. 1.957-1   Definition of controlled foreign corporation.

    (a) In general. The term controlled foreign corporation means any 
foreign corporation of which more than 50 percent (or such lesser amount 
as is provided in section 957(b) or section 953(c)) of either--
    (1) The total combined voting power of all classes of stock of the 
corporation entitled to vote; or
    (2) The total value of the stock of the corporation, is owned within 
the meaning of section 958(a), or (except for purposes of section 
953(c)) is considered as owned by applying the rules of section 958(b) 
and Sec. 1.958-2, by United States shareholders on any day during the 
taxable year of such foreign corporation. For the definition of the term 
United States shareholder, see sections 951(b) and 953(c)(1)(A). For the 
definition of the term foreign corporation, see Sec. 301.7701-5 of this 
chapter (Procedure and Administration Regulations). For the treatment of 
associations as corporations, see section 7701(a)(3) and Secs. 301.7701-
1 and 301.7701-2 of this chapter. For the definition of the term stock, 
see sections 958(a)(3) and 7701(a)(7). For the classification of a 
member in an association, joint stock company or insurance company as a 
shareholder, see section 7701(a)(8).
    (b) Percentage of total combined voting power owned by United States 
shareholders--(1) Meaning of combined voting power. In determining for 
purposes of paragraph (a) of this section whether United States 
shareholders own the requisite percentage of total combined voting power 
of all classes of stock entitled to vote, consideration will be given to 
all the facts and circumstances of each case. In all cases, however, 
United States shareholders of a foreign corporation will be deemed to 
own the requisite percentage of total combined voting power with respect 
to such corporation--
    (i) If they have the power to elect, appoint, or replace a majority 
of that body of persons exercising, with respect to such corporation, 
the powers ordinarily exercised by the board of directors of a domestic 
corporation;
    (ii) If any person or persons elected or designated by such 
shareholders have the power, where such shareholders have the power to 
elect exactly one-half of the members of such governing body of such 
foreign corporation, either to cast a vote deciding an evenly divided 
vote of such body or, for the duration of any deadlock which may arise, 
to exercise the powers ordinarily exercised by such governing body; or
    (iii) If the powers which would ordinarily be exercised by the board 
of directors of a domestic corporation are exercised with respect to 
such foreign corporation by a person whom such shareholders have the 
power to elect, appoint, or replace.
    (2) Shifting of formal voting power. Any arrangement to shift formal 
voting power away from United States shareholders of a foreign 
corporation will not be given effect if in reality voting power is 
retained. The mere ownership of stock entitled to vote does not by 
itself mean that the shareholder owning such stock has the voting power 
of such stock for purposes of section 957. For example, if there is any 
agreement, whether express or implied, that any shareholder will not 
vote his stock or will vote it only in a specified manner, or that 
shareholders owning stock having not more than 50 percent of the total 
combined voting power will exercise voting power normally possessed by a 
majority of stockholders, then the nominal ownership of the voting power 
will be disregarded in determining which shareholders actually hold such 
voting power, and this determination will be made on the basis of such 
agreement. Moreover, where United States shareholders own shares of one 
or more classes of stock of a foreign corporation which has another 
class of stock outstanding, the voting power ostensibly provided such 
other class of stock will be deemed owned by any person or

[[Page 355]]

persons on whose behalf it is exercised or, if not exercised, will be 
disregarded if the percentage of voting power of such other class of 
stock is substantially greater than its proportionate share of the 
corporate earnings, if the facts indicate that the shareholders of such 
other class of stock do not exercise their voting rights independently 
or fail to exercise such voting rights, and if a principal purpose of 
the arrangement is to avoid the classification of such foreign 
corporation as a controlled foreign corporation under section 957.
    (c) Illustrations. The application of this section may be 
illustrated by the following examples:

    Example 1. Foreign corporation R has two classes of capital stock 
outstanding, 60 shares of class A stock, and 40 shares of class B stock. 
Each share of each class of stock has one vote for all purposes. E, a 
United States person, owns 51 shares of class A stock. Corporation R is 
a controlled foreign corporation.
    Example 2. Foreign corporation S has three classes of capital stock 
outstanding, consisting of 60 shares of class A stock, 40 shares of 
class B stock, and 200 shares of class C stock. The owners of a majority 
of class A stock are entitled to elect 6 of the 10 corporate directors, 
and the owners of a majority of the class B stock are entitled to elect 
the other 4 of the 10 directors. Class C stock has no voting rights. D, 
a United States person, owns all of the shares of the class C stock. He 
also owns 31 shares of class A stock and as such an owner can elect 6 
members of the board of directors. None of the remaining shares of class 
A stock, or the 40 shares of class B stock, is owned, or considered as 
owned, within the meaning of section 958, by a United States person. 
Since, as owner of 31 shares of the class A stock, D has sufficient 
voting power to elect 6 directors, D has more than 50 percent of the 
total combined voting power of all classes of stock entitled to vote, 
and S Corporation is a controlled foreign corporation.
    Example 3. M, a United States person, owns a 51-percent interest in 
R Company, a foreign company of which he is a member. The company, if it 
were domestic, would be taxable as a corporation. The remaining interest 
of 49 percent in the company is owned by seven other members none of 
whom is a United States person. The memorandum of association of R 
Company provides for only one manager, who with respect to the company 
exercises the powers ordinarily exercised by a board of directors of a 
domestic corporation. The manager is to be elected by unanimous 
agreement of all the members. Since M owns 51 percent of the company, he 
will be deemed to own more than 50 percent of the total combined voting 
power of all classes of stock of R Company entitled to vote, 
notwithstanding that he has power to elect a manager only with the 
agreement of the other members. Company R is a controlled foreign 
corporation.
    Example 4. Domestic corporation M owns a 49-percent interest in S 
Company, a foreign company of which it is a member. The company, if it 
were domestic, would be taxable as a corporation. Company S is formed 
under the laws of foreign country Y. The remaining interest of 51 
percent in S Company is owned by persons who are not United States 
persons. The organization contract of S Company provides for one 
manager, B, a citizen and resident of country Y who is an officer of M 
Corporation in charge of its foreign operations in such country, or any 
person M Corporation may at any time appoint to succeed B in such 
capacity. The manager has the sole authority with respect to S Company 
to exercise powers ordinarily exercised by a board of directors of a 
domestic corporation. Since M Corporation has the discretionary power to 
replace B and to appoint his successor as manager of S Company, the 
company is a controlled foreign corporation.
    Example 5. N, a United States person, owns 50 percent of the 
outstanding shares of the only class of capital stock of foreign 
corporation R. An additional 48 percent of the outstanding shares is 
owned by foreign corporation S. The remaining 2 percent of shares is 
owned by P, a citizen and resident of foreign country T, who regularly 
acts as attorney for N in the conduct of N's business affairs in country 
T. All of the shares of the outstanding capital stock of R Corporation 
are bearer shares. At the time of the issuance of the shares to him, P 
places the certificates for such shares in a depository to which N has 
access. On several occasions N, with P's acquiescence, has taken such 
shares from the depository and, on one such occasion, used the shares as 
collateral in borrowing funds on a loan. Although dividends, when paid, 
are paid to P on his shares, his charges to N for legal fees are reduced 
by the amount of the dividends paid on such shares. Although P votes his 
shares at meetings of shareholders, the facts set forth above indicate 
an implied agreement between P and N that N is really to retain dominion 
over the stock. N is deemed to own the voting rights ostensibly attached 
to the stock owned by P, and R Corporation is a controlled foreign 
corporation.
    Example 6. M, a domestic corporation which manufactures in the 
United States and distributes all of its production for foreign 
consumption through N, a person other than a related person or a United 
States person, forms foreign corporation S to purchase products from M 
Corporation and sell them

[[Page 356]]

to N. Corporations S and M have common directors. The outstanding 
capital stock of S Corporation consists of 10,000 shares of $100 par 
value class A stock, which has no voting rights except to vote for 
dissolution of the corporation on a share-for-share basis, and 500 
shares of no par class B stock which has full voting rights. Each class 
of the outstanding stock is to participate on a share for share basis in 
any dividend. The class A stock has a preference as to assets on 
dissolution of the corporation to the extent of its par value as well as 
the right to participate with the class B stock in all other assets on a 
share for share basis. All of the shares of class A stock are issued to 
M Corporation in return for property having a value of $1 million. Of 
the class B stock, 300 of the shares are issued to N in return for 
$3,000 in cash and 200 shares are issued to M Corporation for $2,000 in 
cash. At stockholder meetings N never votes in opposition to M 
Corporation on important issues. Corporation S has average annual 
earnings of $200,000, all of which will be subpart F income if S 
Corporation is held to be a controlled foreign corporation. All such 
earnings are accumulated. Although N ostensibly has 60 percent of the 
voting power of S Corporation by virtue of his ownership of 300 shares 
of class B stock, he has the right to only approximately 3 percent of 
any dividends which may be paid by S Corporation; in addition, upon 
liquidation of S Corporation, N is entitled to share in the assets only 
after M Corporation has received the par value of its 10,000 shares of 
class A stock, or $1 million. Thus, the voting power owned by N is 
substantially greater than its proportionate share of the earnings of S 
Corporation. In addition, the facts set forth above indicate that N is 
not exercising his voting rights independently and that a principal 
purpose of the capitalization arrangement is to avoid classification of 
S Corporation as a controlled foreign corporation. For these reasons, 
the voting power ostensibly provided the class B stock will be deemed 
owned by M Corporation, and S Corporation is a controlled foreign 
corporation.
    Example 7. Foreign corporation A, authorized to issue 100 shares of 
one class of capital stock, issues, for $1,000 per share, 45 shares to 
domestic corporation M, 45 shares to foreign corporation B, and 10 
shares to foreign corporation C. Corporation C, a bank, lends $3 million 
to finance the operations of A Corporation. In the course of negotiating 
these financial arrangements, D, an officer of C Corporation, and E, an 
officer of M Corporation, orally agree that C Corporation will vote its 
stock as M Corporation directs. By virtue of such oral agreement M 
Corporation possesses the voting power ostensibly owned by C 
Corporation, and A Corporation is a controlled foreign corporation.
    Example 8. For its prior taxable year, JV, a foreign corporation, 
had outstanding 1000 shares of class A stock, which is voting common, 
and 1000 shares of class B stock, which is nonvoting preferred. DP, a 
domestic corporation, and FP, a foreign corporation, each owned 
precisely 500 shares of both class A and class B stock, and each elected 
5 of the 10 members of JV's board of directors. The other facts and 
circumstances were such that JV was not a controlled foreign corporation 
on any day of the prior taxable year. On the first day of the current 
taxable year, DP purchased one share of class B stock from FP. JV was a 
controlled foreign corporation on the following day because over 50 
percent of the total value in the corporation was held by a person that 
was a United States shareholder under section 951(b). See Sec. 1.951-
1(f).
    Example 9. The facts are the same as in Example 8 except that the 
stock of FP was publicly traded, FP had one class of stock, and on the 
first day of the current taxable year DP purchased one share of FP stock 
on the foreign stock exchange instead of purchasing one share of JV 
stock from FP. JV became a controlled foreign corporation on the 
following day because over 50 percent of the total value in the 
corporation was held by a person that was a United States shareholder 
under section 951(b).
    Example 10. X, a foreign corporation, is incorporated under the laws 
of country Y. Under the laws of country Y, X is considered a mutual 
insurance company. X issues insurance policies that provide the 
policyholder with the right to vote for directors of the corporation, 
the right to a share of the assets upon liquidation in proportion to 
premiums paid, and the right to receive policyholder dividends in 
proportion to premiums paid. Only policyholders are provided with the 
right to vote for directors, share in assets upon liquidation, and 
receive distributions. United States policyholders contribute 25 percent 
of the premiums and have 25 percent of the outstanding rights to vote 
for the board of directors. Based on these facts, the United States 
policyholders are United States shareholders owning the requisite 
combined voting power and value. Thus, X is a controlled foreign 
corporation for purposes of taking into account related person insurance 
income under section 953(c).

    (d) Effective date. Paragraphs (a) and (c) Examples 8 through 10 of 
this section are effective for taxable years of a controlled foreign 
corporation beginning after November 6, 1995.

[T.D. 6688, 28 FR 11631, Oct. 31, 1963, as amended by T.D. 8216, 53 FR 
27510, July 21, 1988; T.D. 8618, 60 FR 46529, Sept. 7, 1995; 60 FR 
62026, Dec. 4, 1995; T.D. 8704, 62 FR 21, Jan. 2, 1997]

[[Page 357]]


<R05>
Sec. 1.957-2   Controlled foreign corporation deriving income from insurance of United States risks.

    (a) In general. For purposes of taking into account only the income 
derived from the insurance of United States risks under Sec. 1.953-1, 
the term ``controlled foreign corporation'' means any foreign 
corporation of which more than 25 percent, but not more than 50 percent, 
of the total combined voting power of all classes of stock entitled to 
vote is owned within the meaning of section 958(a), or is considered as 
owned by applying the rules of ownership of section 958(b), by United 
States shareholders on any day of the taxable year of such foreign 
corporation, but only if the gross amount of premiums received by such 
foreign corporation during such taxable year which are attributable to 
the reinsuring and the issuing of insurance and annuity contracts in 
connection with United States risks, as defined in Sec. 1.953-2 or 
1.953-3, exceeds 75 percent of the gross amount of all premiums received 
by such foreign corporation during such year which are attributable to 
the reinsuring and the issuing of insurance and annuity contracts in 
connection with all risks. The subpart F income for a taxable year of a 
foreign corporation which is a controlled foreign corporation for such 
taxable year within the meaning of this paragraph shall, subject to the 
provisions of section 952(b), (c), and (d), and Sec. 1.952-1, include 
only the income derived from the insurance of United States risks, as 
determined under Sec. 1.953-1.
    (b) Gross amount of premiums defined. For a foreign corporation 
which is engaged in the business of reinsuring or issuing insurance or 
annuity contracts and which, if it were a domestic corporation engaged 
only in such business, would be taxable as--
    (1) A life insurance company to which part I (sections 801 through 
820) of subchapter L of the Code applies,
    (2) A mutual insurance company to which part II (sections 821 
through 826) of subchapter L of the Code applies, or
    (3) A mutual marine insurance or other insurance company to which 
part III (sections 831 and 832) of subchapter L of the Code applies,

the term ``gross amount of premiums'' means, for purposes of paragraph 
(a) of this section, the gross amount of premiums and other 
consideration which are taken into account by a life insurance company 
under section 809(c)(1). Determinations for purposes of this paragraph 
shall be made without regard to section 501(a).

[T.D. 6795, 30 FR 942, Jan. 29, 1965]


<R05>
Sec. 1.957-3   Corporations organized in United States possessions.

    (a) General rule. For purposes of sections 951 through 964, a 
corporation created or organized in a possession of the United States or 
under the laws of a possession of the United States shall not be treated 
as a controlled foreign corporation for any taxable year if--
    (1) 80 percent or more of the gross income of such corporation for 
the 3-year period immediately preceding the close of the taxable year or 
for such part of such 3-year period as such corporation was in existence 
or for such part of such 3-year period as occurs on and after the 
beginning of such corporation's first annual accounting period beginning 
after December 31, 1962, whichever period is shortest, was derived from 
sources within a possession of the United States; and
    (2) 50 percent or more of the gross income of such corporation for 
such period, or for such part of such period, was derived from the 
active conduct within a possession of the United States of one or more 
trades or businesses constituting--
    (i) The manufacture or processing of goods, wares, merchandise, or 
other tangible personal property;
    (ii) The processing of agricultural or horticultural products or 
commodities (including but not limited to livestock, poultry, or fur-
bearing animals);
    (iii) The catching or taking of any kind of fish, or any 
manufacturing or processing of any products or commodities obtained from 
such activities;
    (iv) The mining or extraction of natural resources, or any 
manufacturing or processing of any products or commodities obtained from 
such activities; or
    (v) The ownership or operation of hotels.

[[Page 358]]

    (b) Special provisions. For purposes of section 957(c) and this 
section--
    (1) United States defined. The term ``United States'' includes only 
the States and the District of Columbia.
    (2) Possession of the United States defined. The term ``possession 
of the United States'' includes Guam, the Midway Islands, the Panama 
Canal Zone, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, American Samoa, the Virgin 
Islands, and Wake Island.
    (3) Determination of source of gross income. Whether gross income of 
a corporation referred to in paragraph (a) of this section is derived 
from sources within a possession of the United States shall be 
determined by the application of the provisions of Sec. 1.955-6 except 
that, for purposes of making such determination, the term ``produced'', 
as used in paragraph (d)(2) of Sec. 1.955-6, shall also include the 
activities described in paragraph (a)(2)(i) through (iv) of this section 
and the activities considered, under subparagraph (4) of this paragraph, 
to be qualifying trades or businesses.
    (4) Manufacturing or processing. The trades or businesses which 
qualify under the provisions of paragraph (a)(2) of this section shall 
include, but not be limited to, the manufacture of tabulating cards, 
paper tablets or pads, facial tissues, and paper napkins from rolls of 
paper; the manufacture of such household products as liquid starch by 
mixing quantities of the ingredients which are used to produce liquid 
starch; and the manufacture of juices and drinks from fruit 
concentrates. In the application of paragraph (a)(2) of this section, 
proper regard shall be given to the classification of a trade or 
business as a manufacturing or processing activity under the applicable 
economic incentive law of the possession involved. The fact that an 
activity of a corporation qualifies as a trade or business for purposes 
of paragraph (a) of this section does not necessarily mean that such 
activity constitutes a substantial transformation of property within the 
meaning of paragraph (a)(4) of Sec. 1.954-3 for purposes of determining 
any foreign base company income of such corporation.

[T.D. 6683, 28 FR 11184, Oct. 18, 1963]


<R05>
Sec. 1.957-4   United States person defined.

    (a) Basic rule--(1) In general. The term ``United States person'' 
has the same meaning for purposes of sections 951 through 964 which it 
has under section 7701(a)(30) and in the regulations thereunder, except 
as provided in section 957(d) and paragraphs (b), (c), and (d) of this 
section which provide, with respect to corporations organized in 
possessions of the United States, that certain residents of such 
possessions are not United States persons. The effect of determining 
that an individual is not a United States person for such purposes is to 
exclude such individual in determining whether a foreign corporation 
created or organized in, or under the laws of, Puerto Rico, the Virgin 
Islands, or any possession of the United States (other than Puerto Rico 
or the Virgin Islands) is a controlled foreign corporation. See 
Sec. 1.957-1 for definition of the term ``controlled foreign 
corporation''; Sec. 1.957-2 for a special limitation on the amount of 
subpart F income of certain controlled foreign corporations deriving 
income from the insurance of United States risks; and Sec. 1.957-3 for 
the exclusion of certain corporations organized in United States 
possessions from the definition of controlled foreign corporation.
    (2) Special provisions applicable to possessions of the United 
States. For purposes of section 957(d) and this section--
    (i) Possession of the United States defined. The term ``possession 
of the United States'' has the same meaning which it has under paragraph 
(b)(2) of Sec. 1.957-3.
    (ii) Determination of residence in a possession. Whether an 
individual is a bona fide resident of Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, 
or any other possession of the United States, shall be determined in 
general by applying to the facts and circumstances in each case the 
principles of Secs. 1.871-2 through 1.871-5, relating to the 
determination of residence in the United States.
    (b) Puerto Rico corporation and resident. With respect only to a 
foreign corporation created or organized in, or under the laws of, 
Puerto Rico--
    (1) If an individual (who, without regard to this paragraph, is a 
United States person) is a bona fide resident of

[[Page 359]]

Puerto Rico during his entire taxable year in which or with which the 
taxable year of such foreign corporation ends, and
    (2) If 50 percent or more of the gross income of such foreign 
corporation is derived from sources within Puerto Rico, as determined 
under Sec. 1.863-6, for the 3-year period (or for such part of such 3-
year period as such foreign corporation has been in existence) ending 
with the close of the taxable year of such foreign corporation which--
    (i) Ends with or within the taxable year next preceding such taxable 
year of such individual and at any time, during the period beginning 
with the beginning of such latter taxable year of such individual and 
ending not later than one year after the close of such taxable year of 
such foreign corporation, such individual directly owns stock in such 
foreign corporation, or
    (ii) Ends within such taxable year of such individual and at any 
time, during the period beginning after the close of such taxable year 
of such foreign corporation and ending with the close of such taxable 
year of such individual, such individual directly owns stock in such 
foreign corporation,

then, such individual shall not be considered a United States person 
with respect to such corporation for the taxable year of such 
corporation which ends with or within the taxable year of such person. 
The application of this paragraph may be illustrated by the following 
examples:

    Example 1. Foreign corporation R, incorporated under the laws of 
Puerto Rico, is wholly owned by D, a United States citizen. D and 
corporation R use the calendar year as the taxable year. For 1961, 1962, 
and 1963, 60 percent of the gross income of R Corporation is derived 
from sources within Puerto Rico and 40 percent of the gross income of R 
Corporation is derived from sources within Panama, as determined under 
Sec. 1.863-6. During all of 1964, D is a bona fide resident of Puerto 
Rico. D is not a United States person with respect to R Corporation for 
1964. Accordingly, R Corporation is not a controlled foreign corporation 
at any time in 1964.
    Example 2. Foreign corporation R is incorporated on January 1, 1962, 
under the laws of Puerto Rico. D, a United States citizen, owns all the 
one class of stock of R Corporation throughout 1962 and 1963. D and 
corporation R use the calendar year as the taxable year. For 1962, 55 
percent of the gross income of R Corporation is derived from sources 
within Puerto Rico and 45 percent of the gross income of R Corporation 
is derived from sources within the Netherlands Antilles, as determined 
under Sec. 1.863-6. For 1963, 40 percent of the gross income of R 
Corporation is derived from sources within Puerto Rico and 60 percent of 
the gross income of R Corporation is derived from sources within the 
Netherlands Antilles, as determined under Sec. 1.863-6. During all of 
1963 D is a bona fide resident of Puerto Rico. With respect to R 
Corporation, D is not a United States person for 1963 because D is a 
bona fide resident of Puerto Rico for all of 1963; 55 percent of the 
gross income of R Corporation for 1962 is derived from sources within 
Puerto Rico; and D owns stock in R Corporation at some time during 1963. 
Accordingly, R Corporation is not a controlled foreign corporation at 
any time in 1963. In making this determination, it is immaterial that R 
Corporation does not satisfy the 50-percent gross income test for 1963, 
the taxable year during all of which D is a resident of Puerto Rico.
    Example 3. Foreign corporation R is incorporated on January 1, 1962, 
under the laws of Puerto Rico. D, a United States citizen, owns all the 
one class of stock of R Corporation throughout 1962 and 1963. D and 
corporation R use the calendar year as the taxable year. For 1962, 45 
percent of the gross income of R Corporation is derived from sources 
within Puerto Rico and 55 percent of the gross income of R Corporation 
is derived from sources within the Netherlands Antilles, as determined 
under Sec. 1.863-6. For 1963, 60 percent of the gross income of R 
Corporation is derived from sources within Puerto Rico and 40 percent of 
the gross income of R Corporation is derived from sources within the 
Netherlands Antilles, as determined under Sec. 1.863-6. With respect to 
R Corporation, D is a United States person for 1963, since R Corporation 
does not satisfy the 50-percent gross income test for 1962. Accordingly, 
R Corporation is a controlled foreign corporation for all of 1963.
    Example 4. Foreign corporation S is incorporated on July 1, 1962, 
under the laws of Puerto Rico. Corporation S uses the fiscal year ending 
on June 30 as the taxable year. For its fiscal year ending on June 30, 
1963, 55 percent of the gross income of S Corporation is derived from 
sources within Puerto Rico and 45 percent of the gross income of S 
Corporation is derived from sources within Switzerland, as determined 
under Sec. 1.863-6. For its fiscal years ending on June 30, 1964, and 
June 30, 1965, respectively, 40 percent of the gross income of S 
Corporation is derived from sources within Puerto Rico and 60 percent of 
the gross income of S Corporation is derived from sources within 
Switzerland, as determined under Sec. 1.863-6. B, a United States 
citizen, who uses the calendar year as the taxable year, is a bona fide 
resident of Puerto

[[Page 360]]

Rico for all of 1964. On July 1, 1964, B acquires, and holds throughout 
the remainder of 1964, all of the one class of stock of S Corporation. 
With respect to S Corporation for its taxable year ending June 30, 1964, 
B is a United States person because--
    (a) Although B is a bona fide resident of Puerto Rico for his entire 
year 1964 in which ends S Corporation's taxable year ending June 30, 
1964, and S Corporation meets the 50-percent gross income test for the 
applicable part of the 3-year period ending June 30, 1963, B does not 
own stock in S Corporation during the period beginning January 1, 1964, 
and ending June 30, 1964, and
    (b) Although B owns stock in S Corporation during the period 
beginning July 1, 1964, and ending December 31, 1964, S Corporation does 
not meet the 50-percent gross income test for the applicable part of the 
3-year period ending June 30, 1964.

Accordingly, with respect to B, S Corporation is a controlled foreign 
corporation for its entire taxable year ending June 30, 1964.
    Example 5. The facts are the same as in example 4, except B buys all 
of the stock of S Corporation on June 1, 1964, rather than on July 1, 
1964. With respect to S Corporation for its taxable year ending June 30, 
1964, B is not a United States person because B is a bona fide resident 
of Puerto Rico for his entire taxable year 1964 in which ends S 
Corporation's taxable year ending June 30, 1964; S Corporation meets the 
50-percent gross income test for the applicable part of the 3-year 
period ending June 30, 1963; and B owns stock in S Corporation during 
the period beginning January 1, 1964, and ending June 30, 1964. 
Accordingly, with respect to B, S Corporation is not a controlled 
foreign corporation at any time during its taxable year ending June 30, 
1964.

    (c) Virgin Islands corporation and President. With respect only to a 
foreign corporation created or organized in, or under the laws of, the 
Virgin Islands--
    (1) If an individual (who, without regard to this paragraph, is a 
United States person) is a bona fide resident of the Virgin Islands as 
of the last day of his taxable year in which or with which the taxable 
year of such foreign corporation ends, and
    (2) Such individual's income tax obligations under subtitle A 
(relating to income taxes) of the Code for his taxable year are 
satisfied, in accordance with section 28(a) of the Revised Organic Act 
of the Virgin Islands (48 U.S.C. 1642), by paying the tax on his income 
derived from all sources, both within and outside the Virgin Islands, 
into the treasury of the Virgin Islands, then, such individual shall not 
be considered a United States person with respect to such corporation 
for the taxable year of such corporation which ends with or within the 
taxable year of such person. The application of this paragraph may be 
illustrated by the following examples:

    Example 1. Foreign corporation S, incorporated under the laws of the 
Virgin Islands, is wholly owned by D, a United States citizen. 
Corporation S uses the fiscal year ending on June 30 as the taxable 
year, and D uses the calendar year as the taxable year. From September 
1, 1963, to December 31, 1964, inclusive, D is a bona fide resident of 
the Virgin Islands. For 1963 and 1964, D satisfies his income tax 
obligations under section 28(a) of the Revised Organic Act of the Virgin 
Islands by paying the tax on his income derived from all sources, both 
within and outside the Virgin Islands, into the treasury of the Virgin 
Islands. With respect to S Corporation for its taxable years ending June 
30, 1963, and 1964, D is not a United States person. Accordingly, S 
Corporation is not a controlled foreign corporation for such taxable 
years of such corporation.
    Example 2. The facts are the same as in example 1, except that from 
August 15, 1964, to December 31, 1964, inclusive, D is a bona fide 
resident of the United States. Thus, D does not satisfy his income tax 
obligations for 1964 under section 28(a) of the Revised Organic Act of 
the Virgin Islands. The result is the same as in example 1, except that 
with respect to S Corporation for its taxable year ending June 30, 1964, 
D is a United States person and, accordingly, S Corporation is a 
controlled foreign corporation for such taxable year of such 
corporation.

    (d) Corporation and resident of other United States possessions. 
With respect only to a foreign corporation created or organized in, or 
under the laws of, any possession of the United States (other than 
Puerto Rico or the Virgin Islands)--
    (1) If an individual (who, without regard to this paragraph, is a 
United States person) is a bona fide resident of such possession during 
his entire taxable year in which or with which the taxable year of such 
foreign corporation ends, and
    (2) Any part or all of such individual's income (other than amounts 
includible in his gross income under section 951(a)) for his taxable 
year derived, in accordance with Sec. 1.863-6, from sources within any 
possession of the

[[Page 361]]

United States (whether or not the possession of which such individual is 
a resident) is not, as a result of the application of section 931, 
included in his gross income for his taxable year,

then, such individual shall not be considered a United States person 
with respect to such corporation for the taxable year of such 
corporation which ends with or within the taxable year of such person. 
Subparagraph (2) of this paragraph shall apply only for purposes of 
determining whether an individual is a United States person; after such 
determination has been made, section 931 shall be applied to the gross 
income (including amounts includible in gross income under section 
951(a)) of such individual to determine the amount to be excluded from 
such individual's gross income under section 931. The application of 
this paragraph may be illustrated by the following examples:

    Example 1. Foreign corporation R, incorporated under the laws of 
Guam, is wholly owned by D, a United States citizen. D and corporation R 
use the calendar year as the taxable year and the cash receipts and 
disbursements method of accounting. D is a bona fide resident of Guam 
for all of 1963 and all of his income of $30,000 (determined without 
taking into account amounts includible in his gross income under section 
951(a)) is derived from sources within Guam. Of such income, $24,000 is 
received in Guam and $6,000 is erceived in the United States. It meets 
the 3-year test of section 931(a) and, but for the application of 
section 931(b), all of his income of $30,000 would be excluded from 
gross income for 1963 under section 931. However, in accordance with 
section 931(b) and paragraph (c) of Sec. 1.931-1, the $6,000 received in 
the United States is included in gross income. Nevertheless, since part 
($24,000) of his income of $30,000 for 1963 derived, in accordance with 
Sec. 1.863-6, from sources within Guam is not, as a result of the 
application of section 931, included in his gross income, D is not a 
United States person with respect to R Corporation for its taxable year 
1963. Accordingly, R Corporation is not a controlled foreign corporation 
for its taxable year 1963.
    Example 2. The facts are the same as in example 1, except that, 
instead of receiving the $6,000 in the United States, D receives $10,000 
of the $30,000 in Guam for services performed for an agency of the 
United States. Under Sec. 1.863-6, all of D's income for 1963 is income 
derived from sources within Guam. However, since D's income of $10,000 
from the agency of the United States is deemed under section 931 (i) to 
be derived from sources within the United States for purposes of section 
931, at least 80 percent of his gross income for 1963, determined 
without the application of section 931, is not derived from sources 
within Guam. Accordingly, since no part of D's gross income of $30,000 
for 1963 derived, in accordance with Sec. 1.863-6, from sources within 
Guam is, as a result of the application of section 931, excluded from 
gross income for 1963, D is a United States person with respect to R 
Corporation for R Corporation's taxable year 1963. Accordingly, R 
Corporation is a controlled foreign corporation for its taxable year 
1963.

[T.D. 6775, 29 FR 16082, Dec. 2, 1964]


<R05>
Sec. 1.958-1  Direct and indirect ownership of stock.

    (a) In general. Section 958(a) provides that, for purposes of 
sections 951 to 964 (other than sections 955(b)(1)(A) and (B) and 
955(c)(2)(A)(ii) (as in effect before the enactment of the Tax Reduction 
Act of 1975), and 960(a)(1)), stock owned means--
    (1) Stock owned directly; and
    (2) Stock owned with the application of paragraph (b) of this 
section.

The rules of section 958(a) and this section provide a limited form of 
stock attribution primarily for use in determining the amount taxable to 
a United States shareholder under section 951(a). These rules also apply 
for purposes of other provisions of the Code and regulations which make 
express reference to section 958(a).
    (b) Stock ownership through foreign entities. For purposes of 
paragraph (a)(2) of this section, stock owned, directly or indirectly, 
by or for a foreign corporation, foreign partnership, or foreign trust 
or foreign estate (within the meaning of section 7701(a)(31)) shall be 
considered as being owned proportionately by its shareholders, partners, 
or beneficiaries, respectively. Stock considered to be owned by reason 
of the application of this paragraph shall, for purposes of reapplying 
this paragraph, be treated as actually owned by such person. Thus, this 
rule creates a chain of ownership; however, since the rule applies only 
to stock owned by a foreign entity, attribution under the rule stops 
with the first United States person in the chain of ownership running 
from the foreign entity. The application of this paragraph may be 
illustrated by the following example:


[[Page 362]]


    Example. Domestic corporation M owns 75 percent of the one class of 
stock in foreign corporation R, which in turn owns 80 percent of the one 
class of stock in foreign corporation S, which in turn owns 90 percent 
of the one class of stock in foreign corporation T. Under this 
paragraph, R Corporation is considered as owning 80 percent of the 90 
percent of the stock which S Corporation owns in T Corporation, or 72 
percent. Corporation M is considered as owning 75 percent of such 72 
percent of the stock in T Corporation, or 54 percent. Since M 
Corporation is a domestic corporation, the attribution under this 
paragraph stops with M Corporation, even though, illustratively, such 
corporation is wholly owned by domestic corporation N.

    (c) Rules of application--(1) Special rule for mutual insurance 
companies. For purposes of applying paragraph (a) of this section in the 
case of a foreign mutual insurance company, the term ``stock'' shall 
include any certificate entitling the holder to voting power in the 
corporation.
    (2) Amount of interest in foreign corporation, foreign partnership, 
foreign trust, or foreign estate. The determination of a person's 
proportionate interest in a foreign corporation, foreign partnership, 
foreign trust, or foreign estate will be made on the basis of all the 
facts and circumstances in each case. Generally, in determining a 
person's proportionate interest in a foreign corporation, the purpose 
for which the rules of section 958(a) and this section are being applied 
will be taken into account. Thus, if the rules of section 958(a) are 
being applied to determine the amount of stock owned for purposes of 
section 951(a), a person's proportionate interest in a foreign 
corporation will generally be determined with reference to such person's 
interest in the income of such corporation. If the rules of section 
958(a) are being applied to determine the amount of voting power owned 
for purposes of section 951(b) or 957, a person's proportionate interest 
in a foreign corporation will generally be determined with reference to 
the amount of voting power in such corporation owned by such person. 
However, any arrangement which artificially decreases a United States 
person's proportionate interest will not be recognized. See Secs. 1.951-
1 and 1.957-1.
    (d) Illustration. The application of this section may be illustrated 
by the following examples:

    Example 1. United States persons A and B own 25 percent and 50 
percent, respectively, of the one class of stock in foreign corporation 
M. Corporation M owns 80 percent of the one class of stock in foreign 
corporation N, and N Corporation owns 60 percent of the one class of 
stock in foreign corporation P. Under paragraph (b) of this section, M 
Corporation is considered to own 48 percent (80 percent of 60 percent) 
of the stock in P Corporation; such 48 percent is treated as actually 
owned by M Corporation for the purpose of again applying paragraph (b) 
of this section. Thus, A and B are considered to own 12 percent (25 
percent of 48 percent) and 24 percent (50 percent of 48 percent), 
respectively, of the stock in P Corporation.
    Example 2. United States person C is a 60-percent partner in foreign 
partnership X. Partnership X owns 40 percent of the one class of stock 
in foreign corporation Q. Corporation Q is a 50-percent partner in 
foreign partnership Y, and partnership Y owns 100 percent of the one 
class of stock in foreign corporation R. By the application of paragraph 
(b) of this section, C is considered to own 12 percent (60 percent of 40 
percent of 50 percent of 100 percent) of the stock in R Corporation.
    Example 3. Foreign trust Z was created for the benefit of United 
States persons D, E, and F. Under the terms of the trust instrument, the 
trust income is required to be divided into three equal shares. Each 
beneficiary's share of the income may either be accumulated for him or 
distributed to him in the discretion of the trustee. In 1970, the trust 
is to terminate and there is to be paid over to each beneficiary the 
accumulated income applicable to his share and one-third of the corpus. 
The corpus of trust Z is composed of 90 percent of the one class of 
stock in foreign corporation S. By the application of this section, each 
of D, E, and F is considered to own 30 percent (\1/3\ of 90 percent) of 
the stock in S Corporation.
    Example 4. Among the assets of foreign estate W are Blackacre and a 
block of stock, consisting of 75 percent of the one class of stock of 
foreign corporation T. Under the terms of the will governing estate W, 
Blackacre is left to G, a nonresident alien, for life, remainder to H, a 
nonresident alien, and the block of stock is left to United States 
person K. By the application of this section, K is considered to own the 
75 percent of the stock of T Corporation, and G and H are not considered 
to own any of such stock.

[T.D. 6889, 31 FR 9455, July 12, 1966, as amended by T.D. 7893, 48 FR 
22509, May 19, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 1.958-2  Constructive ownership of stock.

    (a) In general. Section 958(b) provides that, for purposes of 
sections 951(b),

[[Page 363]]

954(d)(3), 956(b)(2), and 957, the rules of section 318(a) as modified 
by section 958(b) and this section shall apply to the extent that the 
effect is to treat a United States person as a United States shareholder 
within the meaning of section 951(b), to treat a person as a related 
person within the meaning of section 954(d)(3), to treat the stock of a 
domestic corporation as owned by a United States shareholder of a 
controlled foreign corporation under section 956(b)(2), or to treat a 
foreign corporation as a controlled foreign corporation under section 
957. The rules contained in this section also apply for purposes of 
other provisions of the Code and regulations which make express 
reference to section 958(b).
    (b) Members of family--(1) In general. Except as provided in 
subparagraph (3) of this paragraph, an individual shall be considered as 
owning the stock owned, directly or indirectly, by or for--
    (i) His spouse (other than a spouse who is legally separated from 
the individual under a decree of divorce or separate maintenance); and
    (ii) His children, grandchildren, and parents.
    (2) Effect of adoption. For purposes of subparagraph (1)(ii) of this 
paragraph, a legally adopted child of an individual shall be treated as 
a child of such individual by blood.
    (3) Stock owned by nonresident alien individual. For purposes of 
this paragraph, stock owned by a nonresident alien individual (other 
than a foreign trust or foreign estate) shall not be considered as owned 
by a United States citizen or a resident alien individual. However, this 
limitation does not apply for purposes of determining whether the stock 
of a domestic corporation is owned or considered as owned by a United 
States shareholder under section 956(b)(2) and Sec. 1.956-2(b)(1)(viii). 
See section 958(b)(1).
    (c) Attribution from partnerships, estates, trusts, and 
corporations--(1) In general. Except as provided in subparagraph (2) of 
this paragraph--
    (i) From partnerships and estates. Stock owned, directly or 
indirectly, by or for a partnership or estate shall be considered as 
owned proportionately by its partners or beneficiaries.
    (ii) From trusts--(a) To beneficiaries. Stock owned, directly or 
indirectly, by or for a trust (other than an employees' trust described 
in section 401(a) which is exempt from tax under section 501(a)) shall 
be considered as owned by its beneficiaries in proportion to the 
actuarial interest of such beneficiaries in such trust.
    (b) To owner. Stock owned, directly or indirectly, by or for any 
portion of a trust of which a person is considered the owner under 
sections 671 to 678 (relating to grantors and others treated as 
substantial owners) shall be considered as owned by such person.
    (iii) From corporations. If 10 percent or more in value of the stock 
in a corporation is owned, directly or indirectly, by or for any person, 
such person shall be considered as owning the stock owned, directly or 
indirectly, by or for such corporation, in that proportion which the 
value of the stock which such person so owns bears to the value of all 
the stock in such corporation. See section 958(b)(3).
    (2) Rules of application. For purposes of subparagraph (1) of this 
paragraph, if a partnership, estate, trust, or corporation owns, 
directly or indirectly, more than 50 percent of the total combined 
voting power of all classes of stock entitled to vote in a corporation, 
it shall be considered as owning all the stock entitled to vote. See 
section 958(b)(2).
    (d) Attribution to partnerships, estates, trusts, and corporations--
(1) In general. Except as provided in subparagraph (2) of this 
paragraph--
    (i) To partnerships and estates. Stock owned, directly or 
indirectly, by or for a partner or a beneficiary of an estate shall be 
considered as owned by the partnership or estate.
    (ii) To trusts--(a) From beneficiaries. Stock owned, directly or 
indirectly, by or for a beneficiary of a trust (other than an employees' 
trust described in section 401(a) which is exempt from tax under section 
501(a)) shall be considered as owned by the trust, unless such 
beneficiary's interest in the trust is a remote contingent interest. For 
purposes of the preceding sentence, a contingent interest of a 
beneficiary in a trust shall be considered remote if, under the maximum 
exercise of discretion by the trustee in favor of such

[[Page 364]]

beneficiary, the value of such interest, computed actuarially, is 5 
percent or less of the value of the trust property.
    (b) From owner. Stock owned, directly or indirectly, by or for a 
person who is considered the owner of any portion of a trust under 
sections 671 to 678 (relating to grantors and others treated as 
substantial owners) shall be considered as owned by the trust.
    (iii) To corporations. If 50 percent or more in value of the stock 
in a corporation is owned, directly or indirectly, by or for any person, 
such corporation shall be considered as owning the stock owned, directly 
or indirectly, by or for such person. This subdivision shall not be 
applied so as to consider a corporation as owning its own stock.
    (2) Limitation. Subparagraph (1) of this paragraph shall not be 
applied so as to consider a United States person as owning stock which 
is owned by a person who is not a United States person. This limitation 
does not apply for purposes of determining whether the stock of a 
domestic corporation is owned or considered as owned by a United States 
shareholder under section 956(b)(2) and Sec. 1.956-2(b)(1)(viii). See 
section 958(b)(4).
    (e) Options. If any person has an option to acquire stock, such 
stock shall be considered as owned by such person. For purposes of the 
preceding sentence, an option to acquire such an option, and each one of 
a series of such options, shall be considered as an option to acquire 
such stock.
    (f) Rules of application. For purposes of this section--
    (1) Stock treated as actually owned-- (i) In general. Except as 
provided in subdivisions (ii) and (iii) of this subparagraph, stock 
constructively owned by a person by reason of the application of 
paragraphs (b), (c), (d), and (e) of this section shall, for purposes of 
applying such paragraphs, be considered as actually owned by such 
person.
    (ii) Members of family. Stock constructively owned by an individual 
by reason of the application of paragraph (b) of this section shall not 
be considered as owned by him for purposes of again applying such 
paragraph in order to make another the constructive owner of such stock.
    (iii) Partnerships, estates, trusts, and corporation. Stock 
constructively owned by a partnership, estate, trust, or corporation by 
reason of the application of paragraph (d) of this section shall not be 
considered as owned by it for purposes of applying paragraph (c) of this 
section in order to make another the constructive owner of such stock.
    (iv) Option rule in lieu of family rule. For purposes of this 
subparagraph, if stock may be considered as owned by an individual under 
paragraph (b) or (e) of this section, it shall be considered as owned by 
him under paragraph (e).
    (2) Coordination of different attribution rules. For purposes of any 
one determination, stock which may be owned under more than one of the 
rules of Sec. 1.958-1 and this section, or by more than one person, 
shall be owned under that attribution rule which imputes to the person, 
or persons, concerned the largest total percentage of such stock. The 
application of this subparagraph may be illustrated by the following 
examples:

    Example 1. (a) United States persons A and B, and domestic 
corporation M, own 9 percent, 32 percent, and 10 percent, respectively, 
of the one class of stock in foreign corporation R. A also owns 10 
percent of the one class of stock in M Corporation. For purposes of 
determining whether A is a United States shareholder with respect to R 
Corporation, 10 percent of the 10-percent interest of M Corporation in R 
Corporation is considered as owned by A. See paragraph (c)(1)(iii) of 
this section. Thus, A owns 10 percent (9 percent plus 10 percent of 10 
percent) of the stock in R Corporation and is a United States 
shareholder with respect to such corporation. Corporation M and B, by 
reason of owning 10 percent and 32 percent, respectively, of the stock 
in R Corporation are United States shareholders with respect to such 
corporation.
    (b) For purposes of determining whether R Corporation is a 
controlled foreign corporation, the 1 percent of the stock in R 
Corporation directly owned by M Corporation and considered as owned by A 
cannot be counted twice. Therefore, the total amount of stock in R 
Corporation owned by United States shareholders is 51 percent, 
determined as follows:

                    Stock Ownership in R Corporation                    
                                [percent]                               
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
A..............................................................        9
B..............................................................       32

[[Page 365]]

                                                                        
M Corporation..................................................       10
                                                                --------
  Total........................................................       51
                                                                        

    Example 2. United States person C owns 10 percent of the one class 
of stock in foreign corporation N, which owns 60 percent of the one 
class of stock in foreign corporation S. Under paragraph (a)(2) of 
Sec. 1.958-1, C is considered as owning 6 percent (10 percent of 60 
percent) of the stock in S Corporation. Under paragraph (c)(1)(iii) and 
(2) of this section N Corporation is considered as owning 100 percent of 
the stock in S Corporation and C is considered as owning 10 percent of 
such 100 percent, or 10 percent of the stock in S Corporation. Thus, for 
purposes of determining whether C is a United States shareholder with 
respect to S Corporation, the attribution rules of paragraph (c)(1)(iii) 
and (2) of this section are used inasmuch as C owns a larger total 
percentage of the stock of S Corporation under such rules.

    (g) Illustration. The application of this section may be illustrated 
by the following examples:

    Example 1. United States persons A and B own 5 percent and 25 
percent, respectively, of the one class of stock in foreign corporation 
M. Corporation M owns 60 percent of the one class of stock in foreign 
corporation N. Under paragraph (a)(2) of Sec. 1.958-1, A and B are 
considered as owning 3 percent (5 percent of 60 percent) and 15 percent 
(25 percent of 60 percent), respectively, of the stock in N Corporation. 
Under paragraph (c)(2) of this section, M Corporation is treated as 
owning all the stock in N Corporation, and, under paragraph (c)(1)(iii) 
of this section, B is considered as owning 25 percent of such 100 
percent, or 25 percent of the stock in N Corporation. Inasmuch as A owns 
less than 10 percent of the stock in M Corporation, he is not considered 
as owning, under paragraph (c)(1)(iii) of this section, any of the stock 
in N Corporation owned by M Corporation. Thus, the attribution rules of 
paragraph (a)(2) of Sec. 1.958-1 are used with respect to A inasmuch as 
he owns a larger total percentage of the stock of N Corporation under 
such rules; and the attribution rules of paragraph (c)(1)(iii) and (2) 
of this section are used with respect to B inasmuch as he owns a larger 
total percentage of the stock of N Corporation under such rules.
    Example 2. United States person C owns 60 percent of the one class 
of stock in domestic corporation P; corporation P owns 60 percent of the 
one class of stock in foreign corporation Q; and corporation Q owns 60 
percent of the one class of stock in foreign corporation R. Under 
paragraph (a)(2) of Sec. 1.958-1, P Corporation is considered as owning 
36 percent (60 percent of 60 percent) of the stock in R Corporation, and 
C is considered as owning none of the stock in R Corporation inasmuch as 
the chain of ownership stops at the first United States person and P 
Corporation is such a person. Under paragraph (c)(2) of this section, Q 
Corporation is treated as owning 100 percent of the stock in R 
Corporation, and under paragraph (c)(1)(iii) of this section, P 
Corporation is considered as owning 60 percent of such 100 percent, or 
60 percent of the stock in R Corporation. For purposes of determining 
the amount of stock in R Corporation which C is considered as owning, P 
Corporation is treated under paragraph (c)(2) of this section as owning 
100 percent of the stock in R Corporation; therefore, C is considered as 
owning 60 percent of the stock in R Corporation. Thus, the attribution 
rules of paragraph (c)(1)(iii) and (2) of this section are used with 
respect to C and P Corporation inasmuch as they each own a larger total 
percentage of the stock of R Corporation under such rules.
    Example 3. United States person D owns 25 percent of the one class 
of stock in foreign corporation S. D is also a 40-percent partner in 
domestic partnership X, which owns 50 percent of the one class of stock 
in domestic corporation T. Under paragraph (d)(1)(i) of this section, 
the 25 percent of the stock in S Corporation owned by D is considered as 
being owned by partnership X; since such stock is treated as actually 
owned by partnership X under paragraph (f)(1)(i) of this section, such 
stock is in turn considered as being owned by T Corporation under 
paragraph (d)(1)(iii) of this section. Thus, under paragraphs (d)(1) and 
(f)(1)(i) of this section, T Corporation is considered as owning 25 
percent of the stock in S Corporation.
    Example 4. Foreign corporation U owns 100 percent of the one class 
of stock in domestic corporation V and also 100 percent of the one class 
of stock in foreign corporation W. By virtue of paragraph (d)(2) of this 
section, V Corporation may not be considered under paragraph (d)(1) of 
this section as owning the stock owned by its sole shareholder, U 
Corporation, in W Corporation.
    Example 5. United States citizen E owns 15 percent of the one class 
of stock in foreign corporation Y, and United States citizen F, E's 
spouse, owns 5 percent of such stock. E and F's four nonresident alien 
grandchildren each own 20 percent of the stock in Y Corporation. Under 
paragraph (b)(1) of this section, E is considered as owning the stock 
owned by F in Y Corporation; however, by virtue of paragraph (b)(3) of 
this section, E may not be considered under paragraph (b)(1) of this 
section as owning any of the stock in Y Corporation owned by such 
grandchildren.
    Example 6. United States person F owns 10 percent of the one class 
of stock in foreign corporation Z; corporation Z owns 10 percent

[[Page 366]]

of the one class of stock in foreign corporation K; and corporation K 
owns 100 percent of the one class of stock in foreign corporation L. 
United States person G, F's spouse, owns 9 percent of the stock in K 
Corporation. Under paragraph (c)(1)(iii) of this section or paragraph 
(a)(2) of Sec. 1.958-1, F is considered as owning 1 percent (10 percent 
of 10 percent of 100 percent) of the stock in L Corporation by reason of 
his ownership of stock in Z Corporation, and, under paragraph (b)(1) of 
this section, G is considered as owning such 1 percent of the stock in L 
Corporation. Under paragraph (a)(2) of Sec. 1.958-1, G is considered as 
owning 9 percent (9 percent of 100 percent) of the stock in L 
Corporation by reason of her ownership of stock in K Corporation, and, 
under paragraph (b)(1) of this section, F is considered as owning such 9 
percent of the stock in L Corporation. Thus, for the purpose of 
determining whether F or G is a United States shareholder with respect 
to L Corporation, each of F and G is considered as owning a total of 10 
percent of the stock in L Corporation by applying the rules of paragraph 
(a)(2) of Sec. 1.958-1 and paragraphs (b)(1) and (c)(1)(iii) of this 
section.

(Secs. 956(c), 7805, Internal Revenue Code of 1954 (76 Stat. 1017, 68A 
Stat. 917; (26 U.S.C. 956(c) and 7805 respectively)))

[T.D. 6889, 31 FR 9455, July 12, 1966, as amended by T.D. 7712, 45 FR 
52375, Aug. 7, 1980]


<R05>
Sec. 1.959-1   Exclusion from gross income of United States persons of previously taxed earnings and profits.

    (a) In general. Sections 951 through 964 provide that certain types 
of income of controlled foreign corporations will be subject to United 
States income tax even though such amounts are not currently distributed 
to the United States shareholders of such corporations. The amounts so 
taxed to certain United States shareholders are described as subpart F 
income, previously excluded subpart F income withdrawn from investment 
in less developed countries, previously excluded subpart F income 
withdrawn from investment in foreign base company shipping operations, 
and increases in earnings invested in United States property. Section 
959 provides that amounts taxed as subpart F income, as previously 
excluded subpart F income withdrawn from investment in less developed 
countries, or as previously excluded subpart F income withdrawn from 
investment in foreign base company shipping operations are not taxed 
again as increases in earnings invested in United States property. 
Section 959 also provides an exclusion whereby none of the amounts so 
taxed are taxed again when actually distributed directly, or indirectly 
through a chain of ownership described in section 958(a), to United 
States shareholders or to such shareholders' successors in interest. The 
exclusion also applies to amounts taxed to United States shareholders as 
income of one controlled foreign corporation and later distributed to 
another controlled foreign corporation in such a chain of ownership 
where such amounts would otherwise be again included in the income of 
such shareholders or their successors in interest as subpart F income of 
the controlled foreign corporation to which they are distributed. 
Section 959 also provides rules for the allocation of distributions to 
earnings and profits and for the non-dividend treatment of actual 
distributions which are excluded from gross income.
    (b) Actual distributions to United States persons. The earnings and 
profits for a taxable year of a foreign corporation attributable to 
amounts which are, or have been, included in the gross income of a 
United States shareholder of such corporation under section 951(a) shall 
not, when such amounts are distributed to such shareholder directly, or 
indirectly through a chain of ownership described in section 958(a), be 
again included in the gross income of such United States shareholder. 
See section 959(a)(1). Thus, earnings and profits attributable to 
amounts which are, or have been, included in the gross income of a 
United States shareholder of a foreign corporation under section 951 
(a)(1)(A)(i) as subpart F income, under section 951(a)(1)(A)(ii) as 
previously excluded subpart F income withdrawn from investment in less 
developed countries, under section 951(a)(1)(A)(iii) as previously 
excluded subpart F income withdrawn from investment in foreign base 
company shipping operations, or under section 951(a)(1)(B) as earnings 
invested in United States property, shall not be again included in the 
gross income of such shareholder when such amounts are actually 
distributed, directly or indirectly, to such shareholder. See paragraph 
(d) of this section for exclusion

[[Page 367]]

applicable to such shareholder's successor in interest. The application 
of this paragraph may be illustrated by the following example:

    Example. (a) A, a United States shareholder, owns 100 percent of the 
only class of stock of R Corporation, a corporation organized on January 
1, 1963, which is a controlled foreign corporation throughout the period 
here involved. Both A and R Corporation use the calendar year as a 
taxable year.
    (b) During 1964, R Corporation derives $100 of subpart F income, and 
A includes such amount in his gross income under section 
951(a)(1)(A)(i). Corporation R's current and accumulated earnings and 
profits (before taking into account distributions made during 1964) are 
$150. Also, during 1964, R Corporation distributes $50 to A. The $50 
distribution is excludable from A's gross income for 1964 under this 
paragraph and Sec. 1.959-3 because such distribution represents earnings 
and profits attributable to amounts which are included in A's gross 
income for such year under section 951(a).
    (c) If instead of deriving the $100 of subpart F income in 1964, R 
Corporation derives such amount during 1963 and has earnings and profits 
for 1963 in excess of $100, A must include $100 in his gross income for 
1963 under section 951(a)(1)(A)(i). However, the $50 distribution made 
by R Corporation to A during 1964 is excludable from A's gross income 
for such year under this paragraph and Sec. 1.959-3 because such 
distribution represents earnings and profits attributable to amounts 
which have been included in A's gross income for 1963 under section 
951(a).
    (d) If, with respect to 1964--
    (1) Instead of owning the stock of R Corporation directly, A owns 
such stock through a chain of ownership described in section 958(a), 
that is, A owns 100 percent of M Corporation which owns 100 percent of N 
Corporation which owns 100 percent of R Corporation,
    (2) Both M and N Corporations use the calendar year as a taxable 
year and are controlled foreign corporations throughout the period here 
involved,
    (3) Corporation R derives $100 of subpart F income and has earnings 
and profits in excess of $100,
    (4) Neither M Corporation nor N Corporation has earnings and profits 
or a deficit in earnings and profits, and
    (5) The $50 distribution is from R Corporation to N Corporation to M 
Corporation to A,

A must include $100 in his gross income for 1964 under section 
951(a)(1)(A)(i) by reason of his indirect ownership of R Corporation. 
However, the $50 distribution is excludable from A's gross income for 
1964 under this paragraph and Sec. 1.959-3 because such distribution 
represents earnings and profits attributable to amounts which are 
included in A's gross income for such year under section 951(a) and are 
distributed indirectly to A through a chain of ownership described in 
section 958(a).

    (c) Excludable investment of earnings in United States property. The 
earnings and profits for a taxable year of a foreign corporation 
attributable to amounts which are, or have been, included in the gross 
income of a United States shareholder of such corporation under section 
951(a)(1)(A) shall not, when such amounts would, but for section 
959(a)(2) and this paragraph, be included under section 951(a)(1)(B) in 
the gross income of such shareholder directly, or indirectly through a 
chain of ownership described in section 958(a), be again included in the 
gross income of such United States shareholder. Thus, earnings and 
profits attributable to amounts which are, or have been, included in the 
gross income of a United States shareholder of a foreign corporation 
under section 951(a)(1)(A)(i) as subpart F income, under section 
951(a)(1)(A)(ii) as previously excluded subpart F income withdrawn from 
investment in less developed countries, or under section 
951(a)(1)(A)(iii) as previously excluded subpart F income withdrawn from 
investment in foreign base company shipping operations, may be invested 
in United States property without being again included in such 
shareholder's income under section 951 (a). Moreover, the first amount 
deemed invested in United States property are amounts previously 
included in the gross income of a United States shareholder under 
section 951(a)(1)(A).

[[Page 368]]

See paragraph (d) of this section for exclusion applicable to such 
shareholder's successor in interest. The application of this paragraph 
may be illustrated by the following example:

    Example. (a) A, a United States shareholder, owns 100 percent of the 
only class of stock of R Corporation, a corporation organized on January 
1, 1963, which is a controlled foreign corporation throughout the period 
here involved. Both A and R Corporation use the calendar year as a 
taxable year.
    (b) During 1964, R Corporation derives $35 of subpart F income, and 
A includes such amount in his gross income under section 
951(a)(1)(A)(i). During 1964, R Corporation also invests $50 in tangible 
property (other than property described in section 956(b)(2)) located in 
the United States. Corporation R makes no distributions during the year, 
and its current earnings and profits are in excess of $50. Of the $50 
investment of earnings in United States property, $35 is excludable from 
A's gross income for 1964 under section 959(a)(2) because such amount 
represents earnings and profits which are attributable to amounts which 
are included in A's gross income for such year under section 
951(a)(1)(A)(i) and therefore may be invested in United States property 
without again being included in A's gross income. The remaining $15 is 
includible in A's gross income for 1964 under section 951(a)(1)(B).
    (c) If, instead of deriving $35 of subpart F income in 1964, R 
Corporation has no subpart F income for 1964 but derives the $35 of 
subpart F income during 1963 and has earnings and profits for such year 
in excess of $35, A must include $35 in his gross income for 1963 under 
section 951(a)(1)(A)(i). However, of the $50 investment of earnings in 
United States property made by R Corporation during 1964, $35 is 
excludable from A's gross income for 1964 under section 959(a)(2) 
because such amount represents earnings and profits attributable to 
amounts which have been included in A's gross income for 1963 under 
section 951(a)(1)(A)(i). The remaining $15 is includible in A's gross 
income for 1964 under section 951(a)(1)(B).

    (d) Application of exclusions to shareholder's successor in 
interest. If a United States person (as defined in Sec. 1.957-4) 
acquires from any person any portion of the interest in the foreign 
corporation of a United States shareholder referred to in paragraph (b) 
or (c) of this section, the rules of such paragraph shall apply to such 
acquiring person but only to the extent that the acquiring person 
establishes to the satisfaction of the district director his right to 
the exclusion provided by such paragraph. The information to be 
furnished by the acquiring person to the district director with his 
return for the taxable year to support such exclusion shall include:
    (1) The name, address, and taxable year of the foreign corporation 
from which the distribution is received and of all other corporations, 
partnerships, trusts, or estates in any applicable chain of ownership 
described in section 958(a);
    (2) The name, address, and (in the case of information required to 
be furnished after June 20, 1983) taxpayer identification number of the 
person from whom the stock interest was acquired;
    (3) A description of the stock interest acquired and its relation, 
if any, to a chain of ownership described in section 958(a);
    (4) The amount for which an exclusion under section 959(a) is 
claimed; and
    (5) Evidence showing that the earnings and profits for which an 
exclusion is claimed are attributable to amounts which were included in 
the gross income of a United States shareholder under section 951(a), 
that such amounts were not previously excluded from the gross income of 
a United States person, and the identity of the United States 
shareholder including such amounts.

The acquiring person shall also furnish to the district director such 
other information as may be required by the district director in support 
of the exclusion.

    Example. (a) A, a United States shareholder, owns 100 percent of the 
only class of stock of R Corporation, a corporation organized on January 
1, 1964, and a controlled foreign corporation throughout the period here 
involved. Both A and R Corporation use the calendar year as a taxable 
year.
    (b) During 1964, R Corporation has $100 of subpart F income and 
earnings and profits in excess of $100. A includes $100 in his gross 
income for 1964 under section 951(a)(1)(A)(i). During 1965, A sells 40 
percent of his stock in R Corporation to B, a United States person who 
uses the calendar year as a taxable year. In 1965, R Corporation has no 
earnings and profits and experiences no increase in earnings invested in 
United States property. Corporation R distributes $40 to B on December

[[Page 369]]

1, 1965. If B establishes his right to the exclusion to the satisfaction 
of the district director, he may exclude $40 from his gross income for 
1965 under section 959(a)(1).
    (c) If, instead of selling his 40-percent interest directly to B, A 
sells on February 1, 1965, 40 percent of his stock in R Corporation to 
C, a nonresident alien, and on October 1, 1965, B acquires the 40-
percent interest in R Corporation from C, the result is the same as in 
paragraph (b) of this example, if B establishes his right to the 
exclusion to the satisfaction of the district director.
    (d) If, instead of acquiring 40 percent, B acquires only 5 percent 
of A's stock in R Corporation and R Corporation distributes $5 to B 
during 1965, B is not a United States shareholder (within the meaning of 
section 951(b)) with respect to R Corporation since he owns only 5 
percent of the stock of R Corporation. Notwithstanding, B may exclude 
the $5 distribution from his gross income for 1965 under section 
959(a)(1) if he establishes his right to the exclusion to the 
satisfaction of the district director.
    (e) If the facts are assumed to be the same as in paragraphs (a) and 
(b) of this example except that--
    (1) A owns the stock of R Corporation indirectly through a chain of 
ownership described in section 958(a), that is, A owns 100 percent of M 
Corporation which owns 100 percent of N Corporation which owns 100 
percent of R Corporation,
    (2) B acquires from N Corporation 40 percent of the stock in R 
Corporation,
    (3) Both M Corporation and N Corporation are controlled foreign 
corporations which use the calendar year as a taxable year,
    (4) Neither M Corporation nor N Corporation has any amount in 1964 
or 1965 which is includible in gross income of United States 
shareholders under section 951(a), and
    (5) Neither M Corporation nor N Corporation has a deficit in 
earnings and profits for 1964;

the result is the same as in paragraph (b) of this example if B 
establishes his right to the exclusion to the satisfaction of the 
district director.

[T.D. 6795, 30 FR 943, Jan. 29, 1965, as amended by T.D. 7893, 48 FR 
22509, May 19, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 1.959-2   Exclusion from gross income of controlled foreign corporations of previously taxed earnings and profits.

    (a) Applicable rule. The earnings and profits for a taxable year of 
a controlled foreign corporation attributable to amounts which are, or 
have been, included in the gross income of a United States shareholder 
under section 951(a) shall not, when distributed through a chain of 
ownership described in section 958(a), be also included in the gross 
income of another controlled foreign corporation in such chain for 
purposes of the application of section 951(a) to such other controlled 
foreign corporation with respect to such United States shareholder. See 
section 959(b). The exclusion from the income of such other foreign 
corporation also applies with respect to any other United States 
shareholder who acquires from such United States shareholder or any 
other person any portion of the interest of such United States 
shareholder in the controlled foreign corporation, but only to the 
extent the acquiring shareholder establishes to the satisfaction of the 
district director his right to such exclusion. An acquiring shareholder 
claiming the exclusion under section 959(b) shall furnish to the 
district director with his return for the taxable year the information 
required under paragraph (d) of Sec. 1.959-1 to support the exclusion 
under this paragraph.
    (b) Illustration. The application of this section may be illustrated 
by the following example:

    Example. (a) A, a United States shareholder, owns 100 percent of the 
only class of stock of M Corporation which in turn owns 100 percent of 
the only class of stock of N Corporation. A and corporations M and N use 
the calendar year as a taxable year and corporations M and N are 
controlled foreign corporations throughout the period here involved.
    (b) During 1963, N Corporation invests $100 in tangible property 
(other than property described in section 956(b)(2)) located in the 
United States and has earnings and profits in excess of $100. A is 
required to include $100 in his gross income for 1963 under section 
951(a)(1)(B) by reason of his indirect ownership of the stock of N 
Corporation. During 1963, M Corporation has no income or investments 
other than the income derived from a distribution of $100 from N 
Corporation. Corporation M has earnings and profits of $100 for 1963. 
Under paragraph (a) of Sec. 1.954-2, the $100 distribution received by M 
Corporation from N Corporation would otherwise constitute subpart F 
income of M Corporation; however, by reason of section 959(b) and this 
section, this amount does not constitute gross income of M Corporation 
for purposes of determining amounts includible in A's gross income under 
section 951(a)(1)(A)(i).
    (c) During 1964, N Corporation derives $100 of subpart F income and 
distributes $100 to

[[Page 370]]

M Corporation which has no subpart F income for 1964 but which invests 
the $100 distribution in tangible property (other than property 
described in section 956(b)(2)) located in the United States. 
Corporation N's earnings and profits for 1964 are in excess of $100, and 
M Corporation's current and accumulated earnings and profits (before 
taking into account distributions made during 1964) are in excess of 
$100. A is required with respect to N Corporation to include $100 in his 
gross income for 1964 under section 951(a)(1)(A)(i) by reason of his 
indirect ownership of the stock of N Corporation. The investment by M 
Corporation in United States property would otherwise constitute an 
investment of earnings in United States property to which section 956 
applies; however, by reason of section 959(b) and this section, such 
amount does not constitute gross income of M Corporation for purposes of 
determining amounts includible in A's gross income under section 
951(a)(1)(B).
    (d) If during 1965, N Corporation invests $100 in tangible property 
(other than property described in section 956(b)(2)) located in the 
United States and has earnings and profits in excess of $100, A will be 
required with respect to N Corporation to include $100 in his gross 
income for 1965 under section 951(a)(1)(B), because the $100 of earnings 
and profits for 1964 attributable to N Corporation's subpart F income 
which was taxed to A in 1964 was distributed to M Corporation in such 
year.
    (e) If, with respect to 1966--
    (1) Corporation N owns 100 percent of the only class of stock of R 
Corporation,
    (2) Corporation R derives $100 of subpart F income, has earnings and 
profits in excess of $100, and makes no distributions to N Corporation,
    (3) Corporation N invests $25 in tangible property (other than 
property described in section 956(b)(2)) located in the United States 
and has current and accumulated earnings and profits in excess of $25, 
and
    (4) Corporation M has no income or investments and does not have a 
deficit in earnings and profits,

the $100 of subpart F income derived by R Corporation is includible in 
A's gross income for 1966 under section 951(a)(1)(A)(i) and the $25 
investment of earnings in United States property by N Corporation is 
includible in A's gross income for 1966 under section 951(a)(1)(B).
    (f) If, however, the facts are the same as in paragraph (e) of this 
example except that--
    (1) During 1966, R Corporation distributes $20 to N Corporation, and
    (2) Corporation N makes no distributions during such year to M 
Corporation,

of the $25 investment in United States property by N Corporation, $20 is 
not includible in A's gross income for 1966 because such amount 
represents earnings and profits which are attributable to amounts 
included in A's gross income for such year under section 951(a)(1)(A)(i) 
with respect to R Corporation and which have been distributed to N 
Corporation by R Corporation. By reason of section 959(B) and this 
section, such $20 distribution to N Corporation does not constitute 
gross income of N Corporation for purposes of determining amounts 
includible in A's gross income under section 951(a)(1)(B); however, the 
remaining $5 of investment of earnings in United States property by N 
Corporation in 1966 is includible in A's gross income for such year 
under section 951(a)(1)(B).

[T.D. 6795, 30 FR 944, Jan. 29, 1965]


<R05>
Sec. 1.959-3   Allocation of distributions to earnings and profits of foreign corporations.

    (a) In general. For purposes of Secs. 1.959-1 and 1.959-2, the 
source of the earnings and profits from which distributions are made by 
a foreign corporation as between earnings and profits attributable to 
increases in earnings invested in United States property, previously 
taxed subpart F income, previously excluded subpart F income withdrawn 
from investment in less developed countries, previously excluded subpart 
F income withdrawn from investment in foreign base company shipping 
operations, and other amounts shall be determined in accordance with 
section 959(c) and paragraphs (b) through (e) of this section.
    (b) Applicability of section 316(a). For purposes of this section, 
section 316(a) shall be applied, in determining the source of 
distributions from the earnings and profits of a foreign corporation, by 
first applying section 316(a)(2) and then by applying section 
316(a)(1)--
    (1) First, as provided by section 959 (c)(1), to earnings and 
profits attributable to amounts included in gross income of a United 
States shareholder under section 951(a)(1)(B) (or which would have been 
so included but for section 959(a)(2) and paragraph (c) of Sec. 1.959-
1),

[[Page 371]]

    (2) Secondly, as provided by section 959(c)(2), to earnings and 
profits attributable to amounts included in gross income of a United 
States shareholder under section 951(a)(1)(A) (but reduced by amounts 
not included in such gross income under section 951(a)(1)(B) because of 
the exclusion provided by section 959(a)(2) and paragraph (c) of 
Sec. 1.959-1), and
    (3) Finally, as provided by section 959(c)(3), to other earnings and 
profits. Thus, distributions shall be considered first attributable to 
amounts, if any, described in subparagraph (1) of this paragraph (first 
for the current taxable year and then for prior taxable years beginning 
with the most recent prior taxable year), secondly to amounts, if any, 
described in subparagraph (2) of this paragraph (first for the current 
taxable year and then for prior taxable years beginning with the most 
recent prior taxable year), and finally to the amounts, if any, 
described in subparagraph (3) of this paragraph (first for the current 
taxable year and then for prior taxable years beginning with the most 
recent prior taxable year). See, however, paragraph (e) of Sec. 1.963-3 
(applied as if section 963 had not been repealed by the Tax Reduction 
Act of 1975) for a special rule for determination of the source of 
distributions counting as minimum distributions. Earnings and profits 
are classified as to year and as to section 959(c) amount in the year in 
which such amounts are included in gross income of a United States 
shareholder under section 951(a) and are reclassified as to section 
959(c) amount in the year in which such amounts would be so included but 
for the provisions of section 959(a)(2); any subsequent distribution of 
such amounts to a higher tier in a chain of ownership described in 
section 958(a) does not of itself change such classifications. For 
example, earnings and profits of a foreign corporation attributable to 
amounts of previously excluded subpart F income withdrawn from 
investment in less developed countries (or from investments in export 
trade assets or foreign base company shipping operations) shall be 
reclassified as amounts to which subparagraph (2), rather than 
subparagraph (3), of this paragraph applies for purposes of determining 
priority of distribution, and such earnings and profits shall be 
considered attributable to the taxable year in which the withdrawal 
occurs. This paragraph shall apply to distributions by one foreign 
corporation to another foreign corporation and by a foreign corporation 
to a United States person. The application of this paragraph may be 
illustrated by the following example:

    Example. (a) M, a controlled foreign corporation, is organized on 
January 1, 1963, and is 100-percent owned by A, a United States 
shareholder. Both A and M Corporation use the calendar year as a taxable 
year, and M Corporation is a controlled foreign corporation throughout 
the period here involved. As of December 31, 1966, M Corporation's 
accumulated earnings and profits of $450 (before taking into account 
distributions made in 1966) applicable to A's interest in such 
corporation are classified for purposes of section 959(c) as follows:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                        Classification of earnings and  
                                        profits for purposes of section 
                Year                                  959               
                                     -----------------------------------
                                        (c)(1)      (c)(2)      (c)(3)  
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1963................................        $100  ..........  ..........
1964................................         100         $75  ..........
1965................................  ..........          75         $50
1966................................  ..........  ..........          50
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (b) During 1966, M Corporation makes three separate distributions to 
A of $150 each, and the source of such distributions under section 
959(c) is as follows:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                           Allocation of
                                                           distributions
                                         Amount     Year   under section
                                                                959     
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Distribution No. 1...................       $100     1964        (c)(1) 
                                              50     1963        (c)(1) 
                                      -----------                       
                                             150                        
                                      ===========                       
Distribution No. 2...................         50     1963        (c)(1) 
                                              75     1965        (c)(2) 
                                              25     1964        (c)(2) 
                                      -----------                       
                                             150                        
                                      ===========                       
Distribution No. 3...................         50     1964        (c)(2) 
                                              50     1966        (c)(3) 
                                              50     1965        (c)(3) 
                                      -----------                       
                                             150                        
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (c) If, in addition to the above facts--
    (1) M Corporation owns throughout the period here involved 100 
percent of the only class of stock of N Corporation, a controlled 
foreign corporation which uses the calendar year as a taxable year,
    (2) Corporation N derives $60 of subpart F income for 1963 which A 
includes in his gross

[[Page 372]]

income for such year under section 951(a)(1)(A)(i),
    (3) Corporation N has earnings and profits for 1963 of $60 but has 
neither earnings or profits nor a deficit in earnings and profits for 
1964, 1965, or 1966, and
    (4) During 1966, N Corporation invests $20 in tangible property (not 
described in section 956(b)(2)) located in the United States and 
distributes $45 to M Corporation,

the $20 investment of earnings in United States property is excludable 
from A's gross income for 1966, under section 959(a)(2) and paragraph 
(c) of Sec. 1.959-1, with respect to N Corporation and the $45 dividend 
received by M Corporation does not, under section 959(b) and Sec. 1.959-
2, constitute gross income of M Corporation for 1966 for purposes of 
determining amounts includible in A's gross income under section 
951(a)(1)(A)(i) with respect to M Corporation. However, the $45 dividend 
paid by N Corporation to M Corporation is allocated under section 959(c) 
and this paragraph to the earnings and profits of N Corporation as 
follows: $20 to 1963 earnings described in section 959(c)(1) and $25 to 
1963 earnings described in section 959(c)(2). In such case, M 
Corporation's earnings and profits of $495 (before taking into account 
distributions made in 1966) would be classified as follows for purposes 
of section 959(c):

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                        Classification of earnings and  
                                        profits for purposes of section 
                Year                                  959               
                                     -----------------------------------
                                        (c)(1)      (c)(2)      (c)(3)  
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1963................................        $120         $25  ..........
1964................................         100          75  ..........
1965................................  ..........          75         $50
1966................................  ..........  ..........          50
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (d) The three distributions to A in 1966 of $150 each would then 
have the following source under section 959(c):

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                           Allocation of
                                                           distributions
                                         Amount     Year   under section
                                                                959     
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Distribution No. 1...................       $100     1964        (c)(1) 
                                              50     1963        (c)(1) 
                                      -----------                       
                                             150  .......  .............
                                      ===========                       
Distribution No. 2...................         70     1963        (c)(1) 
                                              75     1965        (c)(2) 
                                               5     1964        (c)(2) 
                                      -----------                       
                                             150  .......  .............
                                      ===========                       
Distribution No. 3...................         70     1964        (c)(2) 
                                              25     1963        (c)(2) 
                                              50     1966        (c)(3) 
                                               5     1965        (c)(3) 
                                                                        
                                      -----------                       
                                             150  .......  .............
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (c) Treatment of deficits in earnings and profits. For purposes of 
this section, a United States shareholder's pro rata share (determined 
in accordance with the principles of paragraph (e) of Sec. 1.951-1) of a 
foreign corporation's deficit in earnings and profits, determined under 
section 964(a) and Sec. 1.964-1, for any taxable year shall be applied 
only to earnings and profits described in paragraph (b)(3) of this 
section.
    (d) Treatment of certain foreign taxes. For purposes of this 
section, any amount described in subparagraph (1), (2), or (3) of 
paragraph (b) of this section which is distributed by a foreign 
corporation through a chain of ownership described in section 958(a)(2) 
shall be reduced by any income, war profits, or excess profits taxes 
imposed on or with respect to such distribution by any foreign country 
or possession of the United States.

    Example. (a) Domestic corporation M owns 100 percent of the only 
class of stock of foreign corporation A, which is incorporated under the 
laws of foreign country X and which, in turn, owns 100 percent of the 
only class of stock of foreign corporation B, which is incorporated 
under the laws of foreign country Y. All corporations use the calendar 
year as a taxable year and corporations A and B are controlled foreign 
corporations throughout the period here involved.
    (b) During 1963, B Corporation (a less developed country corporation 
for 1963 within the meaning of Sec. 1.955-5) derives $90 of subpart F 
income, after incurring $10 of foreign income tax allocable to such 
income under paragraph (c) of Sec. 1.954-1, has earnings and profits in 
excess of $90, and makes no distributions. Corporation M must include 
$90 in its gross income for 1963 under section 951(a)(1)(A)(i). As of 
December 31, 1963, with respect to M Corporation, B Corporation has 
earnings and profits for 1963 described in section 959(c)(2) of $90.
    (c) During 1964, B Corporation has neither earnings and profits nor 
a deficit in earnings and profits but distributes $90 to A Corporation, 
and, by reason of section 959(b) and Sec. 1.959-2, such amount is not 
includible in the gross income of M Corporation for 1964 under section 
951(a) with respect to A Corporation. Corporation A incurs a withholding 
tax of $13.50 on the $90 dividend distributed from B Corporation (15 
percent of $90) and an additional foreign income tax of 10 percent or 
$7.65 by reason of the inclusion of the net distribution of $76.50 ($90 
minus $13.50) in its taxable income for 1964. As of December 31,

[[Page 373]]

1964, with respect to M Corporation, B Corporation's earnings and 
profits for 1963 described in section 959(c)(2) amount to zero ($90 
minus $90); and A Corporation's earnings and profits for 1963 described 
in section 959(c)(2) amount to $68.85 ($90 minus $13.50 minus $7.65).

    (e) Determination of foreign tax credit. For purposes of applying 
section 902 and section 960 in determining the foreign tax credit 
allowable under section 901 in a case in which distributions are made by 
a second-tier corporation or a first-tier corporation, as the case may 
be, from its earnings and profits for a taxable year which are 
attributable to an amount included in the gross income of a U.S. 
shareholder under section 951(a) or which are attributable to amounts 
excluded from the gross income of such foreign corporation under section 
959(b) and Sec. 1.959-2 with respect to a U.S. shareholder, the rules of 
paragraph (b) of this section shall apply except that in applying 
subparagraph (1) or (2) of such paragraph--
    (1) Distributions from the earnings and profits for such taxable 
year of the second-tier corporation shall be considered first 
attributable to its earnings and profits attributable to distributions 
from the earnings and profits of the foreign corporation, if any, next 
lower in the chain of ownership described in section 958(a), to the 
extent of such earnings and profits of the second-tier corporation, and 
then to the other earnings and profits of such second-tier corporation, 
and
    (2) Distributions from the earnings and profits for such taxable 
year of the first-tier corporation shall be considered first 
attributable to its earnings and profits attributable to distributions 
from the earnings and profits of the second-tier corporation, to the 
extent of such earnings and profits of the first-tier corporation, and 
then to the other earnings and profits of such first-tier corporation. 
For purposes of this paragraph, a second-tier corporation is a foreign 
corporation referred to in section 960(a)(1)(B), and a first-tier 
corporation is a foreign corporation referred to in section 960 
(a)(1)(A). The application of this paragraph may be illustrated by the 
following examples:

    Example 1. (a) Domestic corporation A, a United States shareholder, 
owns 100 percent of the only class of stock of foreign corporation R 
which, in turn, owns 100 percent of the only class of stock of foreign 
corporation S. All corporations use the calendar year as a taxable year, 
and corporations R and S are controlled foreign corporations throughout 
the period here involved.
    (b) Neither R Corporation nor S Corporation has subpart F income for 
1963. During 1963, S Corporation increases by $100 its investment in 
tangible property (not described in section 956(b)(2)) located in the 
United States, makes no distributions, and has earnings and profits of 
$100. Corporation A must include $100 in its gross income for 1963 under 
section 951(a)(1)(B) with respect to S Corporation. During 1963, R 
Corporation also increases by $100 its investment in tangible property 
(not described in section 956(b)(2)) located in the United States, makes 
no distributions, and has earnings and profits of $100. Corporation A 
must include $100 in its gross income for 1963 under section 
951(a)(1)(B) with respect to R Corporation.
    (c) During 1964, S Corporation distributes $100 to R Corporation, 
and R Corporation distributes $100 to A Corporation. Neither corporation 
has any earnings or profits or deficit in earnings and profits for such 
year. On December 31, 1964, R Corporation has earnings and profits 
(computed before distributions to A Corporation made for the year) of 
$200, consisting of $100 of section 959(c)(1) amounts of R Corporation 
for 1963 and of $100 of section 959(c)(1) amounts of S Corporation for 
1963. For purposes of determining the foreign tax credit under section 
960 and the regulations thereunder, the $100 distribution by R 
Corporation shall be considered attributable to S Corporation's earnings 
and profits for 1963 described in section 959(c)(1).
    Example 2. (a) Domestic corporation A, a United States shareholder, 
owns 100 percent of the only class of stock of foreign corporation T 
which, in turn, owns 100 percent of the only class of stock of foreign 
corporation U. All corporations use the calendar year as a taxable year, 
and corporations T and U are controlled foreign corporations throughout 
the period here involved.
    (b) During 1964, T Corporation invests $100 in tangible property 
(not described in section 956(b)(2)) located in the United States. For 
1964, T Corporation has no subpart F income and makes no distributions; 
A must include $100 in its gross income for 1964 under section 
951(a)(1)(B) with respect to T Corporation. For 1964, U Corporation has 
no subpart F income or investment of earnings in United States property 
but U Corporation has $100 of earnings and profits which it distributes 
to T Corporation. At December 31, 1964, T Corporation has earnings and 
profits of $300, consisting of operating income of $100 for each of the 
years 1963 and 1964 and $100 in dividends received from the earnings and

[[Page 374]]

profits of U Corporation for 1964. These earnings and profits are 
classified as follows under section 959(c): $100 of section 959(c)(1) 
amounts of T Corporation for 1964, $100 of section 959(c)(3) amounts of 
U Corporation for 1964, and $100 of section 959(c)(3) amounts of T 
Corporation for 1963.
    (c) During 1965 neither T Corporation nor U Corporation has any 
earnings and profits or deficit in earnings and profits or investment of 
earnings in U.S. property, but T Corporation distributes $100 to A 
Corporation. For purposes of determining the foreign tax credit under 
section 960 and the regulations thereunder, the $100 distribution of T 
Corporation shall be considered attributable to T Corporation's earnings 
and profits for 1964 described in section 959(c)(1).

    (f) Illustration. The application of this section may be illustrated 
by the following example:

    Example. (a) M, a controlled foreign corporation is organized on 
January 1, 1963, and is wholly owned by A, a United States shareholder. 
Both A and Corporation M use the calendar year as a taxable year.

    (b) Corporation M's earnings and profits (before distributions) for 
1963 are $200, $100, of which is attributable to subpart F income. 
Corporation M's earnings and profits for such year also include $25 
attributable to subpart F income which is excluded from M Corporation's 
foreign base company income under section 954(b)(1) as dividends, 
interest, and gains invested in qualified investments in less developed 
countries. Corporation M's increase in earnings invested in tangible 
property (not described in section 956(b)(2)) located in the United 
States for 1963, is $50, and M Corporation makes a distribution of such 
property during such year of $20. For purposes of section 959, A's 
interest in M Corporation's earnings and profits as of December 31, 
1963, determined after the distributions of $20, is classified as 
follows:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
Section 959(c)(1) amounts:                                              
  Earnings for 1963 attributable to increased                           
   investment in U.S. property which would have been                    
   included in A's gross income but for application of                  
   section 959(a)(2) and Sec.  1.959-1(c).............      $50         
  Less: Distribution for 1963 allocated under section                   
   959(c)(1) and paragraph (b)(1) of this section to                    
   such amounts.......................................       20      $30
                                              ---------                 
Section 959(c)(2) amounts:                                              
  Earnings for 1963 attributable to subpart F income                    
   included in A's gross income under section                           
   951(a)(1)(A)(i)....................................      100         
  Less: Earnings for 1963 attributable to increased                     
   investment in U.S. property which would have been                    
   included in A's gross income but for application of                  
   section 959(a)(2) and Sec.  1.959-1(c).............       50       50
                                              ---------                 
Section 959(c)(3) amounts:                                              
  Predistribution earnings for 1963...................      200         
  Less: Earnings for 1963 classified as:                                
    Section 959(c)(1) amounts................      $50                  
    Section 959(c)(2) amounts................       50      100      100
                                              --------------------------
A's total interest in M Corporation's                                   
 earnings and profits........................  .......  .......      180
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                        

For 1963, A is required to include $100 of subpart F income in his gross 
income under section 951(a)(1)(A)(i). He would have been required to 
include $50 in his gross income under section 951(a)(1)(B) as M 
Corporation's increase in earnings invested in United States property, 
except that section 959(a)(2) and paragraph (c) of Sec. 1.959-1 provide 
in effect that earnings and profits taxed to A under section 
951(a)(1)(A) with respect to M Corporation (whether in the current 
taxable year or in prior years) may be invested in United States 
property without again being included in gross income under section 
951(a). The $20 dividend from M Corporation is excluded from A's gross 
income under section 959(a)(1) and paragraph (b) of Sec. 1.959-1, since 
such distribution is allocated under section 959(c)(1) and paragraph 
(b)(1) of this section to amounts described in section 959(c)(1).
    (c) During 1964, M Corporation's earnings and profits (before 
distributions) are $300, $75 of which is attributable to subpart F 
income. Corporation M has no change in investments in United States 
property during such year and withdraws $15 of previously excluded 
subpart F income from investment in less developed countries. 
Corporation M makes a cash distribution of $250 to A during 1964. For 
purposes of section 959, A's interest in M Corporation's earnings and 
profits as of December 31, 1964, determined after the distribution of 
$250, is classified as follows:

[[Page 375]]



                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
Section 959 (c)(1) amounts:                                             
  Section 959(c)(1) net amount for 1963 (as determined                  
   under paragraph (b) of this example)...............      $30         
  Less: Distribution for 1964 allocated under section                   
   959(c)(1) and paragraph (b)(1) of this section to                    
   such amount........................................       30         
                                     =========                          
Section 959(c)(2) amounts:                                              
  Section 959(c)(2) net amount for 1963 (as determined                  
   under paragraph (b) of this example)...............       50         
  Plus: Earnings for 1964 attributable to:                              
    Subpart F income for 1964 included in A's gross                     
     income under section 951(a)(1)(A)(i).............       75         
    Previously excluded subpart F income withdrawn in                   
     1964 from investment in less developed countries                   
     and included in A's gross income under section                     
     951(a)(1)(A)(ii).................................       15         
                                     ---------                          
                                                            140         
  Less: Distribution for 1964 allocated under section                   
   959(c)(2) and paragraph (b)(2) of this section to                    
   such amounts.......................................      140         
                                     =========                          
Section 959(c)(3) amounts:                                              
  Section 959(c)(3) net amount for 1963 (as determined                  
   under paragraph (b) of this example)...............      100         
  Plus: Section 959(c)(3) net amount                                    
   for 1964:                                                            
    Predistribution earnings for                                        
     1964...........................  .......     $300                  
    Less:                                                               
      Earnings for 1964 classified                                      
       as section 959(c)(1) amounts                                     
       ($0) and as section 959(c)(2)                                    
       amounts ($75+$15)............      $90                           
      Distributions for 1964                                            
       allocated under section                                          
       959(c)(3) and paragraph                                          
       (b)(3) of this section.......       80      170      130     $230
                                     -----------------------------------
A's total interest in M                                                 
 Corporation's earnings and profits.  .......  .......  .......      230
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                        

For 1964, A is required to include in his gross income under section 
951(a)(1)(A)(i) $75 of subpart F income, and under section 951 
(a)(1)(A)(ii) $15 of previously excluded subpart F income withdrawn from 
investment in less developed countries. Of the $250 cash distribution, A 
may exclude $170 from his gross income under section 959(a)(1) and 
paragraph (b) of Sec. 1.959-1 and $80 is includible in his gross income 
as a dividend.
    (d) The source under section 959(c) of the 1964 distribution of $250 
to A is as follows:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                           Allocation of
                                                           distribution 
                  Year                        Amount       under section
                                                                959     
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1963....................................             $30         (c)(1).
1964....................................              90         (c)(2).
1963....................................              50         (c)(2).
1964....................................              80         (c)(3).
                                         ----------------               
                                                     250                
------------------------------------------------------------------------

[T.D. 6795, 30 FR 945, Jan. 29, 1965, as amended by T.D. 7334, 39 FR 
44211, Dec. 23, 1974; T. D. 7545, 43 FR 19652, May 8, 1978; T.D. 7893, 
48 FR 22510, May 19, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 1.959-4   Distributions to United States persons not counting as dividends.

    Except as provided in section 960(a)(3) and Sec. 1.960-2, any 
distribution to a United States person which is excluded from the gross 
income of such person under section 959(a)(1) and Sec. 1.959-1 shall be 
treated for purposes of chapter 1 (relating to normal taxes and 
surtaxes) of subtitle A (relating to income taxes) of the Code as a 
distribution which is not a dividend. However, see paragraph (b)(1) of 
Sec. 1.956-1, relating to the dividend limitation on the amount of a 
controlled foreign corporation's investment of earnings in United States 
property.

[T.D. 7120, 36 FR 10860, June 4, 1971]


<R05>
Sec. 1.960-1  Foreign tax credit with respect to taxes paid on earnings and profits of controlled foreign corporations.

    (a) Scope of regulations under section 960. This section prescribes 
rules for determining the foreign income taxes deemed paid under section 
960(a)(1) by a domestic corporation which is required under section 951 
to include in gross income an amount attributable to a first-, second-, 
or third-tier corporation's earnings and profits. Section 1.960-2 
prescribes rules for applying section 902 to dividends paid by a third-, 
second-, or first-tier corporation from earnings and profits 
attributable to an amount which is, or has been, included in gross 
income under section 951. Section 1.960-3 provides special rules for the 
application of the gross-up provisions of section 78 where an amount is 
included in gross income under section 951. Section 1.960-4 prescribes 
rules for increasing the applicable foreign tax

[[Page 376]]

credit limitation under section 904(a) of the domestic corporation for 
the taxable year in which it receives a distribution of earnings and 
profits in respect of which it was required under section 951 to include 
an amount in its gross income for a prior taxable year. Section 1.960-5 
prescribes rules for disallowing a deduction for foreign income taxes 
for such taxable year of receipt where the domestic corporation received 
the benefits of the foreign tax credit for such previous taxable year of 
inclusion. Section 1.960-6 provides that the excess of such an increase 
in the applicable limitation under section 904(a) over the tax liability 
of the domestic corporation for such taxable year of receipt results in 
an overpayment of tax. Section 1.960-7 prescribes the effective dates 
for application of these rules.
    (b) Definitions. For purposes of section 960 and Secs. 1.960-1 
through 1.960-7--
    (1) First-tier corporation. The term ``first-tier corporation'' 
means a foreign corporation at least 10 percent of the voting stock of 
which is owned by the domestic corporation described in paragraph (a) of 
this section.
    (2) Second-tier corporation. In the case of amounts included in the 
gross income of the taxpayer under section 951--
    (i) For taxable years beginning before January 1, 1977, the term 
``second-tier corporation'' means a foreign corporation at least 50 
percent of the voting stock of which is owned by such first-tier 
corporation.
    (ii) For taxable years beginning after December 31, 1976, the term 
``second-tier corporation'' means a foreign corporation as least 10 
percent of the voting stock of which is owned by such first-tier 
corporation.
    (3) Third-tier corporation. In the case of amounts included in the 
gross income of a domestic shareholder under section 951 for taxable 
years beginning after December 31, 1976, the term ``third-tier 
corporation'' means a foreign corporation at least 10 percent of the 
voting stock of which is owned by such second-tier corporation.
    (4) Immediately lower-tier corporation. In the case of a first-tier 
corporation the term ``immediately lower-tier corporation'' means a 
second-tier corporation. In the case of a second-tier corporation, the 
term ``immediately lower-tier corporation'' means a third-tier 
corporation. In the case of a third-tier corporation, the term 
``immediately lower-tier corporation'' means a fourth-tier corporation.
    (5) Foreign income taxes. The term ``foreign income taxes'' means 
income, war profits, and excess profits taxes, and taxes included in the 
term ``income, war profits, and excess profits taxes'' by reason of 
section 903, imposed by a foreign country or a possession of the United 
States.
    (c) Amount of foreign income taxes deemed paid by domestic 
corporation in respect of earnings and profits of foreign corporation 
attributable to amount included in income under section 951--(1) In 
general. For purposes of section 901--
    (i) If for the taxable year there is included in the gross income of 
a domestic corporation under section 951 an amount attributable to the 
earnings and profits of a first- or second-tier corporation for any 
taxable year, the domestic corporation shall be deemed to have paid the 
same proportion of the total foreign income taxes paid, accrued, or 
deemed (in accordance with paragraph (b) of Sec. 1.960-2) to be paid by 
such foreign corporation on or with respect to its earnings and profits 
for its taxable year as the amount (in the case of a first-tier 
corporation, determined without regard to section 958(a)(2); in the case 
of a second-tier corporation, determined without regard to section 
958(a)(1)(A) and, to the extent that stock of such second-tier 
corporation is owned by the domestic corporation through a foreign 
corporation other than the first-tier corporation, determined without 
regard to section 958(a)(2)) so included in the gross income of the 
domestic corporation under section 951 with respect to such foreign 
corporation bears to the total earnings and profits of such foreign 
corporation for its taxable year. This paragraph (c)(1)(i) shall not 
apply to amounts included in the gross income of the domestic 
corporation under section 951 with respect to the second-tier 
corporation unless the percentage-of-voting-stock requirement of section 
902(b)(3)(A) is satisfied.

[[Page 377]]

    (ii) If for the taxable year there is included in the gross income 
of a domestic corporation under section 951 an amount attributable to 
the earnings and profits of a third-tier corporation for any taxable 
year, the domestic corporation shall be deemed to have paid the same 
proportion of the total foreign income taxes paid or accrued by such 
foreign corporation on or with respect to its earnings and profits for 
its taxable year as the amount (determined without regard to section 
958(a)(1)(A) and, to the extent that stock of such third-tier 
corporation is owned by the domestic corporation through a foreign 
corporation other than the second-tier corporation, determined without 
regard to section 958(a)(2)) so included in the gross income of the 
domestic corporation under section 951 with respect to such foreign 
corporation bears to the total earnings and profits of such foreign 
corporation. This paragraph (c)(1)(ii) shall not apply unless the 
percentage-of-voting-stock requirement of section 902(b)(3)(B) is 
satisfied.
    (iii) In applying paragraph (c)(1)(i) or (c)(1)(ii) of this section 
to a first-, second-, or third-tier corporation which for the taxable 
year has income excluded under section 959(b), paragraph (c)(3) of this 
section shall apply for purposes of excluding certain earnings and 
profits of such foreign corporation and foreign income taxes, if any, 
attributable to such excluded income.
    (iv) This paragraph (c)(1) applies whether or not the first-, 
second-, or third-tier corporation makes a distribution for the taxable 
year of its earnings and profits which are attributable to the amount 
included in the gross income of the domestic corporation under section 
951.
    (v) This paragraph (c)(1) does not apply to an increase in current 
earnings invested in United States property which, but for paragraph (e) 
of Sec. 1.963-3 (applied as if section 963 had not been repealed by the 
Tax Reduction Act of 1975), would be included in the gross income of the 
domestic corporation under section 951(a)(1)(B) but which, pursuant to 
such paragraph, counts toward a minimum distribution for the taxable 
year. This subdivision shall apply in taxable years subsequent to the 
Tax Reduction Act of 1975 only in those cases where an adjustment is 
required as a result of an election made under section 963 prior to the 
Act.
    (2) Taxes paid or accrued on or with respect to earnings and profits 
of foreign corporation. For purposes of paragraph (c)(1) of this 
section, the foreign income taxes paid or accrued by a first-, second- 
or third-tier corporation on or with respect to its earnings and profits 
for its taxable years shall be the total amount of the foreign income 
taxes paid or accrued by such foreign corporation for such taxable year.
    (3) Exclusion of earnings and profits and taxes of a first-, second-
, or third-tier corporation having income excluded under section 959(b). 
If in the case of a first-, second-, or third-tier corporation to which 
paragraph (c)(1)(i) or (c)(1)(ii) of this section is applied--
    (i) The earnings and profits of such foreign corporation for its 
taxable year consist of (A) earnings and profits attributable to 
dividends received from an immediately lower-tier corporation which are 
attributable to amounts included in the gross income of a domestic 
corporation under section 951 with respect to the immediately lower- or 
lower-tier corporations, and (B) other earnings and profits, and
    (ii) The effective rate of foreign income taxes paid or accrued by 
such foreign corporation in respect to the dividends to which its 
earnings and profits described in paragraph (c)(3)(i)(A) of this section 
are attributable is higher or lower than the effective rate of foreign 
income taxes paid or accrued by such foreign corporation in respect to 
the income to which its earnings and profits described in paragraph 
(c)(3)(i)(B) of this section are attributable,

then, for the purposes of applying paragraph (c)(1)(i) or (c)(1)(ii) of 
this section to the foreign income taxes paid, accrued, or deemed to be 
paid, by such foreign corporation on or with respect to its earnings and 
profits for such taxable year, the earnings and profits of such foreign 
corporation for such taxable year shall be considered not to include the 
earnings and profits described in paragraph (c)(3)(i)(A) of this section 
and only the foreign income taxes paid, accrued, or deemed to be

[[Page 378]]

paid, by such foreign corporation in respect to the income to which its 
earnings and profits described in paragraph (c)(3)(i)(B) of this section 
are attributable shall be taken into account. For purposes of applying 
this paragraph (c)(3), the effective rate of foreign income taxes paid 
or accrued in respect to income shall be determined consistently with 
the principles of paragraphs (b)(3)(iv) and (viii) and (c) of 
Sec. 1.954-1. Thus, for example, the effective rate of foreign income 
taxes paid or accrued in respect to dividends received by such foreign 
corporation shall be determined by taking into account any 
intercorporate dividends received deduction allowed to such corporation 
for such dividends.
    (4) Illustrations. The application of this paragraph may be 
illustrated by the following examples:

    Example 1. Domestic corporation N owns all the one class of stock of 
controlled foreign corporation A. Both corporations use the calendar 
year as the taxable year. For 1978, N Corporation is required under 
section 951 to include in gross income $50 attributable to the earnings 
and profits of A Corporation for such year, but A Corporation does not 
distribute any earnings and profits for such year. The foreign income 
taxes paid by A Corporation for 1978 which are deemed paid by N 
Corporation for such year under section 960(a)(1) are determined as 
follows upon the basis of the facts assumed:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
Pretax earnings and profits of A Corporation..................   $100.00
Foreign income taxes (20%)....................................     20.00
Earnings and profits..........................................     80.00
Amount required to be included in N Corporation's gross income          
 under section 951............................................     50.00
Dividends paid to N Corporation...............................         0
Foreign income taxes paid on or with respect to earnings and            
 profits of A Corporation.....................................     20.00
Foreign income taxes of A Corporation deemed paid by N                  
 Corporation under section 960(a)(1) ($50/$80 x $20)..........     12.50
                                                                        

    Example 2. Domestic corporation N owns all the one class of stock of 
controlled foreign corporation A, which owns all the one class of stock 
of controlled foreign corporation B. All such corporations use the 
calendar year as the taxable year. For 1978, N Corporation is required 
under section 951 to include in gross income $45 attributable to the 
earnings and profits of B Corporation for such year, but is not required 
to include any amount in gross income under section 951 attributable to 
the earnings and profits of A Corporation for such year. Neither B 
Corporation nor A Corporation distributes any earnings and profits for 
1978. The foreign income taxes paid by B Corporation for 1978 which are 
deemed paid by N Corporation for such year under section 960(a)(1) are 
determined as follows upon the basis of the facts assumed:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
Pretax earnings and profits of B Corporation..................   $100.00
Foreign income taxes (40%)....................................     40.00
Earnings and profits..........................................     60.00
Amounts required to be included in N Corporation's gross                
 income under section 951 with respect to B Corporation.......     45.00
Dividends paid................................................         0
Foreign income taxes paid on or with respect to earnings and            
 profits of B Corporation.....................................     40.00
Foreign income taxes of B Corporation deemed paid by N                  
 Corporation under section 960(a)(1) ($45/$60 x $40)..........     30.00
                                                                        

    Example 3. Domestic corporation N owns all the one class of stock of 
controlled foreign corporation A, which owns all the one class of stock 
of controlled foreign corporation B, which owns all the one class of 
stock of foreign corporation C. All such corporations use the calendar 
year as the taxable year. For 1978, N Corporation is required under 
section 951 to include in gross income $80 attributable to the earnings 
and profits of C Corporation for such year, $45 attributable to the 
earnings and profits of B Corporation for such year and $50 attributable 
to the earnings and profits of A Corporation for such year. Neither C 
Corporation nor B corporation distributes any earnings and profits for 
1978. The foreign income taxes which are deemed paid by N Corporation 
for such year under section 960(a)(1) are determined as follows upon the 
basis of the facts assumed:

    C Corporation (third-tier corporation):

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
Pretax earnings of C Corporation..............................   $150.00
Foreign income taxes (40%)....................................     60.00
Earnings and profits..........................................     90.00
Amounts required to be included in N Corporation's gross                
 income under section 951.....................................     80.00
Dividends paid to B Corporation...............................         0
Foreign income taxes paid on or with respect to earnings and            
 profits of C Corporation.....................................     60.00
                                                                        

    B Corporation (second-tier corporation):

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
Pretax earnings of B Corporation..............................   $100.00
Foreign income taxes (40%)....................................     40.00
Earnings and profits..........................................     60.00
Amount required to be included in N Corporation's gross income          
 under section 951............................................     45.00
Dividends paid to A Corporation...............................         0
Foreign income taxes paid on or with respect to earnings and            
 profits of B Corporation.....................................     40.00
                                                                        

    A Corporation (first-tier corporation):

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
Pretax earnings and profits of A Corporation..................   $100.00
Foreign income taxes (20%)....................................     20.00

[[Page 379]]

                                                                        
Earnings and profits..........................................     80.00
Amount required to be included in N Corporation's gross income          
 under section 951............................................     50.00
Dividends paid to N Corporation...............................         0
Foreign income taxes paid on or with respect to earnings and            
 profits of A Corporation.....................................     20.00
                                                                        

    N Corporation (domestic corporation):

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
Foreign income taxes deemed paid by N Corporation under                 
 section 960(a)(1):                                                     
  Taxes of C Corporation $80/$90 x $60........................    $53.33
  Taxes of B Corporation $45/$60 x $40........................     30.00
  Taxes of A Corporation $50/$80 x $20........................     12.50
                                                               ---------
    Total taxes deemed paid under section 960(a)(1)...........    $95.83
                                                                        

    Example 4. Domestic corporation N owns all the one class of stock of 
controlled foreign corporation A, which owns 5 percent of the one class 
of stock of controlled foreign corporation B. N Corporation also 
directly owns 95 percent of the one class of stock of B Corporation. 
(Under these facts, B Corporation is only a first-tier corporation with 
respect to N Corporation) all such corporations use the calendar year as 
the taxable year. For 1978, N Corporation is required under section 951 
to include in gross income $60 attributable to the earnings and profits 
of B Corporation and $79.20 attributable to the earnings and profits of 
A Corporation. For 1978, B Corporation distributes $19 to N Corporation 
and $1 to A Corporation, but A Corporation makes no distribution to N 
Corporation. The foreign income taxes paid by N Corporation for such 
year under section 960(a)(1) are determined as follows upon the basis of 
the facts assumed in accordance with Sec. 1.960-1(c)(1)(i):

    B Corporation (first-tier corporation):

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
Pretax earnings and profits...................................   $100.00
Foreign income taxes (40%)....................................     40.00
Earnings and profits..........................................     60.00
Amount required to be included in N Corporation's gross income          
 under section 951 with respect to B Corporation..............     60.00
                                                                        

    A Corporation (first-tier corporation):

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
Pretax earnings and profits (including $1 dividend from B               
 Corporation).................................................   $100.00
Foreign income taxes (20%)....................................     20.00
Earnings and profits..........................................     80.00
Amount required to be included in N Corporation's gross income          
 with respect to A Corporation ($99-[$99 x 0.20]..............     79.20
                                                                        

    N Corporation (domestic corporation):

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
Foreign income taxes deemed paid by N Corporation under                 
 section 960(a)(1) with respect to--                                    
  B Corporation ([$60 x 0.95/$60] x $40)......................    $38.00
  A Corporation ($79.20/$80 x $20)............................     19.80
                                                               ---------
    Total taxes deemed paid under section 960(a)(1)...........    $57.80
                                                                        

    Example 5. Domestic corporation N owns all the one class of stock of 
controlled foreign corporation A, which owns all the one class of stock 
of controlled foreign corporation B. All such corporations use the 
calendar year as the taxable year. For 1978, N Corporation is required 
under section 951 to include in gross income $175 attributable to the 
earnings and profits of A Corporation for such year. For 1978, B 
Corporation has earnings and profits of $225, on which it pays foreign 
income taxes of $75. In 1978, B Corporation distributes $150, which, 
under paragraph (b) of Sec. 1.960-2, consists of $100 to which section 
902(b)(1) does not apply (from B Corporation's earnings and profits 
attributable to an amount required under section 951 to be included in N 
Corporation's gross income with respect to B Corporation) and $50 to 
which section 902(b)(1) applies (from B Corporation's other earnings and 
profits). The country under the laws of which A Corporation is 
incorporated imposes an income tax of 40 percent on all income but 
exempts from tax dividends received from a subsidiary corporation. A 
Corporation makes no distribution for 1978. Under paragraph (b) of 
Sec. 1.960-2, A Corporation is deemed to have paid $25 ($50/$150 x $75) 
of the $75 foreign income taxes paid by B Corporation on its pretax 
earnings and profits of $225. The foreign income taxes deemed paid by N 
Corporation for 1978 under section 960(a)(1) with respect to A 
Corporation are determined as follows upon the basis of the following 
assumed facts:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
Pretax earnings and profits of A Corporation:                           
  Dividends received from B Corporation.......................   $150.00
  Other income................................................    250.00
                                           -----------                  
                                                                        
    Total pretax earnings and profits.........................   $400.00
                                                                        
Foreign income taxes:                                                   
  On dividends received from B Corporation..........         0          
  On other income ($250 x 0.40).....................    100.00          
                                           -----------                  
                                                                        
    Total foreign income taxes................................    100.00
                                                                        
Earnings and profits:                                                   
  Attributable to dividends received from B                             
   Corporation which are attributable to amounts                        
   included in N Corporation's gross income under                       
   section 951 with respect to B Corporation........    100.00          

[[Page 380]]

                                                                        
  Attributable to other income:                                         
    Attributable to dividends received                                  
     from B Corporation which are                                       
     attributable to amounts not included                               
     in N Corporation's gross income under                              
     951 with respect to B Corporation....    $50.00                    
    Attributable to other income ($250-                                 
     $100 [$250 x 0.40])..................    150.00   $200.00          
                                           -----------                  
                                                                        
                                                     -----------        
      Total earnings and profits..............................   $300.00
                                                                        
Foreign income taxes deemed paid by N Corporation under                 
 section 960(a)(1) with respect to A Corporation:                       
  Tax paid by A Corporation in respect to its income other              
   than dividends received from B Corporation attributable to           
   amounts included in N Corporation's gross income under               
   section 951 with respect to B Corporation ($175/$200 x               
   $100)......................................................     87.50
  Tax of B Corporation deemed paid by A Corporation under               
   section 902(b)(1) in respect to such income ($175/$200 x             
   $25).......................................................     21.88
                                           -----------                  
                                                                        
    Total foreign income taxes deemed paid by N Corporation             
     under section 960(a)(1) with respect to A Corporation....   $109.38
                                           ===========                  
                                                                        

    (d) Time for meeting stock ownership requirements--(1) In general. 
For the purposes of applying paragraph (c) of this section to amounts 
included in the gross income of a domestic corporation attributable to 
the earnings and profits of a first-, second-, or third-tier 
corporation, the stock ownership requirements of paragraph (b)(1), (2), 
and (3) of this section and the percentage of voting stock requirements 
of paragraph (c)(1)(i) and (ii) of this section, if applicable, must be 
satisfied on the last day in the taxable year of such first-, second-, 
or third-tier corporation, as the case may be, on which such foreign 
corporation is a controlled foreign corporation. For paragraph (c) to 
apply to amounts included in a domestic corporation's gross income 
attributable to the earnings and profits of a second-tier corporation, 
the requirements of paragraph (b)(1) and (2) of this section and the 
percentage of voting stock requirement of paragraph (c)(1)(i) of this 
section must be met on such date. For paragraph (c) to apply to amounts 
included in a domestic corporation's gross income attributable to the 
earnings and profits of a third-tier corporation, the requirements of 
paragraph (b)(1), (2), and (3) of this section and the percentage of 
voting stock requirement of paragraph (c)(1)(ii) of this section must be 
met on such date.
    (2) Illustrations. The application of this paragraph may be 
illustrated by the following examples:

    Example 1. Domestic corporation N is required for its taxable year 
ending June 30, 1978, to include in gross income under section 951 an 
amount attributable to the earnings and profits of controlled foreign 
corporation A for 1977 and another amount attributable to the earnings 
and profits of controlled foreign corporation B for such year. 
Corporations A and B use the calendar year as the taxable year. Such 
amounts are required to be included in N Corporation's gross income by 
reason of its ownership of stock in A Corporation and in turn by A 
Corporation's ownership of stock in B Corporation. Corporation A is a 
controlled foreign corporation throughout 1977, but B Corporation is a 
controlled foreign corporation only from January 1, 1977, through 
September 30, 1977. Corporation N may obtain credit under section 
960(a)(1) for the year ending June 30, 1978, for foreign income taxes 
paid by A Corporation for 1977, only if N Corporation owns at least 10 
percent of the voting stock of A Corporation on December 31, 1977. 
Corporation N may obtain credit under section 960(a)(1) for the year 
ending June 30, 1978, for foreign income taxes paid by B Corporation for 
1977, only if on September 30, 1977, N Corporation owns at least 10 
percent of the voting stock of A Corporation, A Corporation owns at 
least 10 percent of the voting stock of B Corporation, and the 
percentage of voting stock requirement of paragraph (c)(1)(i) of this 
section is met.
    Example 2. The facts are the same as in example 1, except that A 
Corporation is a controlled foreign corporation only from January 1, 
1977, through March 31, 1977. Corporation N may obtain credit under 
section 960(a)(1) for the year ending June 30, 1978, for foreign income 
taxes paid by A Corporation for 1977, only if N Corporation owns at 
least 10 percent of the voting stock of A Corporation on March 31, 1977. 
Corporation N may obtain credit under section 960(a)(1) for the year 
ending June 30, 1978, for foreign income taxes paid by B Corporation for 
1977, only if on September 30, 1977, N Corporation owns at least 10 
percent of the voting stock of A Corporation, A Corporation owns at 
least 10 percent of the voting stock of B Corporation, and the 
percentage of voting stock requirement of paragraph (c)(1)(i) of this 
section is met.
    Example 3. Domestic Corporation N owns 100 percent of the stock of 
controlled foreign corporation A. A Corporation owns 20 percent of the 
stock of controlled foreign corporation B. B Corporation owns 10 percent 
of

[[Page 381]]

the voting stock of controlled foreign corporation C. For calendar year 
1983, N Corporation is required to include amounts in its gross income 
attributable to the earnings and profits of A, B, and C Corporations. A, 
B, and C Corporations were all controlled foreign corporations 
throughout their respective taxable years ending as follows: A 
Corporation, December 31, 1983; B Corporation, November 31, 1983; and C 
Corporation, August 31, 1983. Paragraph (c) of this section applies to 
amounts included in gross income of N Corporation with respect to the 
earnings and profits of A Corporation because the 10 percent ownership 
requirement of paragraph (b)(1) of this section is met on December 31, 
1983. Paragraph (c) of this section applies to amounts included in the 
gross income of N Corporation with respect to the earnings and profits 
of B Corporation because the 10 percent stock ownership requirements of 
paragraphs (b)(1) and (2) of this section are met on November 30, 1983, 
and the percentage of voting stock requirement of paragraph (c)(1)(i) of 
this section (5 percent) is also met on such date. The percentage of 
voting stock in A Corporation owned by N Corporation (100 percent) 
multiplied by the percentage of voting stock in B Corporation owned by A 
Corporation (20 percent) is 20 percent. Paragraph (c) of this section 
will not apply to amounts included in N Corporation's gross income 
attributable to the earnings and profits of C Corporation even though on 
August 31, 1983, the 10 percent stock ownership requirements of 
paragraphs (b)(1), (2), and (3) of this section are met, because the 
percentage of voting stock requirement of paragraph (c)(1)(ii) of this 
section (5 percent) is not met on such date. The percentage of voting 
stock of C Corporation owned by B Corporation (10 percent) multiplied by 
20 percent (the percentage of voting stock of A Corporation owned by N 
Corporation multiplied by the percentage of voting stock of B 
Corporation owned by A Corporation) is 2 percent.

    (e) Information to be furnished. If the credit for foreign income 
taxes claimed under section 901 includes taxes deemed paid under section 
960(a)(1), the domestic corporation must furnish the same information 
with respect to the taxes so deemed paid as it is required to furnish 
with respect to the taxes actually paid or accrued by it and for which 
credit is claimed. See Sec. 1.905-2. For other information required to 
be furnished by the domestic corporation for the annual accounting 
period of certain foreign corporations ending with or within such 
corporation's taxable year, see section 6038(a) and the regulations 
thereunder.
    (f) Reduction of foreign income taxes paid or deemed paid. For 
reduction of the amount of foreign income taxes paid or deemed paid by a 
foreign corporation for purposes of section 960, see section 6038(c) (as 
amended by section 338 of the Tax Equity and Fiscal Responsibility Act 
of 1982) and the regulations thereunder, relating to failure to furnish 
information with respect to certain foreign corporations. For reduction 
of the foreign income taxes deemed paid by a domestic corporation under 
section 960 with respect to foreign oil and gas extraction income, see 
section 907(a).
    (g) Amounts under section 951 treated as distributions for purposes 
of applying effective dates. For purposes of applying section 902 in 
determining the amount of credit allowed under section 960(a)(1) and 
paragraph (c) of this section, the effective date provisions of the 
regulations under section 902 shall apply, and for purposes of so 
applying the regulations under section 902, any amount attributable to 
the earnings and profits for the taxable year of a first-, second-, or 
third-tier corporation which is included in the gross income of a 
domestic corporation under section 951 shall be treated as a 
distribution received by such domestic corporation on the last day in 
such taxable year on which such foreign corporation is a controlled 
foreign corporation.
    (h) Source of income and country to which tax is deemed paid--(1) 
Source of income. For purposes of section 904--
    (i) The amount included in gross income of a domestic corporation 
under section 951 for the taxable year with respect to a first-, second-
, or third-tier corporation, plus
    (ii) Any section 78 dividend to which such section 951 amount gives 
rise by reason of taxes deemed paid by such domestic corporation under 
section 960(a)(1),

shall be deemed to be derived from sources within the foreign country or 
possession of the United States under the laws of which such first-tier 
corporation, or the first-tier corporation in the same chain of 
ownership as such second- or third-tier corporation, is created or 
organized.
    (2) Country to which taxes deemed paid. For purposes of section 904, 
the foreign

[[Page 382]]

income taxes paid by the first-, second-, or third-tier corporation and 
deemed to be paid by the domestic corporation under section 960(a)(1) by 
reason of the inclusion of the amount described in paragraph (h)(1)(i) 
of this section in the gross income of such domestic corporation shall 
be deemed to be paid to the foreign country or possession of the United 
States under the laws of which such first-tier corporation, or the 
first-tier corporation in the same chain of ownership as such second- or 
third-tier corporation, is created or organized.
    (3) Illustration. The application of this paragraph may be 
illustrated by the following example:

    Example. Domestic corporation N owns all the one class of stock of 
controlled foreign corporation A, incorporated under the laws of foreign 
country X, which owns all the one class of stock of controlled foreign 
corporation B, incorporated under the laws of foreign country Y. All 
such corporations use the calendar year as the taxable year. For 1978, N 
Corporation is required under section 951 to include in gross income $45 
attributable to the earnings and profits of B Corporation for such year 
and $50 attributable to the earnings and profits of A Corporation for 
such year. For 1978, because of the inclusion of such amounts in gross 
income, N Corporation is deemed under section 960(a)(1) and paragraph 
(c) of this section to have paid $15 of foreign income taxes paid by B 
Corporation for such year and $10 of foreign income taxes paid by A 
Corporation for such year. For purposes of section 904, the amount ($95) 
included in N Corporation's gross income under section 951 attributable 
to the earnings and profits of corporations A and B is deemed to be 
derived from sources within country X, and the section 78 dividend 
consisting of the foreign income taxes ($25) deemed paid by N 
Corporation under section 960(a)(1) with respect to such $95 is deemed 
to be derived from sources within country X. The $25 of foreign income 
taxes so deemed paid by N Corporation are deemed to be paid to country X 
for purposes of section 904.
    (i) Computation of deemed-paid taxes in post-1986 taxable years--(1) 
General rule. If a domestic corporation is eligible to compute deemed-
paid taxes under section 960(a)(1) with respect to an amount included in 
gross income under section 951(a), then, such domestic corporation shall 
be deemed to have paid a portion of the foreign corporation's post-1986 
foreign income taxes determined under section 902 and the regulations 
under that section in the same manner as if the amount so included were 
a dividend paid by such foreign corporation (determined by applying 
section 902(c) in accordance with section 904(d)(3)(B)).
    (2) Ordering rule for computing deemed-paid taxes under sections 902 
and 960. If a domestic corporation computes deemed-paid taxes under both 
sections 902 and 960 in the same taxable year, section 960 shall be 
applied first. After the deemed-paid taxes are computed under section 
960 with respect to a deemed income inclusion, post-1986 undistributed 
earnings and post-1986 foreign income taxes in each separate category 
shall be reduced by the appropriate amounts before deemed-paid taxes are 
computed under section 902 with respect to a dividend distribution.
    (3) Computation of post-1986 undistributed earnings. Post-1986 
undistributed earnings (or an accumulated deficit in post-1986 
undistributed earnings) are computed under section 902 and the 
regulations under that section.
    (4) Allocation of accumulated deficits. For purposes of computing 
post-1986 undistributed earnings under sections 902 and 960, a post-1986 
accumulated deficit in a separate category shall be allocated 
proportionately to reduce post-1986 undistributed earnings in the other 
separate categories. However, a deficit in any separate category shall 
not permanently reduce earnings in other separate categories, but after 
the deemed-paid taxes are computed the separate limitation deficit shall 
be carried forward in the same separate category in which it was 
incurred. In addition, because deemed-paid taxes may not exceed taxes 
paid or accrued by the controlled foreign corporation, in computing 
deemed-paid taxes with respect to an inclusion out of a separate 
category that exceeds post-1986 undistributed earnings in that separate 
category, the numerator of the deemed-paid credit fraction (deemed 
inclusion from the separate category) may not exceed the denominator 
(post-1986 undistributed earnings in the separate category).
    (5) Examples. The application of this paragraph (i) may be 
illustrated by the following examples. See Sec. 1.952-1(f)(4) for 
additional illustrations of these rules.


[[Page 383]]


    Example 1. (i) A, a U.S. person, is the sole shareholder of CFC, a 
controlled foreign corporation formed on January 1, 1998, whose 
functional currency is the u. In 1998 CFC earns 100u of general 
limitation income described in section 904(d)(1)(I) that is not subpart 
F income and 100u of foreign personal holding company income that is 
passive income described in section 904(d)(1)(A). In 1998 CFC also 
incurs a (50u) loss in the shipping category described in section 
904(d)(1)(D). CFC's subpart F income for 1998, 100u, does not exceed 
CFC's current earnings and profits of 150u. Accordingly, all 100u of 
CFC's subpart F income is included in A's gross income under section 
951(a)(1)(A). Under section 904(d)(3)(B) of the Internal Revenue Code 
and paragraph (i)(1) of this section, A includes 100u of passive 
limitation income in gross income for 1998.
    (ii) For purposes of computing post-1986 undistributed earnings 
under sections 902, 904(d) and 960 with respect to the subpart F 
inclusion, the shipping limitation deficit of (50u) is allocated 
proportionately to reduce general limitation earnings of 100u and 
passive limitation earnings of 100u. Thus, general limitation earnings 
are reduced by 25u to 75u (100u general limitation earnings/200u total 
earnings in positive separate categories  x  (50u) shipping deficit = 
25u reduction), and passive limitation earnings are reduced by 25u to 
75u (100u passive earnings/200u total earnings in positive separate 
categories  x  (50u) shipping deficit = 25u reduction). All of CFC's 
post-1986 foreign income taxes with respect to passive limitation 
earnings are deemed paid by A under section 960 with respect to the 100u 
subpart F inclusion of passive income (75u inclusion (numerator limited 
to denominator under paragraph (i)(4) of this section)/75u passive 
earnings). After the inclusion and deemed-paid taxes are computed, at 
the close of 1998 CFC has 100u of general limitation earnings, 0 of 
passive limitation earnings (100u of foreign personal holding company 
income -- 100u inclusion), and a (50u) deficit in shipping limitation 
earnings.
    Example 2. (i) The facts are the same as in Example 1 with the 
addition of the following facts. In 1999, CFC distributes 150u to A. CFC 
has 100u of previously-taxed earnings and profits described in section 
959(c)(2) attributable to 1998, all of which is passive limitation 
earnings and profits. Under section 959(c), 100u of the 150u 
distribution is deemed to be made from earnings and profits described in 
section 959(c)(2). The remaining 50u is deemed to be made from earnings 
and profits described in section 959(c)(3). The entire dividend 
distribution of 50u is treated as made out of CFC's general limitation 
earnings and profits. See section 904(d)(3)(D).
    (ii) For purposes of computing post-1986 undistributed earnings 
under section 902 with respect to the 1999 dividend of 50u, the shipping 
limitation accumulated deficit of (50u) reduces general limitation 
earnings and profits of 100u to 50u. Thus, 100% of CFC's post-1986 
foreign income taxes with respect to general limitation earnings are 
deemed paid by A under section 902 with respect to the 1999 dividend of 
50u (50u dividend/50u general limitation earnings). After the deemed-
paid taxes are computed, at the close of 1999 CFC has 50u of general 
limitation earnings (100u opening balance--50u distribution), 0 of 
passive limitation earnings, and a (50u) deficit in shipping limitation 
earnings.

    (6) Effective date. This paragraph (i) applies to taxable years of a 
controlled foreign corporation beginning after March 3, 1997.

[T.D. 7120, 36 FR 10852, June 4, 1971; 36 FR 11924, June 23, 1971, as 
amended by T.D. 7334, 39 FR 44211, Dec. 23, 1974; 40 FR 1014, Jan. 6, 
1975; T.D. 7649, 44 FR 60088, 60089, Oct. 18, 1979; T.D. 7843, 47 FR 
50472, Nov. 8, 1982; 47 FR 55477, Dec. 10, 1982; T.D. 7961, 49 FR 26225, 
June 27, 1984; T.D. 8704, 62 FR 21, Jan. 2, 1997]


<R05>
Sec. 1.960-2  Interrelation of section 902 and section 960 when dividends are paid by third-, second-, or first-tier corporation.

    (a) Scope of this section. This section prescribes rules for the 
application of section 902 in a case where dividends are paid by a 
third-, second-, or first-tier corporation, as the case may be, from its 
earnings and profits for a taxable year when an amount attributable to 
such earnings and profits is included in the gross income of a domestic 
corporation under section 951, or when such earnings and profits are 
attributable to an amount excluded from the gross income of such foreign 
corporation under section 959(b) and Sec. 1.959-2, with respect to the 
domestic corporation. In making determinations under this section, any 
portion of a distribution received from a first-tier corporation by the 
domestic corporation which is excluded from the domestic corporation's 
gross income under section 959(a) and Sec. 1.959-1, or any portion of a 
distribution received from an immediately lower-tier corporation by the 
third-, second-, or first-tier corporation which is excluded from such 
foreign corporation's gross income under section 959(b) and Sec. 1.959-
2, shall be treated as a dividend for purposes of taking into account 
under section 902 any foreign income taxes paid by such third-, second-, 
or first-tier corporation which

[[Page 384]]

are not deemed paid by the domestic corporation under section 960(a)(1) 
and Sec. 1.960-1.
    (b) Application of section 902(b) to dividends received from an 
immediately lower-tier corporation. For purposes of paragraph (a) of 
this section and paragraph (c)(1)(i) of Sec. 1.960-1, section 902(b) 
shall apply to all dividends received by the first- or second-tier 
corporation from the immediately lower-tier corporation other than 
dividends attributable to earnings and profits of such immediately 
lower-tier corporation in respect of which an amount is, or has been, 
included in the gross income of a domestic corporation under section 951 
with respect to such immediately lower-tier corporation.
    (c) Application of section 902(a) to dividends received by domestic 
corporation from first-tier corporation. For purposes of paragraph (a) 
of this section, section 902 (a) shall apply to all dividends received 
by the domestic corporation for its taxable year from the first-tier 
corporation other than dividends attributable to earnings and profits of 
such first-tier corporation in respect of which an amount is, or has 
been, included in the gross income of a domestic corporation under 
section 951 with respect to such first-tier corporation.
    (d) Allocation of earnings and profits of a first- or second-tier 
corporation having income excluded under section 959(b)--(1) First-tier 
corporations. If the first-tier corporation for its taxable year 
receives dividends from the second-tier corporation to which in 
accordance with paragraph (b) of this section 902(b)(1) or section 
902(b)(2) applies and other dividends from the second-tier corporation 
to which such sections do not apply, then in applying section 902(a) 
pursuant to this section and in applying section 960(a)(1) pursuant to 
Sec. 1.960-1(c)(1)(i), with respect to the foreign income taxes paid and 
deemed paid by the second-tier corporation which are deemed paid by the 
first-tier corporation for such taxable year under section 902(b)(1)--
    (i) The earnings and profits of the first-tier corporation for such 
taxable year shall be considered not to include its earnings and profits 
which are attributable to the dividends to which section 902(b)(1) does 
not apply (in determining the domestic corporation's credit for the 
taxes paid by the second-tier corporation) or which are attributable to 
the dividends to which sections 902(b)(1) and 902(b)(2) do not apply (in 
determining the domestic corporation's credit for taxes deemed paid by 
the second-tier corporation) and
    (ii) For the purposes of so applying section 902(a), distributions 
to the domestic corporation from such earnings and profits which are 
attributable to the dividends to which section 902(b)(1) does not apply 
(in determining the domestic corporation's credit for taxes paid by the 
second-tier corporation) or which are attributable to the dividends to 
which sections 902(b)(1) and 902(b)(2) do not apply (in determining the 
domestic corporation's credit for taxes deemed paid by the second-tier 
corporation) shall not be treated as a dividend.
    (2) Second-tier corporations. If the second-tier corporation for its 
taxable year receives dividends from the third-tier corporation to 
which, in accordance with paragraph (b) of this section, section 
902(b)(2) applies and other dividends from the third-tier corporation to 
which such section does not apply, then in applying section 902(b)(1) 
pursuant to this section, and in applying section 960(a)(1) pursuant to 
paragraph (c)(1)(i) of Sec. 1.960-1, with respect to the foreign taxes 
deemed paid by the second-tier corporation for such taxable year under 
section 902(b)(2)--
    (i) The earnings and profits of the second-tier corporation for such 
taxable year shall be considered not to include its earnings and profits 
which are attributable to such other dividends from the third-tier 
corporation, and
    (ii) For the purposes of so applying section 902(b)(1), 
distributions to the first-tier corporation from such earnings and 
profits which are attributable to such other dividends from the third-
tier corporation shall not be treated as a dividend.
    (e) Separate determinations under sections 902(a), 902(b)(1), and 
902(b)(2)   in the case of a first-, second-, or third-tier corporation 
having income excluded under section 956(b). If in the case of a first-, 
second-,   or third-tier corporation to which paragraph (b) or (c) of 
this section is applied--

[[Page 385]]

    (1) The earnings and profits of such foreign corporation for its 
taxable year consist of--
    (i) Dividends received from an immediately lower-tier corporation 
which are attributable to amounts included in the gross income of a 
domestic corporation under section 951 with respect to the immediately 
lower- or lower-tier corporations, and
    (ii) Other earnings and profits, and
    (2) The effective rate of foreign income taxes paid or accrued by 
such foreign corporation on the dividends described in paragraph 
(e)(1)(i) of this section is higher or lower than the effective rate of 
foreign income taxes attributable to its earnings and profits described 
in paragraph (e)(1)(ii) of this section,

then, for purposes of applying paragraph (b) or (c) of this section to 
dividends paid by such foreign corporation to the domestic corporation 
or the first- or second-tier corporation, sections 902(a), 902(b)(1), 
and 902(b)(2) shall be applied separately to the portion of the dividend 
which is attributable to the earnings and profits described in paragraph 
(e)(1)(i) of this section and separately to the portion of the dividend 
which is attributable to the earnings and profits described in paragraph 
(e)(1)(ii) of this section. In making a separate determination with 
respect to the earnings and profits described in paragraph (e)(1)(i) or 
(e)(1)(ii) of this section, only the foreign income taxes paid or 
accrued (or, in the case of earnings and profits of a first- or second-
tier corporation described in paragraph (e)(1)(ii) of this section, 
deemed to be paid) by such foreign corporation on the income 
attributable to such earnings and profits shall be taken into account. 
For purposes of applying this paragraph (e), no part of the foreign 
income taxes paid, accrued, or deemed to be paid which are attributable 
to the earnings and profits described in paragraph (e)(1)(ii) of this 
section shall be attributed to the dividend described in paragraph 
(e)(1)(i) of this section; and no part of the foreign income taxes paid 
or accrued on the dividend described in paragraph (e)(1)(i) of this 
section shall be attributed to the earnings and profits described in 
paragraph (e)(1)(ii) of this section. Furthermore, the effective rate of 
foreign income taxes paid or accrued shall be determined consistently 
with the principles of paragraphs (b)(3)(iv) and (viii) and (c) of 
Sec. 1.954-1. Thus, for example, the effective rate of foreign income 
taxes on dividends received by such foreign corporation shall be 
determined by taking into account any intercorporate dividends received 
deduction allowed to such corporation for such dividends.
    (f) Illustrations. The application of this section may be 
illustrated by the following examples. In all of the examples other than 
examples 6, 7, 9 and 10, it is assumed that the effective rate of 
foreign income taxes paid or accrued by the first- or second-tier 
corporation, as the case may be, in respect to dividends received from 
the immediately lower-tier corporation, is the same as the effective 
rate of foreign income taxes paid or accrued by the first- or second-
tier corporation with respect to its other income:

    Example 1. Domestic corporation N owns all the one class of stock of 
controlled foreign corporation A, which owns all the one class of stock 
of controlled foreign corporation B. All such corporations use the 
calendar year as the taxable year. For 1978, N Corporation is required 
under section 951 to include $50 in gross income attributable to the 
earnings and profits of A Corporation for such year, but is not required 
to include any amount in gross income under section 951 attributable to 
the earnings and profits of B Corporation. For such year, B Corporation 
distributes a dividend of $45, but A Corporation does not make any 
distributions. The foreign income taxes deemed paid by N Corporation for 
1978 under section 960(a)(1), after applying section 902(b)(1) for such 
year of A Corporation, are determined as follows upon the basis of the 
facts assumed:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
B Corporation (second-tier corporation):                                
  Pretax earnings and profits.................................   $100.00
  Foreign income taxes (40%)..................................     40.00
  Earnings and profits........................................     60.00
  Dividends paid to A Corporation.............................    $45.00
  Foreign income taxes paid by B Corporation on or with                 
   respect to its accumulated profits.........................     40.00
  Foreign income taxes of B Corporation deemed paid by A                
   Corporation for 1978 under section 902(b)(1) ($45/$60 x              
   $40).......................................................     30.00
A Corporation (first-tier corporation):                                 
  Pretax earnings and profits:                                          
    Dividends from B Corporation.....................   $45.00          
    Other income.....................................   100.00          
                                                      ---------         
      Total pretax earnings and profits..............  .......    145.00
  Foreign income taxes (20%).........................  .......     29.00
  Earnings and profits...............................  .......    116.00

[[Page 386]]

                                                                        
  Foreign income taxes paid, and deemed to be paid, by A                
   Corporation on or with respect to its earnings and profits           
   ($29+$30)..................................................     59.00
  Amount required to be included in N Corporation's gross               
   income under section 951 with respect to A Corporation.....     50.00
  Dividends paid to N Corporation.............................         0
N Corporation (domestic corporation):                                   
  Foreign income taxes of A Corporation deemed paid by N                
   Corporation for 1978 under section 960(a)(1) ($50/$116 x             
   $59).......................................................     25.43
                                                                        

    Example 2. Domestic corporation N owns all the one class of stock of 
controlled foreign corporation A, which owns all the one class of stock 
of controlled foreign corporation B. All such corporations use the 
calendar year as the taxable year. For 1978, N Corporation is required 
under section 951 to include in gross income $150 attributable to the 
earnings and profits of B Corporation for such year, which B Corporation 
distributes during such year. Corporation N is not required for 1978 to 
include any amount in gross income under section 951 attributable to the 
earnings and profits of A Corporation, but A Corporation distributes for 
such year $135 from its earnings and profits attributable to B 
Corporation's dividend. The foreign income taxes deemed paid by N 
Corporation for 1978 under section 960(a)(1)(C) and section 902(a) are 
determined as follows upon the basis of the facts assumed:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
B Corporation (second-tier corporation):                                
  Pretax earnings and profits.................................   $250.00
  Foreign income taxes (20%)..................................     50.00
  Earnings and profits........................................    200.00
  Amounts required to be included in N Corporation's gross              
   income under section 951 with respect to B Corporation.....    150.00
  Dividends paid to A Corporation.............................    150.00
  Foreign income taxes paid on or with respect to earnings and          
   profits of B Corporation...................................     50.00
A Corporation (first-tier corporation):                                 
  Pretax earnings and profits:                                          
    Dividends from B Corporation....................   $150.00          
    Other income....................................    200.00          
                                                     ----------         
      Total pretax earnings and profits.......................    350.00
  Foreign income taxes (10%)..................................     35.00
  Earnings and profits........................................    315.00
  Dividends paid to N Corporation.............................    135.00
  Foreign income taxes paid by A Corporation on or with                 
   respect to its accumulated profits.........................     35.00
N Corporation (domestic corporation):                                   
  Foreign income taxes of B Corporation deemed paid by N                
   Corporation for 1978 under section 960(a)(1) ($150/$200 x            
   $50).......................................................     37.50
  Foreign income taxes of A Corporation deemed paid by N                
   Corporation for 1978 under section 902(a) ($135/$315 x $35)     15.00
                                                     -----------        
      Total foreign income taxes deemed paid by N Corporation           
     under section 901........................................     52.50
                                                                        

    Example 3. Domestic corporation N owns all the one class of stock of 
controlled foreign corporation A, which owns all the one class of stock 
of controlled foreign corporation B. All such corporations use the 
calendar year as the taxable year. For 1978, N Corporation is required 
under section 951 to include $180 in gross income attributable to the 
earnings and profits of A Corporation for such year, but is not required 
to include any amount in gross income under section 951 attributable to 
the earnings and profits of B Corporation. Corporation B distributes 
from its earnings and profits for 1978 a dividend of $50. For 1978, A 
Corporation distributes $180 from its earnings and profits attributable 
to the amount required under section 951 to be included in N 
Corporation's gross income for such year with respect to A Corporation 
and $20 from its other earnings and profits. The foreign income taxes 
deemed paid by N Corporation for 1978 under section 960(a)(1) and 
section 902(a) are determined as follows upon the basis of the facts 
assumed:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
B Corporation (second-tier corporation):                                
  Pretax earnings and profits.................................   $100.00
  Foreign income taxes (40%)..................................     40.00
  Earnings and profits........................................     60.00
  Dividends paid to A Corporation.............................     50.00
  Foreign income taxes paid by B Corporation on or with                 
   respect to its accumulated profits.........................     40.00
  Foreign income taxes of B Corporation deemed paid by A                
   Corporation for 1978 under section 902(b)(1) ($50/$60 x              
   $40).......................................................     33.33
A Corporation (first-tier corporation):                                 
  Pretax earnings and profits:                                          
    Dividends from B Corporation....................    $50.00          
    Other income....................................    200.00          
                                                     ----------         
    Total pretax earnings and profits.........................    250.00
  Foreign income taxes (10%)..................................     25.00
  Earnings and profits........................................    225.00
  Foreign income taxes paid, and deemed to be paid, by A                
   Corporation on or with respect to its earnings and profits           
   ($25.00+$33.33)............................................     58.33
  Amounts required to be included in N Corporation's gross              
   income for 1978 under section 951 with respect to A                  
   Corporation................................................    180.00
  Dividends paid to N Corporation:                                      
    Dividends to which section 902(a) does not apply                    
     (from A Corporation's earnings and profits in                      
     respect of which an amount is required under                       
     section 951 to be included in N Corporation's                      
     gross income with respect to A Corporation)....    180.00          
    Dividends to which section 902(a) applies (from                     
     A Corporation's other earnings and profits)....     20.00          
                                                     ----------         
    Total dividends paid to N Corporation.....................   $200.00
N Corporation (domestic corporation):                                   
  Foreign income taxes of corporations A and B deemed paid by           
   N Corporation under   section 960(a)(1) ($180/$225 x                 
   $58.33)....................................................     46.66
  Foreign income taxes of corporations A and B deemed paid by           
   N Corporation under   section 902(a) ($20/$225 x $58.33)...      5.18
                                                     -----------        
      Total foreign income taxes deemed paid by N Corporation           
     under section 901........................................     51.84
                                                                        

    Example 4. Domestic corporation N owns all the one class of stock of 
controlled foreign corporation A, which owns all the one

[[Page 387]]

class of stock of controlled foreign corporation B. All such 
corporations use the calendar year as the taxable year. For 1978, N 
Corporation is required under section 951 to include in gross income 
$150 attributable to the earnings and profits of B Corporation for such 
year and $22.50 attributable to the earnings and profits of A 
Corporation for such year. For 1978, B Corporation distributes $175, 
consisting of $150 from its earnings and profits attributable to amounts 
required under section 951 to be included in N Corporation's gross 
income with respect to B Corporation and $25 from its other earnings and 
profits. Corporation A does not distribute any dividends for 1978. The 
foreign income taxes deemed paid by N Corporation for 1978 under section 
960(a)(1) are determined as follows upon the basis of the facts assumed:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
B Corporation (second-tier corporation):                                
  Pretax earnings and profits.................................   $250.00
  Foreign income taxes (20%)..................................     50.00
  Earnings and profits........................................    200.00
  Amounts required to be included in N Corporation's gross              
   income under section 951 for 1978 with respect to B                  
   Corporation................................................    150.00
  Dividends paid by B Corporation:                                      
    Dividends to which section 902(b) does not apply                    
     (from B Corporation's earnings and profits in                      
     respect of which an amount is required under                       
     section 951 to be included in N Corporation's                      
     gross income with respect to B Corporation)....   $150.00          
    Dividends to which section 902(b)(1) applies                        
     (from B Corporation's other earnings and                           
     profits).......................................     25.00          
                                                     ----------         
      Total dividends paid to A Corporation...................    175.00
  Foreign income taxes paid by B Corporation on or with                 
   respect to its accumulated profits.........................     50.50
  Foreign income taxes of B Corporation deemed paid by A                
   Corporation for 1978 under section 902(b)(1) ($25/$200 x             
   $50).......................................................      6.25
A Corporation (first-tier corporation):                                 
  Pretax earnings and profits.................................    175.00
  Foreign income tax (10 percent).............................     17.50
  Earnings and profits........................................    157.50
  Earnings and profits after exclusion of amounts attributable          
   to dividends to which section 902(b) does not apply                  
   ($157.50 less [$150- ($150 x 0.10)]).......................     22.50
  Amount required to be included in N Corporation's gross               
   income for 1978 under section 951 with respect to A                  
   Corporation................................................     22.50
  Dividends paid to N Corporation.............................        0 
N Corporation (domestic corporation):                                   
  Foreign income taxes deemed paid by N Corporation                     
   under section 960(a)(1)(C) with respect to A                         
   Corporation:                                                         
    Tax actually paid by A Corporation ($22.50/                         
     $157.50 x $17.50)..............................      2.50          
    Tax of B Corporation deemed paid by A                               
     Corporation under section 902(b)(1) ($22.50/                       
     $22.50 x $6.25)................................      6.25          
                                                     -----------        
                                                                    8.75
  Foreign income taxes deemed paid by N Corporation under               
   section 960(a)(1)(C) with respect to B Corporation ($150/            
   $200 x $50)................................................     37.50
                                                     -----------        
      Total taxes deemed paid under section 960(a)(1)(C)......     46.20
                                                                        

    Example 5. Domestic corporation N owns all the one class of stock of 
controlled foreign corporation A, which owns all the one class of stock 
of controlled foreign corporation B. All such corporations use the 
calendar year as the taxable year. For 1978, N Corporation is required 
under section 951 to include in gross income $150 attributable to the 
earnings and profits of B Corporation for such year and $22.50 
attributable to the earnings and profits of A Corporation for such year. 
For 1978, B Corporation distributes $175, consisting of $150 from its 
earnings and profits attributable to amounts required under section 951 
to be included in N Corporation's gross income with respect to B 
Corporation and $25 from its other earnings and profits. For 1978, A 
Corporation distributes $225, consisting of $135 from its earnings and 
profits attributable to the amount required under section 951 to be 
included in N Corporation's gross, income with respect to B Corporation, 
$22.50 from its earnings and profits attributable to the amount required 
under section 951 to be included in N Corporation's gross income with 
respect to A Corporation, and $67.50 from its other earnings and 
profits. The foreign income taxes deemed paid by N Corporation for 1978 
under section 960(a)(1) and section 902(a)(1) are determined as follows 
upon the basis of the facts assumed:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
B Corporation (second-tier corporation):                                
  Pretax earnings and profits.................................   $250.00
  Foreign income taxes (20%)..................................     50.00
  Earnings and profits........................................    200.00
  Amounts required to be included in N Corporation's gross              
   income for 1978 under section 951 with respect to B                  
   Corporation................................................    150.00
  Dividends paid by B Corporation:                                      
    Dividends to which section 902(b) does not apply                    
     (from B Corporation's earnings and profits in                      
     respect of which an amount is required under                       
     section 951 to be included in N Corporation's                      
     gross income with respect to B Corporation)....   $150.00          
    Dividends to which section 902(b) applies (from                     
     B Corporation's other earnings and profits)....    $25.00          
                                                     ----------         
      Total dividends paid to A Corporation...................   $175.00
  Foreign income taxes paid by B Corporation on or with                 
   respect to its accumulated profits.........................     50.00
  Foreign income taxes of B Corporation deemed paid by A                
   Corporation for 1978 under section 902(b)(1) ($25/$200 x             
   $50).......................................................     6.25 

[[Page 388]]

                                                                        
A Corporation (first-tier corporation):                                 
  Pretax earnings and profits:                                          
    Dividends received from B Corporation...........    175.00          
    Other income....................................    100.00          
                                                     ----------         
      Total pretax earnings and profits.......................    275.00
  Foreign income taxes (10 percent)...........................     27.50
  Earnings and profits........................................    247.50
  Earnings and profits after exclusion of amounts attributable          
   to dividends to which section 902(b) does not apply                  
   ($247.50 less [$150 -($150 x 0.10)]).......................    112.50
  Amount required to be included in N Corporation's gross               
   income for 1978 under section 951 with respect to A                  
   Corporation................................................    22.50 
Distributions paid by A Corporation:                                    
  Dividends to which section 902(a) does not apply                      
   (From A Corporation's earnings and profits in                        
   respect of which an amount is required under                         
   section 951 to be included in N Corporation's                        
   gross income with respect to A Corporation)......     22.50          
  Dividends to which section 902(a) applies (from A                     
   Corporation's other earnings and profits)........    202.50          
                                                     ----------         
    Total dividends paid to N Corporation...........    225.00          
N Corporation (domestic corporation):                                   
  Foreign income taxes deemed paid by N Corporation                     
   under section 960(a)(1) with respect to--                            
    B Corporation ($150/$200 x $50).................  ........     37.50
    A Corporation:                                                      
      Tax paid by A Corporation ($22.50/ $247.50 x                      
       $27.50)......................................      2.50          
      Tax of B Corporation deemed paid by A                             
       Corporation under section 902(b)(1) ($22.50/                     
       $112.50 x $6.25).............................      1.25      3.75
                                                     -----------        
        Total taxes deemed paid under section 960(a)(1).......     41.25
  Foreign income taxes deemed paid by N Corporation                     
   under section 902(a)(1) with respect to A                            
   Corporation:                                                         
    Tax paid by A Corporation ($200.50/$247.50 x                        
     $27.50)........................................     22.50          
    Tax of B Corporation deemed paid by A                               
     Corporation ($67.50/ $112.50 x $6.25)..........      3.75          
                                                     ----------         
      Total taxes deemed paid under section 902(a)(1).........     26.52
                                                     -----------        
    Total foreign income taxes deemed paid by N Corporation             
     under section 901........................................     67.05
                                                                        

    Example 6. Domestic corporation N owns all the one class of stock of 
controlled foreign corporation A, which owns all the one class of stock 
of controlled foreign corporation B. All such corporations use the 
calendar year as the taxable year. A and B corporations are organized 
under the laws of foreign country X. All of B corporation's assets used 
in a trade or business are located in country X. Country X imposes an 
income tax of 20 percent on B corporation's income. For 1978, N 
Corporation is required under section 951 to include in gross income 
$100 attributable to the earnings and profits of B Corporation for such 
year. For 1978, B Corporation distributes $150, consisting of $100 from 
its earnings and profits attributable to the amount required under 
section 951 to be included in N Corporation's gross income with respect 
to B Corporation and $50 from its other earnings and profits. Country X 
imposes an income tax of 10 percent on A Corporation's income but 
exempts from tax dividends received from B Corporation. N is not 
required to include any amount in gross income under section 951 for 
1978 attributable to the earnings and profits of A Corporation for such 
year. For 1978, A Corporation distributes $175, consisting of $100 from 
its earnings and profits attributable to the amount required under 
section 951 to be included in N Corporation's gross income with respect 
to B Corporation, and $75 from its other earnings and profits. The 
foreign income taxes deemed paid by N Corporation for 1978 under section 
960(a)(1) and section 902(a) are determined as follows on the basis of 
the facts assumed:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
B Corporation (2d-tier corporation):                                    
  Pretax earnings and profits.................................   $200.00
  Foreign income taxes (20%)..................................     40.00
  Earnings and profits........................................    160.00
  Amount required to be included in N Corporation's gross               
   income for 1978 under section 951 with respect to B                  
   Corporation................................................   100.00 
Dividends paid by B Corporation:                                        
  Dividends to which section 902(b) does not apply                      
   (from B corporation's earnings and profits in                        
   respect of which an amount is required under                         
   section 951 to be included in N corporation's                        
   gross income with respect to B corporation)......   $100.00          
  Dividends to which section 902(b)(1) applies (from                    
   B corporation's other earnings and profits)......     50.00          
                                                     ----------         
    Total dividends paid to A corporation.....................    150.00
  Foreign income taxes of B corporation deemed paid                     
   by A corporation for 1978 under section 902(b)(1)                    
   ($50/$100 x  $40)................................     12.50          
A corporation (1st-tier corporation):                                   
  Pretax earnings and profits:                                          
    Dividends received from B corporation...........    150.00          
    Other income....................................    100.00          
                                                     ----------         
      Total pretax earnings and profits.............  ........    250.00
  Foreign income taxes:                                                 
    On dividends received from B corporation........      None          
    On other income ($100 x 0.10)...................     10.00          
      Total foreign income taxes....................              10.00 
Earnings and profits:                                                   
  Attributable to dividends received from B corporation to              
   which section 902(b) does not apply........................    100.00

[[Page 389]]

                                                                        
Attributable to other income:                                           
  Attributable to dividends received from B                             
   Corporation to which section 902(b)(1) applies...     50.00          
  Attributable to other income ($100-$10)...........     90.00          
                                                     ----------         
    Subtotal..................................................    140.00
    Total earnings and profits................................    240.00
  Earnings and profits after exclusion of amounts attributable          
   to dividends to which section 902(b) does not apply ($240-           
   $100)......................................................    140.00
  Amount required to be included in N corporation's gross               
   income for 1978 under section 951 with respect to A                  
   corporation................................................      None
  Dividends paid by A corporation:                                      
    Dividends to which section 902(a) does not apply                    
     (from A corporation's earnings and profits in                      
     respect of which an amount is required under                       
     section 951 to be included in N corporation's                      
     gross income with respect to A corporation)....      None          
    Dividends to which section 902(a) applies (from                     
     A corporation's other earnings and profits)....   $175.00          
                                                     ----------         
      Total dividends paid to N corporation...................   $175.00
N corporation (domestic corporation):                                   
  Foreign income taxes deemed paid by N corporation under               
   section 960(a)(1) with respect to B corporation ($100/$160           
   x $40).....................................................     25.00
  Foreign income taxes deemed paid by N corporation                     
   under section 902(a) with respect to A                               
   corporation (allocation of earnings and profits                      
   being made under pars. (c)(2) and (d) of this                        
   section):                                                            
    Tax paid by A corporation in respect to                             
     dividends received from B Corporation to which                     
     section 902(b) does not apply ($100/ $100 x $0)      None          
    Tax paid by A corporation in respect to its                         
     other income ($75/ $140 x $10).................      5.36          
    Tax paid by B corporation deemed paid by A                          
     corporation in respect to such other income                        
     ($75/$140 x $12.50)............................      6.70          
                                                     ----------         
      Total taxes deemed paid under section 902(a)............     12.06
    Total foreign income taxes deemed paid by N                         
     corporation under section 901..................     37.06          
                                                                        

    Example 7. Domestic corporation N owns all the one class of stock of 
controlled foreign corporation A, which owns all the one class of stock 
of controlled foreign corporation B. All such corporations use the 
calendar year as the taxable year. For 1978, N Corporation is required 
under section 951 to include in gross income $150 attributable to the 
earnings and profits of B Corporation for such year and $47.50 
attributable to the earnings and profits of A Corporation for such year. 
For 1978, B Corporation distributes $200, consisting of $150 from its 
earnings and profits attributable to the amount required under section 
951 to be included in N Corporation's gross income with respect to B 
Corporation and $50 from its other earnings and profits. The country 
under the laws of which A Corporation is incorporated imposes an income 
tax of 5 percent on dividends received from a subsidiary corporation and 
20 percent on other income. For 1978, A Corporation distributes $100 
from its earnings and profits to N Corporation, such amount being 
attributable under paragraph (e) of Sec. 1.959-3 to the amount required 
under section 951 to be included in N Corporation's gross income with 
respect to B Corporation. The foreign income taxes deemed paid by N 
Corporation for 1978 under section 960(a)(1) and section 902(a) are 
determined as follows on the basis of the facts assumed:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
B Corporation (2d-tier corporation):                                    
  Pretax earnings and profits.................................   $250.00
  Foreign income taxes (20 percent)...........................    150.00
  Earnings and profits........................................    200.00
  Amount required to be included in N Corporation's gross               
   income for 1978 under section 951 with respect to B                  
   corporation................................................   150.00 
Dividends paid by B corporation:                                        
    Dividends to which section 902(b) does not apply                    
     (from B corporation's earnings and profits in                      
     respect of which an amount is required under                       
     section 951 to be included in N corporation's                      
     gross income with respect to B corporation)....   $150.00          
    Dividends to which section 902(b)(1) applies                        
     (from B corporation's other earnings and                           
     profits).......................................     50.00          
                                                     ----------         
    Total dividends paid to A corporation.....................    200.00
  Foreign income taxes of B corporation deemed paid by A                
   corporation for 1978 under section 902(b)(1) ($50/$200 x             
   $50).......................................................    12.50 
A corporation (1st-tier corporation):                                   
  Pretax earnings and profits:                                          
    Dividends received from B corporation...........    200.00          
    Other income....................................    100.00          
                                                     ----------         
      Total pretax earnings and profits.......................    300.00
  Foreign income taxes:                                                 
    On dividends received from B corporation to which section           
     902(b) does not apply ($150 x  0.05).....................      7.50
    On other income:                                                    
      Dividends received from B corporation to which                    
       section 902(b)(1) applies ($50 x  0.05)......      2.50          
      Other income of A corporation ($100 x 0.20)...     20.00          
                                                     ----------         
      Total...................................................     22.50
                                                     -----------        
    Total foreign income taxes................................     30.00
Earnings and profits:                                                   
  Attributable to dividends received from B corporation to              
   which section 902(b) does not apply ($150-$7.50)...........    142.50

[[Page 390]]

                                                                        
  Attributable to other income:                                         
    Attributable to dividends received from B                           
     corporation to which section 902(b)(1) applies                     
     ($50-$2.50)....................................     47.50          
    Attributable to other income ($100-$20..........     80.00          
                                                     ----------         
      Total...................................................    127.50
                                                     -----------        
      Total earnings and profits..............................    270.00
Earnings and profits after exclusion of amounts attributable            
 to dividends to which section 902(b) does not apply ($270              
 less $142.50)................................................    127.50
Amount required to be included in N corporation's gross income          
 for 1978 under section 951 with respect to A corporation.....    47.50 
Dividends paid by A Corporation:                                        
  Dividends to which section 902(a) does not apply                      
   (from A corporation's earnings and profits in                        
   respect of which an amount is required under                         
   section 951 to be included in N corporation's                        
   gross income with respect to A corporation)......      None          
  Dividends to which section 902(a)(1) applies (from                    
   A corporation's other earnings and profits)......   $100.00          
                                                     ----------         
      Total dividends paid to N corporation...................   $100.00
N Corporation (domestic corporation):                                   
  Foreign income taxes deemed paid by N corporation under               
   section 960(a)(1) with respect to--B corporation ($150/$200          
   x $50)                                                          37.50
  A corporation (allocation of earnings and profits being made          
   under Sec.  1.960-1(c)(3) and par. (d) of this section):             
    Tax paid by A corporation ($47.50/$127.50 x                         
     $22.50)........................................      8.38          
    Tax of B corporation deemed paid by A                               
     corporation under section 902(b)(1) ($47.50/                       
     $127.50 x $12.50)..............................      4.66          
                                                     ----------         
      Total.........................................               13.04
                                                               =========
      Total taxes deemed paid under section                             
     960(a)(1)......................................  ........     50.54
  Foreign income taxes deemed paid by N corporation                     
   under section 902(a) with respect to A                               
   corporation (allocations of earnings and profits                     
   being made under pars. (c)(2) and (d) of this                        
   section) ($100/$142.50 x $7.50)..................      5.26          
                                                     ----------         
    Total foreign income taxes deemed paid by N Corporation             
     under section 901........................................     55.80
                                                                        

    Example 8. Domestic corporation N owns all the one class of stock of 
controlled foreign corporation A, which owns all the one class of stock 
of controlled foreign corporation B, which owns all the one class of 
stock of controlled foreign corporation C. All such corporations use the 
calendar year as the taxable year. For 1978, N Corporation is required 
under section 951 to include $50 attributable to the earnings and 
profits of C Corporation and $15 attributable to the earnings and 
profits of B Corporation in its gross income. N Corporation is not 
required to include any amount in its gross income with respect to A 
Corporation under section 951 in 1978. For such year, C Corporation 
distributes $75 to B Corporation. B Corporation in turn distributes $60 
of its earnings and profits to A Corporation. A Corporation has no other 
earnings and profits for 1978 and distributes $45 of its earnings and 
profits to N Corporation. The foreign income taxes deemed paid by N 
Corporation under section 960(a)(1) and section 902(a) are determined as 
follows on the basis of the facts assumed:
    C Corporation (third-tier corporation):

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
Pretax earnings and profits...................................   $150.00
Foreign taxes paid by C Corporation (30%).....................     45.00
Earnings and profits..........................................    105.00
Amount required to be included in gross income of N                     
 Corporation under section 951 with respect to C Corporation..     50.00
Dividend to B Corporation.....................................     75.00
  Dividend from earnings and profits to which                           
   section 902(b)(2) does not apply (attributable to                    
   amounts included in N Corporation's gross income                     
   under section 951 with respect to C Corporation).     50.00          
  Dividend from earnings and profits to which                           
   section 902(b)(2) applies (attributable to                           
   amounts not included in N Corporation's gross                        
   income with respect to C Corporation)............    $25.00          
                                                                        
Amount of foreign income taxes of C Corporation deemed paid by          
 B Corporation under section 902(b)(2) and Sec.  1.960-2(b):            
                                                                        

 [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC09OC91.016
 

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
  ($25/$105 x $45)............................................    $10.71
                                                                        

    B Corporation (second-tier corporation):

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
Pretax earnings and profits:                                            
  Dividend from C Corporation.......................    $75.00          
  Other earnings and profits........................    225.00          
                                                     -----------        
                                                                        
    Total pretax earnings and profits.........................   $300.00
                                                                        
Foreign income taxes paid by B Corporation (40%)..............    120.00
Earnings and profits..........................................    180.00

[[Page 391]]

                                                                        
  Earnings and profits attributable to amounts to                       
   which section 902(b)(2) does not apply (amounts                      
   included in N Corporation's gross income under                       
   section 951 with respect to C Corporation ($50-                      
   ($50 x .40)).....................................     30.00          
  Other earnings and profits........................    150.00          
                                                                        
Earnings and profits of B Corporation after exclusion for               
 amounts to which section 902(b)(2) does not apply (amounts             
 attributable to earnings and profits which are included in N           
 Corporation's gross income under section 951 with respect to           
 C Corporation) ($180-$30)....................................    150.00
Amount to be included in gross income under section 951 of N            
 Corporation with respect to B Corporation....................     15.00
Amount of dividend to A Corporation...........................     60.00
  Dividend from earnings and profits to which                           
   section 902(b)(2) does not apply (attributable to                    
   amounts included in N Corporation's gross income                     
   under section 951 with respect to C Corporation).     30.00          
  Dividend from earnings and profits to which                           
   section 902(b)(1) does not apply (attributable to                    
   amounts included in N Corporation's gross income                     
   under section 951 with respect to B Corporation).     15.00          
  Dividend from other earnings and profits                              
   (attributable to amounts not included in N                           
   Corporation's gross income under section 951 with                    
   respect to B or C Corporation)...................     15.00          
                                                                        
Foreign income taxes of B Corporation deemed paid by A                  
 Corporation under section 902(b)(1) and Sec.  1.960-2(b):              
                                                                        

 [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC09OC91.017
 

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
  ($45/$180 x 120)............................................    $30.00
                                                                        
Foreign income taxes (of C Corporation) deemed paid by B                
 Corporation deemed paid by A Corporation under section                 
 902(b)(1) in accordance with Sec.  1.960-2(b) and Sec.  1.960-         
 2(d)(2)(i) and (ii):                                                   
                                                                        

 [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC09OC91.018
 

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
  ($15/$150 x $10.71).........................................      1.07
                                                                        

    A Corporation (first-tier corporation):

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
Pretax earnings and profits:                                            
  Dividend from B Corporation.......................    $60.00          
  Other earnings and profits........................         0          
                                                     -----------        
                                                                        
    Total pretax earnings and profits.........................    $60.00
                                                                        
Foreign income taxes paid by A Corporation (10%)..............      6.00
Earnings and profits..........................................     54.00
  Earnings and profits attributable to amounts to                       
   which section 902(b)(2) does not apply                               
   (attributable to amounts previously included in N                    
   Corporation's gross income under section 951 with                    
   respect to C Corporation) ($30-($30X.10))........     27.00          
  Earnings and profits attributable to amounts to                       
   which section 902(b)(1) does not apply                               
   (attributable to amounts included in N                               
   Corporation's gross income under section 951 with                    
   respect to B Corporation) ($15- ($15X.10)).......     13.50          
  Other earnings and profits ($15--($15X.10)).......     13.50          
                                                                        

[[Page 392]]

                                                                        
Earnings and profits of A Corporation after exclusion for               
 amounts to which section 902(b)(1) does not apply                      
 (attributable to amounts included in N Corporation's gross             
 income under section 951 with respect to B Corporation)                
 ($54.00-$13.50)..............................................     40.50
Earnings and profits of A Corporation after exclusion for               
 amounts to which sections 902(b)(1) and (2) do not apply               
 (attributable to amounts included in N Corporation's gross             
 income under section 951 with respect to B or C Corporation)           
 ($40.50-$27.00)..............................................     13.50
Dividend to N Corporation.....................................     45.00
  Dividend from earnings and profits to which                           
   section 902(b)(2) does not apply (attributable to                    
   amounts included in N Corporation's gross income                     
   under section 951 with respect to C Corporation).    $27.00          
  Dividend from earnings and profits to which                           
   section 902(b)(1) does not apply (attributable to                    
   amounts included in N Corporation's gross income                     
   under section 951 with respect to B Corporation).     13.50          
  Dividend from earnings and profits to which                           
   section 902(a) does not apply (attributable to                       
   amounts included in N Corporation's gross income                     
   under section 951 with respect to A Corporation).         0          
  Dividend from other earnings and profits                              
   (attributable to amounts not included in N                           
   Corporation's gross income under section 951 with                    
   respect to A, B, or C Corporation)...............      4.50          
                                                                        

    N Corporation (domestic corporation):

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
Foreign income taxes deemed paid by N Corporation under                 
 section 960(a)(1) and Sec.  1.960-1(c)(1)(ii) with respect to          
 C Corporation:                                                         
                                                                        

 [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC09OC91.019
 

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
  ($50/$105 x $45.00).........................................    $21.43
                                                                        
Foreign income taxes deemed paid by N Corporation under                 
 section 960(a)(1) and Sec.  1.960-1(c)(1)(i) with respect to           
 B Corporation................................................     11.07
                                                                        

    Taxes paid by B Corporation:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC09OC91.020
    

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
  ($15/$180 x $120).................................    $10.00          
                                                                        
                                                                        

    Taxes deemed paid by B Corporation in accordance with Sec. 1.960-
2(d)(2)(i):
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC09OC91.021


                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
  ($15/$150 x $10.71)...............................     $1.07          
                                                                        
                                                     -----------        
    Total taxes deemed paid by N Corporation under section              
     960(a)(1)................................................    $32.50
                                                                        
Foreign income taxes deemed paid by N Corporation under                 
 section 902(a):                                                        
                                                                        

    Taxes paid by A Corporation in accordance with Sec. 1.960-2(c):

[[Page 393]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC09OC91.022



                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
  ($45/$54 x $6)....................................     $5.00          
                                                                        
  Taxes paid by B Corporation deemed paid by A                          
   Corporation in accordance with Secs.  1.960-2(c)                     
   and 1.960-2(d)(1)(i) and (ii):                                       
                                                                        

   [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC09OC91.023
   

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
  ($31.50/$40.50 x $30.00)..........................     23.33          
                                                                        
                                                                        

    Taxes (of C Corporation) deemed paid by B Corporation deemed paid by 
A Corporation in accordance with Secs. 1.960-2(c) and 1.960-2(d)(1)(i) 
and (ii):
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC09OC91.024


                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
  ($4.50/$13.50 x $1.07)............................       .36          
                                                     -----------        
    Total taxes deemed paid by N Corporation under section              
     902(a)...................................................    $28.69
                                                     -----------        
                                                                        
    Total foreign income taxes deemed paid by N Corporation             
     under section 901..................................$61.19          
                                                     ===========        
                                                                        

    Example 9. Domestic corporation N owns all the one class of stock of 
controlled foreign corporation A, which owns all the one class of stock 
of controlled foreign corporation B, which owns all the one class of 
stock of controlled foreign corporation C. A and B Corporations are 
organized under the laws of foreign country X. C Corporation is 
organized under the laws of foreign country Y. All of B Corporation's 
assets used in a trade or business are located in country X. All such 
corporations use the calendar year as the taxable year. For 1978, N 
Corporation is required to include in its gross income under section 
951, $50 attributable to the earnings and profits of C Corporation and 
$100 attributable to the earnings and profits of B Corporation. N 
Corporation is not required to include any amount in its gross income 
under section 951 with respect to A Corporation. Country X imposes an 
income tax of 10 percent on dividends from foreign subsidiaries, 20 
percent on dividends from domestic subsidiaries, and 40 percent on other 
earnings and profits. For 1978, C Corporation distributes $75 to B 
Corporation. For such year, B Corporation distributes $175 of its 
earnings and profits to A Corporation. A Corporation

[[Page 394]]

has no other earnings and profits for 1978 and distributes $130 of its 
earnings and profits to N Corporation. The foreign income taxes deemed 
paid by N Corporation under sections 960(a)(1) and 902(a) are determined 
as follows on the basis of the facts assumed:

    C Corporation (third-tier corporation):

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
Pretax earnings and profits...................................   $150.00
Foreign income taxes paid by C Corporation (30%)..............     45.00
Earnings and profits..........................................    105.00
Amount required to be included in gross income of N                     
 Corporation under section 951 with respect to C Corporation..     50.00
Dividend to B Corporation.....................................     75.00
  Dividend to which section 902(b)(2) does not apply                    
   (attributable to amounts included in N                               
   Corporation's gross income under section 951 with                    
   respect to C Corporation)........................    $50.00          
  Dividend to which section 902(b)(2) applies                           
   (attributable to amounts not included in N                           
   Corporation's gross income under section 951 with                    
   respect to C Corporation)........................     25.00          
                                                                        
Amount of foreign income taxes of C Corporation deemed paid by          
 B Corporation under section 902(b)(2) and Sec.  1.960-2(b)             
 ($25/$105 x $45).............................................     10.71
  (For formula see Sec.  1.960-2(g)(1)(i)(A))                           
                                                                        

    B Corporation (second-tier corporation):

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
Pretax earnings and profits:                                            
  Dividend from C Corporation.......................    $75.00          
  Other earnings and profits........................    225.00          
                                                     -----------        
                                                                        
    Total pretax earnings and profits.........................   $300.00
                                                                        
Foreign income taxes paid by B Corporation....................     97.50
  On dividends received from C Corporation to which                     
   section 902(b)(2) does not apply (attributable to                    
   amounts included in N Corporation's gross income                     
   under section 951 with respect to C Corporation)                     
   ($50 x .10)......................................     $5.00          
  On dividend from C Corporation to which section                       
   902(b)(2) applies (attributable to amounts not                       
   included in N Corporation's gross income under                       
   section 951 with respect to C Corporation) ($25 x                    
   .10).............................................      2.50          
  On other income of B Corporation ($225 x .40).....     90.00          
                                                                        
Earnings and profits..........................................    202.50
  Attributable to dividend to which section                             
   902(b)(2) does not apply (attributable to amounts                    
   included in N Corporation's gross income under                       
   section 951 with respect to C Corporation) ($50-                     
   $5)..............................................     45.00          
  Attributable to dividend from C Corporation to                        
   which section 902(b)(2) applies (attributable to                     
   amounts not included in N Corporation's gross                        
   income under section 951 with respect to C                           
   Corporation) ($25-$2.50).........................    $22.50          
  Attributable to other income of B Corporation                         
   ($225-$90).......................................    135.00          
                                                                        
Earnings and profits after exclusion of amounts attributable            
 to dividend to which section 902(b)(2) does not apply                  
 (attributable to amounts included in N Corporation's gross             
 income under section 951 with respect to C Corporation)                
 ($202.50-$45)................................................   $157.50
Amount required to be included in N Corporation's gross income          
 under section 951 with respect to B Corporation..............    100.00
Dividend paid by B Corporation................................    175.00
  Dividend to which section 902(b)(2) does not apply                    
   (attributable to amounts included in N                               
   Corporation's gross income under section 951 with                    
   respect to C Corporation)........................    $45.00          
  Dividend to which section 902(b)(1) does not apply                    
   (attributable to amounts included in N                               
   Corporation's gross income under section 951 with                    
   respect to B Corporation)........................    100.00          
  Dividend from other earnings and profits                              
   (attributable to amounts not included in N                           
   Corporation's gross income with respect to B or C                    
   Corporation).....................................     30.00          
                                                                        
Foreign income taxes of B Corporation deemed paid by A                  
 Corporation under section 902(b)(1) (separate tax rate                 
 applicable to dividend received by B Corporation allocation            
 in accordance with Sec.  1.960-2(e)) (for formula see Sec.             
 1.960-2(g)(1)(ii)(A)(2) (i) and (ii)):                                 
                                                                        

    Tax paid by B Corporation on earnings previously taxed with respect 
to C Corporation or lower-tiers which is deemed paid by A Corporation:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC09OC91.025


[[Page 395]]



                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
  ($45/$45 x $5)..............................................     $5.00
                                                                        
                                                                        

    Tax paid by B Corporation on earnings not previously taxed with 
respect to C Corporation or lower-tiers which is deemed paid by A 
Corporation:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC09OC91.026


                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
  ($30/157.50 x $92.50).......................................    $17.62
                                                                        
Foreign income taxes (of C Corporation) deemed paid by B                
 Corporation deemed paid by A Corporation under section                 
 902(b)(1) ($30/$157.50 x $10.71).............................      2.04
  (For formula see Sec.  1.960-2(g)(1)(ii)(B)(1))                       
                                                                        

    A Corporation (first-tier corporation):

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
Pretax earnings and profits:                                            
  Dividend from B Corporation.......................   $175.00          
  Other income......................................         0          
                                                     -----------        
                                                                        
    Total pretax earnings and profits.........................   $175.00
                                                                        
Foreign income taxes paid by A Corporation (20%)..............     35.00
Earnings and profits..........................................    140.00
  Attributable to dividend to which section                             
   902(b)(2) does not apply (attributable to amounts                    
   included in N Corporation's gross income under                       
   section 951 with respect to C Corporation) ($45-                     
   ($45 x .20)).....................................    $36.00          
  Attributable to amounts to which section 902(b)(1)                    
   does not apply (Attributable to amounts included                     
   in N Corporation's gross income under section 951                    
   with respect to B Corporation) ($100-($100 x                         
   .20))............................................     80.00          
  Attributable to other earnings and profits                            
   (attributable to amounts not included in N                           
   Corporation's gross income with respect to B or C                    
   Corporation).....................................     24.00          
                                                                        
Earnings and profits after exclusion for amounts to which               
 section 902(b)(1) does not apply (attributable to amounts              
 included in N Corporation's gross income under section 951             
 with respect to B Corporation) ($140-$80)....................    $60.00
Earnings and profits after exclusion for amounts to which               
 sections 902(b)(1) and 902(b)(2) do not apply (attributable            
 to amounts included in N Corporation's gross income under              
 section 951 with respect to B or C Corporation) ($60-$36)....     24.00
Amount required to be included in N Corporation's gross income          
 under section 1951 with respect to A Corporation.............      None
Dividend to N Corporation.....................................   $130.00
  Dividend to which section 902(b)(2) does not apply                    
   (attributable to amounts included in N                               
   Corporation's gross income under section 951 with                    
   respect to C Corporation)........................    $36.00          
  Dividend to which section 902(b)(1) does not apply                    
   (attributable to amounts included in N                               
   Corporation's gross income under section 951 with                    
   respect to B Corporation)........................     80.00          
  Dividend to which section 902(a) does not apply                       
   (attributable to amounts included in N                               
   Corporation's gross income under section 951 with                    
   respect to A Corporation)........................         0          
  Dividend from other earnings and profits                              
   (attributable to amounts not included in N                           
   Corporation's gross income with respect to A, B,                     
   or C Corporation)................................     14.00          
                                                                        

    N Corporation (domestic corporation):

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
Foreign income taxes deemed paid by N Corporation under                 
 section 960(a)(1) and Sec.  1.960-1(c) with respect to C               
 Corporation ($50/$105 x $45).................................    $21.43
  (for formula see Sec.  1.960-2(g)(2)(i)(A))                           
Foreign income taxes deemed paid by N Corporation under                 
 section 960(a)(1) with respect to B Corporation (allocation            
 of earnings and profits being made in accordance with Sec.             
 1.960-1(c)(3) and Sec.  1.960-2(e)) (Separate tax rate                 
 applicable to dividend received by B Corporation)............     65.53
                                                                        
                                                                        

    Taxes paid by B corporation (for formula see Sec. 1.960-2(g)(2)(ii) 
(A)(2)):

[[Page 396]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC09OC91.027



                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
  ($100/$157.50 x $92.50)...........................    $58.73          
  Taxes (of C Corporation) deemed paid by B                             
   Corporation under section 902(b)(2) which are                        
   deemed paid by N Corporation under section                           
   960(a)(1) ($100/$157.50 x $10.71)................      6.80          
  (for formula see Sec.  1.960-2(g)(2)(ii)(B)(1))                       
                                                                        
                                                     ----------         
    Total taxes deemed paid by N Corporation under section              
     960(a)(1)................................................    $86.96
                                                                        
Foreign income taxes deemed paid by N Corporation under                 
 section 902(a):                                                        
  Taxes paid by A Corporation ($130/$140 x $35).....    $32.50          
  (for formula see Sec.  1.960-2(g)(1)(iii)(A)(1))                      
  Taxes paid by B Corporation deemed paid by A Corporation              
   (Separate tax rate applicable to dividend received by B              
   Corporation allocation required by Sec.  1.960-2(e)) (for            
   formula see Sec.  1.960-2(g)(1)(iii)(B)(2) (i) and (ii)):            
                                                                        
  Tax paid by B Corporation on earnings previously                      
   taxed with respect to C Corporation or lower                         
   tiers which is deemed paid by N Corporation:                         
                                                                        

   [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC09OC91.028
   

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
  ($36/$36 x $5)....................................     $5.00          
                                                                        
  Tax paid by B Corporation on earnings not                             
   previously taxed with respect to C Corporation or                    
   lower tiers which is deemed paid by N                                
   Corporation:                                                         
                                                                        

   [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC09OC91.029
   

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
  ($14/$24 x $17.62)................................    $10.28          
  Taxes (of C Corporation) deemed paid by B                             
   Corporation deemed paid by A Corporation ($14/$24                    
   x $2.04).........................................      1.19          
                                                     -----------        
                                                                        
  (for formula see Sec.  1.960-2(g)(1)(iii)(C)(1))                      
    Total taxes deemed paid by N Corporation under section              
     902(a)...................................................    $48.97
                                                     -----------        
                                                                        

[[Page 397]]

                                                                        
    Total foreign income taxes deemed paid by N Corporation             
     under section 901........................................    135.93
                                                     ===========        
                                                                        

    Example 10. The facts are the same as in example 9 except that A 
Corporation has other earnings and profits of $200 in 1978 and country X 
imposes a tax of 50 percent on A Corporation's other earnings and 
profits. A Corporation distributes $200 of its earnings and profits to N 
Corporation in 1978. The foreign income taxes paid by N Corporation 
under sections 960 (a)(1) and 902 (a) are determined as follows on the 
basis of the facts assumed:
    C Corporation (third-tier corporation):

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
Pretax earnings and profits...................................   $150.00
Foreign income taxes paid by C Corporation (30%)..............     45.00
Earnings and profits..........................................    105.00
Amount required to be included in gross income of N                     
 Corporation under section 951 with respect to C Corporation..    $50.00
Dividend to B Corporation.....................................     75.00
  Dividend to which section 902(b)(2) does not apply                    
   (attributable to amounts included in N                               
   Corporation's gross income under section 951 with                    
   respect to C Corporation)........................     50.00          
  Dividend to which section 902(b)(2) applies                           
   (attributable to amounts not included in N                           
   Corporation's gross income under section 951 with                    
   respect to C Corporation)........................     25.00          
Amount of foreign income taxes of C Corporation deemed paid by          
 B Corporation under section 902(b)(2) and Sec.  1.960-2(b)             
 ($25/$105 x $45).............................................     10.71
  (for formula see Sec.  1.960-2(g)(1)(i)(A))                           
                                                                        

    B Corporation (second-tier corporation):

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
Pretax earnings and profits:                                            
  Dividend from C Corporation.......................    $75.00          
  Other earnings and profits........................    225.00          
                                                     -----------        
                                                                        
    Total pretax earnings and profits.........................   $300.00
                                                                        
Foreign income taxes of B Corporation.........................    $97.50
  On dividends received from C Corporation to which                     
   section 902(b)(2) does not apply (attributable to                    
   amounts included in N Corporation's gross income                     
   under section 951 with respect to C Corporation)                     
   ($50 x .10)......................................     $5.00          
  On dividend from C Corporation to which section                       
   902(b)(2) applies (attributable to amounts not                       
   included in N Corporation's gross income under                       
   section 951 with respect to C Corporation) ($25 x                    
   .10).............................................      2.50          
  On other income of B Corporation ($225 x .40).....     90.00          
                                                                        
Earnings and profits..........................................   $202.50
  Attributable to dividend to which section                             
   902(b)(2) does not apply (attributable to amounts                    
   included in N Corporation's gross income under                       
   section 951 with respect to C Corporation) ($50-                     
   $5)..............................................    $45.00          
  Attributable to dividend from C Corporation to                        
   which section 902(b)(2) applies (attributable to                     
   amounts not included in N Corporation's gross                        
   income under section 951 with respect to C                           
   Corporation) ($25-$2.50).........................     22.50          
  Attributable to other income of B Corporation                         
   ($225-$90).......................................    135.00          
Earnings and profits after exclusion of amounts attributable            
 to dividend to which section 902(b)(2) does not apply                  
 (attributable to amounts included in N Corporation's gross             
 income under section 951 with respect to C Corporation)                
 ($202.50-$45)................................................    157.50
Amount required to be included in N Corporation's gross income          
 under section 951 with respect to B Corporation..............    100.00
Dividend paid by B Corporation................................    175.00
  Dividend to which section 902(b)(2) does not apply                    
   (attributable to amounts included in N                               
   Corporation's gross income under section 951 with                    
   respect to C Corporation)........................    $45.00          
  Dividend to which section 902(b)(1) does not apply                    
   (attributable to amounts included in N                               
   Corporation's gross income under section 951 with                    
   respect to B Corporation)........................    100.00          
  Dividend from other earnings and profits                              
   (attributable to amounts not included in N                           
   Corporation's gross income with respect to B or C                    
   Corporation).....................................     30.00          
Foreign income taxes of B Corporation deemed paid by A                  
 Corporation under section 902(b)(1) with allocation required           
 by Sec.  1.960-2 (e):                                                  
  ($45/$45 x $5)..............................................      5.00
  ($30/$157.50 x $92.50)......................................     17.62
  (for formula see Sec.  1.960-2(g)(1)(ii)(A)(2) (i) and (ii))          
Foreign income taxes (of C Corporation) deemed paid by B                
 Corporation deemed paid by A Corporation under section                 
 902(b)(1): ($30/$157.50  x  $10.71)                                2.04
  (for formula see Sec.  1.960-2(g)(1)(ii)(B)(1))                       
                                                                        

    A Corporation (first-tier corporation):

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
Pretax earnings and profits:                                            
  Dividend from B Corporation.......................   $175.00          
  Other earnings and profits........................    200.00          
                                                     -----------        
                                                                        
    Total pretax earnings and profits.........................   $375.00
Foreign income taxes paid by A Corporation....................    135.00
  On dividend received from B Corporation to which                      
   section 902(b)(2) does not apply (attributable to                    
   amounts included in N Corporation's gross income                     
   under section 951 with respect to C Corporation)                     
   ($45 x .20)......................................      9.00          
  On dividend received from B Corporation to which                      
   section 902(b)(1) does not apply (attributable to                    
   amounts included in N Corporation's gross income                     
   under section 951 with respect to B Corporation)                     
   ($100 x .20).....................................     20.00          

[[Page 398]]

                                                                        
  On dividend from B Corporation attributable to B                      
   Corporation's other earnings and profits                             
   (attributable to amounts not included in N                           
   Corporation's gross income with respect to B or C                    
   Corporation) ($30 x .20).........................      6.00          
  On other income of A Corporation ($200 x .50).....    100.00          
Earnings and profits..........................................    240.00
  Attributable to dividend to which section                             
   902(b)(2) does not apply (attributable to amounts                    
   included in N Corporation's gross income under                       
   section 951 with respect to C Corporation) ($45-                     
   $9)..............................................     36.00          
  Attributable to dividend to which section                             
   902(b)(1) does not apply (attributable to amounts                    
   included in N Corporation's gross income with                        
   respect to B Corporation) ($100-$20).............     80.00          
  Attributable to other earnings and profits of A                       
   Corporation (attributable to amounts not included                    
   in N Corporation's gross income with respect to                      
   A, B, or C Corporation) [($30-$6)+($200-$100)]...    124.00          
Amount required to be included in N Corporation's gross income          
 under section 951 with respect to A Corporation..............      None
Earnings and profits after exclusion of amounts attributable            
 to dividend to which section 902(b)(1) does not apply                  
 (attributable to amounts included in N Corporation's gross             
 income under section 951 with respect to B Corporation)......    160.00
Earnings and profits after exclusion of amounts attributable            
 to dividend to which sections 902(b)(1) and 902(b)(2) do not           
 apply (attributable to amounts included in N Corporation's             
 gross income under section 951 with respect to B and C                 
 Corporation).................................................    124.00
Dividend to N Corporation.....................................    200.00
  Dividend attributable to amounts to which section                     
   902(b)(2) does not apply (attributable to amounts                    
   included in N Corporation's gross income under                       
   section 951 with respect to C Corporation).......    $36.00          
  Dividend attributable to amounts to which section                     
   902(b)(1) does not apply (attributable to amounts                    
   included in N Corporation's gross income with                        
   respect to B Corporation)........................     80.00          
  Dividend attributable to amounts to which section                     
   902(a) does not apply (attributable to amounts                       
   included in N Corporation's gross income under                       
   section 951 with respect to A Corporation).......         0          
  Dividend attributable to A Corporation's other                        
   earnings and profits (attributable to amounts not                    
   included in N Corporation's gross income under                       
   section 951 with respect to A, B, or C                               
   Corporation).....................................    $84.00          
                                                                        

    N Corporation (domestic corporation).

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
Foreign income taxes deemed paid by N Corporation under                 
 section 960(a)(1) and Sec.  1.960-1(c) with respect to C               
 Corporation ($50/$150 x $45).................................    $21.43
  (for formula see Sec.  1.960-2(g)(2)(i)(A))                           
Foreign income taxes deemed paid by N Corporation under                 
 section 960(a)(1) with respect to B Corporation (allocation            
 of earning and profits being made in accordance with Sec.              
 1.960-1(c)(3) and Sec.  1.960-2(e))..........................     65.53
  Taxes paid by B Corporation ($100/$157.50 x                           
   $92.50)..........................................    $58.73          
  (for formula see Sec.  1.960-2(g)(2)(ii)(A)(2))                       
  Taxes deemed paid by B Corporation ($100 x $157.50                    
   x $10.71)........................................      6.80          
  (for formula see Sec.  1.960-2(g)(2)(ii)(B)(1))                       
                                                                        
                                                     ----------         
    Total taxes deemed paid by N Corporation under section              
     960(a)(1)................................................     86.96
                                                                        
Foreign income taxes deemed paid by N Corporation under                 
 section 902(a) (separate tax rate applicable to dividends              
 received by A Corporation allocation required by Sec.  1.960-          
 2(e)) (for formula see Sec.  1.960-2(g)(1)(iii)(A)(2) (i) and          
 (ii)):                                                                 
                                                                        
                                                                        

    Tax paid by A Corporation on earnings previously taxed with respect 
to B Corporation or lower tiers which is deemed paid by N Corporation:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC09OC91.030


                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
  ($116/$116 x $29).................................    $29.00          
                                                                        
  Tax paid by A Corporation on earnings not                             
   previously taxed with respect to B Corporation or                    
   lower tiers which is deemed paid by N                                
   Corporation:                                                         
                                                                        


[[Page 399]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC09OC91.031


                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
  ($84/$124 x $106).................................    $71.81          
                                                                        
  Taxes (paid by B Corporation) deemed paid by A                        
   Corporation allocation required by Sec.  1.960-                      
   2(e):                                                                
  ($36/$36 x $5)....................................      5.00          
  ($84/$124 x $17.62)...............................     11.94          
  (for formula see Sec.  1.960-2(g)(1)(iii)(B)(2)                       
   (i) and (ii))                                                        
                                                                        
  Taxes (of C Corporation) deemed paid by B                             
   Corporation deemed paid by A Corporation ($84/                       
   $124 x $2.04)....................................      1.38          
                                                     -----------        
                                                                        
  (for formula see Sec.  1.960-2(g)(1)(iii)(C)(1))                      
                                                                        
    Total taxes deemed paid by N Corporation under section              
     902(a) credit............................................   $119.13
                                                     -----------        
                                                                        
    Total foreign income taxes deemed paid by N Corporation             
     under section 901........................................    206.09
                                                     ===========        
                                                                        

    (g) Formulas. This paragraph contains formulas for determining a 
domestic corporation's section 902 and 960 credits when amounts 
distributed through a chain of ownership have been included in whole or 
in part in the gross income of a domestic corporation under section 951 
with respect to first-, second-, third-, or lower-tier corporations.
    (1) Determination of the section 902 credit--(i) Section 902(b)(2) 
credit. If the second-tier corporation receives a dividend from a third-
tier corporation attributable in whole or in part to amounts included in 
a domestic corporation's gross income under section 951 with respect to 
the third- or lower-tier corporations, the second-tier corporation's 
credit for taxes paid by the third-tier corporation under section 
902(b)(2) is determined as follows:
    (A) If the effective rate of tax on dividends received by the third-
tier corporation is the same as the effective rate of tax on its other 
earnings and profits--
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC09OC91.032

    (B) If the effective rate of tax on dividends received by the third-
tier corporation is higher or lower than the effective rate of tax on 
its other earnings and profits--
    (1) Credit for tax paid by third-tier corporation on earnings 
included in domestic corporation's gross income with respect to fourth- 
or lower-tier corporations--

[[Page 400]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC09OC91.033


    (2) Credit for tax paid by third-tier corporation on earnings not 
included in domestic corporation's gross income with respect to fourth- 
or lower-tier corporations--
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC09OC91.034

    (ii) Section 902(b)(1) credit. If the first-tier corporation 
receives a dividend from a second-tier corporation attributable in a 
whole or in part to amounts included in a domestic corporation's gross 
income under section 951 with respect to the second- or lower-tier 
corporations, the first-tier corporation's credit for taxes paid and 
deemed paid by the second-tier corporation under section 902(b)(1) is 
determined as follows:
    (A) Taxes paid by the second-tier corporation which are deemed paid 
by the first-tier corporation--(1) If the effective rate of tax on 
dividends received by the second-tier corporation is the same as the 
effective rate of tax on its other earnings and profits--
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC09OC91.035

    (2) If the effective rate of tax on dividends received by the 
second-tier corporation is higher or lower than the effective rate of 
tax on its other earnings and profits--
    (i) Credit for tax paid by second-tier corporation on earnings 
previously taxed with respect to third- or lower-tier corporations--

[[Page 401]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC09OC91.036


    (ii) Credit for tax paid by second-tier corporation on earnings not 
previously taxed with respect to third- or lower-tier corporations--
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC09OC91.037

    (B) Taxes deemed paid by the second-tier corporation which are 
deemed paid by the first-tier corporation-- (1) If the effective rate of 
tax dividends received by the third-tier corporation is the same as the 
effective rate of tax on its other earnings and profits--
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC09OC91.038

    (2) If the effective rate of tax on dividends received by the third-
tier corporation is higher or lower than the effective rate of tax on 
its other earnings and profits--
    (i) Credit for tax paid by third-tier corporation on earnings 
previously taxed with respect to fourth- or lower-tier corporations--

[[Page 402]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC09OC91.039


    (ii) Credit for tax paid by third-tier corporation on earnings not 
previously taxed with respect to fourth- or lower-tier corporations--
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC09OC91.040

    (iii) Section 902(a) credit. If the domestic corporation receives a 
dividend from a first-tier corporation attributable in whole or in part 
to amounts included in a domestic corporation's gross income under 
section 951 with respect to the first- or lower-tier corporations, the 
domestic corporation's credit for taxes paid and deemed paid by the 
first-tier corporation under section 902(a) is determined as follows:
    (A) Taxes paid by the first-tier corporation which are deemed paid 
by domestic corporation--(1) If the effective rate of tax on dividends 
received by the first-tier corporation is the same as the effective rate 
of tax on its other earnings and profits--
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC09OC91.041

    (2) If the effective rate of tax on dividends received by the first-
tier corporation is higher or lower than the effective rate of tax on 
its other earnings and profits--
    (i) Credit for tax paid by first-tier corporation on earnings 
previously taxed with respect to second- or lower-tier corporations--

[[Page 403]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC09OC91.042


    (ii) Credit for tax paid by first-tier corporation on earnings not 
previously taxed with respect to second- or lower-tier corporations--
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC09OC91.043

    (B) Taxes (paid by second-tier corporation) deemed paid by first-
tier corporation which are deemed paid by domestic corporation--(1) If 
the effective rate of tax on dividends received by the second-tier 
corporation is the same as its tax rate on other earnings and profits--
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC09OC91.044

    (2) If the effective rate of tax on dividends received by the 
second-tier corporation is higher or lower than the effective rate of 
tax on its other earnings and profits--
    (i) Credit for tax paid by second-tier corporation on earnings 
previously taxed with respect to third-tier or lower-tier corporations--

[[Page 404]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC09OC91.045


    (ii) Credit for tax paid by second-tier corporation on earnings not 
previously taxed with respect to third- or lower-tier corporations--
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC09OC91.046

    (C) Taxes (of third-tier corporation) deemed paid by first-tier 
corporation which are deemed paid by domestic corporation--(1) If the 
effective rate of tax on dividends received by the third-tier 
corporation is the same as the effective rate of tax on its other 
earnings and profits--
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC09OC91.047

    (2) If the effective rate of tax on dividends received by the third-
tier corporation is higher or lower than the effective rate of tax on 
its other earnings and profits--
    (i) Credit for tax (of third-tier corporation) deemed paid by 
second-tier

[[Page 405]]

corporation on earnings previously taxed with respect to fourth- or 
lower-tier corporations--
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC09OC91.048

    (ii) Credit for tax (of third-tier corporation) deemed paid by 
second-tier on earnings not previously taxed with respect to fourth- or 
lower-tier corporations--
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC09OC91.049

    (2) Determination of domestic corporation's section 960 credit for 
amounts included in its gross income with respect to a first-, second-, 
or third-tier corporation which has received a distribution previously 
included in the gross income of a domestic corporation under section 
951--(i) Third-tier credit. If a domestic corporation is required to 
include an amount in its gross income under section 951 with respect to 
a third-tier corporation which has received a distribution from a 
fourth-tier corporation of amounts included in a domestic corporation's 
gross income under section 951 with respect to the fourth- or lower-tier 
corporations, the domestic corporation's credit for taxes paid by the 
third-tier corporation under section 960(a)(1) is determined as follows:
    (A) If the effective rate of tax on dividends received by the third-
tier corporation is the same as the effective rate of tax on its other 
earnings and profits--

[[Page 406]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC09OC91.050


    (B) If the effective rate of tax on dividends received by the third-
tier corporation is higher or lower than the effective rate of tax on 
its other earnings and profits--
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC09OC91.051

    (ii) Second-tier credit. If a domestic corporation is required to 
include an amount in its gross income under section 951 with respect to 
a second-tier corporation which has received a distribution from a 
third-tier corporation of amounts included in a domestic corporation's 
gross income under section 951 with respect to the third- or lower-tier 
corporations, the domestic corporation's credit for taxes paid and 
deemed paid by the second-tier corporation under section 960(a)(1) is 
determined as follows:
    (A) Credit for taxes paid by the second-tier corporation which are 
deemed paid by the domestic corporation.
    (1) If the effective rate of tax on dividends received by the 
second-tier corporation is the same as the effective rate of tax on its 
other earnings and profits--
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC09OC91.052

    (2) If the effective rate of tax on dividends received by the 
second-tier is higher or lower than the effective rate of tax on its 
other earnings and profits--

[[Page 407]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC09OC91.053


    (B) Credit for taxes (of the third-tier corporation) deemed paid by 
the second-tier corporation under section 902(b)(2)--(1) If the 
effective rate of tax on dividends received by the third-tier 
corporation is the same as the effective rate of tax on its other 
earnings and profits--
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC09OC91.054

    (2) If the effective rate of tax on dividends received by the third-
tier corporation is higher or lower than the effective rate of tax on 
its other earnings and profits--
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC09OC91.055

    (iii) First-tier credit. If a domestic corporation is required to 
include amounts in its gross income under section 951 with respect to a 
first-tier corporation which has received a distribution from a second-
tier corporation of amounts included in a domestic corporation's gross 
income under section 951 with respect to the second- or lower-tier 
corporations, the domestic corporation's credit for taxes paid and 
deemed paid by the first-tier corporation under section 960(a)(1) shall 
be determined as follows:
    (A) Credit for taxes paid by the first-tier corporation.
    (1) If the effective rate of tax on dividends received by the first-
tier corporation is the same as the effective rate of tax on its other 
earnings and profits--

[[Page 408]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC09OC91.056


    (2) If the effective rate of tax on dividends received by the first-
tier corporation is higher or lower than the effective rate of tax on 
its other earnings and profits--
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC09OC91.057

    (B) Credit for taxes paid by the second-tier corporation deemed paid 
by the first-tier corporation under section 902(b)(1).
    (1) If the effective rate of tax on dividends received by the 
second-tier corporation is the same as the effective rate of tax on its 
other earnings and profits--
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC09OC91.058

    (2) If the effective rate of tax on dividends received by the 
second-tier corporation is higher or lower than the effective rate of 
tax on its other earnings and profits--

[[Page 409]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC09OC91.059


    (C) Credit for taxes (of the third-tier corporation) deemed paid by 
the second-tier corporation which are deemed paid by first-tier 
corporation under section 902(b)(1).
    (1) If the effective rate of tax on dividends received by the third-
tier corporation is the same as the effective rate of tax on its other 
earnings and profits--
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC09OC91.060

    (2) If the effective rate of tax on dividends received by the third-
tier corporation is higher or lower than the effective rate of tax on 
its other earnings and profits--
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC09OC91.061

[T.D. 7120, 36 FR 10854, June 4, 1971; 36 FR 11924, June 23, 1971, as 
amended by T.D. 7334, 39 FR 44212, Dec. 23, 1974; 40 FR 1014, Jan. 6, 
1975; 40 FR 2802, Jan. 16, 1975; T.D. 7649, 44 FR 60089, Oct. 18, 1979; 
T.D. 7843, 47 FR 50476, Nov. 8, 1982; 47 FR 55477, Dec. 10, 1982]


<R05>
Sec. 1.960-3   Gross-up of amounts included in income under section 951.

    (a) General rule for including taxes in income. Any taxes deemed 
paid by a domestic corporation for the taxable year pursuant to section 
960(a)(1) shall, except as provided in paragraph (b) of this section, be 
included in the gross income of such corporation for such

[[Page 410]]

year as a dividend pursuant to section 78 and Sec. 1.78-1.
    (b) Certain taxes not included in income. Any taxes deemed paid by a 
domestic corporation for the taxable year pursuant to section 902(a) or 
section 960(a)(1) shall not be included in the gross income of such 
corporation for such year as a dividend pursuant to section 78 and 
Sec. 1.78-1 to the extent that such taxes are paid or accrued by the 
first-, second-, or third-tier corporation, as the case may be, on or 
with respect to an amount which is excluded from the gross income of 
such foreign corporation under section 959(b) and Sec. 1.959-2 as 
distributions from the earnings and profits of another controlled 
foreign corporation attributable to an amount which is, or has been, 
required to be included in the gross income of the domestic corporation 
under section 951.
    (c) Illustrations. The application of this section may be 
illustrated by the following examples:

    Example 1. Domestic corporation N owns all the one class of stock of 
controlled foreign corporation A, which owns all the one class of stock 
of controlled foreign corporation B. All such corporations use the 
calendar year as the taxable year. For 1978, B Corporation, after having 
paid $20 of foreign income taxes, has $80 in earnings and profits, which 
are attributable to the amount required to be included in N 
Corporation's gross income for such year under section 951 with respect 
to B Corporation and all of which are distributed to A Corporation in 
such year. The dividend so received from B Corporation is excluded from 
A Corporation's gross income under section 959(b) and Sec. 1.959-2. An 
income tax of 10 percent is required to be withheld from such dividend 
by the foreign country under the laws of which B Corporation is created, 
and the foreign country under the laws of which A Corporation is created 
imposes an income tax of $22 on the dividend received from B 
Corporation. For 1978, A Corporation's earnings and profits are $50 
($80-[0.10 x $80]-$22), which it distributes in such year to N 
Corporation. For 1978, N Corporation is required under section 951 to 
include $80 in gross income with respect to B Corporation and also is 
required under the gross-up provisions of section 78 to include in gross 
income $20 ($80/$80 x $20), the amount equal to the foreign income taxes 
of B Corporation which are deemed paid by N Corporation under section 
960(a)(1). Under paragraph (b) of this section N Corporation is not 
required to include in gross income the $30 ($8+$22) of foreign income 
taxes which are paid by A Corporation in connection with the dividend 
received from B Corporation and which are deemed paid by N Corporation 
under section 902(a) and paragraph (c) of Sec. 1.960-2.
    Example 2. Domestic corporation N owns all the one class of stock of 
controlled foreign corporation A, which owns all the one class of stock 
of controlled foreign corporation B, which in turn owns all the one 
class of stock of controlled foreign corporation C. All such 
corporations use the calendar year as the taxable year. For 1978, C 
Corporation, after having paid $20 of foreign income taxes, has $80 in 
earnings and profits, which are attributable to the amount required to 
be included in N Corporation's gross income for such year under section 
951 with respect to C Corporation and all of which are distributed to B 
Corporation in such year. After having paid foreign income taxes of $10 
on the dividend received from C Corporation, B Corporation distributes 
the balance of $70 to A Corporation. After having paid foreign income 
taxes of $5 on the dividend received from B Corporation, A Corporation 
distributes the balance of $65 to N Corporation. The dividend so 
received by B Corporation, and in turn by A Corporation, is excluded 
from the gross income of such corporations under section 959(b) and 
Sec. 1.959-2. Under paragraph (b) of this section N Corporation is not 
required to include in gross income the $15 ($10+$5) of foreign income 
taxes which are paid by corporations B and A, respectively, in 
connection with the dividend so received and which are deemed paid by N 
Corporation under section 902(a) and paragraphs (b) and (c) of 
Sec. 1.960-2.

[T.D. 7120, 36 FR 10856, June 4, 1971, as amended by T.D. 7481, 42 FR 
20130, Apr. 18, 1977; T.D. 7649, 44 FR 60089, Oct. 18, 1979; T.D. 7843, 
47 FR 50484, Nov. 8, 1982]


<R05>
Sec. 1.960-4   Additional foreign tax credit in year of receipt of previously taxed earnings and profits.

    (a) Increase in section 904(a) limitation for the taxable year of 
exclusion--(1) In general. The applicable limitation under section 
904(a) for a taxpayer's taxable year (hereinafter in this section 
referred to as the ``taxable year of exclusion'') in which he receives 
an amount which is excluded from gross income under section 959(a)(1) 
and which is attributable to a controlled foreign corporation's earnings 
and profits in respect of which an amount was required to be included in 
the gross income of such taxpayer under section 951(a) for a taxable 
year (hereinafter in this section referred to as the ``taxable

[[Page 411]]

year of inclusion'') previous to the taxable year of exclusion shall be 
increased under section 960(b)(1) by the amount described in paragraph 
(b) of this section if the conditions described in subparagraph (2) of 
this paragraph are satisfied.
    (2) Conditions under which increase in limitation is allowed for the 
taxable year of exclusion. The increase in limitation described in 
subparagraph (1) of this paragraph for the taxable year of exclusion 
shall be made only if the taxpayer--
    (i) For the taxable year of inclusion either chose to claim a 
foreign tax credit as provided in section 901 or did not pay or accrue 
any foreign income taxes,
    (ii) Chooses to claim a foreign tax credit as provided in section 
901 for the taxable year of exclusion, and
    (iii) For the taxable year of exclusion pays, accrues, or is deemed 
to have paid foreign income taxes with respect to the amount, described 
in subparagraph (1) of this paragraph, which is excluded from his gross 
income for such year under section 959(a)(1).
    (b) Amount of increase in limitation for the taxable year of 
exclusion. The amount of increase under section 960 (b)(1) in the 
applicable limitation under section 904(a) for the taxable year of 
exclusion shall be--
    (1) The amount by which the applicable section 904(a) limitation for 
the taxable year of inclusion was increased, determined as provided in 
paragraph (c) of this section, by reason of the inclusion of the amount 
in the taxpayer's income for such year under section 951(a), reduced by
    (2) The amount of foreign income taxes allowed as a credit under 
section 901 for such taxable year of inclusion and which were allowable 
to such taxpayer solely by reason of the inclusion of such amount in his 
gross income under section 951(a), as determined under paragraph (d) of 
this section, and then by
    (3) The additional reduction for such taxable year of inclusion 
arising by reason of increases in limitation under section 960(b)(1) for 
taxable years intervening between such taxable year of inclusion and 
such taxable year of exclusion, as determined under paragraph (e) of 
this section in respect of such inclusion under section 951(a),

except that the amount of increase determined under this paragraph for 
the taxable year of exclusion shall in no case exceed the amount of 
foreign income taxes paid, accrued, or deemed to be paid by such 
taxpayer for such taxable year of exclusion with respect to the amount, 
described in paragraph (a)(1) of this section, which is excluded from 
gross income for such year under section 959(a)(1).
    (c) Determination of increase in limitation for the taxable year of 
inclusion. The amount of the increase in the applicable limitation under 
section 904(a) for the taxable year of inclusion which arises by reason 
of the inclusion of the amount in gross income under section 951(a) 
shall be the amount of the applicable limitation under section 904(a) 
for such year reduced by the amount which would have been the applicable 
limitation under section 904(a) for such year if the amount had not been 
included in gross income for such year under section 951(a).
    (d) Determination of foreign income taxes allowed for taxable year 
of inclusion by reason of section 951(a) amount. The amount of foreign 
income taxes allowed as a credit under section 901 for the taxable year 
of inclusion which were allowable solely by reason of the inclusion of 
the amount in gross income for such year under section 951(a) shall be 
the amount of foreign income taxes allowed as a credit under section 901 
for such year reduced by the amount of foreign income taxes which would 
have been allowed as a credit under section 901 for such year if the 
amount had not been included in gross income for such year under section 
951(a). For purposes of this paragraph, the term ``foreign income 
taxes'' includes foreign income taxes paid or accrued, and foreign 
income taxes deemed paid under section 902, section 904(d), and section 
960(a), for the taxable year of inclusion.
    (e) Additional reduction for the taxable year of inclusion arising 
by reason of increases in limitation for intervening years. The amount 
of increase in the applicable limitation under section 904(a) for the 
taxable year of inclusion shall also be reduced, after first deducting 
the

[[Page 412]]

foreign income taxes described in paragraph (b)(2) of this section, by 
any increases in limitation which arise under section 960(b)(1)--by 
reason of any earlier exclusions under section 959(a)(1) in respect of 
the same inclusion under section 951(a) for such taxable year of 
inclusion--for the first, second, third, fourth, etc., succeeding 
taxable years of exclusion, in that order, which follow such taxable 
year of inclusion and precede the taxable year of exclusion in respect 
of which the increase in limitation under section 960(b)(1) and 
paragraph (b) of this section is being determined. The amount of any 
increase in limitation which arises under section 960(b)(1) for any such 
succeeding taxable year of exclusion shall be the amount of foreign 
income taxes allowed as a credit under section 901 for each such taxable 
year reduced by the amount of foreign income taxes which would have been 
allowed as a credit under section 901 for each such year if the 
limitation for each such year were not increased under section 
960(b)(1). For any such succeeding taxable year of exclusion for which 
the taxpayer does not choose to claim a foreign tax credit as provided 
in section 901, the same increase in limitation under section 960(b)(1) 
shall be treated as having been made, for purposes of this paragraph, 
which would have been made for such taxable year if the taxpayer had 
chosen to claim the foreign tax credit for such year.
    (f) Illustrations. The application of this section may be 
illustrated by the following examples:

    Example 1. Domestic corporation N owns all of the one class of stock 
of controlled foreign corporation A. Corporation A, after paying foreign 
income taxes of $30, has earnings and profits for 1978 of $70, all of 
which are attributable to an amount required under section 951(a) to be 
included in N Corporation's gross income for 1978. Both corporations use 
the calendar year as the taxable year. For 1979 and 1980, A Corporation 
has no earnings and profits attributable to an amount required to be 
included in N Corporation's gross income under section 951(a); for each 
such year it makes a distribution of $35 (from its earnings and profits 
for 1978) from which a foreign income tax of $6 is withheld. For each of 
1978, 1979, and 1980, N Corporation derives taxable income of $50 from 
sources within the United States and claims a foreign tax credit under 
section 901, determined by applying the overall limitation under section 
904(a)(2).

The United States tax payable by N Corporation is determined as follows, 
assuming a corporate tax rate of 48 percent:

                                  1978                                  
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
Taxable income of N Corporation:                                        
  U.S. sources...............................................     $50.00
  Sources without the U.S.:                                             
    Amount required to be included in N                                 
     Corporation's gross income under section                           
     951(a).......................................     $70.00           
    Foreign income taxes deemed paid by N                               
     Corporation under section 960(a)(1) and                            
     included in N Corporation's gross income                           
     under section 78 ($30 x $70/$70).............      30.00     100.00
                                                   ---------------------
    Total taxable income..........................  .........     150.00
                                                              ==========
U.S. tax payable for 1978:                                              
  U.S. tax before credit ($150 x 0.48).......................      72.00
  Credit: Foreign income taxes of $30, but not to exceed                
   overall limitation of $48 for 1978 ($100/$150 x $72)......      30.00
                                                   ------------         
  U.S. tax payable...........................................      42.00
                                                   ============         
                                                                        


                                  1979                                  
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
Taxable income of N Corporation, consisting of income from              
 U.S. sources................................................     $50.00
U.S. tax before credit ($50 x 0.48)..........................      24.00
Section 904(a)(2) overall limitation for 1979:                          
  Limitation for 1979 before increase under section 960(b)(1)           
   ($24 x $0/$50)............................................          0
  Plus: Increase in overall limitation for 1979                         
   under section 960(b)(1):                                             
    Amount by which 1978 overall limitation was                         
     increased by reason of inclusion in N                              
     Corporation's gross income under section                           
     951(a) for 1978 ($48-[($50 x 0.48) x $0/$50])     $48.00           
    Less: Foreign income taxes allowed as a credit                      
     for 1978 which were allowable solely by                            
     reason of such section 951(a) inclusion ($30-                      
     $0)..........................................      30.00           
                                                   -----------          
    Balance.......................................      18.00           
    But: Such balance not to exceed foreign income                      
     taxes paid by N Corporation for 1979 with                          
     respect to $35 distribution excluded under                         
     section 959(a)(1) ($6 tax withheld)..........       6.00       6.00
                                                   ---------------------
  Overall limitation for 1979................................       6.00
                                                   ============         
U.S. tax payable for 1979:                                              
  U.S. tax before credit ($50 x 0.48)........................      24.00
  Credit: Foreign income taxes of $6, but not to exceed                 
   overall limitation of $6 for 1966.........................       6.00
                                                   ------------         

[[Page 413]]

                                                                        
  U.S. tax payable...........................................      18.00
                                                   ============         
                                                                        


                                  1980                                  
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
Taxable income of N Corporation, consisting of income from U.S.         
 sources.......................................................   $50.00
U.S. tax before credit ($50 x 0.48)............................    24.00
                                                       ==========       
Section 904(a)(2) overall limitation for 1980:                          
  Limitation for 1980 before increase under section 960(b)(1)           
   ($24 x $0/$50)..............................................        0
  Plus: Increase in overall limitation for 1980 under                   
   section 960(b)(1):                                                   
    Amount by which 1978 overall limitation was                         
     increased by reason of inclusion in N                              
     Corporation's gross income under section 951(a)                    
     for 1978 ($48-[($50 x 0.48) x $0/$50])...........   $48.00         
    Less: Foreign income taxes allowed as a credit for                  
     1978 which were allowable solely by reason of                      
     such section 951(a) inclusion ($30-$0)...........    30.00         
                                                       ---------        
    Tentative balance.................................    18.00         
    Less: Increase in overall limitation under section                  
     960(b)(1) for 1979 by reason of such section                       
     951(a) inclusion.................................    $6.00         
                                                       ---------        
    Balance...........................................    12.00         
  But: Such balance not to exceed foreign income taxes                  
   paid by N Corporation for 1980 with respect to $35                   
   distribution excluded under section 959(a)(1) ($6                    
   tax withheld)......................................     6.00    $6.00
                                                       -----------------
  Overall limitation for 1980..................................     6.00
                                                       ==========       
U.S. tax payable for 1980:                                              
  U.S. tax before credit ($50 x 0.48)..........................    24.00
  Credit: Foreign income taxes of $6, but not to exceed overall         
   limitation of $6 for 1967...................................     6.00
                                                       ----------       
  U.S. tax payable.............................................    18.00
                                                                        

    Example 2. The facts for 1978, 1979, and 1980, are the same as in 
example 1, except that in 1977, to which the section 904(a)(2) overall 
limitation applies, N Corporation pays $18 of foreign income taxes in 
excess of the overall limitation and that such excess is not absorbed as 
a carryback to 1975 or 1976 under section 904(c). Therefore, there is no 
increase under section 960(b)(1) in the overall limitation for 1979 or 
1980 since the amount ($48) by which the 1978 overall limitation was 
increased by reason of the inclusion in N Corporation's gross income for 
1978 under section 951(a), less the foreign income taxes ($48) allowed 
as a credit which were allowable solely by reason of such inclusion, is 
zero. The foreign income taxes so allowed as a credit for 1978 which 
were allowable solely by reason of such section 951(a) inclusion consist 
of the $30 of foreign income taxes deemed paid for 1978 under section 
960(a)(1) and the $18 of foreign income taxes for 1977 carried over and 
deemed paid for 1978 under section 904(c).
    Example 3. (a) Domestic corporation N owns all the one class of 
stock of controlled foreign corporation A, which in turn owns all the 
one class of stock of controlled foreign corporation B. All corporations 
use the calendar years as the taxable year. Corporation B, after paying 
foreign income taxes of $30, has earnings and profits for 1978 of $70, 
all of which is attributable to an amount required under section 951(a) 
to be included in N Corporation's gross income for 1978, and $35 of 
which it distributes in such year to A Corporation. For 1978, A 
Corporation, after paying foreign income taxes of $5 on such dividend 
from B Corporation, has total earnings and profits of $30, all of which 
it distributes in such year to N Corporation, a foreign income tax of $3 
being withheld therefrom.
    (b) For 1979, B Corporation has no earnings and profits, but 
distributes in such year to A Corporation the $35 remaining of its 
earnings and profits for 1965. For 1979, A Corporation, after paying 
foreign income taxes of $5 on such dividend from B Corporation, has 
total earnings and profits of $30, all of which it distributes to N 
Corporation, a foreign income tax of $3 being withheld therefrom.
    (c) For each of 1978 and 1979, N Corporation has taxable income of 
$100 from United States sources and claims a foreign tax credit under 
section 901, determined by applying the overall limitation under section 
904(a)(2). The United States tax payable by N Corporation is determined 
as follows, assuming a corporate tax rate of 48 percent:

                                  1978                                  
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
Taxable income of N Corporation:                                        
  U.S. sources..................................................    $100
  Sources without the U.S.:                                             
    Amount required to be included in N Corporation's                   
     gross income under section 951(a) with respect to B                
     Corporation.........................................    $70        
    Foreign income taxes deemed paid by N Corporation                   
     under section 960(a)(1) and included in N                          
     Corporation's gross income under section 78 ($30 x                 
     $70/$70)............................................     30     100
                                                          --------------
  Total taxable income...................................  .....     200
                                                                 =======
U.S. tax payable for 1978:                                              
  U.S. tax before credit ($200 x 0.48)..........................      96
  Credit: Foreign income taxes of $38 ([$30 x $70/$70]+$3), but         
   not to exceed overall limitation of $48 ($96 x $100/$200)....      38
                                                          --------      
  U.S. tax payable..............................................      58
                                                          ========      
                                                                        


                                  1979                                  
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
Taxable income of N Corporation, consisting of income from U.S.         
 sources.......................................................     $100
U.S. tax before credit ($100 x 0.48)...........................       48
Section 904(a)(2) overall limitation for 1979:                          
  Limitation for 1979 before increase under section 960(b)(1)           
   ($48 x $0/$100).............................................        0

[[Page 414]]

                                                                        
  Plus: Increase in overall limitation for 1979 under                   
   section 960(b)(1):                                                   
    Amount by which 1978 overall limitation was                         
     increased by reason of inclusion in N                              
     Corporation's gross income under section 951(a)                    
     for 1978 ($48-[($100 x 0.48) x $0/$100])..........     $48         
    Less: Foreign income taxes allowed as a credit for                  
     1978 which were allowable solely by reason of such                 
     section 951(a) inclusion ($38-$0).................      38         
                                                        --------        
      Balance..........................................      10         
    But: Such balance not to exceed foreign income                      
     taxes paid and deemed paid by N Corporation for                    
     1979 with respect to $30 distribution excluded                     
     under section 959(a)(1) ([$5 x $30/$30]+$3).......       8        8
                                                        ----------------
  Overall limitation for 1979..........................  ......        8
                                                                ========
U.S. tax payable for 1979:                                              
  U.S. tax before credit ($100 x 0.48).........................       48
  Credit: Foreign income taxes of $8 ($3+$5), but not to exceed         
   overall limitation of $8 for 1979...........................        8
                                                        ---------       
  U.S. tax payable.............................................       40
                                                                        

[T.D. 7120, 36 FR 10859, June 4, 1971, as amended by T.D. 7649, 44 FR 
60089, Oct. 18, 1979]


<R05>
Sec. 1.960-5   Credit for taxable year of inclusion binding for taxable year of exclusion.

    (a) Taxes not allowed as a deduction for taxable year of exclusion. 
In the case of any taxpayer who--
    (1) Chooses to claim a foreign tax credit as provided in section 901 
for the taxable year for which he is required to include in gross income 
under section 951(a) an amount attributable to the earnings and profits 
of a controlled foreign corporation, and
    (2) Does not choose to claim a foreign tax credit as provided in 
section 901 for a taxable year in which he receives an amount which is 
excluded from gross income under section 959(a)(1) and which is 
attributable to such earnings and profits of such controlled foreign 
corporation,

No deduction shall be allowed under section 164 for the taxable year of 
such exclusion for any foreign income taxes paid or accrued on or with 
respect to such excluded amount.
    (b) Illustration. The application of this section may be illustrated 
by the following example:

    Example. Domestic Corporation N owns all the one class of stock of 
controlled foreign corporation A. Both corporations use the calendar 
year as the taxable year. All of A Corporation's earnings and profits of 
$80 for 1978 (after payment of foreign income taxes of $20 on its total 
income of $100 for such year) are attributable to amount required under 
section 951(a) to be included in N Corporation's gross income for 1978. 
For 1978, N Corporation chooses to claim a foreign tax credit for the 
$20 of foreign income taxes which for such year are paid by A 
Corporation and deemed paid by N Corporation under section 960(a)(1) and 
paragraph (c)(1) of Sec. 1.960-1. For 1979, A Corporation distributes 
the entire $80 of 1978 earnings and profits, a foreign income tax of $8 
being withheld therefrom. Although N Corporation does not choose to 
claim a foreign tax credit for 1979, it may not deduct such $8 of 
foreign income taxes under section 164. Corporation N may, however, 
deduct under such section a foreign income tax of $4 which is withheld 
from a distribution of $40 by A Corporation during 1979 from its 1979 
earnings and profits.

[T.D. 7120, 36 FR 10859, June 4, 1971, as amended by T.D. 7649, 44 FR 
60089, Oct. 18, 1979]


<R05>
Sec. 1.960-6   Overpayments resulting from increase in limitation for taxable year of exclusion.

    (a) Amount of overpayment. If an increase in the limitation under 
section 960(b)(1) and Sec. 1.960-4 for a taxable year of exclusion 
exceeds the tax (determined before allowance of any credits against tax) 
imposed by chapter 1 of the Code for such year, the amount of such 
excess shall be deemed an overpayment of tax for such year and shall be 
refunded or credited to the taxpayer in accordance with chapter 65 
(section 6401 and following) of the Code.
    (b) Illustration. The application of this section may be illustrated 
by the following example:

    Example. Domestic corporation N owns all the one class of stock of 
controlled foreign corporation A. Both corporations use the calendar 
year as the taxable year. For 1978, A Corporation has total income of 
$100,000 on which it pays foreign income taxes of $20,000. All of A 
Corporation's earnings and profits for 1978 of $80,000 are attributable 
to an amount which is required under section 951(a) to be included in N 
Corporation's gross income for 1978. By reason of such income inclusion 
N Corporation is deemed for 1978 to have paid under section 960(a)(1), 
and is required under section 78 to include in gross income for such 
year, the $20,000

[[Page 415]]

($20,000 x $80,000/$80,000) of foreign income taxes paid by A 
Corporation for such year. Corporation N also derives $100,000 taxable 
income from sources within the United States for 1978. For 1979, N 
Corporation has $25,000 of taxable income, all of which is derived from 
sources within the United States. No part of A Corporation's earnings 
and profits for 1979 is attributable to an amount required under section 
951(a) to be included in N Corporation's gross income. During 1979, A 
Corporation makes one distribution consisting of its $80,000 earnings 
and profits for 1978, all of which is excluded under section 959(a)(1) 
from N Corporation's gross income for 1979, and from which distribution 
foreign income taxes of $10,000 are withheld. For 1978 and 1979, N 
Corporation claims the foreign tax credit under section 901, determined 
by applying the overall limitation under section 904(a)(2). The United 
States tax of N Corporation is determined as follows for such years, 
assuming a corporate tax rate of 22 percent, a surtax of 26 percent and 
a surtax exemption of $25,000:

                                  1978                                  
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
Taxable income of N Corporation:                                        
  U.S. sources.............................................     $100,000
  Sources without the U.S.:                                             
    Amount required to be included in N                                 
     Corporation's gross income under section                           
     951(a)...................................      $80,000             
    Foreign income taxes deemed paid by N                               
     Corporation under section 960(a)(1) and                            
     included in N Corporation's gross income                           
     under section 78 ($20,000 x $80,000/                               
     $80,000).................................       20,000      100,000
                                               -------------------------
      Total taxable income....................  ...........      200,000
                                                            ============
U.S. tax payable for 1978:                                              
  U.S. tax before credit ([$200,000 x  0.22]+[$175,000 x                
   0.26])..................................................       89,500
  Credit: Foreign income taxes of $20,000, but not to                   
   exceed overall limitation of $44,750 ($89,500 x $100,000/            
   $200,000)...............................................       20,000
                                               --------------           
  U.S. tax payable.........................................       69,500
                                               ==============           
                                                                        


                                  1979                                  
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
Taxable income of N Corporation, consisting of income from              
 U.S. sources..............................................      $25,000
U.S. tax before credit ($25,000 x 0.22)....................        5,500
Section 904(a)(2) overall limitation for 1979:                          
  Limitation for 1979 before increase under section                     
   960(b)(1) ($5,500 x $0/$25,000).........................            0
  Plus: Increase in overall limitation for                              
   1979 under section 960(b)(1):                                        
    Amount by which 1978 overall limitation                             
     was increased by reason of inclusion in N                          
     Corporation's gross income under section                           
     951(a) for 1978 ($44,750 - [$41,500  x                             
     $0/$100,000])............................      $44,750             
    Less: Foreign income taxes allowed as a                             
     credit for 1978 which were allowable                               
     solely by reason of such section 951(a)                            
     inclusion ($20,000-$0)...................       20,000             
                                               -------------            
      Balance.................................       24,750             
    But: Such balance not to exceed foreign                             
     income taxes paid by N Corporation for                             
     1979 with respect to $80,000 distribution                          
     excluded under section 959(a)(1) ($10,000                          
     tax withheld)............................       10,000       10,000
                                               -------------------------
  Overall limitation for 1979..............................       10,000
                                               ==============           
U.S. tax payable for 1979:                                              
  U.S. tax before credit ($25,000 x 0.22)..................        5,500
  Credit: Foreign income taxes of $10,000, but not to                   
   exceed overall limitation of $10,000 for 1979...........       10,000
                                               --------------           
  U.S. tax payable.........................................         None
                                               ==============           
Overpayment of tax for 1979:                                            
  Increase in limitation under section 960(b)(1) for 1979..       10,000
  Less: Tax imposed for 1979 under chapter 1 of the Code...        5,500
                                               --------------           
  Excess treated as overpayment............................        4,500
                                                                        

[T.D. 7120, 36 FR 10859, June 4, 1971, as amended by T.D. 7649, 44 FR 
60089, Oct. 18, 1979]


<R05>
Sec. 1.960-7  Effective dates.

    (a) General rule. Except as provided in paragraph (b), the rules 
contained in Secs. 1.960-1--1.960-6 shall apply to taxable years of 
foreign corporations beginning after December 31, 1962, and taxable 
years of U.S. corporate shareholders within which or with which the 
taxable year of such foreign corporation ends.
    (b) Exception for less developed country corporations. If for any 
taxable year beginning after December 31, 1962, and before January 1, 
1976, a first-tier foreign corporation qualified as a less developed 
country corporation as defined in

[[Page 416]]

26 CFR 1.902-2 revised as of April 1, 1978, the rules pertaining to less 
developed country corporations contained in 26 CFR 1.960-1--1.960-6 
revised as of April 1, 1978, shall apply to any amounts required to be 
included in gross income under section 951 for such taxable year.
    (c) Third-tier credit. The rules contained in Secs. 1.960-1--1.960-6 
shall apply to amounts included in the gross income of a domestic 
corporation under section 951 with respect to the earnings and profits 
of third-tier corporations (as defined in Sec. 1.960-1) in taxable years 
beginning after December 31, 1976.

[T.D. 7649, 44 FR 60089, Oct. 18, 1979, as amended by T.D. 7843, 47 FR 
50484, Nov. 8, 1982]


<R05>
Sec. 1.961-1   Increase in basis of stock in controlled foreign corporations and of other property.

    (a) Increase in basis--(1) In general. Except as provided in 
subparagraph (2) of this paragraph, the basis of a United States 
shareholder's--
    (i) Stock in a controlled foreign corporation; or
    (ii) Property (as defined in paragraph (b)(1) of this section) by 
reason of the ownership of which he is considered under section 
958(a)(2) as owning stock in a controlled foreign corporation shall be 
increased under section 961(a), as of the last day in the taxable year 
of such corporation on which it is a controlled foreign corporation, by 
the amount required to be included with respect to such stock or such 
property in such shareholder's gross income under section 951(a) for his 
taxable year in which or with which such taxable year of such 
corporation ends. The increase in basis provided by the preceding 
sentence shall be made only to the extent to which such amount required 
to be included in gross income under section 951(a) was so included in 
gross income.
    (2) Limitation on amount of increase in case of election under 
section 962. In the case of a United States shareholder who makes the 
election under section 962 for the taxable year, the amount of the 
increase in basis provided by subparagraph (1) of this paragraph shall 
not exceed the amount of United States tax paid in accordance with such 
election with respect to the amounts included in such shareholder's 
gross income under section 951(a) for such year (as determined under 
Sec. 1.962-1).
    (b) Rules of application--(1) Property defined. The property of a 
United States shareholder referred to in paragraph (a)(1)(ii) of this 
section shall consist of--
    (i) Stock in a foreign corporation;
    (ii) An interest in a foreign partnership; or
    (iii) A beneficial interest in a foreign estate or trust (as defined 
in section 7701(a)(31)).
    (2) Increase with respect to each share of stock. Any increase under 
paragraph (a) of this section in the basis of a United States 
shareholder's stock in a foreign corporation shall be made in the amount 
included in gross income under section 951(a) or in the amount of United 
States tax paid in accordance with an election under section 962, as the 
case may be, with respect to each share of such stock.
    (c) Illustration. The application of this section may be illustrated 
by the following examples:

    Example 1. Domestic corporation M owns 800 of the 1,000 shares of 
the one class of stock in controlled foreign corporation R which owns 
all of the one class of stock in controlled foreign corporation S. 
Corporations M, R, and S use the calendar year as a taxable year. In 
1964, S Corporation has $100,000 of earnings and profits after the 
payment of $11,250 of foreign income taxes, and $100,000 of subpart F 
income. Corporation R has no earnings and profits. With respect to S 
Corporation, M Corporation is required to include in gross income 
$80,000 (800/1,000 x $100,000) under section 951(a), and $9,000 
($80,000/$100,000 x $11,250) under section 78. On December 31, 1964, M 
Corporation must increase the basis of each share of its stock in R 
Corporation by $100 ($80,000/800).
    Example 2. A, an individual United States shareholder, owns all of 
the 1,000 shares of the one class of stock in controlled foreign 
corporation T. Corporation T and A use the calendar year as a taxable 
year. In 1964, T Corporation has $80,000 of earnings and profits after 
the payment of $20,000 of foreign income taxes, and $80,000 of subpart F 
income. A makes the election under section 962 for 1964 and in 
accordance with such election pays a United States tax of $23,000 with 
respect to the $80,000 included in his gross income under section 
951(a). On December 31, 1964, A must increase the basis of each share

[[Page 417]]

of his stock in T Corporation by $23 ($23,000/1,000).

[T.D. 6850, 30 FR 11854, Sept. 16, 1978]


<R05>
Sec. 1.961-2   Reduction in basis of stock in foreign corporations and of other property.

    (a) Reduction in basis--(1) In general. Except as provided in 
subparagraph (2) of this paragraph, the adjusted basis of a United 
States person's--
    (i) Stock in a foreign corporation;
    (ii) Interest in a foreign partnership; or
    (iii) Beneficial interest in a foreign estate or trust (as defined 
in section 7701(a)(31)),

with respect to which such United States person receives an amount which 
is excluded from gross income under section 959(a), shall be reduced 
under section 961(b), as of the time such person receives such excluded 
amount, by the sum of the amount so excluded and any income, war 
profits, or excess profits taxes imposed by any foreign country or 
possession of the United States on or with respect to the earnings and 
profits attributable to such excluded amount when such earnings and 
profits were actually distributed directly or indirectly through a chain 
of ownership described in section 958(a)(2).
    (2) Limitation on amount of reduction in case of election under 
section 962. In the case of a distribution of earnings and profits 
attributable to amounts with respect to which an election under section 
962 has been made, the amount of the reduction in basis provided by 
subparagraph (1) of this paragraph shall not exceed the sum of--
    (i) The amount of such distribution which is excluded from gross 
income under section 959(a) after the application of section 962(d) and 
Sec. 1.962-3; and
    (ii) Any income, war profits, or excess profits taxes imposed by any 
foreign country or possession of the United States on or with respect to 
the earnings and profits attributable to such excluded amount when such 
earnings and profits were actually distributed directly or indirectly 
through a chain of ownership described in section 958(a)(2).
    (b) Reduction with respect to each share of stock. Any reduction 
under paragraph (a) of this section in the adjusted basis of a United 
States person's stock in a foreign corporation shall be made with 
respect to each share of such stock in the sum of--
    (1)(i) The amount excluded from gross income under section 959(a); 
or
    (ii) The amount excluded from gross income under section 959(a) 
after the application of section 962(d) and Sec. 1.962-3; and
    (2) The amount of any income, war profits, or excess profits taxes 
imposed by any foreign country or possession of the United States on or 
with respect to the earnings and profits attributable to such excluded 
amount when such earnings and profits were actually distributed directly 
or indirectly through a chain of ownership described in section 
958(a)(2).
    (c) Amount in excess of basis. To the extent that the amount of the 
reduction in the adjusted basis of property provided by paragraph (a) of 
this section exceeds such adjusted basis, the amount shall be treated as 
gain from the sale or exchange of property.
    (d) Illustration. The application of this section may be illustrated 
by the following examples:

    Example 1. (a) Domestic corporation M owns all of the 1,000 shares 
of the one class of stock in controlled foreign corporation R, which 
owns all of the 500 shares of the one class of stock in controlled 
foreign corporation S. Each share of M Corporation's stock in R 
Corporation has a basis of $200. Corporations M, R, and S use the 
calendar year as a taxable year. In 1963, S Corporation has $100,000 of 
earnings and profits after the payment of $50,000 of foreign income 
taxes and $100,000 of subpart F income. For 1963, M Corporation includes 
$100,000 in gross income under section 951(a) with respect to S 
Corporation. In accordance with the provisions of Sec. 1.961-1, M 
Corporation increases the basis of each of its 1,000 shares of stock in 
R Corporation to $300 ($200+$100,000/1,000) as of December 31, 1963.
    (b) On July 31, 1964, M Corporation sells 250 of its shares of stock 
in R Corporation to domestic corporation N at a price of $350 per share. 
Corporation N satisfies the requirements of paragraph (d) of Sec. 1.959-
1 so as to qualify as M Corporation's successor in interest. On 
September 30, 1964, the earnings and profits attributable to the 
$100,000 included in M Corporation's gross income under section 951(a) 
for 1963 are distributed to R Corporation which incurs a withholding tax 
of $10,000 on such distribution (10 percent

[[Page 418]]

of $100,000) and an additional foreign income tax of 33\1/3\ percent or 
$30,000 by reason of the inclusion of the net distribution of $90,000 
($100,000 minus $10,000) in its taxable income for 1964. On June 30, 
1965, R Corporation distributes the remaining $60,000 of such earnings 
and profits to corporations M and N: Corporation M receives $45,000 
(750/1,000 x $60,000) and excludes such amount from gross income under 
section 959(a); Corporation N receives $15,000 (250/1,000 x $60,000) 
and, as M Corporation's successor in interest, excludes such amount from 
gross income under section 959(a). As of June 30, 1965, M Corporation 
must reduce the adjusted basis of each of its 750 shares of stock in R 
Corporation to $200 ($300 minus ($45,000/750+$10,000/1,000+$30,000/
1,000)); and N Corporation must reduce the basis of each of its 250 
shares of stock in R Corporation to $250 ($350 minus ($15,000/
250+$10,000/1,000+$30,000/1,000)).
    Example 2. The facts are the same as in paragraph (a) of example 1, 
except that in addition, on July 31, 1964, R Corporation sells its 500 
shares of stock in S Corporation to domestic corporation P at a price of 
$600 per share. Corporation P satisfies the requirements of paragraph 
(d) of Sec. 1.959-1 so as to qualify as M Corporation's successor in 
interest. On September 30, 1964, S Corporation distributes $100,000 of 
earnings and profits to P Corporation, which earnings and profits are 
attributable to the $100,000 included in M Corporation's gross income 
under section 951(a) for 1963. Corporation P incurs a withholding tax of 
$10,000 on the distribution from S Corporation (10 percent of $100,000). 
As M Corporation's successor in interest, P Corporation excludes the 
$90,000 it receives from gross income under section 959(a). As of 
September 30, 1964, P Corporation must reduce the basis of each of its 
500 shares of stock in S Corporation to $400 ($600 minus ($90,000/
500+$10,000/500)).

[T.D. 6850, 30 FR 11854, Sept. 16, 1965]


<R05>
Sec. 1.962-1   Limitation of tax for individuals on amounts included in gross income under section 951(a).

    (a) In general. An individual United States shareholder may, in 
accordance with Sec. 1.962-2, elect to have the provisions of section 
962 apply for his taxable year. In such case--
    (1) The tax imposed under chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code on 
all amounts which are included in his gross income for such taxable year 
under section 951(a) shall (in lieu of the tax determined under section 
1) be an amount equal to the tax which would be imposed under section 11 
if such amounts were received by a domestic corporation (determined in 
accordance with paragraph (b)(1) of this section), and
    (2) For purposes of applying section 960(a)(1) (relating to foreign 
tax credit) such amounts shall be treated as if received by a domestic 
corporation (as provided in paragraph (b)(2) of this section).

Thus, an individual United States shareholder may elect to be subject to 
tax at corporate rates on amounts included in his gross income under 
section 951(a) and to have the benefit of a credit for certain foreign 
taxes paid with respect to the earnings and profits attributable to such 
amounts. Section 962 also provides rules for the treatment of an actual 
distribution of earnings and profits previously taxed in accordance with 
an election of the benefits of this section. See Sec. 1.962-3. For 
transitional rules for certain taxable years, see Sec. 1.962-4.
    (b) Rules of application. For purposes of this section--
    (1) Application of section 11. For purposes of applying section 11 
for a taxable year as provided in paragraph (a)(1) of this section in 
the case of an electing United States shareholder--
    (i) Determination of taxable income. The term ``taxable income'' as 
used in section 11 shall mean the sum of--
    (a) All amounts required to be included in his gross income under 
section 951(a) for such taxable year; plus
    (b) All amounts which would be required to be included in his gross 
income under section 78 for such taxable year with respect to the 
amounts referred to in (a) of this subdivision if such shareholder were 
a domestic corporation.

For purposes of this section, such sum shall not be reduced by any 
deduction of the United States shareholder even if such shareholder's 
deductions exceed his gross income.
    (ii) Limitation on surtax exemption. The surtax exemption provided 
by section 11(c) shall not exceed an amount which bears the same ratio 
to $25,000 ($50,000 in the case of a taxable year ending after December 
31, 1974, and before January 1, 1976) as the amounts included in his 
gross income under section 951(a) for the taxable year bear to his pro 
rata share of the earnings and

[[Page 419]]

profits for the taxable year of all controlled foreign corporations with 
respect to which such United States shareholder includes any amount in 
his gross income under section 951(a) for the taxable year.
    (2) Allowance of foreign tax credit--(i) In general. Subject to the 
applicable limitation of section 904 and to the provisions of this 
subparagraph, there shall be allowed as a credit against the United 
States tax on the amounts described in subparagraph (1)(i) of this 
paragraph the foreign income, war profits, and excess profits taxes 
deemed paid under section 960(a)(1) by the electing United States 
shareholder with respect to such amounts.
    (ii) Application of section 960(a)(1). In applying section 960(a)(1) 
for purposes of this subparagraph in the case of an electing United 
States shareholder, the term ``domestic corporation'' as used in 
sections 960(a)(1) and 78, and the term ``corporation'' as used in 
section 901, shall be treated as referring to such shareholder with 
respect to the amounts described in subparagraph (1)(i) of this 
paragraph.
    (iii) Carryback and carryover of excess tax deemed paid. For 
purposes of this subparagraph, any amount by which the foreign income, 
war profits, and excess profits taxes deemed paid by the electing United 
States shareholder for any taxable year under section 960(a)(1) exceed 
the limitation determined under subdivision (iv)(a) of this subparagraph 
shall be treated as a carryback and carryover of excess tax paid under 
section 904(d), except that in no case shall excess tax paid be deemed 
paid in a taxable year if an election under section 962 by such 
shareholder does not apply for such taxable year. Such carrybacks and 
carryovers shall be applied only against the United States tax on 
amounts described in subparagraph (1)(i) of this paragraph.
    (iv) Limitation on credit. For purposes of determining the 
limitation under section 904 on the amount of the credit for foreign 
income, war profits, and excess profits taxes--
    (a) Deemed paid with respect to amounts described in subparagraph 
(1)(i) of this paragraph, the electing United States shareholder's 
taxable income shall be considered to consist only of the amounts 
described in such subparagraph (1)(i), and
    (b) Paid with respect to amounts other than amounts described in 
subparagraph (1)(i) of this paragraph, the electing United States 
shareholder's taxable income shall be considered to consist only of 
amounts other than the amounts described in such subparagraph (1)(i).
    (v) Effect of choosing benefits of sections 901 to 905. The 
provisions of this subparagraph shall apply for a taxable year whether 
or not the electing United States shareholder chooses the benefits of 
subpart A of part III of subchapter N of chapter 1 (sections 901 to 905) 
of the Internal Revenue Code for such year.
    (c) Illustration. The application of this section may be illustrated 
by the following example:

    Example. Throughout his taxable year ending December 31, 1964, A, an 
unmarried individual who is not the head of a household, owns 60 of the 
100 shares of the one class of stock in foreign corporation M and 80 of 
the 100 shares of the one class of stock in foreign corporation N. A and 
corporations M and N use the calendar year as a taxable year, 
corporations M and N are controlled foreign corporations throughout the 
period here involved, and neither corporation is a less developed 
country corporation. The earnings and profits and subpart F income of, 
and the foreign income taxes paid by, such corporations for 1964 are as 
follows:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                       M           N    
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Pretax earnings and profits.....................    $500,000  $1,200,000
Foreign income taxes............................     200,000     400,000
Earnings and profits............................     300,000     800,000
Subpart F income................................     150,000     750,000
------------------------------------------------------------------------

Apart from his section 951(a) income, A has gross income of $200,600 and 
$100,000 of deductions attributable to such income. He is required to 
include $90,000 (0.60 x $150,000) in gross income under section 951(a) 
with respect to M Corporation and $600,000 (0.80 x $750,000) with 
respect to N Corporation. A elects to have the provisions of section 962 
apply for 1964 and computes his tax as follows:

                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
Tax on amounts                                                                                                  
 included under                                                                                                 
 section                                                                                                        
 951(a):                                                                                                        
  Income under                                                                                                  
   section                                                                                                      
   951(a) from                                                                                                  
   M                                                                                                            
   Corporation.  $90,000..........................................                                              

[[Page 420]]

                                                                                                                
  Gross-up                                                                                                      
   under                                                                                                        
   sections                                                                                                     
   960(a)(1)                                                                                                    
   and 78                                                                                                       
   ($90,000/                                                                                                    
   $300,000 x $                                                                                                 
   200,000)....  60,000...........................................                                              
  Income under                                                                                                  
   section                                                                                                      
   951(a) from                                                                                                  
   N                                                                                                            
   Corporation.  600,000..........................................                                              
  Gross-up                                                                                                      
   under                                                                                                        
   sections                                                                                                     
   960(a)(1)                                                                                                    
   and 78                                                                                                       
   ($600,000/                                                                                                   
   $800,000 x $                                                                                                 
   400,000)....  300,000..........................................                                              
                ---------------------------------------------------                                             
  Taxable                                                                                                       
   income under                                                                                                 
   section 11..  1,050,000 .......................................                                              
  Normal tax (0.22 x $1,050,000)..................................       $231,000                               
  Surtax                                                                                                        
   exemption                                                                                                    
   ([$90,000+$6                                                                                                 
   00,000]/                                                                                                     
   [0.60 x $300                                                                                                 
   ,000+(0.80 x                                                                                                 
    $800,000)]                                                                                                  
   x$25,000)...  21,036...........................................                                              
  Subject to                                                                                                    
   surtax under                                                                                                 
   section 11                                                                                                   
   ($1,050,000-                                                                                                 
   $21,036)....  1,028,964 .......................................                                              
  Surtax (0.28 x $1,028,964)......................................         288,110                              
                ---------------------------------------------------                                             
  Tentative U.S. tax..............................................        519,110                               
  Foreign tax                                                                                                   
   credit                                                                                                       
   ($60,000+$30                                                                                                 
   0,000)......  360,000..........................................                                              
                ---------------------------------------------------                                             
    Total U.S. tax payable on amounts included under section 951(a)...............        $159,110              
Tax with                                                                                                        
 respect to                                                                                                     
 other income:                                                                                                  
  Gross income....................................................         200,600                              
  Less:                                                                                                         
    Personal                                                                                                    
     exemption.  600..............................................                                              
    Deductions.  100,000..........................................                                              
                ----------------------------------------------------                                            
                 100,600..........................................                                              
                                                                   ----------------                             
  Taxable income..................................................        100,000                               
  Tax with                                                                                                      
   respect to                                                                                                   
   such other                                                                                                   
   taxable                                                                                                      
   income......  .................................................          59,340                              
                                                                   -----------------                            
    Total tax ($159,110+$59,340)..................................................         218,450              
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

[T.D. 6858, 30 FR 13695, Oct. 28, 1965, as amended by T.D. 7413, 41 FR 
12640, Mar. 26, 1976]


<R05>
Sec. 1.962-2   Election of limitation of tax for individuals.

    (a) Who may elect. The election under section 962 may be made only 
by a United States shareholder who is an individual (including a trust 
or estate).
    (b) Time and manner of making election. Except as provided in 
Sec. 1.962-4, a United States shareholder shall make an election under 
this section by filing a statement to such effect with his return for 
the taxable year with respect to which the election is made. The 
statement shall include the following information:
    (1) The name, address, and taxable year of each controlled foreign 
corporation with respect to which the electing shareholder is a United 
States shareholder and of all other corporations, partnerships, trusts, 
or estates in any applicable chain of ownership described in section 
958(a);
    (2) The amounts, on a corporation-by-corporation basis, which are 
included in such shareholder's gross income for his taxable year under 
section 951(a);
    (3) Such shareholder's pro rata share of the earnings and profits 
(determined under Sec. 1.964-1) of each such controlled foreign 
corporation with respect to which such shareholder includes any amount 
in gross income for his taxable year under section 951(a) and the 
foreign income, war profits, excess profits, and similar taxes paid on 
or with respect to such earnings and profits;
    (4) The amount of distributions received by such shareholder during 
his taxable year from each controlled foreign corporation referred to in 
subparagraph (1) of this paragraph from excludable section 962 earnings 
and profits (as defined in paragraph (b)(1)(i) of Sec. 1.962-3), from 
taxable section 962 earnings and profits (as defined in paragraph 
(b)(1)(ii) of Sec. 1.962-3), and from earnings and profits other than 
section 962 earnings and profits, showing the source of such amounts by 
taxable year; and
    (5) Such further information as the Commissioner may prescribe by 
forms and accompanying instructions relating to such election.
    (c) Effect of election--(1) In general. Except as provided in 
subparagraph (2) of this paragraph and Sec. 1.962-4, an election under 
this section by a United States shareholder for a taxable year shall be 
applicable to all controlled foreign corporations with respect to which 
such shareholder includes any amount in gross income for his taxable 
year under section 951(a) and shall be

[[Page 421]]

binding for the taxable year for which such election is made.
    (2) Revocation. Upon application by the United States shareholder, 
an election made under this section may, subject to the approval of the 
Commissioner, be revoked. Approval will not be granted unless a material 
and substantial change in circumstances occurs which could not have been 
anticipated when the election was made. The application for consent to 
revocation shall be made by the United States shareholder's mailing a 
letter for such purpose to Commissioner of Internal Revenue, Attention: 
T:R, Washington, DC 20224, containing a statement of the facts upon 
which such shareholder relies in requesting such consent.

[T.D. 6858, 30 FR 13696, Oct. 28, 1965]


<R05>
Sec. 1.962-3  Treatment of actual distributions.

    (a) In general. Section 962(d) provides that the earnings and 
profits of a foreign corporation attributable to amounts which are, or 
have been, included in the gross income of an individual United States 
shareholder under section 951(a) by reason of such shareholder's 
ownership (within the meaning of section 958(a)) of stock in such 
corporation and with respect to which amounts an election under 
Sec. 1.962-2 applies or applied shall, when such earnings and profits 
are distributed to such shareholder with respect to such stock, 
notwithstanding the provisions of section 959(a)(1), be included in his 
gross income to the extent that such earnings and profits exceed the 
amount of income tax paid by such shareholder under this chapter on the 
amounts to which such election applies or applied. Thus, when such 
shareholder receives an actual distribution of section 962 earnings and 
profits (as defined in paragraph (b)(1) of this section) from a foreign 
corporation, only the excludable section 962 earnings and profits (as 
defined in paragraph (b)(1)(i) of this section) may be excluded from his 
gross income.
    (b) Rules of application. For purposes of this section--
    (1) Section 962 earnings and profits defined. With respect to an 
individual United States shareholder, the term ``section 962 earnings 
and profits'' means the earnings and profits of a foreign corporation 
referred to in paragraph (a) of this section. Such earnings and profits 
include--
    (i) Excludable section 962 earnings and profits. Excludable section 
962 earnings and profits which are the amount of the section 962 
earnings and profits equal to the amount of income tax paid under this 
chapter by such shareholder on the amounts included in his gross income 
under section 951(a); and
    (ii) Taxable section 962 earnings and profits. Taxable section 962 
earnings and profits which are the excess of section 962 earnings and 
profits over the amount described in subdivision (i) of this 
subparagraph.
    (2) Determinations made separately for each taxable year. If section 
962 earnings and profits attributable to more than one taxable year are 
distributed by a foreign corporation the determinations under this 
section shall be made separately with respect to each such taxable year.
    (3) Source of distributions--(i) In general. Except as otherwise 
provided in this subparagraph, the provisions of paragraphs (a) through 
(d) of Sec. 1.959-3 shall apply in determining the source of 
distributions of earnings and profits by a foreign corporation.
    (ii) Treatment of section 962 earnings and profits under Sec. 1.959-
3. For purposes of a section 959(c) amount and year classification under 
paragraph (b) of Sec. 1.959-3, a distribution of earnings and profits by 
a foreign corporation shall be first allocated to earnings and profits 
other than section 962 earnings and profits (as defined in subparagraph 
(1) of this paragraph) and then to section 962 earnings and profits. 
Thus distributions shall be considered first attributable to amounts 
described in paragraph (b)(1) of Sec. 1.959-3 which are not section 962 
earnings and profits and then to amounts described in such paragraph 
(b)(1) which are section 962 earnings and profits (first for the current 
taxable year and then for prior taxable years beginning with the most 
recent prior taxable year), secondly to amounts described in paragraph 
(b)(2) of Sec. 1.959-3 which are not section 962 earnings and profits 
and then to amounts described in such paragraph (b)(2) which are section 
962 earnings

[[Page 422]]

and profits (first for the current taxable year and then for prior 
taxable years beginning with the most recent prior taxable year), and 
finally to the amounts described in paragraph (b)(3) of Sec. 1.959-3 
(first for the current taxable year and then for prior taxable years 
beginning with the most recent prior taxable year).
    (iii) Allocation to excludable section 962 earnings and profits. A 
distribution of section 962 earnings and profits by a foreign 
corporation for any taxable year shall be considered first attributable 
to the excludable section 962 earnings and profits (as defined in 
subparagraph (1)(i) of this paragraph) and then to taxable section 962 
earnings and profits.
    (iv) Allocation of deficits in earnings and profits. A United States 
shareholder's pro rata share (determined in accordance with the 
principles of paragraph (e) of Sec. 1.951-1) of a foreign corporation's 
deficit in earnings and profits (determined under Sec. 1.964-1) for any 
taxable year shall be applied in accordance with the provisions of 
paragraph (c) of Sec. 1.959-3 except that such deficit shall also be 
applied to taxable section 962 earnings and profits (as defined in 
subparagraph (1)(ii) of this paragraph).
    (4) Distribution in exchange for stock. The provisions of this 
section shall not apply to a distribution of section 962 earnings and 
profits which is treated as in part or full payment in exchange for 
stock under subchapter C of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code. The 
application of this subparagraph may be illustrated by the following 
example:

    Example. Individual United States shareholder A owns 60 percent of 
the only class of stock in foreign corporation M, the basis of which is 
$10,000. Both A and M Corporation use the calendar year as a taxable 
year. In each of the taxable years 1964, 1965, and 1966, M Corporation 
has $1,000 of earnings and profits and $1,000 of subpart F income. With 
respect to each such amount, A includes $600 in gross income under 
section 951(a), makes the election under section 962, and pays a United 
States tax of $132 (22 percent of $600). Accordingly, A increases the 
basis of his stock in M corporation under section 961(a) by $132 in each 
of the years 1964, 1965, and 1966, and thus on December 31, 1966, the 
adjusted basis for A's stock in M Corporation is $10,396. In 1967, M 
Corporation is completely liquidated (in a transaction described in 
section 331) and A receives $13,800, consisting of $1,800 of earnings 
and profits attributable to the amounts which A included in gross income 
under section 951(a) in 1964, 1965, and 1966, and $12,000 attributable 
to the other assets of M Corporation. No amount of the $3,404 gain 
realized by A on such distribution ($13,800 minus $10,396) may be 
excluded from gross income under section 959(a)(1). However, section 
962(d) will not prevent any part of such $3,404 from being treated as a 
capital gain under section 331.

    (5) Illustration. The application of this paragraph may be 
illustrated by the following example:

    Example. (a) M, a controlled foreign corporation is organized on 
January 1, 1963; A and B, individual United States shareholders, own 50 
percent and 25 percent, respectively, of the only class of stock in M 
Corporation. Corporation M, A, and B use the calendar year as a taxable 
year, and M Corporation is a controlled foreign corporation throughout 
the period here involved. For the taxable years 1963, 1964, 1965, and 
1966, A and B must include amounts in gross income under section 951(a) 
with respect to M Corporation. For the years 1963, 1965, and 1966, A 
makes the election under section 962. On January 1, 1967, B sells his 
25-percent interest in M Corporation to A; A satisfies the requirements 
of paragraph (d) of Sec. 1.959-1 so as to qualify as B's successor in 
interest. As of December 31, 1967, M Corporation's accumulated earnings 
and profits of $675 (before taking into account distributions made in 
1967) applicable to A's interest (including his interest as B's 
successor in interest) in such corporation are classified under 
Sec. 1.959-3 and this section for purposes of section 962(d) as follows:

                      Classification of Earnings and Profits for Purposes of Sec.  1.962-3                      
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                           Section 959(c)(1)                 Section 959(c)(2)                  
                                  --------------------------------------------------------------------          
                                      Non-    Excludable   Taxable      Non-    Excludable   Taxable            
                                    section     section    section    section     section    section    Section 
               Year                   962         962        962,       962         962        962        959   
                                    earnings   earnings    earnings   earnings   earnings    earnings    (c)(3) 
                                      and         and        and        and         and        and              
                                    profits     profits    profits    profits     profits    profits            
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1963.............................        $25         $11        $39  .........  ..........  .........  .........
1964.............................         75  ..........  .........        $60  ..........  .........        $15
1965.............................  .........  ..........  .........         75         $33       $117  .........

[[Page 423]]

                                                                                                                
1966.............................  .........  ..........  .........         50          22         78  .........
1967.............................  .........  ..........  .........  .........  ..........  .........         75
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (b) During 1967, M Corporation makes three separate distributions to 
A of $200, $208, and $267. The source of such distributions under 
Sec. 1.959-3 and this section is as follows:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                      Classification of 
                                                     distributions under
           Distribution             Amount    Year     sections 959 and 
                                                            962(d)      
------------------------------------------------------------------------
No. 1............................       $75    1964  (c)(1) non-section 
                                         25    1963   962.              
                                         11    1963      Do.            
                                         39    1963  (c)(1) excludable  
                                         50    1966   section 962.      
                                                     (c)(1) taxable     
                                                      section 962.      
                                                     (c)(2) non-section 
                                                      962.              
                                  ----------                            
  Total..........................       200                             
------------------------------------------------------------------------
No. 2............................        22    1966  (c)(2) excludable  
                                         78    1966   section 962       
                                         75    1965  (c)(2) taxable     
                                         33    1965   section 962.      
                                                     (c)(2) non-section 
                                                      962.              
                                                     (c)(2) excludable  
                                                      section 962.      
                                                                        
  Total..........................       208                             
------------------------------------------------------------------------
No. 3............................       117    1965  (c)(2) taxable     
                                         60    1964   section 962.      
                                         75    1967  (c)(2) non-section 
                                         15    1964   962.              
                                                     (c)(3).            
                                                         Do.            
                                  ----------                            
  Total..........................       267                             
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (c) A must include $324 in his gross income for 1967. The source of 
these amounts is as follows:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
           Distribution             Amount    Year      Classification  
------------------------------------------------------------------------
No. 1............................       $39    1963  (c)(1) taxable     
                                                      section 962.      
No. 2............................        78    1966  (c)(2) taxable     
                                                      section 962.      
No. 3............................       117    1965      Do.            
                                         75    1967  (c)(3).            
                                         15    1964      Do.            
                                  ----------                            
  Total..........................       324                             
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (c) Treatment of shareholder's successor in interest--(1) In 
general. If a United States person (as defined in Sec. 1.957-4) acquires 
from any person any portion of the interest in the foreign corporation 
of a United States shareholder referred to in this section, the rules of 
paragraphs (a) and (b) of this section shall apply to such acquiring 
person. However, no exclusion of section 962 earnings and profits under 
paragraph (a) of this section shall be allowed unless such acquiring 
person establishes to the satisfaction of the district director his 
right to such exclusion. The information to be furnished by the 
acquiring person to the district director with his return for the 
taxable year to support such exclusion shall include:
    (i) The name, address, and taxable year of the foreign corporation 
from which a distribution of section 962 earnings and profits is 
received and of all other corporations, partnerships, trusts, or estates 
in any applicable chain of ownership described in section 958(a);
    (ii) The name and address of the person from whom the stock interest 
was acquired;
    (iii) A description of the stock interest acquired and its relation, 
if any, to a chain of ownership described in section 958(a);
    (iv) The amount for which an exclusion under paragraph (a) of this 
section is claimed; and
    (v) Evidence showing that the section 962 earnings and profits for 
which an exclusion is claimed are attributable to amounts which were 
included in the gross income of a United States shareholder under 
section 951(a) subject to an election under Sec. 1.962-2, that such 
amounts were not previously excluded from the gross income of a United 
States person, and the identity of the United States shareholder 
including such amount.

The acquiring person shall also furnish to the district director such 
other information as may be required by the district director in support 
of the exclusion.
    (2) Taxes previously deemed paid by an individual United States 
shareholder. If a

[[Page 424]]

corporate successor in interest of an individual United States 
shareholder receives a distribution of section 962 earnings and profits, 
the income, war profits, and excess profits taxes paid to any foreign 
country or to any possession of the United States in connection with 
such earnings and profits shall not be taken into account for purposes 
of section 902, to the extent such taxes were deemed paid by such 
individual United States shareholder under paragraph (b)(2) of 
Sec. 1.962-1 and section 960(a)(1) for any prior taxable year.

[T.D. 6858, 30 FR 13696, Oct. 28, 1965]


<R05>
Sec. 1.962-4   Transitional rules for certain taxable years.

    (a) Extension of time for making or revoking election. Paragraphs 
(b) and (c) of this section provide additional rules with respect to 
making or revoking an election under section 962 which apply only to a 
taxable year of a United States shareholder for which the last day 
prescribed by law for filing his return (including any extensions of 
time under section 6081) occurs or occurred on or before January 31, 
1966.
    (b) Manner of making election not previously made. If a United 
States shareholder who has not previously made an election under section 
962 for any taxable year referred to in paragraph (a) of this section 
desires to make such an election, he may do so by filing his return or 
an amended return for such taxable year together with a statement 
setting forth the information required under paragraph (b) of 
Sec. 1.962-2. Such return or amended return and statement shall be filed 
on or before January 31, 1966.
    (c) Revocation of election previously made. If a United States 
shareholder who has made an election under section 962 on or before 
November 1, 1965, for any taxable year referred to in paragraph (a) of 
this section desires to revoke such election, he may do so by filing an 
amended return to which is attached a statement that the election 
previously made is revoked. Such amended return and statement shall be 
filed on or before January 31, 1966.

[T.D. 6858, 30 FR 13698, Oct. 28, 1965]


<R05>
Sec. 1.963-0  Repeal of section 963; effective dates.

    (a) Repeal of section 963. Except as provided in paragraphs (b) and 
(c) of this section, the provisions of section 963 and Secs. 1.963-1 
through 1.963-7 are repealed for taxable years of foreign corporations 
beginning after December 31, 1975, and for taxable years of United 
States shareholders (within the meaning of section 951(b), within which 
or with which such taxable years of such foreign corporations end.
    (b) Transitional rules for chain or group election--(1) In general. 
If a United States shareholder (within the meaning of section 951(b) 
makes either a chain election pursuant to Sec. 1.963-1(e) or a group 
election pursuant to Sec. 1.963-1(f) for a taxable year of such 
shareholder beginning after December 31, 1975, then a foreign 
corporation shall be includible in such election only if--
    (i) It has a taxable year beginning before January 1, 1976, which 
ends within such taxable year of the United States shareholder, and
    (ii) It is either--
    (A) A controlled foreign corporation or
    (B) A foreign corporation by reason of ownership of stock in which 
such shareholder indirectly owns (within the meaning of section 
958(a)(2)) stock in a controlled foreign corporation to which this 
subparagraph applies.
    (2) Series rule. If any foreign corporation in a series of foreign 
corporations is excluded by subparagraph (i) of this paragraph from a 
chain or group election of a United States shareholder for its taxable 
year, then any foreign corporation in which the United States 
shareholder owns stock indirectly by reason of ownership of stock in 
such excluded corporation shall also be excluded from such election to 
the extent of such indirect ownership regardless of when its taxable 
year begins.
    (3) Illustration. The application of this paragraph may be 
illustrated by the following example:

    Example. (a) M is a domestic corporation, A, B, D, and E are 
controlled foreign corporations, and C is a foreign corporation other 
than a controlled foreign corporation. All five foreign corporations, 
each have only one class of stock outstanding. M owns directly all of 
the stock of A, which in turn

[[Page 425]]

owns directly all of the stock of B, which in turn owns directly 60 
percent of the stock of D, which in turn owns directly all of the stock 
of E. M also owns directly 40 percent of the stock of C, which in turn 
owns directly the remaining 40 percent of the stock of D. M is a United 
States shareholder with respect to no other foreign corporation. M and B 
each use the calendar year as the taxable year. A, C, D, and E each use 
a fiscal year ending on November 30 as the taxable year. For calendar 
year 1976, M may make either a first-tier election with respect to A, a 
chain election with respect to C and D (to the extent of M's indirect 
16-percent stock interest in D by reason of its direct ownership of 40 
percent of the stock of C) or a group election with respect to A, C, D 
(to the extent of such 16-percent stock interest) and E (to the extent 
of M's indirect 16-percent stock interest in E).
    (b) M's indirect 100 percent stock interest in B will be excluded 
from any chain or group election made by M for calendar year 1976 since 
B is a controlled foreign corporation which does not have a taxable year 
beginning before January 1, 1976, which ends within the taxable year of 
M beginning after December 31, 1975, for which M has made either a chain 
or group election.
    (c) M's indirect 60 percent stock interest through A and B in D and 
E will be excluded from any chain or group election made by M for 
calendar year 1976 since such 60 percent interests are indirectly owned 
by M by reason of its indirect ownership of stock in B, which is a 
foreign corporation which does not have a taxable year beginning before 
January 1, 1976, which ends within the taxable year of M beginning after 
December 31, 1975, for which M has made either a chain or group 
election.
    (d) If C used the calendar year as its taxable year and was 
therefore excluded from a chain election made with respect to it and D, 
then D would also be excluded from such an election, since D would then 
be a foreign corporation in which M owns stock indirectly by reason of 
ownership of stock in C, which is excluded from such election.

    (c) Deficiency distributions. The rules relating to deficiency 
distributions under section 963(e)(2) and Sec. 1.963-6 shall continue to 
apply to a taxable year beginning after the effective date of the repeal 
of section 963 in which it is determined that a deficiency distribution 
must be made for an earlier taxable year for which a United States 
shareholder made an election to secure the exclusion under section 963 
but failed to receive a minimum distribution.
    (d) Special adjustments pursuant to section 963 to be taken into 
account for taxable years subsequent to the repeal of section 963. If a 
United States shareholder of a controlled foreign corporation elects to 
receive a minimum distribution under section 963 for a taxable year, 
section 963 and the regulations thereunder may require certain elections 
and adjustments to be made in subsequent taxable years. These elections 
and adjustments shall be taken into account for subsequent taxable years 
as if section 963 were still in effect and no election to receive a 
minimum distribution were made after the effective date of the repeal of 
section 963. Examples of these elections and special adjustments 
include, but are not limited to, the election which may be made pursuant 
to Sec. 1.963-3(g)(2), relating to the special extended distribution 
period, and the special adjustments to be made pursuant to Sec. 1.963-4, 
relating to the minimum overall tax burden test.

[T.D. 7545, 43 FR 19652, May 8, 1978]


<R05>
Sec. 1.963-1   Exclusion of subpart F income upon receipt of minimum distribution.

    (a) In general--(1) Purpose of section 963. Section 963 sets forth 
an exception to section 951(a)(1)(A)(i) by providing that a United 
States corporate shareholder may exclude from its gross income the 
subpart F income of a controlled foreign corporation if for the taxable 
year such shareholder elects such exclusion and, where necessary, 
receives a distribution of the earnings and profits of such foreign 
corporation sufficient to bring the aggregate U.S. and foreign income 
taxes on the pretax earnings and profits of that corporation to a 
percentage level approaching the U.S. tax rate for such year on the 
income of a domestic corporation. The election to secure an exclusion 
under section 963 may be made with respect to a ``single first-tier 
corporation'' or a ``chain'' or ``group'' of controlled foreign 
corporations. This section defines the terms ``single first-tier 
corporations,'' ``chains,'' ``group,'' and certain other terms and 
prescribes the manner in which such an election is to be made. Section 
1.963-2 describes the manner in which the amount of the

[[Page 426]]

minimum distribution for any taxable year is to be determined. Section 
1.963-3 specifies the distributions counting toward a minimum 
distribution. Section 1.963-4 sets forth the requirement with respect to 
a minimum distribution from a chain or group that the overall U.S. and 
foreign income tax must equal either 90 percent of the U.S. corporate 
tax rate applied against consolidated pretax and predistribution 
earnings and profits or, with the application of the special rules set 
forth in that section, the total U.S. and foreign income taxes which 
would have been incurred in respect of a pro rata minimum distribution 
from the chain or group. Section 1.963-5 provides special rules for 
applying section 963 in certain cases in which the rate of foreign 
income tax incurred by a foreign corporation varies with the amount of 
distributions it makes for the taxable year. Section 1.963-6 outlines 
the deficiency distribution procedure that may be followed if for 
reasonable cause a U.S. corporate shareholder fails to receive a 
complete minimum distribution for a taxable year for which it elects the 
exclusion under section 963. Section 1.963-7 provides transitional rules 
for the application of section 963 for certain taxable years of U.S. 
shareholders ending on or before the 90th day after September 30, 1964. 
Section 1.963-8 provides rules for the determination of the required 
minimum distribution during the period the Sec. surcharge imposed by 
section 51 is in effect.
    (2) Conditions for exclusion of subpart F income. To qualify for an 
exclusion under section 963 for any taxable year with respect to the 
subpart F income of a controlled foreign corporation, a corporate United 
States shareholder must--
    (i) Elect such exclusion on or before the last day (including any 
extensions of time under section 6081) prescribed by law for filing its 
return of the tax imposed by chapter 1 of the Code for the taxable year;
    (ii) Receive, if and to the extent necessary, distributions of the 
type described in paragraph (a) of Sec. 1.963-3 sufficient in amount to 
constitute a minimum distribution;
    (iii) Incur, in the case of a chain or group election, income tax 
with respect to such minimum distribution sufficient to satisfy the 
requirements of paragraph (a) of Sec. 1.963-4, relating to the minimum 
overall tax burden; and
    (iv) Consent, on or before such last day for making the election, to 
the regulations under section 963 applicable to such taxable year and to 
any amendments thereof duly prescribed before such last day.

The making of the election under section 963 by filing the return on or 
before such last day shall constitute the consent to the regulations 
under such section prescribed before such last day. For an extension of 
the time for receiving a minimum distribution and making the consent for 
certain taxable years ending on or before the 90th day after September 
30, 1964, see Sec. 1.963-7.
    (3) Subpart F income excluded. An exclusion under section 963 for a 
taxable year of a United States shareholder for which the election is 
made under such section shall apply only to the subpart F income for the 
taxable year of the single first-tier corporation to which the election 
applies or of each controlled foreign corporation in the chain or group 
to which the election applies. Only those amounts attributable to the 
stock interest to which the election relates may be excluded. Thus, in 
case of a first-tier election with respect to stock of a controlled 
foreign corporation owned directly within the meaning of section 
958(a)(1)(A), the corporate United States shareholder may not exclude 
any subpart F income of such foreign corporation which is includible in 
its gross income under section 951(a)(1)(A)(i) by virtue of its indirect 
ownership of stock in such foreign corporation through the operation of 
section 958(a)(2). Subpart F income of a controlled foreign corporation 
which is excluded from the gross income of a United States shareholder 
by reason of the receipt of a minimum distribution to which section 963 
applies shall not be considered to be excluded under section 954(b)(1) 
or section 970(a).
    (4) Affiliated group of corporations. An affiliated group of 
domestic corporations which makes a consolidated return under section 
1501 for the taxable year shall be treated as a single United States 
shareholder for purposes of applying section 963 for such year if the

[[Page 427]]

common parent corporation in its return for such affiliated group makes 
any first-tier election, chain election, or group election under section 
963 for such affiliated group; in such case, no member of such 
affiliated group may separately make any first-tier election, chain 
election, or group election under section 963 for the taxable year. If 
the common parent of such an affiliated group so making a consolidated 
return makes no first-tier election, chain election, or group election 
for such affiliated group, then any member may make a first-tier 
election, chain election, or group election to the same extent that it 
could so elect if such affiliated group had not filed a consolidated 
return; in such case, the affiliated group will not be treated as a 
single United States shareholder.
    (b) Definitions. For purposes of section 963 and Secs. 1.963-1 
through 1.963-8--
    (1) Controlled foreign corporation. The term ``Controlled foreign 
corporation'' shall have the meaning accorded to it by section 957 and 
the regulations thereunder but shall not include any foreign corporation 
for a taxable year beginning before January 1, 1963.
    (2) Single first-tier corporation. The term ``single first-tier 
corporation'' means a controlled foreign corporation described in 
paragraph (d) of this section with respect to which a first-tier 
election has been made for the taxable year.
    (3) Chain. The term ``chain'' means collectively the foreign 
corporations described in paragraph (e) of this section with respect to 
which a chain election has been made for the taxable year.
    (4) Group. The term ``group'' means collectively the foreign 
corporations described in paragraph (f) of this section with respect to 
which a group election has been made for the taxable year.
    (5) First-tier election, etc. The term ``first-tier election'' means 
an election described in paragraph (c)(1)(i)(a) of this section; the 
term ``chain election'' means an election described in paragraph 
(c)(1)(i)(b) of this section; and the term ``group election'' means an 
election described in paragraph (c)(1)(ii) of this section.
    (6) Taxable year. (i) The term ``taxable year of a single first-tier 
corporation,'' ``taxable year of a corporation in a chain,'' or 
``taxable year of a corporation in a group,'' means, respectively, the 
taxable year of such corporation ending with or within the taxable year 
of the electing United States shareholder for which is made under 
paragraph (c)(1) of this section the election establishing it as a 
single first-tier corporation, a corporation in a chain, or corporation 
in a group, as the case may be.
    (ii) The term ``taxable year'' when used in reference to a chain or 
group refers collectively to the respective taxable years of the foreign 
corporations in such chain or group to which applies the election 
establishing such chain or group status, such taxable year being, in the 
case of each respective corporation in the chain or group, such 
corporation's taxable year ending with or within the taxable year of the 
electing United States shareholder, whether or not such taxable year of 
the corporation is the same as that of any other foreign corporation in 
the chain or group.
    (7) Foreign income tax. The term ``foreign income tax'' means 
income, war profits, and excess profits taxes, and taxes included in the 
term ``income, war profits, and excess profits taxes'' by reason of 
section 903, paid or accrued to a foreign country or possession of the 
United States and taken into account for purposes of sections 901 
through 905. Except in determining the foreign tax credit under section 
901, the term shall not include any tax which is deemed paid by a 
foreign corporation under section 902(b).
    (c) Election to exclude subpart F income--(1) Foreign corporations 
included in election. A corporate United States shareholder may for any 
taxable year exercise the election to secure an exclusion under section 
963 either--
    (i)(a) Separately with respect to any foreign corporation which as 
to such shareholder is described in paragraph (d) of this section, and/
or
    (b) Separately with respect to the foreign corporation or 
corporations which as to such shareholder are in a series described in 
paragraph (e) of this

[[Page 428]]

section, except to the extent of any interest (of such shareholder in 
any such corporation) with respect to which an election has otherwise 
been made under this subdivision (i); or
    (ii) With respect to all foreign corporations which as to such 
shareholder are described in paragraph (f) of this section.
    (2) Manner of making election. An election under subparagraph (1) of 
this paragraph to secure an exclusion under section 963 and the consent 
to the regulations under such section shall be made for a taxable year 
by filing with the return for such taxable year--
    (i) A written statement stating that such election is made for such 
taxable year,
    (ii) The names of the foreign corporations to which the election 
applies, the taxable year, country or incorporation, earnings and 
profits (as determined under paragraph (d) of Sec. 1.963-2), foreign 
income tax taken into account under paragraph (e) of Sec. 1.963-2, and 
outstanding capital stock, of each such corporation,
    (iii) In case of a group election, the names of all foreign 
corporations excluded from such group under paragraph (f)(2) and (3) of 
this section and identifying characterizations for all foreign branches 
included in, and excluded from, such group under paragraph (f)(4) of 
this section, together with the authority for such exclusion or 
inclusion, and
    (iv) Such other information relating to the election made as the 
Commissioner may prescribe by instructions or schedules to support such 
return.
    (3) Duration of election--(i) Year-by-year requirement. An election 
under subparagraph (1) of this paragraph to secure an exclusion under 
section 963 may be made for each taxable year of the United States 
shareholder but shall be effective only with respect to the taxable year 
for which made. An election made for any taxable year shall be 
irrevocable with respect to that taxable year once the period for the 
making of such election has expired, except to the extent provided by 
subdivision (ii) of this subparagraph.
    (ii) Revocation or modification of election for reasonable cause--
(a) Conditions under which allowed. If, after the making of an election 
under subparagraph (1) of this paragraph, the United States shareholder 
establishes to the satisfaction of the Commissioner that reasonable 
cause exists for revocation or modification of such election, it may 
withdraw that election; change from a group election to first-tier 
elections and/or chain elections or from a chain election to a first-
tier election: change from a first-tier election to a chain election or 
from first-tier elections and/or chain elections to a group election; 
or, in the case of a chain or group election, alter the composition of 
the chain or group by adding or eliminating corporations. The United 
States shareholder shall be allowed to revoke or modify elections 
pursuant to this subdivision only once for any taxable year of such 
shareholder and then only at a time prior to the expiration of the 
period prescribed by law for making an assessment of the tax imposed by 
chapter 1 of the Code for such taxable year and for any subsequent 
taxable year for which the tax liability of such shareholder would be 
affected by such revocation or modification of election. The 
Commissioner may, as a condition to such revocation or modification of 
the election, require a consent by the United States shareholder under 
section 6501 to extend, for the taxable year and such subsequent years 
affected by the revocation or modification, the period for the making of 
assessments, and the bringing of distraint or a proceeding in court for 
collection, in respect of a deficiency and all interest, additional 
amounts, and assessable penalties.
    (b) Nature of reasonable cause. Reasonable cause shall be deemed to 
exist for the revocation or modification of an election only if, after 
the making of such election, a material and substantial change in 
circumstances affecting the election occurs which reasonably could not 
have been anticipated when the election was made and which, to a 
significant degree, was beyond the control of the electing United States 
shareholder. For example, reasonable cause would exist if the minimum 
distribution were computed on the basis of a contested foreign income 
tax asserted by a foreign tax authority which, as a consequence of 
litigation

[[Page 429]]

occurring after the filing of the United States shareholder's return, is 
refunded, with the result that the United States shareholder is not 
entitled under the election which was made to an exclusion under section 
963.
    (c) Request for revocation or modification. A United States 
shareholder desiring to revoke or modify the election shall mail to the 
Commissioner of Internal Revenue, Attention: T:R, Washington, DC, 20224, 
a letter requesting such revocation or modification; such letter shall 
set forth the information required by subparagraph (2) of this paragraph 
with respect to any new election and the facts and circumstances which 
the shareholder considers reasonable cause for such revocation or 
modification. The shareholder shall also consent, if required, to the 
extension of assessment period referred to in (a) of this subdivision 
and shall furnish such other information as may be required by the 
Commissioner in support of such request. If the Commissioner is 
satisfied that reasonable cause exists for the revocation or 
modification, the United States shareholder shall file an amended return 
consistent with any new election which is made.
    (d) Corporations to which a first-tier election may apply--(1) 
Includible interest. A corporate United States shareholder may make a 
first-tier election for the taxable year only with respect to a single 
controlled foreign corporation in which it owns stock directly within 
the meaning of section 958(a)(1)(A) and only with respect to the stock 
so owned. The election must apply to all of the stock so owned by such 
shareholder and shall relate only to the subpart F income of such 
corporation which would otherwise be required to be included in gross 
income by reason of owning such stock. The shareholder may for the same 
taxable year make a first-tier election with respect to one or more 
controlled foreign corporations in which it directly owns stock and not 
with respect to other controlled foreign corporations in which it 
directly owns stock.
    (2) Illustrations. The application of this paragraph may be 
illustrated by the following examples:

    Example 1. Domestic corporation M directly owns all the one class of 
stock in each of the controlled foreign corporations A, B, and C. 
Corporation M may make a first-tier election for a taxable year with 
respect to any one of corporations A, B, and C; with respect to 
corporations A and B, respectively; with respect to corporations A and 
C, respectively; with respect to corporations B and C, respectively; or 
with respect to corporations A, B, and C, respectively.
    Example 2. Domestic corporation M directly owns all the one class of 
stock of controlled foreign corporation A and 20 percent of the one 
class of stock of controlled foreign corporation B. Corporation A 
directly owns 80 percent of the stock of B Corporation. All such 
corporations use the calendar year as the taxable year. For 1964, M 
Corporation makes a first-tier election with respect to corporations A 
and B, respectively, and receives a minimum distribution from each. An 
exclusion under section 963 for 1964 will be allowed for all of A 
Corporation's subpart F income for such year but only for the amount of 
B Corporation's subpart F income which M Corporation would (without 
regard to section 963) be required to include in gross income for such 
year under section 951(a)(1)(A)(i) by reason of directly owning 20 
percent of the stock of B Corporation. Corporation M may not exclude any 
amount which it would be required (without regard to section 963) to 
include in gross income under section 951(a)(1)(A)(i) for such year with 
respect to the subpart F income of B Corporation by reason of its 
indirect ownership (through the operation of section 958(a)(2)) of 80 
percent of the stock of B Corporation, unless M Corporation separately 
elects such exclusion and receives a minimum distribution with respect 
to such interest. See paragraph (e) of this section relating to chain 
elections.

    (e) Corporations to which a chain election may apply--(1) Includible 
interests. A Corporate United States shareholder may make a chain 
election for the taxable year with respect to one or more controlled 
foreign corporations in any series which includes only one foreign 
corporation described in subdivision (i), any one or more controlled 
foreign corporations described in subdivision (ii), and all foreign 
corporations described in subdivision (iii) of this subparagraph:
    (i) A foreign corporation, whether or not a controlled foreign 
corporation, to the extent of stock owned by such shareholder--
    (a) Directly (within the meaning of section 958(a)(1)(A)) in such 
corporation, or

[[Page 430]]

    (b) Indirectly (through the operation of section 958(a)(2)) by 
virtue of the direct ownership (within the meaning of section 
958(a)(1)(A)) of stock in such corporation by a foreign trust, foreign 
estate, or foreign partnership, in which such shareholder is a 
beneficiary or partner;
    (ii) To the extent that such shareholder so elects, any controlled 
foreign corporation to the extent that, by reason of its ownership of 
stock described in subdivision (i) of this subparagraph, such 
shareholder indirectly owns within the meaning of section 958(a)(2) 
stock in such controlled foreign corporation; and
    (iii) All foreign corporations, whether or not controlled foreign 
corporations, by reason (and to the extent) of ownership of stock in 
which such shareholder indirectly owns within the meaning of section 
958(a)(2) stock in a controlled foreign corporation included in the 
series by reason of subdivision (ii) of this subparagraph.

Notwithstanding the preceding sentence, a corporate United States 
shareholder may make a chain election for the taxable year with respect 
to a single foreign corporation, but only if such foreign corporation is 
a controlled foreign corporation described in subdivision (i)(b) of this 
subparagraph. The shareholder may for the same taxable year make a chain 
election with respect to one or more series, and not with respect to 
other series, to which this subparagraph applies.
    (2) Illustrations. The application of this paragraph may be 
illustrated by the following examples:

    Example 1. Domestic corporation M directly owns all the one class of 
stock of controlled foreign corporation A, which in turn directly owns 
80 percent of the one class of stock of controlled foreign corporation 
B. Corporation M may make a chain election with respect to corporations 
A and B.
    Example 2. Domestic corporation M directly owns all the one class of 
stock of controlled foreign corporation A, which in turn directly owns 
80 percent of the one class of stock of controlled foreign corporation 
B, which in turn directly owns all the one class of stock of controlled 
foreign corporation C. Corporation M also directly owns 20 percent of 
the stock of B Corporation. Corporation M may make a chain election 
either with respect to corporations A and B or with respect to 
corporations A, B, and C. In either case corporations B and C can be 
included in the chain only to the extent of M Corporation's indirect 80-
percent stock interest in such corporations by reason of its direct 
ownership of 100 percent of the stock of A Corporation. Corporation M 
may also make a chain election with respect to corporations B and C, in 
which case the chain would include corporations B and C to the extent of 
the 20-percent stock interest which M Corporation owns directly in B 
Corporation, and indirectly owns in C Corporation by reason of its 
direct ownership of such stock interest in B Corporation.
    Example 3. Domestic corporation M directly owns all the one class of 
stock of controlled foreign corporation A, which in turn directly owns 
all the one class of stock of controlled foreign corporations B and C. 
Corporation M may make a chain election either with respect to 
corporations A, B, and C; or with respect to corporations A and B; or 
with respect to corporations A and C.
    Example 4. Domestic corporation M directly owns all the one class of 
stock of controlled foreign corporation A and 40 percent of the one 
class of stock of foreign corporation B, not a controlled foreign 
corporation. Corporation A directly owns 30 percent of the one class of 
stock of controlled foreign corporation C, and B Corporation directly 
owns the remaining 70 percent of the stock of C Corporation. Corporation 
M may make a chain election with respect to corporations A and C, but in 
such case C Corporation can be included in the chain only to the extent 
of M Corporation's indirect 30-percent stock interest in such 
corporation by reason of its direct ownership of 100 percent of the 
stock of A Corporation. Corporation M may instead make a chain election 
with respect to corporations B and C, but in such case C Corporation can 
be included in the chain only to the extent of M Corporation's indirect 
28-percent stock interest in such corporation by reason of its direct 
ownership of 40 percent of the stock of B Corporation. In the latter 
case, B Corporation must be included in the chain even though it is not 
a controlled foreign corporation. Corporation M may also make two chain 
elections, one with respect to corporations A and C, and the other with 
respect to corporations B and C, as described above.
    Example 5. Domestic corporation M directly owns all the one class of 
stock of controlled foreign corporation A, which in turn directly owns 
all the one class of stock of controlled foreign corporation B and 40 
percent of the one class of stock of foreign corporation C, not a 
controlled foreign corporation. Corporation M may make a chain election 
with respect to corporations A and B. Corporation C may not be included 
in the chain since M Corporation does not, by reason of its indirect 
ownership of stock in C

[[Page 431]]

Corporation, own stock in any controlled foreign corporation.
    Example 6. Domestic corporation M directly owns a 60-percent 
partnership interest in foreign partnership D and by reason of such 
interest owns indirectly, within the meaning of section 958(a)(2), 60 
percent of the one class of stock of controlled foreign corporation E 
(all of the stock of which is directly owned by D Partnership) and 60 
percent of the one class of stock of controlled foreign corporation F 
(all the stock of which is also directly owned by D Partnership). By 
virtue of its direct interest in D Partnership, M Corporation may make a 
chain election with respect to E Corporation alone or with respect to F 
Corporation alone. Corporation M may also make two chain elections, one 
with respect to E Corporation, the other with respect to F Corporation.

    (f) Corporations to which a group election may apply--(1) Includible 
interests. A corporate United States shareholder may make a group 
election for the taxable year with respect to a group of foreign 
corporations which includes, except as provided in subparagraphs (2) and 
(3) of this paragraph, all of the following corporations:
    (i) All controlled foreign corporations in which such shareholder 
owns stock either directly within the meaning of section 958(a)(1)(A) or 
indirectly within the meaning of section 958(a)(2), and
    (ii) All foreign corporations, whether or not controlled foreign 
corporations, by reason (and to the extent) of ownership of stock in 
which such shareholder, indirectly owns within the meaning of section 
958(a)(2) stock in a controlled foreign corporation described in 
subdivision (i) of this subparagraph.

A first-tier election or chain election may not be made for any taxable 
year with respect to any foreign corporation which for such taxable year 
has been excluded under subparagraph (2) or (3) of this paragraph from a 
group with respect to which a group election has been made for such 
year. The application of this subparagraph may be illustrated by the 
following examples:

    Example 1. Domestic corporation M directly owns all the one class of 
stock of controlled foreign corporations A and B and is a United States 
shareholder with respect to no other foreign corporation. M Corporation 
may make a group election with respect to corporations A and B.
    Example 2. Domestic corporation M directly owns all the one class of 
stock of controlled foreign corporations A and B, and B Corporation 
directly owns 80 percent of the one class of stock of controlled foreign 
corporation C. Corporation M is a United States shareholder only with 
respect to corporations A, B, and C. If M Corporation makes a group 
election, it must make the election with respect to corporations A, B, 
and C.
    Example 3. Domestic corporation M directly owns all the one class of 
stock of controlled foreign corporations A and B. Corporation A directly 
owns 70 percent of the one class of stock of controlled foreign 
corporation C. Corporation B directly owns 40 percent of the one class 
of stock of foreign corporation D, not a controlled foreign corporation, 
and D Corporation directly owns 30 percent of the stock of C 
Corporation. Corporation M is a United States shareholder with respect 
to no other foreign corporation. If M Corporation makes a group 
election, it must make the election with respect to corporations A, B, 
C, and D. Corporation D must be included in the group even though it is 
not a controlled foreign corporation.

    (2) Less developed country corporations. If the United States 
shareholder so elects, it may for any taxable year exclude from a group 
for purposes of a group election every controlled foreign corporation 
which is a less developed country corporation as defined in section 
955(c) and Sec. 1.955-5 for the taxable year of such foreign corporation 
ending with or within such taxable year of the shareholder but only if, 
by reason of ownership of stock in such foreign corporation, the 
shareholder does not indirectly own within the meaning of section 
958(a)(2) stock in any other controlled foreign corporation which is not 
a less developed country corporation for its taxable year ending with or 
within such taxable year of the shareholder. The election under this 
subparagraph to exclude a less developed country corporation is required 
to be made with respect to all less developed country corporations of 
which the electing shareholder is a United States shareholder and which, 
under the preceding sentence, are eligible to be excluded.

    Example. Domestic corporation M directly owns all the one class of 
stock of controlled foreign corporations A and B, not less developed 
country corporations. Corporation A directly owns all of the one class 
of stock of controlled foreign corporation C, B Corporation directly 
owns all the one class of stock

[[Page 432]]

of controlled foreign corporation D, and D Corporation directly owns all 
the one class of stock of controlled foreign corporation E. Corporations 
C, D, and E are less developed country corporations under section 
955(c). Corporation M may make a group election with respect to 
corporations A, B, C, D, and E; it may also exclude the less developed 
country corporations and make a group election with respect to 
corporations A and B only. If E Corporation were not a less developed 
country corporation, however, neither D Corporation nor E Corporation 
could be excluded since, by reason of ownership of stock in D 
Corporation, M Corporation would indirectly own stock in E Corporation, 
a controlled foreign corporation which is not a less developed country 
corporation.

    (3) Foreign corporations with blocked foreign income. If the United 
States shareholder so elects, it may for any taxable year exclude from a 
group for purposes of a group election any foreign corporation with 
respect to which it is established to the satisfaction of the 
Commissioner that an amount of earnings and profits of such corporation 
sufficient to constitute its share of a pro rata minimum distribution 
(as defined in paragraph (a)(2)(i) of Sec. 1.963-4) by the group cannot 
be distributed to such United States shareholder because of currency or 
other restrictions or limitations imposed under the laws of any foreign 
country. If, by reason of ownership of stock in a foreign corporation 
which is excluded from the group under the preceding sentence, a United 
States shareholder owns stock in another foreign corporation an amount 
of whose earnings and profits sufficient to constitute its share of a 
pro rata minimum distribution by the group cannot be distributed to such 
United States shareholder through such excluded foreign corporation 
because of currency or other restrictions or limitations imposed under 
the laws of any foreign country, such other foreign corporation must 
also be excluded from the group for purposes of the group election. For 
purposes of this subparagraph, the determination as to whether earnings 
and profits cannot be distributed because of currency or other 
restrictions or limitations imposed under the laws of a foreign country 
shall be made in accordance with the regulations under section 964(b), 
except that such restrictions or limitations shall be considered to 
exist notwithstanding that distributions are made by the foreign 
corporation in a foreign currency if, assuming the distributee to be the 
United States shareholder, the distributed amounts would be excludable 
from the distributee's gross income for the taxable year of receipt 
under a method of accounting in which the reporting of blocked foreign 
income is deferred until the income ceases to be blocked.
    (4) Treatment of foreign branches of domestic corporation as foreign 
subsidiary corporations--(i) In general. If the United States 
shareholder so elects, all branches (other than a branch excluded under 
subdivision (iii) of this subparagraph) maintained by such shareholder 
in foreign countries and possessions of the United States shall be 
treated, for purposes of applying subparagraph (1) of this paragraph, as 
wholly owned foreign subsidiary corporations of such shareholder 
organized under the laws of such respective foreign countries or 
possessions of the United States. Each branch treated as such a foreign 
subsidiary corporation shall be included in the group by the United 
States shareholder making the group election and shall be regarded, for 
purposes of section 963, as having distributed to such shareholder all 
of its earnings and profits for the taxable year, irrespective of the 
statutory percentage applied for the taxable year under paragraph (b) of 
Sec. 1.963-2. As used in this subparagraph, the term ``branch'' shall 
mean a permanent organization maintained in a foreign country or a 
possession of the United States to engage in the active conduct of a 
trade or business. Whether a permanent organization is maintained in a 
foreign country or possession of the United States shall depend upon the 
facts and circumstances of the particular case. As a general rule, a 
permanent organization shall be considered to be maintained in such 
country or possession if the United States shareholder maintains therein 
a significant work force or significant manufacturing, mining, 
warehousing, sales, office, or similar business facilities of a fixed or 
permanent nature. If a United States shareholder so operates that it 
satisfies the branch test with respect to each of several foreign 
countries or possessions, each such branch shall be

[[Page 433]]

treated as a separate wholly owned foreign subsidiary corporation 
organized under the laws of such country or possession in respect of 
which it satisfies such test. In no event shall a branch which is 
treated as a wholly owned foreign subsidiary corporation under this 
subparagraph be also treated as a less developed country corporation. 
The term ``possession of the United States,'' as used in this 
subparagraph, shall be construed to have the same meaning as that 
contained in paragraph (b)(2) of Sec. 1.957-3.
    (ii) Earnings and profits and taxes of a foreign branch. The 
earnings and profits (or deficit in earnings and profits) for a taxable 
year of a branch treated as a wholly owned foreign subsidiary 
corporation under this subparagraph shall be determined by applying 
against the gross income (as defined in section 61) of the branch its 
allowable deductions other than any net operating loss deduction. Any 
excess of gross income over such deductions shall constitute earnings 
and profits. Any excess of such deductions over gross income shall 
constitute a deficit in earnings and profits. For purposes of this 
subparagraph, the gross income of a branch is that which is produced by 
the trade or business activities separately conducted by it outside the 
United States and which is derived from sources without the United 
States under the provisions of sections 861 through 864 and the 
regulations thereunder; the allowable deductions of a branch are those 
which are properly allocable to or chargeable against its gross income 
and which are allowable under chapter 1 of the Code to the corporation 
of which it is a branch. Only the foreign income tax allocable to the 
gross income of the branch shall be considered paid or accrued by such 
branch. Solely for the purpose of determining under paragraph (c)(2) of 
Sec. 1.963-2 the effective foreign tax rate of a group which includes a 
branch treated as a wholly owned foreign subsidiary corporation, the 
foreign income tax considered paid or accrued by the branch shall be 
treated as an allowable deduction of such branch even though the United 
States shareholder chooses to take the benefits of section 901 for the 
taxable year.
    (iii) Excluded branches. For purposes of subdivision (i) of this 
subparagraph, a branch maintained by the United States shareholder in a 
possession of the United States shall not be treated as a wholly owned 
foreign subsidiary corporation of the United States shareholder for the 
taxable year unless such branch would be a controlled foreign 
corporation (as defined in section 957 and the regulations thereunder) 
for such taxable year if it were incorporated under the laws of such 
possession and unless the gross income of such shareholder for such 
taxable year includes for purposes of the tax imposed by Chapter 1 of 
the Code the income, if any, derived by such shareholder from sources 
within possessions of the United States, as determined under the 
provisions of sections 861 through 864 and the regulations thereunder.
    (iv) Illustrations. The application of this subparagraph may be 
illustrated by the following examples:

    Example 1. Throughout 1964, domestic corporation M directly owns all 
of the one class of stock of controlled foreign corporations A and B. 
All corporations use the calendar year as the taxable year. During 1964, 
M Corporation engages in foreign country X in the manufacture and sale 
of steel tubing and rods, maintaining therein a significant work force 
and significant manufacturing and sales facilities for such purpose. 
Corporation M also engages in foreign country Y in the mining and sale 
of iron ore, maintaining therein a significant work force and 
substantial mining and sales facilities for such purpose. For 1964, M 
Corporation may make a group election with respect to corporations A and 
B and the branches operated in country X and country Y, treating such 
branches as wholly owned foreign subsidiary corporations. If corporation 
M elects to include one such branch in the group election, it must 
include both.
    Example 2. Throughout 1964, domestic corporation M directly owns all 
the one class of stock of controlled foreign corporations A and B. All 
corporations use the calendar year as the taxable year. During 1964, M 
Corporation exports tractors to foreign country Z, in which country its 
sole activities consist of arranging for title to the tractors to pass 
to the purchasers in that country. Corporation M's only facility in 
country Z in 1964 is a small rented office, and its work force therein 
consists only of a few clerical employees. The activities of M 
Corporation in country Z do not constitute the maintenance of a

[[Page 434]]

branch therein for purposes of this subparagraph. Corporation M may make 
a group election, only with respect to corporations A and B.

[T.D. 6759, 29 FR 13325, Sept. 25, 1964; 29 FR 13896, Oct. 8, 1964, as 
amended by T.D. 6767, 29 FR 14877, Nov. 3, 1964; T.D. 7100, 36 FR 5335, 
Mar. 20, 1971]


<R05>
Sec. 1.963-2   Determination of the amount of the minimum distribution.

    (a) Application of statutory percentage to earnings and profits. The 
amount of the minimum distribution required to be received by a United 
States shareholder with respect to stock to which the election under 
paragraph (c) of Sec. 1.963-1 applies for the taxable year in order to 
qualify for a section 963 exclusion for such year shall be the amount, 
if any, determined by the multiplication of the statutory percentage 
applicable for the taxable year by--
    (1) In the case of a first-tier election, such shareholder's 
proportionate share (as determined under paragraph (d)(2) of this 
section) of the earnings and profits for the taxable year of the single 
first-tier corporation to which the election relates,
    (2) In the case of a chain election, the consolidated earnings and 
profits (as determined under paragraph (d)(3) of this section) with 
respect to such shareholder for the taxable year of the chain to which 
the election relates, or
    (3) In the case of a group election, the consolidated earnings and 
profits (as determined under paragraph (d)(3) of this section) with 
respect to such shareholder for the taxable year of the group to which 
the election relates.

For the requirement that the overall United States and foreign income 
tax incurred in respect of a minimum distribution from a chain or group 
must equal or exceed either 90 percent of the United States corporate 
tax rate applied against pretax and predistribution consolidated 
earnings and profits or, with the application of the special rules set 
forth therein, must equal or exceed the overall United States and 
foreign income tax which would have resulted from a pro rata minimum 
distribution, see paragraph (a)(1) of Sec. 1.963-4.
    (b) Statutory percentage. The statutory percentage (referred to in 
paragraph (a) of this section) for the taxable year shall be determined 
by applying the effective foreign tax rate (as defined in paragraph (c) 
of this section) for such year with respect to the single first-tier 
corporation, chain, or group, as the case may be, against--
    (1) The table set forth in section 963(b)(1) in the case of an 
election to secure an exclusion under section 963 for a taxable year of 
the United States shareholder beginning in 1963 and a taxable year 
entirely within the surcharge period ending before January 1, 1970.
    (2) The table set forth in section 963(b)(2) in the case of an 
election to secure an exclusion under section 963 for a taxable year of 
the U.S. shareholder beginning in 1964 or for a taxable year of such 
shareholder beginning in 1969 and ending in 1970 to the extent 
subparagraph (B) of section 963(b)(3) applies,
    (3) The table set forth in section 963(b)(3) in the case of an 
election to secure an exclusion under section 963 for a taxable year of 
the U.S. shareholder beginning after December 31, 1964 except a taxable 
year which includes any part of the surcharge period, or
    (4) The table set forth in paragraph (b) of Sec. 1.963-8 in the case 
of an election to secure an exclusion under section 963 for the calendar 
year 1970.

    Example. Domestic corporation M owns all the one class of stock in 
controlled foreign corporation A. Corporation M uses the calendar year 
as its taxable year, and A Corporation uses a fiscal year ending August 
31. For 1964, M Corporation makes a first-tier election in order to 
exclude from gross income for such year the subpart F income of A 
Corporation for its taxable year ending on August 31, 1964. Although, 
such election applies to the taxable year of A Corporation beginning on 
September 1, 1963, the applicable table, for purposes of determining the 
statutory percentages to be used under paragraph (a) of this section for 
the taxable year, is that set forth in section 963(b)(2), which relates 
to taxable years of United States shareholders beginning in 1964. Thus, 
if for the taxable year of A Corporation ending August 31, 1964, the 
effective foreign tax rate is 30 percent, A Corporation would have to 
distribute 72 percent of its earnings and profits for such year in order 
for M Corporation to be entitled to an exclusion under section 963 for 
1964.


[[Page 435]]


    (c) Effective foreign tax rate--(1) Single first-tier corporation. 
For purposes of section 963 the term ``effective foreign tax rate'' for 
a taxable year means, with respect to a single first-tier corporation, 
the percentage which--
    (i) The United States shareholder's proportionate share (as 
determined under paragraph (e)(1) of this section) of the foreign income 
tax of such corporation for such taxable year is of--
    (ii) The sum of--
    (a) The United States shareholder's proportionate share (as 
determined under paragraph (d)(2) of this section) of the earnings and 
profits of such corporation for such taxable year, and
    (b) The amount referred to in subdivision (i) of this subparagraph.
    (2) Chain or group of corporations. For purposes of section 963, the 
term ``effective foreign tax rate'' for a taxable year means, with 
respect to a chain or group, the percentage which--
    (i) The consolidated foreign income taxes (as determined under 
paragraph (e)(2) of this section) of such chain or group with respect to 
the United States shareholder for such taxable year is of--
    (ii) The sum of--
    (a) The consolidated earnings and profits (as determined under 
paragraph (d)(3) of this section) of such chain or group with respect to 
such United States shareholder for such taxable year, and
    (b) The amount referred to in subdivision (i) of this subparagraph.
    (3) Treatment of United States tax as foreign tax. For the purpose 
solely of determining the effective foreign tax rate under this 
paragraph, if a foreign corporation has pretax earnings and profits 
attributable to income from sources within the United States for the 
taxable year upon which it pays United States income tax and if 
distributions from the earnings and profits of such corporation for such 
year to the electing United States shareholder with respect to stock to 
which the election to secure an exclusion under section 963 relates do 
not entitled such shareholder to the dividends-received deduction under 
section 245, the amount of the United States income tax shall be taken 
into account as though such tax were foreign income tax. The amount so 
treated as foreign income tax shall not exceed 90 percent of an amount 
determined by multiplying such pretax earnings and profits attributable 
to income from sources within the United States by a percentage which is 
the sum of the normal tax rate and the surtax rate (determined without 
regard to the surtax exemption) prescribed by section 11 for the taxable 
year of the United States shareholder.
    (d) Determination of proportionate share of earnings and profits and 
consolidated earnings and profits--(1) Earnings and profits of foreign 
corporations. For purposes of Secs. 1.963-1 through 1.963-8, the 
earnings and profits, or deficit in earnings and profits, for the 
taxable year, of a single first-tier corporation or of a foreign 
corporation in a chain or group shall be the amount of its earnings and 
profits for such year, determined under section 964(a) and Sec. 1.964-1 
but without reduction for foreign income tax or for distributions made 
by such corporation, less--
    (i) In the case of a foreign corporation included in a chain or 
group, the amount of any distributions received (computed without 
reduction for any income tax paid or accrued by such corporation with 
respect to such distributions) by such corporation during its taxable 
year from the earnings and profits (whether or not from earnings and 
profits of the taxable year to which the election under section 963 
applies) of another foreign corporation in the chain or group.
    (ii) In the case of every foreign corporation, the amount of foreign 
income tax paid or accrued by such corporation during its taxable year 
other than foreign income tax referred to in subdivision (i) and (iii) 
of this subparagraph, and
    (iii) In the case of a foreign corporation included in a chain or 
group, the foreign income tax paid or accrued by such corporation with 
respect to distributions from the earnings and profits of any other 
foreign corporation in the chain or group for the taxable year of such 
other corporation to which the election under section 963 applies, but 
only if the U.S. shareholder chooses under this subdivision to take such 
tax

[[Page 436]]

into account in determining the effective foreign tax rate rather than 
count it toward the amount of the minimum distribution as provided in 
paragraph (b)(2) of Sec. 1.963-3.

In the event that the foreign income tax of a corporation included in a 
chain or group depends upon the extent to which distributions are made 
by such corporation, the amount of foreign income tax referred to in 
subdivision (ii) of this subparagraph shall, only for purposes of 
determining the effective foreign tax rate, be the amount which would 
have been paid or accrued if no distributions had been made. For the 
rules in other cases involving corporations whose foreign income tax 
varies with distributions, see Sec. 1.963-5. For the manner of computing 
the earnings and profits of a foreign branch treated as a wholly owned 
foreign subsidiary corporation see paragraph (f)(4)(ii) of Sec. 1.963-1.
    (2) Shareholder's proportionate share of earnings and profits--(i) 
Corporation with earnings and profits--(a) In general. A United States 
shareholder's proportionate share, with respect to stock to which the 
election to secure an exclusion under section 963 relates, of the 
earnings and profits of a foreign corporation (not including a foreign 
branch described in (b) of this subdivision) for its taxable year shall 
be the share which such shareholder would receive if the total amount of 
such corporation's earnings and profits, as determined under 
subparagraph (1) of this paragraph, for such year were distributed on 
the last day of such corporation's taxable year on which such 
corporation is a controlled foreign corporation or is a foreign 
corporation by reason of the ownership of stock in which the United 
States shareholder indirectly owns within the meaning of section 
958(a)(2) stock in a controlled foreign corporation.
    (b) Foreign branch treated as a foreign subsidiary corporation. A 
United States shareholder's proportionate share of the earnings and 
profits, for the taxable year, of a branch treated as a wholly owned 
foreign subsidiary corporation and included in a group under paragraph 
(f)(4) of Sec. 1.963-1 shall be the total earnings and profits of such 
branch for the taxable year, as determined under paragraph (f)(4)(ii) of 
such section.
    (c) Indirectly held foreign corporations. If the proportionate share 
to be determined is of earnings and profits of a foreign corporation the 
stock of which is owned by the United States shareholder by reason of 
its ownership of stock (with respect to which the election relates) in 
another corporation, such shareholder's proportionate share of such 
earnings and profits for the taxable year shall be determined on the 
basis of the amount such shareholder would receive from such foreign 
corporation with respect to stock in such foreign corporation if there 
were distributed for the taxable year all such earnings and profits, as 
determined under subparagraph (1) of this paragraph, and of all the 
earnings and profits of all other corporations through which such 
earnings and profits must pass in order to be received by such 
shareholder with respect to the stock to which the election relates. For 
purposes of the preceding sentence, the amount received by the 
shareholder from the earnings and profits of a foreign corporation shall 
be determined without taking into account deductions (whether or not 
allowable under chapter 1 of the Code) of other foreign corporations 
through which such earnings and profits are distributed.
    (d) More than one class of stock. If a foreign corporation for a 
taxable year has more than one class of stock outstanding, the earnings 
and profits of such corporation for such year which shall be taken into 
account with respect to any one class of such stock shall be the 
earnings and profits which would be distributed with respect to such 
class if all earnings and profits of such corporation for such year were 
distributed on the last day of such corporation's taxable year, on which 
such corporation is a controlled foreign corporation or is a foreign 
corporation by reason of the ownership of stock in which the United 
States shareholder indirectly owns within the meaning of section 
958(a)(2) stock in a controlled foreign corporation. If an arrearage in 
dividends for prior taxable years exists with respect to a class of 
preferred stock of such corporation, the earnings and profits for the 
taxable year shall be

[[Page 437]]

attributed to such arrearage only to the extent such arrearage exceeds 
the earnings and profits of such corporation remaining from prior 
taxable years beginning after December 31, 1962. For example, if a 
controlled foreign corporation, using the calendar year as its taxable 
year, has earnings and profits for 1963 of $100 accumulated at December 
31, 1963, and an arrearage of $150 for such year in respect of preferred 
stock, the earnings and profits for 1964 attributable to such arrearage 
may not exceed $50 ($150-$100).
    (e) Discretionary power to allocate earnings to different classes of 
stock. If the allocation of a foreign corporation's earnings and profits 
for the taxable year between two or more classes of stock depends upon 
the exercise of discretion by that body of persons which exercises with 
respect to such corporation the power ordinarily exercised by the board 
of directors of a domestic corporation, the allocation of such earnings 
and profits to such classes shall be made for purposes of this 
subdivision as if such classes constituted one class of stock in which 
each share has the same rights to dividends as any other share, unless a 
different method of allocation of such earnings and profits is made by 
such body not later than 90 days after the close of such taxable year.
    (f) Illustrations. The application of this subdivision may be 
illustrated by the following examples:

    Example 1. Domestic corporation M directly owns 80 percent of the 
one class of stock of controlled foreign corporation A, which directly 
owns 60 percent of the one class of stock of controlled foreign 
corporation B. Each such corporation has earnings and profits of $70 for 
the taxable year, as determined under subparagraph (1) of this 
paragraph. Corporation M's proportionate share of the earnings and 
profits is $56 (0.80 x $70) as to A Corporation and $33.60 
(0.80 x 0.60 x $70) as to B Corporation.
    Example 2. Throughout 1964 controlled foreign corporation A, which 
uses the calendar year as the taxable year, has outstanding 40 shares of 
common stock and 60 shares of 6-percent, nonparticipating, noncumulative 
preferred stock with a par value of $100 per share. Corporation A has 
earnings and profits of $1,000, for 1964, as determined under 
subparagraph (1) of this paragraph. In such case, $360 
(0.06 x $100 x 60) of earnings and profits would be taken into account 
with respect to the preferred stock and $640 ($1,000-$360), with respect 
to the common stock. Thus, if a United States shareholder owns 10 shares 
of common stock and 30 shares of preferred stock for 1964, its 
proportionate share of the earnings and profits for such year is $340 
([10/40 x $640]+[30/60 x $360]).

    (ii) Deficit in earnings and profits of a corporation in a chain or 
group. A United States shareholder's proportionate share, with respect 
to stock to which the election to secure an exclusion under section 963 
relates, of a deficit in earnings and profits of a foreign corporation 
in a chain or group for a taxable year shall be the portion of such 
deficit which, if such corporation had earnings and profits for such 
year as determined under subparagraph (1) of this paragraph and all of 
such earnings and profits were distributed on the date described in 
subdivision (i)(a) of this subparagraph, the share of such earnings and 
profits such shareholder would receive bears to the total of the 
earnings and profits which would be so distributed on such date. For the 
determination of the deficit of a foreign branch treated as a wholly 
owned foreign subsidiary corporation and included in a group, see 
paragraph (f)(4)(ii) of Sec. 1.963-1. A United States shareholder's 
proportionate share of the deficit of such a branch shall be the total 
deficit of such branch for the taxable year.
    (iii) Controlled foreign corporation for part of year. If--
    (a) Stock in a foreign corporation is owned within the meaning of 
section 958(a) by a United States shareholder on the last day in the 
taxable year of such corporation for which such corporation is a 
controlled foreign corporation to which applies an election by such 
shareholder to secure an exclusion under section 963 with respect to 
such stock, or
    (b) Stock in a foreign corporation which is not a controlled foreign 
corporation is owned within the meaning of section 958(a) by a United 
States shareholder on the last day in the taxable year of such 
corporation on which another foreign corporation (which, by reason of 
the stock so owned, is owned by such shareholder within the meaning of 
section 958(a)) is a controlled foreign corporation to which applies an 
election by such shareholder to secure

[[Page 438]]

an exclusion under section 963 with respect to such stock,

the earnings and profits of such foreign corporation for the taxable 
year which are taken into account in determining such shareholder's 
proportionate share thereof shall be an amount of such earnings and 
profits, determined as provided in subparagraph (1) of this paragraph, 
which bears to the total of such earnings and profits the same ratio 
which the part (computed on a daily basis) of such year during which 
such corporation is a controlled foreign corporation (or, in case such 
corporation is not a controlled foreign corporation, during which such 
other corporation is a controlled foreign corporation) bears to the 
total taxable year. If the United States shareholder by sufficient 
records and accounts establishes to the satisfaction of the district 
director the gross income received or accrued, and the deductions paid 
or accrued, for the part of such year during which such corporation is a 
controlled foreign corporation (or, in case such corporation is not a 
controlled foreign corporation, during which such other corporation is a 
controlled foreign corporation), the amount of earnings and profits 
based on such records and accounts may be used in lieu of the amount 
determined under the preceding sentence. The application of this 
subdivision may be illustrated by the following examples:

    Example 1. Domestic corporation M on June 30, 1963, purchases 60 
percent of the one class of stock of A Corporation which on July 1 
becomes a controlled foreign corporation and remains such throughout the 
remainder of 1963. Both corporations use the calendar year as the 
taxable year. Corporation M makes a first-tier election with respect to 
A Corporation. For 1963, A Corporation has $100 of earnings and profits, 
as determined under subparagraph (1) of this paragraph. Corporation M's 
proportionate share of such earnings and profits for 1963 is $30.25 
(0.60 x [184/365 x $100]).
    Example 2. (a) Throughout 1963 domestic corporation M directly owns 
20 percent of the one class of stock of foreign corporation A, not a 
controlled foreign corporation at any time, which directly owns 50 
percent of the one class of stock of foreign corporation B, which 
becomes a controlled foreign corporation on July 1, 1963, and remains 
such throughout the remainder of 1963. All such corporations use the 
calendar year as the taxable year. Each of corporations A and B has 
earnings and profits for 1963 of $100, as determined under subparagraph 
(1) of this paragraph. Corporation M makes a chain election for 1963 
with respect to corporations A and B. Corporation M's proportionate 
share of the earnings and profits of A Corporation for 1963 is $10.08 
(0.20 x [184/365 x $100]). Corporation M's proportionate share of the 
earnings and profits of B Corporation for 1963 is $5.04 
(0.20 x 0.50 x [184/365 x $100]).
    (b) If B Corporation had been a controlled foreign corporation 
throughout 1963, M Corporation's proportionate share of the earnings and 
profits of corporations A and B for 1963 would have been $20 
(0.20 x $100) and $10 (0.20 x 0.50 x $100), respectively.
    (c) If corporations A and B had each been a controlled foreign 
corporation only for the period of January 1, 1963, through June 30, 
1963, M Corporation's proportionate share of the earnings and profits of 
such corporations would have been $9.92 (0.20 x [181/365 x $100]) and 
$4.98 (0.20 x 0.50 x [181/365 x  $100]), respectively.
    (d) If A Corporation had been a controlled foreign corporation 
throughout 1963 or during the period of July 1, 1963, through December 
31, 1963, but B Corporation had been a controlled foreign corporation 
only during the period of January 1, 1963, through June 30, 1963, M 
Corporation's proportionate share of the earnings and profits of such 
corporations would have been $20 (0.20 x $100) and $4.96 
(0.20 x 0.50 x [181/365 x $100]), respectively.

    (3) Consolidated earnings and profits with respect to United States 
shareholder. The consolidated earnings and profits of a chain or group 
with respect to any United States shareholder for the taxable year shall 
be the sum of such shareholder's proportionate shares of the earnings 
and profits, and of the deficit in earnings and profits, determined 
under subparagraph (2) of this paragraph, for such year of all foreign 
corporations, whether or not controlled foreign corporations, in such 
chain or group.
    (e) Foreign income taxes used in determining effective foreign tax 
rate. For purposes of determining the effective foreign tax rate under 
paragraph (c) of this section--
    (1) Shareholder's proportionate share of taxes of a foreign 
corporation. The foreign income tax of a foreign corporation for a 
taxable year shall consist of the foreign income tax referred to in 
paragraph (d)(1)(ii) of this section with respect to such year and, if 
the United States shareholder chooses to take the

[[Page 439]]

foreign income tax described in paragraph (d)(1)(iii) of this section 
into account in determining the effective foreign tax rate of a chain or 
group which includes such foreign corporation, the foreign income tax 
referred to in such paragraph with respect to such year. A United States 
shareholder's proportionate share, with respect to stock to which the 
election to secure an exclusion under section 963 applies, of the 
foreign income tax of such foreign corporation for a taxable year shall 
be the same proportion of such foreign income tax that such 
shareholder's proportionate share (as determined under paragraph 
(d)(2)(i) of this section) of the earnings and profits of such 
corporation for such year bears to the total earnings and profits of 
such corporation for such year. A United States shareholder's 
proportionate share of the foreign income tax, for the taxable year, of 
a branch treated as a wholly owned foreign subsidiary corporation and 
included in a group under paragraph (f)(4) of Sec. 1.963-1 shall be the 
total foreign income tax of such branch for the taxable year.
    (2) Consolidated foreign income taxes with respect to United States 
shareholder. The consolidated foreign income taxes of a chain or group 
with respect to a United States shareholder for the taxable year of such 
chain or group shall be the sum of such shareholder's proportionate 
shares (as determined under subparagraph (1) of this paragraph) of the 
foreign income tax of all foreign corporations, whether or not 
controlled foreign corporations, in such chain or group.
    (3) Taxes paid by foreign corporation on distributions received 
during its distribution period. If a distribution received by a foreign 
corporation in a chain or group from another foreign corporation in such 
chain or group after the close of the recipient's taxable year but 
during its distribution period for such year is allocated to the 
earnings and profits of such recipient corporation for such year under 
paragraph (c)(2) of Sec. 1.963-3, then any foreign income tax paid or 
accrued by such recipient corporation on such distribution shall be 
treated as paid or accrued for such taxable year.
    (f) Illustrations. The application of this section may be 
illustrated by the following examples:

    Example 1. For 1966, domestic corporation M makes a first-tier 
election with respect to controlled foreign corporation A, 80 percent of 
the one class of stock of which M Corporation owns directly. Both 
corporations use the calendar year as the taxable year. For 1966, A 
Corporation has earnings and profits (before reduction for foreign 
income tax) of $100 with respect to which it pays foreign income tax of 
$30. Its earnings and profits are $70 ($100-$30). Corporation M's 
proportionate share of such earnings and profits is $56 (0.80 x $70), 
and its proportionate share of the foreign income tax is $24 ($56/
$70 x $30). The effective foreign tax rate is 30 percent ($24/
[$56+$24]). Based on such effective foreign tax rate, the statutory 
percentage under section 963(b)(3) for 1966 is 69 percent. Thus, the 
amount of the minimum distribution which M Corporation must receive from 
A Corporation's 1966 earnings and profits is a dividend of $38.64 
(0.69 x $56).
    Example 2. For 1966, domestic corporation M makes a first-tier 
election with respect to controlled foreign corporation A, all of whose 
one class of stock M Corporation owns directly. Both corporations use 
the calendar year as the taxable year. For 1966, A Corporation has 
earnings and profits (before reduction for income tax) of $100, of which 
$40 is attributable to income from sources within the United States on 
which $12 United States income tax is paid. The foreign country in which 
A Corporation is incorporated imposes an income tax at 30 percent on the 
$100 but allows a credit against its tax for the $12 of United States 
income tax, so that it imposes a net foreign income tax of $18 for 1966. 
In determining the effective foreign tax rate of A Corporation for 1966, 
such $12 of United States income tax may be treated as foreign income 
tax to the extent it does not exceed $17.28 ($40 x 0.90 x 0.48). 
Corporation A has earnings and profits of $70 for 1966. Although A 
Corporation's effective foreign tax rate for 1966 is 30 percent, 
determined by dividing $30 by the sum of $70 plus $30, none of the 
United States tax which is taken into account in determining such rate 
shall be treated as foreign income tax for purposes of determining the 
foreign tax credit of M Corporation under section 902. Based on such 
effective foreign tax rate, the statutory percentage under section 
963(b)(3) for 1966 is 69 percent. Thus, the amount of the minimum 
distribution which M Corporation must receive from A Corporation's 1966 
earnings and profits is a dividend of $48.30 (0.69 x $70).
    Example 3. Domestic corporation M directly owns throughout 1966, 60 
percent of the one class of stock of controlled foreign corporation A, 
not a less developed country corporation under section 902(d), which has

[[Page 440]]

for 1966 earnings and profits of $70 (all of which is attributable to 
subpart F income) after having paid foreign income tax of $30. Both 
corporations use the calendar year as the taxable year. Corporation A is 
created under the laws of a foreign country which imposes a 6-percent 
dividend withholding tax. Corporation M would be required, but for 
section 963, to include $42 (0.60 x $70) of A Corporation's subpart F 
income in gross income under section 951(a)(1)(A)(i). For 1966, however, 
M Corporation makes a first-tier election with respect to A Corporation. 
Since the tax withheld on distributions made by A Corporation is 
considered to have been paid by M Corporation, the effective foreign tax 
rate applicable to A Corporation for 1966 is only 30 percent, the 
percentage which such $30 of foreign income tax is of $100 (the sum of 
$30 plus $70). Thus, the statutory percentage under section 963(b) for 
1966 is 69 percent. The amount of the minimum distribution which M 
Corporation must receive from A Corporation's 1966 earnings and profits 
is the distribution M Corporation will receive if A Corporation 
distributes 69 percent of its earnings and profits for 1966. Thus, if M 
Corporation receives a distribution of 69 percent of its proportionate 
share of such earnings and profits or $28.98 (0.69 x 0.60 x $70), it may 
exclude from gross income for 1966 $42 otherwise required to be included 
in gross income under section 951(a)(1)(A)(i) and will determine its 
income tax, assuming no other income and no surtax exemption under 
section 11(c), as follows:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
Dividend.......................................................   $28.98
Gross-up under section 78 ($28.98/ $70 x $30)..................    12.42
Taxable income.................................................    41.40
U.S. tax before foreign tax credit ($41.40 x 0.48).............    19.87
Foreign tax credit ($12.42+[0.06  x $28.98])...................    14.16
U.S. tax payable...............................................     5.71
                                                                        

    Example 4. (a) For 1966 domestic corporation M makes a chain 
election with respect to controlled foreign corporation A, all of whose 
one class of stock it directly owns, and controlled foreign corporation 
B, all of whose one class of stock is directly owned by A Corporation. 
Both foreign corporations are subject to a foreign income tax at a flat 
rate of 30 percent, and all corporations use the calendar year as a 
taxable year. For 1966, B Corporation has pretax earnings and profits of 
$100 and distributes $51.50. For 1966, A Corporation has pretax earnings 
and profits of $151.50, consisting of $100 from selling activities and 
$51.50 received as a distribution from B Corporation, upon which it pays 
a foreign income tax of $45.45 (i.e., 30 percent of $151.50).
    (b) Corporation M chooses under paragraph (d)(1)(iii) of this 
section to take the foreign tax paid by A Corporation on the dividend 
received from B Corporation into account in determining the effective 
foreign tax rate of the chain rather than count it toward the amount of 
the minimum distribution. Thus, to determine consolidated earnings and 
profits of the chain for 1966, A Corporation's pretax earnings and 
profits of $151.50 are first reduced by the intercorporate dividend of 
$51.50 received from B Corporation so that A Corporation has pretax and 
predistribution earnings and profits of $100 ($151.50 less $51.50). 
Corporation A's pretax and predistribution earnings and profits of $100 
are then reduced by the foreign income tax of $30 (30 percent of $100) 
paid on such earnings and profits, resulting in predistribution earnings 
and profits of $70 ($100 less $30). Since M Corporation chooses to count 
toward the effective foreign tax rate, rather than toward the minimum 
distribution, A Corporation's foreign income tax of $15.45 
(0.30 x 51.50) imposed on the dividend received from B Corporation, such 
predistribution earnings and profits of $70 of A Corporation are further 
reduced by such $15.45 of tax to $54.55 ($70-$15.45). Corporation B, 
having received no dividends from any other corporation in the chain, 
has predistribution earnings and profits of $70 ($100 less foreign 
income tax of $30).
    (c) The consolidated earnings and profits of the chain for 1966 are 
$124.55 ($54.55+$70). The consolidated foreign income taxes for such 
year are $75.45 ($30+$15.45+$30). The effective foreign tax rate of the 
chain for 1966 is 37.73 percent ($75.45/[$124.55+$75.45]). The statutory 
percentage for 1966 under section 963(b)(3) is 51 percent. Thus, the 
amount of the minimum distribution which M Corporation must receive from 
the 1966 consolidated earnings and profits of the chain is $63.52 
(0.51 x $124.55).
    Example 5. The facts are the same as in example 4 except that M 
Corporation does not choose under paragraph (d)(1)(iii) of this section 
to take into account, in determining the effective foreign tax rate, the 
foreign income tax of $15.45 paid by A Corporation on the distribution 
of $51.50 received from B Corporation. In such case, the consolidated 
earnings and profits of the chain are $140 ($70+$70) and the 
consolidated foreign income taxes are $60 ($30+$30), the latter amount 
being determined without taking into account A Corporation's foreign 
income tax of $15.45 on the distribution of $51.50 received from B 
Corporation. The effective foreign tax rate for 1966 is 30 percent ($60/
[$140+$60]), and the statutory percentage under section 963(b) is 69 
percent. Thus, the amount of the minimum distribution which must be made 
from the 1966 consolidated earnings and profits of the chain is $96.60 
(0.69 x $140). For the counting of such $15.45 of A Corporation's tax 
toward the $96.60 amount of the minimum distribution, see paragraph 
(b)(2) of Sec. 1.963-3.
    Example 6. For 1966 domestic corporation M directly owns the 
following percentages of the one class of stock of the following 
controlled foreign corporations in respect of which it makes a group 
election: 80 percent

[[Page 441]]

of A Corporation, 60 percent of B Corporation, and 70 percent of C 
Corporation. All corporations use the calendar year as the taxable year; 
none of the foreign corporations is a less developed country corporation 
under section 902(d). Each foreign corporation makes distributions 
during 1966. The consolidated earnings and profits, and the consolidated 
foreign income taxes, of the group for 1966 with respect to M 
Corporation, and the amount of the minimum distribution which M 
Corporation must receive, are determined as follows, based on the 
earnings and profits and foreign income tax shown in the following 
table:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                    Controlled foreign  
                                                       corporations     
                                                 -----------------------
                                                    A      B        C   
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Predistribution and pretax earnings and profits.   $100   $100   $100.00
Foreign income tax..............................     15     25     35.00
Predistribution earnings and profits............     85     75     65.00
M Corporation's proportionate share of earnings                         
 and profits:                                                           
  (0.80 x $85)..................................     68  .....  ........
  (0.60 x $75)..................................  .....     45  ........
  (0.70 x $65)..................................  .....  .....     45.50
Consolidated earnings and profits with respect                          
 to M Corporation ($68+$45+$45.50)..............  .....  .....    158.50
M Corporation's proportionate share of foreign                          
 income tax:                                                            
  ($15 x [$68/$85]).............................     12  .....  ........
  ($25 x [$45/$75]).............................  .....     15  ........
  ($35 x [$45.50/$65])..........................  .....  .....     24.50
Consolidated foreign income taxes with respect                          
 to M Corporation ($12+$15+$24.50)..............  .....  .....     51.50
------------------------------------------------------------------------

The effective foreign tax rate for 1966 is 24.5 percent ($51.50/
[$158.50+$51.50]) and the statutory percentage under section 963(b)(3) 
for such year is 76 percent. Thus, the amount of the minimum 
distribution which M Corporation must receive from the 1966 consolidated 
earnings and profits of the group is $120.46 (0.76 x $158.50).
    Example 7. (a) For 1966 domestic corporation M makes a chain 
election with respect to the following controlled foreign corporations: 
A Corporation, 80 percent of whose one class of stock M Corporation owns 
directly; B Corporation, 60 percent of whose one class of stock is 
directly owned by A Corporation; and C Corporation, 70 percent of whose 
one class of stock is directly owned by B Corporation. All corporations 
use the calendar year as the taxable year; none of the foreign 
corporations is a less developed country corporation under section 
902(d). The predistribution and pretax earnings and profits of each 
foreign corporation are $100. Each foreign corporation pays a flat rate 
of foreign income tax on all income computed without reduction for 
dividends paid and determined by including dividends received. Such rate 
is 15 percent for A Corporation, 25 percent for B Corporation, and 35 
percent for C Corporation. Corporation C distributes $65, and B 
Corporation distributes $100, for 1966. Corporation M chooses under 
paragraph (d)(1)(iii) of this section to count toward the effective 
foreign tax rate, rather than toward the amount of the minimum 
distribution, the foreign income tax paid by corporations A and B, 
respectively, on distributions received from corporations B and C, 
respectively.
    (b) The consolidated earnings and profits, and the consolidated 
foreign income taxes, of the chain, and the amount of the minimum 
distribution for 1966, with respect to M Corporation are determined as 
follows:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                      Controlled foreign corporations   
                                 ---------------------------------------
                                      A         B         C       Total 
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Pretax earnings and profits.....   $160.00   $145.50   $100.00  ........
Reduction for intercorporate                                            
 dividends:                                                             
  (0.60 x $100).................     60.00  ........  ........  ........
  (0.70 x $65)..................  ........     45.50  ........  ........
                                 ------------------------------         
Pretax and predistribution                                              
 earnings and profits...........    100.00    100.00    100.00  ........
Reduction for foreign income tax                                        
 on such pretax and                                                     
 predistribution earnings and                                           
 profits:                                                               
  (0.15 x $100).................     15.00  ........  ........  ........
  (0.25 x $100).................  ........     25.00  ........  ........
  (0.35 x $100).................  ........  ........     35.00  ........
                                 ------------------------------         
Predistribution earnings and                                            
 profits........................     85.00     75.00     65.00  ........
Reduction for foreign income tax                                        
 on intercorporate distributions                                        
 of 1966 earnings and profits:                                          
  (0.15 x $60)..................      9.00  ........  ........  ........
  (0.25 x $45.50)...............  ........     11.38  ........  ........
                                 ------------------------------         
                                     76.00     63.62     65.00          
                                 ==============================         

[[Page 442]]

                                                                        
Consolidated earnings and                                               
 profits with respect to M                                              
 Corporation:                                                           
  (0.80 x $76)..................     60.80  ........  ........  ........
  (0.80 x 0.60 x $63.62)........  ........     30.54  ........  ........
  (0.80 x 0.60 x 0.70 x $65)....  ........  ........     21.84   $113.18
Consolidated foreign income                                             
 taxes with respect to M                                                
 Corporation:                                                           
  ($60.80/$76 x [$15+$9]).......     19.20  ........  ........  ........
  ($30.54/$63.62 x [$25+$11.38])  ........     17.46  ........  ........
  ($21.84/$65 x $35)............  ........  ........     11.76    $48.42
Effective foreign tax rate                                              
 ($48.42/[$113.18+$48.42])......  ........  ........  ........    29.96%
Statutory percentage under                                              
 section 963(b).................                                     69%
Amount of minimum distribution                                          
 which M Corporation must                                               
 receive from 1966 consolidated                                         
 earnings and profits (0.69 x                                           
 $113.18), no amount of the tax                                         
 on intercorporate distributions                                        
 being counted toward the                                               
 minimum distribution...........  ........  ........  ........     $78.0
------------------------------------------------------------------------

Example 8. The facts are the same as in example 7 except that M 
Corporation does not choose under paragraph (d)(1)(iii) of this section 
to take into account, in determining the effective foreign tax rate, the 
foreign income tax paid by the recipient corporations on the 
intercorporate distributions. The consolidated earnings and profits, the 
consolidated foreign income taxes, of the chain, and the amount of the 
minimum distribution which M Corporation must receive, for 1966 are 
determined as follows:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                      Controlled foreign corporations   
                                 ---------------------------------------
                                      A         B         C       Total 
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Pretax earnings and profits.....   $160.00   $145.50   $100.00  ........
Reduction for intercorporate                                            
 dividends:                                                             
  (0.60 x $100).................     60.00  ........  ........  ........
  (0.70 x $65)..................  ........     45.50  ........  ........
                                 ------------------------------         
Pretax and predistribution                                              
 earnings and profits...........    100.00    100.00    100.00  ........
Reduction for foreign income tax                                        
 on such pretax and                                                     
 predistribution earnings and                                           
 profits:                                                               
  (0.15 x $100).................     15.00  ........  ........  ........
  (0.25 x $100).................  ........     25.00  ........  ........
  (0.35 x $100).................  ........  ........     35.00  ........
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Predistribution earnings and                                            
 profits........................     85.00     75.00     65.00  ........
Consolidated earnings and                                               
 profits with respect to M                                              
 Corporation:                                                           
  (0.80 x $85)..................     68.00  ........  ........  ........
  (0.80 x 0.60 x $75)...........  ........     36.00  ........  ........
  (0.80 x 0.60 x 0.70 x $65)....  ........  ........     21.84   $125.84
Consolidated foreign income                                             
 taxes with respect to M                                                
 Corporation:                                                           
  ($68/$85 x $15)...............     12.00  ........  ........  ........
  ($36/$75 x $25)...............  ........     12.00  ........  ........
  ($21.84/$65 x $35)............  ........  ........     11.76    $35.76
Effective foreign tax rate                                              
 ($35.76/[$125.84+$35.76])......  ........  ........  ........    22.13%
Statutory percentage under                                              
 section 963(b).................  ........  ........  ........       76%
Amount of minimum distribution                                          
 to be made from 1966                                                   
 consolidated earnings and                                              
 profits with respect to M                                              
 Corporation: (0.76 x $125.84)..  ........  ........  ........    $95.64
Foreign income tax on                                                   
 intercorporate distributions of                                        
 1966 earnings and profits which                                        
 is counted toward the minimum                                          
 distribution (see Sec.  1.963-                                         
 3(b)(2)):                                                              
  ($68/$85 x [0.15 x $60])......      7.20  ........  ........  ........
  ($36/$75 x [0.25 x $45.50])...  ........      5.46  ........    $12.66
Amount of minimum distribution                                          
 which M Corporation must                                               
 actually receive from the chain                                        
 ($95.64-$12.66)................  ........  ........  ........    $82.98
------------------------------------------------------------------------

[T.D. 6759, 29 FR 13329, Sept. 25, 1964, as amended by T.D. 6767, 29 FR 
14877, Nov. 3, 1964; T.D. 7100, 36 FR 5335, Mar. 20, 1971]


<R05>
Sec. 1.963-3   Distributions counting toward a minimum distribution.

    (a) Conditions under which earnings and profits are counted toward a 
minimum distribution--(1) In general. A distribution to the United 
States shareholder by a single first-tier corporation or by a foreign 
corporation included in a chain or group shall count toward a

[[Page 443]]

minimum distribution for the taxable year of such shareholder to which 
the election under section 963 relates only to the extent that--
    (i) It is received by such shareholder during such year or within 
180 days thereafter,
    (ii) It is a distribution of the type described in paragraph (b) of 
this section,
    (iii) Under paragraph (c) of this section, it is deemed to be 
distributed from the earnings and profits of the foreign corporations 
for the taxable year of such corporation to which the election relates, 
and
    (iv) Such shareholder chooses to include it in gross income for the 
taxable year of such shareholder to which the election relates 
notwithstanding that such distribution, by reason of its receipt after 
the close of such year, would ordinarily be includible in the gross 
income of a subsequent year.

Amounts taken into account under this subparagraph as gross income of 
the United States shareholder for the taxable year to which the election 
relates shall not be considered to be includible in the gross income of 
such shareholder for a subsequent taxable year. For purposes of 
determining the foreign tax credit under sections 901 through 905, 
foreign income tax paid or accrued by such shareholder on or with 
respect to such amounts shall be treated as paid or accrued during the 
taxable year of such election.
    (2) Distributions made prior to acquisition of stock. A United 
States shareholder which owns within the meaning of section 958(a) stock 
in a foreign corporation with respect to which such shareholder elects 
to secure an exclusion under section 963 for the taxable year may count 
toward the minimum distribution any distribution made with respect to 
such stock, and before its acquisition by the United States shareholder, 
to any other domestic corporation not exempt from income tax under 
chapter 1 of the Code, to the extent that such distribution is made out 
of the United States shareholder's proportionate share, as determined 
under paragraph (d)(2) of Sec. 1.963-2, of such corporation's earnings 
and profits for the taxable year and would have counted toward a minimum 
distribution if it had been distributed to such United States 
shareholder. The application of this subparagraph may be illustrated by 
the following examples:

    Example 1. Controlled foreign corporation A, which uses the calendar 
year as the taxable year, has for 1963 $100 of earnings and profits and 
100 shares of only one class of stock outstanding. Domestic corporation 
M, not exempt from income tax under chapter 1 of the Code, directly owns 
all of such shares during the period from January 1, 1963, through June 
30, 1963. On June 30, 1963, M Corporation transfers all of such shares 
to domestic corporation N, which owns them throughout the remainder of 
1963 and elects to secure an exclusion under section 963 for such year 
with respect to the subpart F income of A Corporation. During June 1963, 
M Corporation receives a dividend of $75 from A Corporation, which would 
count toward a minimum distribution if it had been distributed to N 
Corporation for such year. Corporation N's proportionate share of the 
earnings and profits of A Corporation for 1963 is $100; N Corporation 
may count toward a minimum distribution for 1963 the entire dividend of 
$75 paid to M Corporation.
    Example 2. The facts are the same as in example 1 except that M is a 
nonresident alien individual. Since A Corporation is not a controlled 
foreign corporation from January 1, 1963, through June 30, 1963, N 
Corporation's proportionate share of the earnings and profits of A 
Corporation for 1963 is $50.41 ($100 x 184/365), as determined under 
paragraph (d)(2)(iii) of Sec. 1.963-2. Although $25.41 ($75-$49.59) of 
the $75 distribution to M is paid from N Corporation's proportionate 
share of A Corporation's 1963 earnings and profits, N Corporation may 
not count toward a minimum distribution any part of the $75 dividend 
distributed to M, since M is not a domestic corporation.

    (b) Qualifying distributions--(1) Amounts not counted toward a 
minimum distribution. No distribution received by a United States 
shareholder shall count toward a minimum distribution for the taxable 
year with respect to such shareholder to the extent the distribution is 
excludable from gross income to the extent gain on the distribution is 
not recognized, or to the extent the distribution is treated as a 
distribution in part or full payment in exchange for stock. 
Undistributed amounts required to be included in gross income under 
section 551 as undistributed foreign personal holding company income or 
under section 951 as undistributed amounts of a controlled foreign 
corporation shall not count toward a minimum distribution

[[Page 444]]

under section 963. An amount received by a United States shareholder as 
a distribution which under section 302 or section 331 is treated as a 
distribution in part or full payment in exchange for stock shall not 
count toward a minimum distribution even though such amount is 
includible in gross income under section 1248 as a dividend. For 
purposes of this subparagraph, any portion of a distribution of earnings 
and profits which is attributable to an increase in current earnings, 
invested in United States property which, but for paragraph (e) of this 
section, would be included in the gross income of the United States 
shareholder under section 951(a)(1)(B) shall not be treated as an amount 
excludable from gross income.
    (2) Inclusion of tax on intercorporate distributions. In the case of 
a chain or group election, the United States shareholder's proportionate 
share of the amount of the foreign income tax paid or accrued for the 
taxable year by a foreign corporation in the chain or group with respect 
to distributions received by such corporation from the earnings and 
profits, of another foreign corporation in such chain or group, for the 
taxable year of such other corporation to which the election relates 
shall count toward a minimum distribution from such chain or group for 
the taxable year, but only if the United States shareholder does not 
choose under paragraph (d)(1)(iii) of Sec. 1.963-2 to take such tax into 
account in determining the effective foreign tax rate of such chain or 
group for the taxable year. To the extent that foreign income tax counts 
toward a minimum distribution under this subparagraph, it shall be 
applied against and reduce the amount of the minimum distribution 
required to be received by the United States shareholder, determined 
without regard to this paragraph.
    (c) Rules for allocation of distributions to earnings and profits 
for a taxable year. To determine whether a distribution to the United 
States shareholder by a single first-tier corporation or by a foreign 
corporation in a chain or group is made from the earnings and profits of 
such corporation for the taxable year to which the election under 
section 963 relates, the following subparagraphs shall apply:
    (1) Exception to section 316. Section 316 shall apply except that a 
distribution of earnings and profits made by a foreign corporation 
either to another foreign corporation or to the United States 
shareholder shall be treated as having been paid from the earnings and 
profits of the distributing corporation for the taxable year of such 
corporation to which the election relates only if it is made during its 
distribution period (described in paragraph (g) of this section) for 
such year.
    (2) Distributions from other corporations. The earnings and profits 
of a foreign corporation shall be determined in accordance with 
paragraph (d)(1) of Sec. 1.963-2 (applied as though the United States 
shareholder had chosen under subparagraph (1)(iii) of such paragraph to 
take the tax described therein into account in determining the effective 
foreign tax rate) except that, in the case of a chain or group election, 
a distribution received by a foreign corporation in the chain or group 
from another foreign corporation in such chain or group shall be taken 
into account as earnings and profits of the recipient corporation for 
the taxable year of such recipient corporation to which the election 
relates but only to the extent that--
    (i) The distribution is received by the recipient corporation during 
the distribution period for the taxable year of such recipient 
corporation to which the election relates,
    (ii) If the distribution had been received by the United States 
shareholder, it would have constituted a distribution of the type 
described in paragraph (b) of this section, and
    (iii) The distribution is made from the earnings and profits of the 
distributing corporation for the taxable year of such distributing 
corporation to which the election relates.
    (d) Year of inclusion in income of foreign corporation and effect 
upon subpart F income. To the extent that a distribution to the United 
States shareholder counting toward a minimum distribution from a chain 
or group consists of earnings and profits distributed to a foreign 
corporation in the chain or group after the close of the recipient

[[Page 445]]

corporation's taxable year but during its distribution period for such 
year by another foreign corporation in such chain or group, such amount 
shall be treated as received by the recipient corporation on the last 
day of such taxable year and shall not be regarded as foreign personal 
holding company income (within the meaning of section 553(a) or 954(c)) 
of such corporation for the taxable year in which such amount is 
actually received. The extent to which a distribution counting toward a 
minimum distribution consists of earnings and profits distributed to a 
foreign corporation in a chain or group shall be determined under the 
ordering rules of paragraph (b)(3) of Sec. 1.963-4 (applied in each 
instance as though the United States shareholder had not chosen under 
paragraph (d)(1)(iii) of Sec. 1.963-2 to take the tax described therein 
into account in determining the effective foreign tax rate). However, 
for such purpose, the amount of foreign income tax, if any, which counts 
toward the minimum distribution shall be determined without regard to 
paragraph (b)(2) of this section but in accordance with paragraph 
(b)(3)(iii) of Sec. 1.963-4.
    (e) Distribution of current earnings invested in United States 
property. A distribution made by a foreign corporation during its 
distribution period for a taxable year shall, notwithstanding section 
959(c), first be attributed to earnings and profits for such year 
described in section 959(c)(3) and then to other earnings and profits. 
For such purposes, earnings and profits of such foreign corporation for 
such year attributable to amounts which would otherwise be included in 
gross income of the United States shareholder under section 951(a)(1)(B) 
for such year shall be treated as earnings and profits to which section 
959(c)(3) applies, shall not be excluded from gross income under section 
959 (a) or (b), and shall count toward a minimum distribution for such 
year. See paragraph (c)(1)(v) of Sec. 1.960-1 and paragraph (a) of 
Sec. 1.960-2.
    (f) Cumulative dividends in arrears. A distribution in satisfaction 
of arrearages shall be treated as being made out of earnings and profits 
of the foreign corporation for the taxable year to which the election 
under section 963 applies only to the extent the dividend is not 
attributed, under paragraph (d)(2)(i)(d) of Sec. 1.963-2, to the 
earnings and profits of such corporation remaining from prior taxable 
years beginning after December 31, 1962. The application of this 
paragraph may be illustrated by the following example:

    Example. For 1963, single first-tier corporation A, which uses the 
calendar year as the taxable year, has earnings and profits of $50; for 
1964, a deficit in earnings and profits of $20; for 1965, earnings and 
profits of $100; and for 1966, earnings and profits of $240. For each of 
such years preferred dividends accumulate at the rate of $60; but no 
dividend is paid until 1966 during which year the current dividend is 
paid and $180 is distributed toward the arrearages. Of this $180, only 
$50 ($180-$130) shall be treated as paid from 1966 earnings and profits.

    (g) Distribution period of a foreign corporation--(1) General 
distribution period. Except as provided by subparagraph (2) of this 
paragraph, the distribution period with respect to a foreign corporation 
for its taxable year shall begin immediately after the close of the 
distribution period for the preceding taxable year and shall end with 
the close of the 60th day of the next succeeding taxable year. If no 
election to secure an exclusion under section 963 applied to the 
preceding taxable year, the distribution period for the taxable year 
shall begin with the 61st day of the taxable year.
    (2) Special extended distribution period. If the United States 
shareholder of the foreign corporation so elects in statement filed with 
its return for the taxable year for which the election to secure the 
exclusion under section 963 is made, the distribution period with 
respect to such foreign corporation for its taxable year to which the 
election to secure the exclusion applies shall end with any day which 
occurs no earlier than the last day of such taxable year of such foreign 
corporation and no later than the 180th day after the close of such 
taxable year. The statement shall designate the day so elected as the 
end of the distribution period.
    (h) Illustrations. The application of this section may be 
illustrated by the following examples:

    Example 1. For 1963 domestic corporation M makes a chain election 
with respect to controlled foreign corporation A, all of whose one class 
of stock M Corporation directly

[[Page 446]]

owns, and controlled foreign corporation B, all of whose one class of 
stock is directly owned by A Corporation. All such corporations use the 
calendar year as the taxable year, and the distribution periods of 
corporations A and B for 1963 coincide. Corporations A and B each have 
earnings and profits (before distributions) of $100 for 1963. On June 1, 
1963, B Corporation distributes earnings and profits of $120, of which 
$100 is from its earnings and profits for 1963 and $20 is from prior 
earnings. For 1963, A Corporation pays no income tax and distributes 
earnings and profits of $150 to M Corporation. Under paragraph (c) of 
this section, such $150 is allocated to A Corporation's earnings and 
profits of $200 for 1963, consisting of its total earnings and profits 
for that year of $220 less the $20 received as a distribution from B 
Corporation's prior earnings.
    Example 2. Domestic corporation M directly owns all of the one class 
of stock of controlled foreign corporation A. Both corporations use the 
calendar year as the taxable year, and A Corporation's taxable year and 
its distribution period for 1963 coincide. For 1963, $50 is included in 
the gross income of M Corporation under section 951(a)(1)(B) as A 
Corporation's increase in earnings invested for such year in United 
States property. For 1964, M Corporation makes a first-tier election 
with respect to A Corporation. For 1964, A Corporation has earnings and 
profits of $100, including $10 attributable to an increase in earnings 
invested for such year in United States property. During 1964, A 
Corporation distributes earnings and profits of $80 to M Corporation. 
Without regard to paragraph (e) of this section, $10 of this 
distribution is attributable under section 959(c)(1) to A Corporation's 
1964 earnings and profits required to be included in M Corporation's 
gross income under section 951(a)(1)(D). Pursuant to paragraph (e) of 
this section, however, the entire distribution of $80 counts toward a 
minimum distribution for 1964 and is considered to be from earnings and 
profits of A Corporation for 1964 described in section 959(c)(3). Thus 
the entire distribution of $80 is included in M Corporation's gross 
income as a dividend and the foreign tax credit in respect of such 
amount is determined in accordance with section 902 as modified by the 
regulations under section 963. On the other hand, if A Corporation made 
no distributions for 1964, no part of the $10 of A Corporation's 
increase in earnings invested in United States property for such year 
would count toward a minimum distribution for any other year but would 
be included in the gross income for M Corporation for 1964 under section 
951(a)(1)(B), and the foreign tax credit in respect of such amount would 
be determined in accordance with Sec. 1.960-1.
    Example 3. For 1964 domestic corporation M makes a chain election 
with respect to controlled foreign corporation A, all the one class of 
stock of which is owned directly by M Corporation, and controlled 
foreign corporation B, all the one class of stock of which is owned 
directly by A Corporation. Corporation M makes no election under section 
963 for 1963 or 1965. Corporations M and B use the calendar year as the 
taxable year, and A Corporation uses for its taxable year a fiscal year 
ending on September 30. Corporation M elects to have the distribution 
period for each controlled foreign corporation end on March 29, 1965, 
such date being the 180th day after the close of A Corporation's taxable 
year ending on September 30, 1964. Corporation A's distribution period 
for its taxable year ending on September 30, 1964, begins on November 
30, 1963, the 61st day of such taxable year. The distribution period of 
B Corporation for 1964 begins on March 1, 1964, the 61st day of such 
taxable year. A distribution counting toward a minimum distribution for 
1964 may be made from the earnings and profits of B Corporation only if 
the amount thereof is distributed by B Corporation to A Corporation, and 
in turn by A Corporation to M Corporation, during the period of March 1, 
1964, through March 29, 1965.
    Example 4. The facts are the same as in example 3, except that for 
their taxable years ending in 1964, corporations A and B each have 
earnings and profits (before distributions) of $100. On March 10, 1965, 
B Corporation distributes to A Corporation a dividend of $80 upon which 
A Corporation incurs foreign income tax at the rate of 10 percent. On 
March 15, 1965, A Corporation distributes to M Corporation a dividend of 
$50. Corporation M chooses to take into account as gross income for 1964 
from such distribution only $40. For purposes of applying this section, 
the distribution counting toward a minimum distribution is $44.44, 
consisting of the $40 of earnings and profits actually received by M 
Corporation plus the $4.44 ($40/$72 x $8) of foreign income tax incurred 
by A Corporation attributable thereto; A Corporation is deemed to have 
received $44.44 ($40<divide>0.90) of the distribution from B Corporation 
on September 30, 1964, the last day of the taxable year of A Corporation 
to which the election relates; and the foreign personal holding company 
income derived by A Corporation for its taxable year ending in 1965 from 
the distribution from B is only $35.56 ($80-$44.44). Assuming that no 
exceptions, exclusions, or exemptions were applicable, subpart F income 
would be realized by A Corporation for its taxable year ending on 
September 30, 1965, upon the distribution by B Corporation to A 
Corporation, but only in the amount of $32 ($35.56 less a deduction 
under section 954(b)(5) for taxes of $3.56).

[T.D. 7100, 36 FR 10860, June 4, 1971; 36 FR 11924, June 23, 1971, as 
amended by T.D. 7334, 39 FR 44214, Dec. 23, 1974]

[[Page 447]]


<R05>
Sec. 1.963-4   Limitations on minimum distribution from a chain or group.

    (a) Minimum overall tax burden--(1) In general. Notwithstanding the 
fact that distributions of the type described in paragraph (a) of 
Sec. 1.963-3 are made by a chain or group to the United States 
shareholder in an amount sufficient to constitute a minimum distribution 
for the taxable year of such shareholder to which the chain or group 
election relates, no exclusion shall be allowable under section 963 to 
such shareholder with respect to such chain or group for such year 
unless--
    (i) Without applying the special rules set forth in paragraphs (b) 
and (c) of this section, the overall United States and foreign income 
tax (as defined in subparagraph (2)(ii) of this paragraph) for the 
taxable year with respect to the distribution which is made equals or 
exceeds 90 percent of an amount determined by multiplying the sum of the 
consolidated earnings and profits (as determined under paragraph (d)(3) 
of Sec. 1.963-2) and the consolidated foreign income taxes (as 
determined under paragraph (e)(2) of Sec. 1.963-2) of such chain or 
group for the taxable year with respect to such shareholder by a 
percentage which equals the sum of the normal tax rate and the surtax 
rate (determined without regard to the surtax exemption) prescribed by 
section 11 for the taxable year of the shareholder, or
    (ii) With the application of the special rules set forth in 
paragraphs (b) and (c) of this section--
    (a) Such shareholder receives a pro rata minimum distribution (as 
defined in subparagraph (2)(i) of this paragraph) from such chain or 
group for such taxable year, or
    (b) To the extent necessary, the amount of the foreign income tax 
allowable as a credit for such year under section 901 with respect to 
the distribution which is made is reduced and credit for the reduction 
is deferred, as provided in paragraph (c)(3) of this section, so that 
the overall United States and foreign income tax for the taxable year 
with respect to such distribution equals or exceeds the lesser of--
    (1) The overall United States and foreign income tax which would be 
paid or accrued for such year with respect to a pro rata minimum 
distribution received by such shareholder from such chain or group for 
such year, and
    (2) Ninety percent of an amount determined by multiplying the sum of 
the consolidated earnings and profits (as determined under paragraph 
(b)(1) of this section) and the consolidated foreign income taxes (as 
determined under paragraph (b)(1) of this section) of such chain or 
group for the taxable year with respect to such shareholder by a 
percentage which equals the sum of the normal tax rate and the surtax 
rate (determined without regard to the surtax exemption) prescribed by 
section 11 for the taxable year of the shareholder.
    (2) Definitions. For purposes of Secs. 1.963-1 through 1.963.8--
    (i) Pro rata minimum distribution. A pro rata minimum distribution 
from a chain or group for the taxable year is a distribution of earnings 
and profits to the United States shareholder, with respect to stock to 
which the chain or group election relates, which is the statutory 
percentage (applicable with respect to such chain or group as determined 
under paragraph (b) of Sec. 1.963-2) of the United States shareholder's 
proportionate share of the taxable year's earnings and profits of each 
foreign corporation in such chain or group (determined in accordance 
with paragraph (d)(2) of Sec. 1.963-2 but without making any deduction 
under paragraph (d)(1)(iii) of such section).
    (ii) Overall United States and foreign income tax. The overall 
United States and foreign income tax for any taxable year of a chain or 
group with respect to a minimum distribution is the sum of--
    (a) The consolidated foreign income taxes of the chain or group for 
such year with respect to the United States shareholder making the chain 
or group election,
    (b) Any other foreign income tax paid or accrued by a foreign 
corporation in the chain or group by reason of the receipt of any 
distributions counting toward such minimum distribution from such chain 
or group for that year, and
    (c) The foreign income tax, if any, and United States income tax 
paid or accrued by such shareholder upon

[[Page 448]]

amounts counting toward such minimum distribution from such chain or 
group for such year.

Such overall United States and foreign income tax shall be determined 
with respect to such minimum distribution without taking into account 
any foreign income tax which is deemed paid for such year under section 
904(d), relating to carryback and carryover of excess tax paid. For 
purposes of this subdivision, the consolidated foreign income taxes of 
the chain or group shall be determined under paragraph (e)(2) of 
Sec. 1.963-2, applied without regard to the second sentence of paragraph 
(d)(1) of that section.
    (3) Taxes paid by foreign corporation on distributions received 
during its distribution period. For purposes of determining foreign 
income tax deemed paid by the United States shareholder for the taxable 
year under section 902, if a distribution received by a foreign 
corporation in a chain or group from another foreign corporation in such 
chain or group after the close of the recipient's taxable year but 
during its distribution period for such year is allocated to the 
earnings and profits of such recipient corporation for such year under 
paragraph (c)(2) of Sec. 1.963-3, any foreign income tax paid or accrued 
by such recipient corporation on such distribution shall be treated as 
paid or accrued for such taxable year.
    (4) Illustration. The application of this paragraph may be 
illustrated by the following example:

    Example. (a) Domestic corporation M directly owns all of the one 
class of stock of foreign corporation A, which in turn directly owns all 
of the one class of stock of foreign corporation B. Corporation M makes 
a chain election with respect to A Corporation and B Corporation. All 
such corporations use the calendar year as the taxable year. Assuming 
that A Corporation does not incur foreign tax on amounts distributed by 
B Corporation, the foreign income tax and earnings and profits of 
corporations A and B, the effective foreign tax rate, and the statutory 
percentage for 1966, are as follows:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                A      B    Consolidated
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Pretax and predistribution earnings and                                 
 profits....................................   $100   $100        $200  
Foreign income tax..........................     20     40          60  
                                             ---------------------------
Earnings and profits........................     80     60         140  
                                             ===========================
Effective foreign tax rate ($60/[$140+$60]).  .....  .....         30%  
Statutory percentage under section 963(b)...  .....  .....         69%  
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (b) Corporation M is entitled for 1966 to exclude its pro rata share 
of the subpart F income of corporations A and B for such year if it 
receives from the 1966 consolidated earnings and profits of the chain 
distributions totaling at least $96.60 (0.69 x $140) and if--
    (1) The sum of the consolidated foreign income taxes ($60) of the 
chain for 1966 and of the United States income tax for 1966 (determined 
by taking into account the foreign tax credit under section 901 without 
regard to paragraph (c) of this section) imposed on such distributions 
equals at least $86.40 (0.90 x 0.48 x $200);
    (2) Under the special rules of paragraphs (b) and (c) of this 
section, the distributions received consist of a distribution from each 
of corporations A and B which is 69 percent of the earnings and profits 
for 1966 of such corporation, that is, a distribution of $55.20 
(0.69 x $80) from A Corporation and of $41.40 (0.69 x $60) from B 
Corporation; or
    (3) Under the special rules of paragraphs (b) and (c) of this 
section, the foreign tax credit is reduced and deferred to such an 
extent that the sum of the consolidated foreign income taxes ($60) of 
the chain for 1966 and of the United States income tax for 1966 
(determined by taking into account the foreign tax credit under section 
901 as modified by paragraph (c) of this section) imposed on such 
distributions equals the lesser of $86.40 (0.90 x 0.48 x $200) and the 
amount which the sum of such taxes would be if M Corporation were to 
receive a distribution of $55.20 (0.69 x $80) from the 1966 earnings and 
profits of A Corporation and $41.40 (0.69 x $60) from the 1966 earnings 
and profits of B Corporation.

    (b) Special rules for determining earnings and profits and foreign 
income taxes. For purposes of determining the minimum overall tax burden 
under paragraph (a)(1)(ii) of this section, Secs. 1.963-2 and 1.963-3 
shall apply as modified by the following subparagraphs:
    (1) Exclusion of tax on intercorporate distributions. The 
consolidated earnings and profits and consolidated foreign income taxes 
of a chain or group for the taxable year shall be determined in 
accordance with Sec. 1.963-2, except that foreign income tax referred to 
in paragraph (d)(1)(iii) of such section may be

[[Page 449]]

taken into account in determining the effective foreign tax rate only--
    (i) To the extent that such tax is not deemed paid by the United 
States shareholder under section 902 (as modified by paragraph (c) of 
this section) for its taxable year to which the chain or group election 
relates, or
    (ii) If, by taking the tax into account, the effective foreign tax 
rate with respect to such chain or group, as determined under paragraph 
(c)(2) of Sec. 1.963-2, exceeds the highest effective foreign tax rate 
requiring a distribution under section 963(b) for such year of the 
shareholder.
    (2) Allocation of deficits. For purposes of determining the amount 
of each foreign corporation's share of a pro rata minimum distribution 
from a chain or group for the taxable year and for purposes of 
determining the foreign tax credit under paragraph (c) of this section 
of the United States shareholder with respect to any minimum 
distribution from a chain or group for the taxable year--
    (i) Deficits of foreign corporations. The total of the United States 
shareholder's proportionate shares, as determined under paragraph 
(d)(2)(ii) of Sec. 1.963-2, of the deficit of every foreign corporation 
in the chain or group having a deficit for the taxable year shall be 
allocated against and shall reduce such shareholder's proportionate 
share, as determined under paragraph (d)(2)(i) of Sec. 1.963-2, of the 
earnings and profits for the taxable year of each other foreign 
corporation in the chain or group having earnings and profits for such 
year in an amount which bears to such total of shares of deficit the 
same ratio which such share of earnings and profits bears to the total 
of such shareholder's proportionate shares, as so determined, of the 
earnings and profits of all foreign corporations in the chain or group 
having earnings and profits for the taxable year.
    (ii) Deficits of foreign branches. If for the taxable year a group 
includes under paragraph (f)(4) of Sec. 1.963-1 foreign branches the 
aggregate of whose allowable deductions (other than any net operating 
loss deduction) exceeds the aggregate of their gross incomes for the 
taxable year, determined as provided in paragraph (f)(4)(ii) of such 
section, the amount of such excess shall be allocated as provided by 
subdivision (i) of this subparagraph.
    (3) Distributions through a chain or group. In determining whether 
and to what extent a distribution for any taxable year has been made out 
of the earnings and profits of a foreign corporation included in a chain 
of ownership described in section 958(a) consisting of two or more 
corporations in a chain or group for the taxable year, the following 
subdivisions shall apply:
    (i) Allocation first to income received as a distribution. If any 
foreign corporation included in the chain or group for the taxable year 
receives a distribution for such year from another foreign corporation 
in the chain or group and in turn makes a distribution for the taxable 
year, the distribution so made shall first be allocated to the earnings 
and profits, to the extent thereof, attributable to the distribution so 
received; if distributions are received from more than one other 
corporation in the chain or group, the distribution made by the 
recipient corporation shall be apportioned among all such amounts. For 
purposes of determining whether a distribution is made or received for 
the taxable year, see paragraph (c) of Sec. 1.963-3.
    (ii) Successive distributions through a chain or group. If any 
foreign corporation included in the chain or group for the taxable year 
distributes an amount from its earnings and profits of such year, the 
amount so distributed shall be considered to be received from such 
earnings and profits by the United States shareholder to the extent the 
amount is distributed by successive distributions made by each other 
foreign corporation in the chain or group for the taxable year through 
the chain of ownership described in section 958(a) into the hands of 
such shareholder.
    (iii) Distribution determined without reduction by taxes of 
intervening corporations. If, for the taxable year to which the election 
to secure an exclusion under section 963 applies, the United States 
shareholder receives a distribution to which subdivision (ii) of this 
subparagraph applies, the entire amount distributed by the foreign 
corporation from such shareholder's proportionate share of its earnings 
and

[[Page 450]]

profits for the taxable year shall, except where taxes referred to in 
paragraph (d)(1)(iii) of Sec. 1.963-2 are taken into account as provided 
by subparagraph (1) of this paragraph, count toward a minimum 
distribution and shall not be reduced for such purpose by an foreign 
income tax paid or accrued on such amount by another foreign corporation 
in the chain or group through which such amount is distributed by 
successive distributions into the hands of such shareholder. The 
application of this subdivision may be illustrated by the following 
examples:

    Example 1. For 1966, domestic corporation M makes a chain election 
with respect to controlled foreign corporation A, all the one class of 
stock of which is directly owned by M Corporation, and controlled 
foreign corporation B, all the one class of stock of which is directly 
owned by A Corporation. All corporations use the calendar year as the 
taxable year. Corporation M complies with the special rules of this 
paragraph and paragraph (c) of this section for the taxable year. 
Corporation A's only income for 1966 is a dividend of $52.50 distributed 
in such year by B Corporation, on which A Corporation is subject to an 
income tax of $10.50. The remaining $42 ($52.50 less $10.50) is 
distributed by A Corporation for 1966 to M Corporation. The full $52.50 
distributed by B Corporation counts toward a minimum distribution by the 
chain for 1966.
    Example 2. For 1966, domestic corporation M makes a chain election 
with respect to controlled foreign corporation A, all the one class of 
stock of which it owns directly, and controlled foreign corporation B, 
all the one class of stock of which A Corporation own directly. All 
corporations use the calendar year as the taxable year. Corporation M 
complies with the special rules of this paragraph and paragraph (c) of 
this section for the taxable year. The predistribution and pretax 
earnings and profits for 1966 of B Corporation are $100, and of A 
Corporation, $0. Corporation B pays foreign income tax of $30 and during 
the year distributes $70. On such $70, A Corporation pays foreign income 
tax of $14. By applying paragraph (d)(1)(iii) of Sec. 1.963-2, the 
consolidated foreign income taxes of the chain for 1966 are $44 
($30+$14) and the consolidated earnings and profits of the chain are $56 
($70-$14); in such case, the effective foreign tax rate of the chain for 
1966 is 44 percent ($44/[$56+$44]) and thus in excess of the highest 
effective foreign tax rate requiring a distribution for such year under 
section 963(b). Since M Corporation may thus take A Corporation's tax of 
$14 into account, the statutory percentage under section 963(b) for 1966 
is zero percent and the amount of the minimum distribution required to 
be made by the chain is $0.

    (c) Special foreign tax credit rules--(1) In general. In determining 
the minimum overall tax burden under paragraph (a)(1)(ii) of this 
section, the foreign tax credit of the United States shareholder with 
respect to a minimum distribution received for the taxable year from the 
chain or group shall be determined under the provisions of sections 901 
through 905 as modified by Sec. 1.963-3 except that--
    (i) Under subparagraph (2) of this paragraph--
    (a) Taxes of a second-tier corporation making a distribution through 
a first-tier corporation shall not be averaged with taxes of such first-
tier corporation,
    (b) Taxes of a first-tier corporation or a second-tier corporation 
on a distribution made through such corporation shall not be averaged 
with such corporation's taxes on its other income; and
    (c) Taxes of a first-tier corporation or a second-tier corporation 
shall not be deemed paid with respect to distributions from the earnings 
and profits of such corporation which are offset by a deficit allocated 
under paragraph (b)(2) of this section to the United States 
shareholder's proportionate share of the earnings and profits of such 
corporation; and
    (ii) The foreign tax credit may be reduced and the reduction 
deferred under subparagraph (3) of this paragraph to another taxable 
year of the United States shareholder.
    (2) Nonaveraging of tax--(i) Year of minimum distribution--(a) Taxes 
deemed paid by a first-tier corporation and taxes actually paid by such 
corporation. If, by successive distributions through a chain or group, a 
United States shareholder receives for a taxable year a distribution of 
the earnings and profits for such year of any corporation in such chain 
or group, and if both section 902(a) and section 902(b) apply with 
respect to such distribution, all the taxes deemed paid under section 
902(b) by the first-tier corporation described in section 902(a) with 
respect to such distribution of such earnings and profits shall be 
deemed paid by the United States shareholder for such taxable

[[Page 451]]

year under section 902(a) with respect to the earnings and profits so 
distributed and, notwithstanding the rules otherwise applicable under 
section 902, no part of the taxes so deemed paid by such first-tier 
corporation shall be attributed to other earnings and profits of such 
first-tier corporation for such year and no part of the taxes paid or 
accrued with respect to such other earnings and profits shall be 
attributed to the earnings and profits so received as a distribution.
    (b) Taxes of a foreign corporation paid on intercorporate 
distributions and on other income. If, by successive distributions 
through a chain or group, a United States shareholder receives for a 
taxable year a distribution of the earnings and profits for such year of 
any corporation in such chain or group, then in applying section 902(a) 
with respect to such distribution through a first-tier corporation 
described in section 902(a), or in applying section 902(b) with respect 
to such distribution through a second-tier corporation described in 
section 902(b), as the case may be, the taxes of such corporation which 
shall be taken into account in determining taxes deemed paid under such 
section shall be the foreign income tax actually paid or accrued for the 
taxable year by such first-tier or second-tier corporation, as the case 
may be, with respect to such distribution; and, notwithstanding the 
rules otherwise applicable under section 902, no part of the taxes so 
paid by such first-tier or second-tier corporation shall be attributed 
to other earnings and profits of such corporation for such year and no 
part of the taxes paid or accrued with respect to such other earnings 
and profits shall be attributed to the earnings and profits so received 
as a distribution.
    (c) Corporation with earnings and profits reduced by allocated 
deficits. In the application of section 902, a United States 
shareholder's proportionate share of the earnings and profits for the 
taxable year of a foreign corporation to which the chain or group 
election applies shall reflect the reduction of such earnings and 
profits by deficits allocated thereto under paragraph (b)(2) of this 
section. No taxes paid or accrued by such corporation shall be deemed 
paid under section 902 with respect to a distribution to such 
shareholder from the earnings and profits of such corporation for such 
year to the extent that such distribution exceeds the shareholder's 
proportionate share as so reduced.
    (ii) Year of distribution of remaining earnings and profits. If for 
a taxable year in respect of which a United States shareholder receives 
a minimum distribution pursuant to an election under section 963 and in 
respect of which the provisions of this subparagraph are applied--
    (a) The foreign income tax which is paid or accrued by a foreign 
corporation for such year, by reason of the receipt and payment of 
earnings and profits counting toward such minimum distribution, is 
deemed paid under subdivision (i) (a) or (b) of this subparagraph,
    (b) The pretax and predistribution earnings and profits for such 
year of a foreign corporation in a chain or group with respect to stock 
on which such minimum distribution is received are reduced by reason of 
the deduction under paragraph (d)(1)(i) of Sec. 1.963-2 of distributions 
received from other corporations in such chain or group, or
    (c) Such shareholder's proportionate share of the earnings and 
profits for such year of a foreign corporation in a chain or group 
making a distribution counting toward such minimum distribution is 
reduced by the allocation thereto under paragraph (b)(2) of this section 
of a portion of the deficits of foreign branches or other foreign 
corporations in such chain or group,

the pretax and predistribution earnings and profits of such foreign 
corporation for such year to which such minimum distribution is 
attributable and the foreign income tax which is taken into account in 
determining tax deemed paid under section 902 on such pretax and 
predistribution earnings and profits shall not be taken into account in 
the application of section 902 when other earnings and profits of such 
foreign corporation for such year are distributed in a subsequent 
taxable year of such foreign corporation to such shareholder. For the 
purpose of applying the preceding sentence to a case in which (c) of 
this subdivision applies, the

[[Page 452]]

pretax and predistribution earnings and profits of the foreign 
corporation for such year to which the minimum distributed is 
attributable shall be the amount of such corporation's earnings and 
profits which are distributed and count toward the minimum distribution 
plus the foreign income tax of such foreign corporation allocated 
thereto in determining the taxes deemed paid under section 902 for the 
taxable year of the minimum distribution.
    (iii) Illustrations. The application of this subparagraph may be 
illustrated by the following examples:

    Example 1. Domestic corporation M makes a chain election for 1966 
with respect to controlled foreign corporation A, which is wholly owned 
directly by M Corporation, and controlled foreign corporation B, which 
is wholly owned directly by A Corporation. Each corporation uses the 
calendar year as the taxable year. In 1966, corporations A and B are 
subject to foreign income tax at the rates of 20 percent and 30 percent, 
respectively, with no deduction being allowed for dividends received or 
paid; each such corporation has pretax and predistribution earnings and 
profits of $100. Corporation M receives from the chain a pro rata 
minimum distribution for such year and applies thereto the special rules 
of this paragraph and paragraph (b) of this section. Corporation A is 
not a less developed country corporation under section 902(d). The 1966 
foreign income tax of corporations A and B which is deemed paid by M 
Corporation under section 902(a) for 1966, and the remaining tax which 
is allocated to earnings and profits to be distributed to M Corporation 
in future years, are determined as follows:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                        A            B          Total   
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Pretax and predistribution                                              
 earnings and profits............      $100.00      $100.00      $200.00
Foreign income tax...............        20.00        30.00        50.00
Consolidated earnings and profits        80.00        70.00       150.00
Effective foreign tax rate ($50/                                        
 [$150+$50]).....................  ...........  ...........          25%
Statutory percentage under                                              
 section 963(b)..................  ...........  ...........          76%
Amount distributed as pro rata                                          
 minimum distribution for 1966:                                         
  (0.76 x $80)...................        60.80  ...........  ...........
  (0.76 x $70)...................  ...........        53.20       114.00
Amount received by M Corporation                                        
 as pro rata minimum                                                    
 distribution:                                                          
  A Corporation's distribution...       $60.80  ...........  ...........
  B Corporation's distribution                                          
   ($53.20 - [0.20  x  $53.20]),                                        
   or ($53.20 - $10.64)..........  ...........       $42.56      $103.36
Amount of tax counted toward                                            
 minimum distribution............  ...........  ...........        10.64
Tax deemed paid by M Corporation                                        
 for 1966 for purposes of gross-                                        
 up under section 78 and foreign                                        
 tax credit:                                                            
  ($60.80/$80 x $20).............        15.20  ...........  ...........
  ([$42.56/$42.56 x $10.64]                                             
   +[$53.20/$70 x $30]) or                                              
   ($10.64+$22.80)...............  ...........        33.44        48.64
Remaining 1966 earnings and                                             
 profits for future distribution                                        
 to M Corporation:                                                      
  ($80-$60.80)...................        19.20  ...........  ...........
  ($70-$53.20)...................  ...........        16.80        36.00
Foreign income tax attributable                                         
 to 1966 earnings and profits                                           
 remaining for future                                                   
 distribution to M Corporation:                                         
  ($19.20/$80 x $20).............         4.80  ...........  ...........
  ($16.80/$70 x $30).............  ...........         7.20        12.00
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    Example 2. The facts are the same as in example 1 except that A 
Corporation pays foreign income tax at the rate of 30 percent and B 
Corporation, at the rate of 20 percent; and A Corporation is allowed a 
deduction, in computing its income subject to tax, for the full amount 
of dividends received. The determination of tax deemed paid for 1966 is 
as follows:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                A         B       Total 
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Pretax and predistribution earnings and                                 
 profits..................................   $100.00   $100.00   $200.00
Foreign income tax........................     30.00     20.00     50.00
Consolidated earnings and profits.........     70.00     80.00     50.00
Effective foreign tax rate ($50/                                        
 [$150+$50])..............................  ........  ........       25%
Statutory percentage under section 963(b).  ........  ........       76%
Amount distributed by foreign corporations                              
 as a pro rata minimum distribution for                                 
 1966 and amount received by M                                          
 Corporation:                                                           
  (0.76 x $70)............................    $53.20  ........  ........
  (0.76 x $80)............................  ........    $60.80   $114.00
Tax deemed paid by M Corporation for 1966                               
 for purposes of gross-up under section 78                              
 and foreign tax credit:                                                
  ($53.20/$70 x $30)......................     22.80  ........  ........
  ($60.80/$80 x $20)......................  ........     15.20     38.00

[[Page 453]]

                                                                        
Remaining 1966 earnings and profits for                                 
 future distribution to M Corporation:                                  
  ($70-$53.20)............................     16.80  ........  ........
  ($80-$60.80)............................  ........     19.20     36.00
Foreign income tax attributable to 1966                                 
 earnings and profits remaining for future                              
 distribution to M Corporation:                                         
  ($16.80/$70 x $30)......................      7.20  ........  ........
  ($19.20/$80 x $20)......................  ........      4.80     12.00
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    Example 3. For 1966, domestic corporation M makes a group election 
with respect to controlled foreign corporations A and B, both of which 
are wholly owned directly by M Corporation, and foreign branch C of M 
Corporation. All such corporations use the calendar year as the taxable 
year. Corporation M receives a pro rata minimum distribution from the 
group for 1966 and applies thereto the special rules of this paragraph 
and paragraph (b) of this section. Neither foreign corporation is a less 
developed country corporation under section 902(d). Corporations A and B 
pay foreign income tax at a flat rate of 20 percent and 30 percent, 
respectively. The 1966 foreign income tax of corporations A and B which 
is deemed paid by M Corporation under section 902(a) for 1966, and the 
remaining tax which is allocated to earnings and profits to be 
distributed to M Corporation in future years, are determined as follows:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                     A         B      Branch C    Total 
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Pretax and predistribution                                              
 earnings and profits (and                                              
 deficit) of the group.........    $60.00    $60.00      ($20)   $100.00
Foreign income tax.............     12.00     18.00  .........     30.00
Earnings and profits (and                                               
 deficit)......................     48.00     42.00       (20)     70.00
Allocation of deficit of Branch                                         
 C:                                                                     
  ($48/[$48+$42] x $20)........   (10.67)  ........  .........  ........
  ($42/[$48+$42] x $20)........  ........    (9.33)  .........  ........
Consolidated earnings and                                               
 profits of the group..........     37.33     32.67  .........     70.00
Effective foreign tax rate ($30/                                        
 $100).........................  ........  ........  .........       30%
Statutory percentage under                                              
 section 963(b)................  ........  ........  .........       69%
Amount received by M                                                    
 Corporation as pro rata                                                
 minimum distribution for 1966:                                         
  (0.69 x $37.33)..............     25.76  ........  .........  ........
  (0.69 x $32.67)..............  ........     22.54  .........    $48.30
Tax deemed paid by M                                                    
 Corporation for 1966 for                                               
 purposes of gross-up under                                             
 section 78 and foreign tax                                             
 credit:                                                                
  ($25.76/$37.33 x $12)........      8.28  ........  .........  ........
  ($22.54/$32.67 x $18)........  ........     12.42  .........     20.70
Remaining 1966 earnings and                                             
 profits for future                                                     
 distribution to M Corporation:                                         
  ($48-$25.76).................     22.24  ........  .........  ........
  ($42-$22.54).................  ........     19.46  .........     41.70
Foreign income tax attributable                                         
 to 1966 earnings and profits                                           
 remaining for future                                                   
 distribution to M Corporation:                                         
  ($12-$8.28)..................      3.72  ........  .........  ........
  ($18-$12.42).................  ........      5.58  .........      9.30
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    Example 4. The facts are the same as in example 3 except that the 
group does not make a pro rata minimum distribution but distributes 
$48.30, consisting of $40 distributed by A Corporation and $8.30 
distributed by B Corporation. Corporation M complies with the special 
rules of this paragraph and paragraph (b) of this section. The 1966 
foreign income tax of corporations A and B which is deemed paid by M 
Corporation under section 902(a) for 1966, and the remaining tax which 
is allocated to earnings and profits to be distributed to M Corporation 
in future years, are determined as follows, the minimum overall tax 
burden for 1966 being such as to satisfy the requirement of paragraph 
(a)(1)(ii)(b) of this section:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                     A         B      Branch C    Total 
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Amount received by M                                                    
 Corporation...................    $40.00     $8.30  .........    $48.30
Tax deemed paid by M                                                    
 Corporation for 1966 for                                               
 purposes of gross-up under                                             
 section 78 and foreign tax                                             
 credit:                                                                
  ($37.33/$37.33 x $12)........     12.00  ........  .........  ........
  ($8.30/$32.67 x $18).........  ........      4.57  .........     16.57
Remaining 1966 earnings and                                             
 profits for future                                                     
 distribution to M Corporation:                                         
  ($48-$40)....................      8.00  ........  .........  ........
  ($42-$8.30)..................  ........     33.70  .........     41.70
------------------------------------------------------------------------


[[Page 454]]


------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                     A         B      Branch C    Total 
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Foreign income tax attributable                                         
 to 1966 earnings and profits                                           
 remaining for future                                                   
 distribution to M Corporation:                                         
  ($12-$12)....................         0  ........  .........  ........
  ($18-$4.57)..................  ........     13.43  .........     13.43
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (3) Reduction and deferral of the foreign tax credit--(i) In 
general. To the extent specified in paragraph (a)(1)(ii)(b) of this 
section a reduction shall be made in the foreign tax credit allowable 
under section 901 for the taxable year with respect to distributions 
counting toward a minimum distribution for such year from the chain or 
group; and such reduction in credit shall be allocated, as provided in 
subdivision (ii) of this subparagraph, to foreign corporations in such 
chain or group and deferred, as provided in subdivision (iii) of this 
subparagraph, to subsequent taxable years of the United States 
shareholder.
    (ii) Allocation of reduction in foreign tax credit. The amount of 
any reduction in foreign tax credit for the taxable year which is made 
under subdivision (i) of this subparagraph with respect to a minimum 
distribution for any taxable year from the chain or group shall be 
allocated among any first-tier and second-tier corporations described in 
section 902 (a) and (b), respectively, which are in such chain or group. 
The amount of any such reduction in foreign tax credit shall be 
allocated among such first-tier and second-tier corporations in the 
ratio which the United States shareholder's proportionate share of 
undistributed earnings and profits of each such corporation for the 
taxable year bears to the total of such shareholder's proportionate 
shares of the undistributed earnings and profits of all such 
corporations for such year. None of such reduction shall be allocated to 
any other corporations in the chain or group or to any foreign branches 
included under paragraph (f)(4) of Sec. 1.963-1 in the group as wholly 
owned foreign subsidiary corporations.
    (iii) Deferral of allocated credit--(a) Allowance of credit in 
subsequent years. The reduction in foreign tax credit allocated to a 
first-tier or second-tier corporation in the chain or group for a 
taxable year under subdivision (ii) of this subparagraph shall be deemed 
paid under the principles of section 902 (applicable to foreign 
corporations which are not less developed country corporations) with 
respect to distributions, to the extent made by such corporation to the 
United States shareholder referred to in subdivision (ii) of this 
subparagraph, in a subsequent taxable year from the undistributed 
earnings and profits of such corporation for such year of allocation. 
Thus, for example, in the case of a distribution in the subsequent year 
from such earnings and profits by a first-tier corporation, the tax 
deemed paid shall be an amount which bears to the total of such 
reduction in foreign tax credit the same ratio that the distribution to 
the shareholder in the subsequent year bears to such shareholder's 
proportionate share of such undistributed earnings and profits for the 
year of allocation.
    (b) Limitations on use of deferred credit. The deferred tax so 
deemed paid shall be deemed paid for such subsequent taxable year and 
shall be allowed under section 901 (without regard to the limitations 
under section 904) as a credit against the income tax imposed for such 
year by chapter 1 of the Code, but the amount of such credit shall not 
exceed the excess of the tax so imposed for such year over the credit 
(determined without regard to this subdivision (iii) allowed under 
sections 901 through 905 for such year. Any amount by which the deferred 
tax so deemed paid in such subsequent taxable year exceeds the 
limitation under the preceding sentence shall not be carried back or 
carried over under section 904(d) to another taxable year of the United 
States shareholder. No credit shall be allowed under this subdivision 
for the subsequent taxable year to the extent that the credit would 
reduce the tax of the United States shareholder under chapter 1 of the 
Code on any minimum distribution for such year to which section 963 
applies.

[[Page 455]]

    (c) Gross-up not applicable. Any amount allowed as a credit for a 
subsequent taxable year under this subdivision shall not be included in 
the gross income of the United States shareholder for such year under 
section 78.
    (d) Illustrations. The application of this section may be 
illustrated by the following examples, in which the surtax exemption 
provided by section 11(c) is disregarded:

    Example 1. (a) For 1966, domestic corporation M makes a chain 
election with respect to controlled foreign corporation A, which it 
wholly owns directly, and controlled foreign corporation B, which A 
Corporation wholly owns directly. Corporation A is not a less developed 
country corporation under section 902(d). All corporations use the 
calendar year as the taxable year. For 1966, M Corporation complies with 
the special rules of paragraphs (b) and (c) of this section. Corporation 
A has pretax and predistribution earnings and profits for 1966 of $40 
and is subject to foreign income tax at a flat rate of 36 percent, with 
no deduction being allowed for dividends received or paid. B Corporation 
has pretax and predistribution earnings and profits of $60 for 1966 and 
is subject to a foreign income tax at a flat rate of 20 percent, with no 
deduction being allowed for dividends received or paid. For 1967, B 
Corporation has no earnings and profits, A Corporation has no earnings 
and profits other than a dividend of $21.22 from B Corporation, and M 
Corporation has taxable income of $20.98 from United States sources. 
Corporation M uses the overall limitation under section 904(a)(2) on the 
foreign tax credit.
    (b) If a pro rata minimum distribution were made for 1966, the 
overall United States and foreign income tax for such year with respect 
to such distribution would be $41.30, determined as follows:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                A         B       Total 
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Pretax and predistribution earnings and                                 
 profits..................................    $40.00    $60.00   $100.00
Foreign income tax:                                                     
  (0.36 x $40)............................     14.40  ........  ........
  (0.20 x $60)............................  ........     12.00    $26.40
Consolidated earnings and profits.........     25.60     48.00     73.60
Effective foreign tax rate ($26.40/                                     
 [$73.60+$26.40]).........................  ........  ........     26.4%
Statutory percentage under section 963(b).  ........  ........       69%
Amount distributed as pro rata minimum                                  
 distribution:                                                          
  (0.69 x $25.60).........................     17.66  ........  ........
  (0.69 x $48)............................  ........     33.12    $50.78
Amount received by M Corporation as pro                                 
 rata minimum distribution:                                             
  Corporation's distribution..............     17.66  ........  ........
  B Corporation's distribution ($33.12-                                 
   [0.36 x  $33.12]), or ($33.12-$11.92)..  ........     21.20     38.86
Gross-up under section 78:                                              
  ($17.66/$25.60 x $14.40)................      9.94  ........  ........
  ($21.20/$21.20 x  [$11.92+($33.12/ $48 x                              
   $12)]), or ($11.92+$8.28)..............  ........     20.20     30.14
                                                               ---------
Taxable income of M Corporation...........  ........  ........     69.00
                                                               ---------
U.S. tax before foreign tax credit ($69 x                               
 0.48)....................................  ........  ........     33.12
Foreign tax credit (as determined under                                 
 gross-up above)..........................  ........  ........     30.14
                                                               ---------
U.S. tax payable..........................  ........  ........      2.98
                                                               =========
Overall U.S. and foreign income tax with                                
 respect to pro rata minimum distribution                               
 ($26.40+$11.92+$2.98)....................  ........  ........     41.30
                                                               =========
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (c) The chain, however, does not make a pro rata distribution for 
1966, but distributes $24 from A Corporation's earnings and profits and 
$26.78 from B Corporation's earnings and profits, the total distribution 
of $50.78 being equal to the statutory percentage of the consolidated 
earnings and profits (0.69 x $73.60) of the chain with respect to M 
Corporation. Thus, M Corporation must make such a reduction in its 
foreign tax credit that the overall United States and foreign income tax 
for 1966 with respect to the distribution equals the lesser of $41.30 
(the overall United States and foreign income tax which would be paid 
with respect to a pro rata minimum distribution) and $43.20 (90 percent 
of 48 percent of pretax and predistribution consolidated earnings and 
profits of $100). The remaining 1956 earnings and profits of the chain 
are distributed late in 1967. Corporation M determines its tax as 
follows for such years:

                                  1966                                  
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                A         B       Total 
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Distributions made........................    $24.00    $26.78    $50.78
  Amount received by M Corporation:                                     
    A Corporation's distribution..........     24.00  ........  ........
    B Corporation's distribution ($26.78-                               
     [0.36 x  26.78]), or ($26.78-$9.64)..  ........     17.14     41.14

[[Page 456]]

                                                                        
Gross-up under section 78:                                              
  ($24/$25.60 x $14.40)...................     13.50  ........  ........
  ($17.14/$17.14 x [$9.64+ ($26.78/$48 x                                
   $12)]), or ($9.64+$6.70)...............  ........     16.34     29.84
                                                               ---------
Taxable income of M Corporation...........  ........  ........    $70.98
                                                               =========
Tentative U.S. tax before foreign tax                                   
 credit ($70.98 x .48)....................  ........  ........     34.07
Less: Tentative foreign tax credit (as                                  
 computed under gross-up above)...........  ........  ........     29.84
                                                               ---------
Tentative U.S. tax payable................  ........  ........      4.23
                                                               =========
Tentative overall U.S. and foreign income                               
 tax ($26.40+$9.64+$4.23).................  ........  ........     40.27
Overall U.S. and foreign tax which would                                
 be paid with respect to a pro rata                                     
 minimum distribution (part (b) of this                                 
 example).................................  ........  ........     41.30
Insufficient overall U.S. and foreign                                   
 income tax ($41.30-$40.27)...............  ........  ........      1.03
Reduced foreign tax credit ($29.84-$1.03).  ........  ........     28.81
U.S. tax payable ($34.07-$28.81)..........  ........  ........      5.26
Overall U.S. and foreign income tax                                     
 ($26.40+$9.64+$5.26).....................  ........  ........     41.30
Reduction in foreign tax credit to be                                   
 deferred ($29.84-$28.81).................  ........  ........      1.03
Remaining 1966 earnings and profits of:                                 
  A Corporation ($25.60-$24)..............     $1.60  ........  ........
  B Corporation ($48-$26.78)..............  ........    $21.22     22.82
Allocation of reduction in foreign tax                                  
 credit to remaining 1966 earnings and                                  
 profits of:                                                            
  A Corporation ($1.60/22.82 x $1.03).....       .07  ........  ........
  B Corporation ($21.22/$22.82 x $1.03)...  ........       .96      1.03
Foreign income tax attributable to                                      
 remaining 1966 earnings and profits of:                                
  A Corporation ($1.60/$25.60 x $14.40)...       .90  ........  ........
  B Corporation ($21.22/$48 x $12)........  ........      5.30      6.20
                                                                        
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                  1967                                  
                                                                        
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Taxable income of M Corporation consisting                              
 of distributions from:                                                 
  A Corporation's remaining 1966 earnings                               
   and profits............................      1.60  ........  ........
  B Corporation's remaining 1966 earnings                               
   and profits ($21.22-[.36 x 21.22]), or                               
   ($21.22-$7.64).........................  ........     13.58     15.18
Gross-up under section 78:                                              
  ($1.60/$1.60 x $0.90)...................       .90  ........  ........
  ($13.58/$13.58 x  [$7.64+($21.22/ 21.22                               
   x $5.30)]).............................  ........     12.94     13.84
                                                               ---------
Taxable income from sources without the                                 
 U.S......................................  ........  ........     29.02
Taxable income from sources within the                                  
 U.S......................................  ........  ........     20.98
                                                               ---------
  Total taxable income of M Corporation...  ........  ........     50.00
                                                               =========
U.S. tax before foreign tax credit (0.48 x                              
 $50).....................................  ........  ........     24.00
Foreign tax credit:                                                     
  Tax deemed paid under section 902:                                    
    $13.84, but not to exceed section 904                               
     limitation of $13.93 ($29.02/$50 x                                 
     $24) (see gross-up above)............  ........  ........     13.84
  Tax deemed paid under the principles of                               
   section 902:                                                         
    ($1.60/$1.60 x $0.07).................       .07  ........  ........
    ($21.22/$21.22 x  0.96)...............  ........       .96      1.03
U.S. tax payable ($24-[$13.84+$1.03]).....  ........  ........      9.13
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    Example 2. (a) For 1963, domestic corporation M makes a group 
election with respect to controlled foreign corporations A and B, both 
of which M Corporation wholly owns directly. All such corporations use 
the calendar year as the taxable year. Corporation A is created under 
the laws of foreign country X, and B Corporation is created under the 
laws of foreign country Y; neither of such corporations is a less 
developed country corporation under section 902(d). Corporation M 
complies with the special rules of paragraphs (b) and (c) of this 
section. Each foreign corporation has pretax earnings and profits of 
$100 for 1963. The income of A Corporation is subject to a foreign 
income tax rate of 20 percent, and the income of B Corporation is 
subject to a foreign income tax rate of 30 percent. Corporation M uses 
the per-country limitation under section 904(a)(1) on the foreign tax 
credit.
    (b) If a pro rata minimum distribution were made for 1963, the group 
would distribute $123 based upon an effective foreign tax rate of 25 
percent ($50/[$50+$150]) and a statutory percentage of 82 percent under 
section

[[Page 457]]

963(b); of this amount $57.40 (0.82 x $70) would be distributed from B 
Corporation's earnings and profits and $65.60 (0.82 x $80) would be 
distributed from A Corporation's earnings and profits. In such case, the 
overall United States and foreign income tax for 1963 with respect to 
the pro rata minimum distribution would be determined as follows, using 
the 52 percent United States corporate income tax rate applicable for 
such year:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
Taxable income of M Corporation from sources in--                       
  Y Country:                                                            
    B Corporation dividend..........................    $57.40  ........
  Gross-up under section 78 ($57.40/$70 x $30)......     24.60    $82.00
                                                     ----------         
X Country:                                                              
  A Corporation dividend............................     65.60  ........
  Gross-up under section 78 ($65.60/$80 x $20)......     16.40     82.00
                                                     -------------------
    Taxable income..................................  ........    164.00
                                                               =========
U.S. tax before tax credit (0.52 x $164)............  ........     85.28
Foreign tax credit:                                                     
  Y Country tax.....................................     24.60  ........
  X Country tax.....................................     16.40     41.00
                                                     -------------------
U.S. tax payable....................................  ........     44.28
                                                               =========
Overall U.S. and foreign income tax with respect to                     
 pro rata minimum distribution ($44.28+ $50)........  ........     94.28
                                                                        

    (c) The group, however, does not make a pro rata minimum 
distribution for 1963 but distributes $123, consisting of $70 from B 
Corporation's earnings and profits and $53 from A Corporation's earnings 
and profits. Thus, M Corporation must make such a reduction in its 
foreign tax credit that the overall United States and foreign income tax 
for 1963 with respect to the distribution equals the lesser of $94.28 
(the overall United States and foreign income tax which would be paid 
with respect to a pro rata minimum distribution) and $93.60 (90 percent 
of 52 percent of pretax and predistribution consolidated earnings and 
profits of $200). The remaining 1963 earnings and profits of the group 
are distributed late in 1964. Neither A Corporation nor B Corporation 
has earnings and profits for 1964. Corporation M determines its tax as 
follows for such years, assuming a 52 percent (instead of 50 percent) 
United States corporate income tax rate for 1964:

                                  1963                                  
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
Taxable income of M Corporation from sources in--                       
  Y Country:                                                            
    B Corporation dividend..........................    $70.00  ........
    Gross-up under section 78 ($70/$70 x $30).......     30.00   $100.00
                                                     ----------         
  X Country:                                                            
  A Corporation dividend............................     53.00  ........
    Gross-up under section 78 ($53/$80 x $20).......     13.25     66.25
                                                     -------------------
      Taxable income for 1963.......................  ........    166.25
                                                               =========
U.S. tax before foreign tax credit (0.52 x $166.25).  ........     86.45
  Less: Tentative foreign tax credit:                                   
    Y Country tax ($30.00 but not to exceed ($100.00/                   
     $166.25 x $86.45)).............................     30.00  ........
    X Country tax ($13.25 but not to exceed ($66.25/                    
     $166.25 x $86.45)).............................     13.24     43.25
                                                     -------------------
Tentative U.S. tax payable..........................  ........     43.20
                                                               =========
Tentative overall U.S. and foreign income tax                           
 ($50+$43.20).......................................  ........     93.60
Insufficient overall U.S. and foreign income tax                        
 ($93.60-$93.20)....................................  ........       .40
Reduced foreign tax credit ($43.25-$0.40)...........  ........     42.85
U.S. tax payable for 1963 ($86.45-$42.85)...........  ........     43.00
Overall U.S. and foreign income tax ($50+$43.60)....  ........     93.60
Reduction in foreign tax credit to be deferred                          
 ($43.25-$42.85)....................................  ........       .40
Remaining 1963 earnings and profits of:                                 
  A Corporation ($80-$53)...........................     27.00  ........
  B Corporation ($70-$70)...........................         0     27.00
                                                     ----------         
Allocation of reduction in foreign tax credit to                        
 remaining 1963 earnings and profits of A                               
 Corporation ($27/$27 x  $0.40).....................  ........       .40
Foreign income tax attributable to remaining 1963                       
 earnings and profits of:                                               
  A Corporation ($20-$13.25)........................      6.75  ........
  B Corporation ($30-$30)...........................         0      6.75
                                                     ----------         
                                                                        
                                  1964                                  
                                                                        
Taxable income of M Corporation from sources in X                       
 Country:                                                               
  A Corporation dividend............................  ........     27.00
  Gross-up under section 78 ($27/$27 x  $6.75)......  ........      6.75
                                                               ---------
    Taxable income for 1964.........................  ........     33.75
                                                               =========
U.S. tax before foreign tax credit ($33.75 x 0.52)..  ........     17.55
  Less: Foreign tax credit:                                             
    Tax deemed paid under section 902 (as computed                      
     under gross-up, but not to exceed $33.75/$33.75                    
      x  $17.55)....................................      6.75  ........
    Tax deemed paid under the principles of section                     
     902 ($27/$27 x $0.40)..........................       .40      7.15
                                                     -------------------
U.S. tax payable for 1964...........................  ........     10.40
                                                               =========
                                                                        

    Example 3. (a) For 1966, domestic corporation M makes a chain 
election with respect to controlled foreign corporation A, which it 
wholly owns directly, and controlled foreign corporation B, which A 
Corporation wholly owns directly. Corporation A is a less developed 
country corporation under section 902(d). All corporations use the 
calendar year as the taxable year. For 1966, each of the foreign 
corporations has pretax and

[[Page 458]]

predistribution earnings and profits of $100. The income of A 
Corporation is subject to a foreign income tax rate of 20 percent, with 
no deduction being allowed for dividends received or paid; and the 
income of B Corporation is subject to a foreign income tax rate of 30 
percent on such basis. During 1966, B Corporation distributes $50 to A 
Corporation, and A Corporation distributes $104 to M Corporation. During 
1967 the remaining 1966 earnings and profits of such corporations are 
distributed to M Corporation.
    (b) If M Corporation were not to comply with the special rules of 
paragraphs (b) and (c) of this section and were to deduct foreign income 
tax on intercorporate distributions under paragraph (d)(1)(iii) of 
Sec. 1.963-2, the chain would not be considered to make a minimum 
distribution for 1966 because, although it makes a distribution which is 
sufficient in amount to constitute a minimum distribution, the overall 
United States and foreign income tax for such year with respect to such 
distribution would be insufficient under paragraph (a)(1)(i) of this 
section. The determination that M Corporation would not be entitled to 
the section 963 exclusion for 1966 by reason of such distribution in 
such circumstances is made as follows:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                   A       B      Total 
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Pretax earnings and profits...................    $150    $100  ........
Reduction for intercorporate dividends........      50  ......  ........
                                               ----------------         
Pretax and predistribution earnings and                                 
 profits......................................     100     100   $200.00
Reduction for foreign income tax on such                                
 pretax and predistribution earnings and                                
 profits......................................      20      30     50.00
                                               -------------------------
Predistribution earnings and profits..........      80      70    150.00
Reduction for foreign income tax on                                     
 intercorporate distributions of 1966 earnings                          
 and profits ($50 x 0.20).....................      10  ......     10.00
                                               -------------------------
Consolidated earnings and profits of the chain      70      70    140.00
                                               -------------------------
Consolidated foreign income taxes                                       
 ($30+$20+$10)................................  ......  ......     60.00
Effective foreign tax rate ($60/ [$140+$60])..  ......  ......       30%
Statutory percentage under section 963(b).....  ......  ......       69%
Amount of a minimum distribution ($140 x 0.69)  ......  ......     96.60
Overall United States and foreign income tax                            
 required to be paid (part (a)(1)(i) of this                            
 section) (0.90 x  [0.22+0.26] x $200)........  ......  ......     86.40
Tentative taxable income of M Corporation.....  ......  ......   $104.00
Tentative U.S. tax before foreign tax credit                            
 (0.48 x $104)................................  ......  ......     49.92
Tentative foreign tax credit ($104/ $120 x                              
 [($120/$150 x $30)+($50/ $100 x $30)] or                               
 ($104/$120 x $39)............................  ......  ......     33.80
Tentative U.S. tax payable ($49.92- $33.80)...  ......  ......     16.12
Overall U.S. and foreign income tax                                     
 ($60+$16.12).................................  ......  ......     76.12
Insufficient overall U.S. and foreign income                            
 tax ($86.40-$76.12)..........................  ......  ......     10.28
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (c) By complying with the special rules of paragraphs (b) and (c) of 
this section, however, M Corporation will receive a minimum distribution 
for 1966 if it receives the statutory percentage of consolidated 
earnings and profits and if the overall United States and foreign income 
tax with respect to the distribution which is made is at least the 
lesser of $86.40 (0.90 x 0.48 x $200) and of the overall United States 
and foreign income tax which would be paid with respect to a pro rata 
minimum distribution from the chain. If a pro rata minimum distribution 
were made for 1966, the chain would be required to distribute earnings 
and profits of $114, based upon an effective foreign tax rate of 25 
percent ($50/[$50+$150]) and a statutory percentage of 76 percent under 
section 963(b); of this amount $53.20 (0.76 x $70) would be distributed 
from B Corporation's earnings and profits and $60.80 (0.76 x $80) would 
be distributed from A Corporation's earnings and profits. The overall 
United States and foreign income tax with respect to such a pro rata 
minimum distribution would be $73.62, determined as follows:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
Taxable income of M Corporation ($60.80+[$53.20-                        
 ($53.20 x 0.20)])..................................  ........   $103.36
U.S. tax before foreign tax credit (0.48  x $103.36)  ........     49.61
Foreign tax credit:                                                     
  B Corporation's distribution ($53.20/[$70+$30] x                      
   $30)+ ($42.56+ $10.64] x $10.64).................    $24.47  ........
  A Corporation's distribution ($60.80/[$80+20] x                       
   $20).............................................     12.16     36.63
                                                     -------------------
U.S. tax payable....................................  ........     12.98
                                                               =========
Overall U.S. and foreign income tax with respect to                     
 pro rata minimum distribution ($50+ $10.64+$12.98).  ........     73.62
                                                                        

    (d) The United States income tax of M Corporation for 1966 and 1967 
is determined as follows, assuming that the minimum overall tax burden 
is determined under paragraph (a)(1)(ii)(b) of this section:

                                  1966                                  
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
Dividend from earnings and profits of--                                 
  B Corporation ($50 minus tax of $10 on A                              
   Corporation at the rate of 20 percent)...........  ........    $40.00
  A Corporation.....................................  ........     64.00
                                                               ---------

[[Page 459]]

                                                                        
Taxable income of M Corporation.....................  ........    104.00
                                                               =========
U.S. tax before foreign tax credit (0.48 x $104)....  ........    $49.92
Less: Foreign tax credit:                                               
  B Corporation's distribution ($50/[$70+$30] x                         
   $30+($40/[$40+$10] x $10), or ($15+$8)...........    $23.00  ........
  A Corporation's distribution ($64/$80+$20] x $20).     12.80     35.80
                                                     -------------------
U.S. tax payable....................................  ........    $14.12
                                                               =========
Overall U.S. and foreign income tax with respect to                     
 actual distribution ($50+$10+$14.12)...............  ........     74.12
Overall U.S. and foreign income tax that would be                       
 paid with respect to a pro rata minimum                                
 distribution (part (c) of this example)............  ........     73.62
Remaining 1966 earnings and profits for future                          
 distribution by:                                                       
  B Corporation ($70-$50)...........................  ........     20.00
  A Corporation ($80-$64)...........................  ........     16.00
                                                               ---------
    Total...........................................  ........     36.00
                                                               =========
Foreign income tax attributable to remaining 1966                       
 earnings and profits of:                                               
  B Corporation ($20/$70 x $30).....................  ........      8.57
  A Corporation ($16/$80 x $20).....................  ........      4.00
                                                                        
                                  1967                                  
                                                                        
Dividend from remaining 1966 earnings and profits                       
 of--                                                                   
  B Corporation ($20 minus tax of $4 on A                               
   Corporation at the rate of 20 percent)...........  ........     16.00
  A Corporation.....................................  ........     16.00
                                                               ---------
Taxable income of M Corporation.....................  ........     32.00
                                                               =========
U.S. tax before foreign tax credit (0.48 x $32).....  ........     15.36
Less: Foreign tax credit:                                               
  B Corporation's distribution ($20/ [$20+$8.57] x                      
   $8.57)+($16/[$16+$4]  x $4), or ($6+$3.20).......     $9.20  ........
  A Corporation's distribution ($16/ [$16+$4] x $4).      3.20     12.40
                                                     -------------------
U.S. tax payable....................................  ........      2.96
                                                               ---------
                                                                        

    Example 4. (a) Domestic corporation M directly owns 90 percent of 
the one class of stock of controlled foreign corporation A, which 
directly owns 80 percent of the one class of stock of controlled foreign 
corporation B, which in turn directly owns 60 percent of the one class 
of stock of controlled foreign corporation C. None of the foreign 
corporations are less developed country corporations under section 
902(d); all corporations use the calendar year as the taxable year. For 
1963, M Corporation makes a chain election with respect to corporations 
A, B, and C and receives a distribution from the consolidated earnings 
and profits of the chain which does not constitute a pro rata minimum 
distribution. The remaining 1963 consolidated earnings and profits of 
the chain are distributed late in 1964, for which year it is assumed 
that the United States corporate income tax rate is the same (52 
percent) as for 1963. No corporation in the chain has earnings and 
profits for 1964 other than from distributions received from remaining 
1963 earnings and profits of another corporation in the chain. The 
foreign country under the laws of which A Corporation is created does 
not tax dividends which are received by such corporation from B 
Corporation, but B Corporation is taxed on dividends received from C 
Corporation. Corporation M complies with the special rules of paragraphs 
(b) and (c) of this section and determines the minimum overall tax 
burden under paragraph (a)(1)(ii)(b) of this section with respect to the 
distribution which is made. Corporation M uses the overall limitation 
under section 904(a)(2) on the foreign tax credit. The distribution 
received by M Corporation for 1963 from the consolidated earnings and 
profits of the chain is sufficient in amount to constitute a minimum 
distribution. The overall United States and foreign income tax for 1963 
with respect to the distribution which is made must be at least equal to 
the lesser of $32.21 (the amount payable, as determined under paragraph 
(b) of this example, with respect to a pro rata minimum distribution) 
and $31.34 (90 percent of 52 percent of pretax and predistribution 
consolidated earnings and profits of $66.96).
    (b) If the chain were to make a pro rata minimum distribution, the 
distributions and the overall United States and foreign income tax for 
1963 with respect to the minimum distribution would be determined as 
follows, based upon the facts assumed:

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                          A          B          C        Total  
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Pretax and predistribution earnings and profits.....................     $20.00     $50.00     $30.00           
Reduction for foreign income tax on such earnings and profits (10%,                                             
 40%, and 10%, respectively)........................................       2.00      20.00       3.00           
                                                                     ---------------------------------          
Predistribution earnings and profits................................      18.00      30.00      27.00           
                                                                     =================================          
Consolidated earnings and profits with respect to M Corporation:                                                
  (0.90 x $18)......................................................      16.20                                 
  (0.90 x 0.80 x $30) or (0.72 x $30)...............................  .........      21.60                      
  (0.90 x 0.80 x 0.60 x $27) or (0.432 x $27).......................  .........  .........      11.66     $49.46
Consolidated foreign income taxes with respect to M Corporation:                                                
  ($16.20/$18 x $2).................................................       1.80                                 

[[Page 460]]

                                                                                                                
  ($21.60/$30 x $20)................................................  .........      14.40                      
  ($11.66/$27 x $3).................................................  .........  .........       1.30      17.50
Effective foreign tax rate of the chain for 1963 ($17.50/                                                       
 [$49.46+$17.50]), or ($17.50/ $66.96)..............................  .........  .........  .........     26.14%
Statutory percentage under section 963(b)...........................  .........  .........  .........        82%
Pro rata minimum distribution (before reduction of dividend from C                                              
 Corporation's share by B Corporation tax paid on such amount):                                                 
  (0.82 x $16.20)...................................................      13.28                                 
  (0.82 x $21.60)...................................................  .........      17.71                      
  (0.82 x $11.66)...................................................  .........  .........       9.56           
  (0.82 x $49.46)...................................................  .........  .........  .........      40.56
Such amounts as reduced by further foreign income tax imposed on                                                
 distributions through the chain:                                                                               
  No further foreign tax............................................      13.28                                 
  No further foreign tax............................................  .........      17.71                      
  B Corporation tax ($9.56-[0.40 x $9.56]), or ($9.56-$3.82)........  .........  .........       5.74      36.73
Gross-up under section 78:                                                                                      
  ($13.28/$16.20 x $1.80)...........................................       1.48                                 
  ($17.71/$21.60 x $14.40)..........................................  .........      11.81                      
  ($5.74/$5.74 x $3.82).............................................  .........       3.82  .........      17.11
M Corporation's taxable income for 1963 attributable to minimum                                                 
 distribution ($36.73+$17.11).......................................  .........  .........  .........      53.84
U.S. tax before foreign tax credit ($53.84 x 0.52)..................  .........  .........  .........      28.00
Foreign tax credit (as determined under gross-up above).............  .........  .........  .........      17.11
U.S. tax payable for 1963 ($28-$17.11)..............................  .........  .........  .........      10.89
Overall U.S. and foreign income tax with respect to pro rata minimum                                            
 distribution ($17.50+$3.82+$10.89).................................  .........  .........  .........      32.21
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (c) Based upon the distributions which are made by corporations A, 
B, and C, M. Corporation pays United States tax as follows for 1963 and 
1964:

                                                      1963                                                      
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                          A          B          C        Total  
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Distribution made from consolidated earnings and profits of the                                                 
 chain..............................................................      $9.36     $21.60      $9.60     $40.56
Excess of distribution over statutory percentage of consolidated                                                
 earnings and profits for 1963 ($40.56-[0.82 x $49.46]).............  .........  .........  .........       None
Determination of whether the overall U.S. and foreign income tax                                                
 with respect to the actual distribution is equal to, or exceeds,                                               
 the lesser of $32.21 (paragraph (b) of example) and $31.34                                                     
 (paragraph (a) of example):                                                                                    
  Amount received by M Corporation after reduction by further                                                   
   foreign income tax imposed on distributions through the chain:                                               
    No further foreign tax..........................................       9.36                                 
    No further foreign tax..........................................  .........      21.60                      
    B Corporation tax ($9.60-[0.40 x $9.60]), or ($9.60-$3.84)......  .........  .........       5.76      36.72
  Gross-up under section 78:                                                                                    
    ($9.36/$16.20 x $1.80)..........................................       1.04                                 
    ($21.60/$21.60 x $14.40)........................................  .........      14.40                      
    ($5.76/$5.76 x $3.84)...........................................  .........       3.84  .........      19.28
Taxable income of M Corporation for 1963 attributable to actual                                                 
 distribution ($36.72+$19.28).......................................  .........  .........  .........      56.00
  U.S. tax before foreign tax credit ($56 x 0.52)...................  .........  .........  .........      29.12
  Tentative foreign tax credit (as determined under gross-up above).  .........  .........  .........      19.28
  Tentative U.S. tax payable ($29.12-$19.28)........................  .........  .........  .........       9.84
  Overall U.S. and foreign income tax with respect to actual                                                    
   distribution ($17.50+ $3.84+$9.84)...............................  .........  .........  .........      31.18
  Insufficient overall U.S. and foreign income tax ($31.34 [i.e.,                                               
   0.90 x 0.52 x $66.96]- 31,18)....................................  .........  .........  .........        .16
Reduced foreign tax credit ($19.28-$0.16)...........................  .........  .........  .........      19.12
U.S. tax payable for 1963 ($29.12-$19.12)...........................  .........  .........  .........      10.00
Overall U.S. and foreign income tax with respect to actual                                                      
 distribution ($17.50+$3.84+$10)....................................  .........  .........  .........      31.34
Allocation of reduction in foreign tax credit to undistributed                                                  
 consolidated 1963 earnings and profits of A and B Corporations to                                              
 be deemed paid by M Corporation in future years:                                                               
  Reduction in foreign tax credit ($19.28-$19.12)...................  .........  .........  .........        .16
  Undistributed 1963 consolidated earnings and profits of the chain:                                            
    ($16.20-$9.36)..................................................       6.84                                 
    ($21.60-$21.00).................................................  .........          0                      
    ($11.66-$9.60)..................................................  .........  .........      $2.06       8.90

[[Page 461]]

                                                                                                                
  Allocation of reduction in credit:                                                                            
    ($6.84/$6.84 x $0.16)...........................................        .16  .........  .........        .16
  Foreign income tax attributable to undistributed 1963 earnings and                                            
   profits of the chain to be taken into account in determining tax                                             
   deemed paid under section 902:                                                                               
    ($1.80-$1.04)...................................................        .76  .........  .........  .........
    ($14.40-$14.40).................................................  .........  .........  .........         .7
                                                                                                                
                                                      1964                                                      
                                                                                                                
Distribution from remaining 1963 consolidated earnings and profits                                              
 of the chain:                                                                                                  
  ($16.20-$9.36)....................................................       6.84                                 
  ($21.60-$21.60)...................................................  .........          0                      
  ($11.66-$9.60)....................................................  .........  .........       2.06       8.90
Such amounts as reduced by further foreign income tax imposed on                                                
 distributions through the chain:                                                                               
  No further foreign tax............................................       6.84                                 
  B Corporation tax ($2.06-[0.40 x $2.06]), or ($2.06-$0.82)........  .........       1.24  .........       8.08
Gross-up under section 78:                                                                                      
  ($6.84/$6.84 x $0.76).............................................       0.76                                 
  ($1.24/$1.24 x $0.82).............................................  .........       0.82  .........       1.58
Taxable income of M Corporation for 1964 attributable to 1964                                                   
 distribution ($8.08+$1.58).........................................  .........  .........  .........       9.66
U.S. tax before foreign tax credit ($9.66 x 0.52)...................  .........  .........  .........       5.02
Foreign tax credit:                                                                                             
  Deferred credit in accordance with principles of section 902                                                  
   ($6.84/$6.84 x $0.16)............................................       0.16  .........  .........       0.16
  Tax deemed paid under section 902 (computed under gross-up above).  .........  .........  .........       1.58
U.S. tax payable for 1964 ($5.02-[$0.16+$1.58]).....................  .........  .........  .........       3.28
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    Example 5. (a) Domestic corporation M directly owns all the one 
class of stock of each of controlled foreign corporations A, B, C, and 
D. All such corporations use the calendar year as the taxable year. None 
of the foreign corporations is a less developed country corporation 
under section 902(d). For 1963, M Corporation makes a group election 
with respect to corporations A, B, C, and D and receives from the 1963 
consolidated earnings and profits of the group a distribution which is 
not a pro rata minimum distribution. None of the foreign corporations 
has earnings and profits for 1964, but the remaining 1963 earnings and 
profits of the group are distributed late in 1964, for which year it is 
assumed that the United States corporate income tax rate is the same (52 
percent) as for 1963. The overall limitation under section 904(a)(2) on 
the foreign tax credit applies for both years.
    (b) Assume that M Corporation does not comply with the special rules 
of paragraphs (b) and (c) of this section and that for 1963 it draws a 
distribution of all of B Corporation's earnings and profits and enough 
of C Corporation's earnings and profits to receive the amount of a 
minimum distribution and to assure that the overall United States and 
foreign income tax for such year with respect to the distribution from 
the group satisfies the overall minimum tax requirement of paragraph 
(a)(1)(i) of this section. In such case, the overall United States and 
foreign income tax for 1963 with respect to the distribution which is 
made, determined by using the foreign tax credit under section 901 
without applying the special credit rules of paragraph (c) of this 
section, must at least equal $37.44 (90 percent of 52 percent of pretax 
and predistribution consolidated earnings and profits of $80). 
Corporation M's United States income tax for 1963 and 1964 with respect 
to the distribution of the 1963 earnings and profits of the group is 
determined as follows, based upon the facts assumed:

                                                      1963                                                      
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                               A          B          C          D        Total  
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Pretax and predistribution earnings and profits (and                                                            
 deficits) of the group..................................     $25.00     $25.00     $50.00   ($20.00)     $80.00
Consolidated foreign income taxes........................       2.50      12.50      15.00  .........      30.00
Consolidated earnings and profits........................      22.50      12.50      35.00    (20.00)      50.00
Effective foreign tax rate ($30/[$50+$30])...............  .........  .........  .........  .........      37.5%
Statutory percentage under section 963(b)................  .........  .........  .........  .........        68%
Amount of a minimum distribution (0.68 x $50)............  .........  .........  .........  .........      34.00
Tentative distribution...................................  .........      12.50      21.50  .........      34.00

[[Page 462]]

                                                                                                                
Tentative gross-up under section 78:                                                                            
  ($12.50/$12.50 x $12.50)                                 .........      12.50  .........  .........  .........
  ($21.50/$35 x $15)                                       .........  .........       9.21  .........      21.71
Tentative taxable income of M Corporation ($34+$21.71)...  .........  .........  .........  .........      55.71
Tentative U.S. tax before foreign tax credit (0.52 x                                                            
 $55.71).................................................  .........  .........  .........  .........      28.97
Tentative foreign tax credit (as computed under gross-up                                                        
 above)..................................................  .........  .........  .........  .........      21.71
Tentative U.S. tax payable ($28.97-$21.71)...............  .........  .........  .........  .........       7.26
Tentative overall U.S. and foreign income tax ($30+$7.26)  .........  .........  .........  .........      37.26
Minimum overall U.S. and foreign income tax required to                                                         
 be paid (0.90 x  .52 x $80).............................  .........  .........  .........  .........      37.44
Insufficient overall U.S. and foreign income tax ($37.44-                                                       
 $37.26).................................................  .........  .........  .........  .........        .18
Revised distribution.....................................  .........      12.50      22.07  .........      34.57
Gross-up under section 78:                                                                                      
  ($12.50/$12.50 x $12.50)...............................  .........      12.50  .........  .........  .........
  ($22.07/$35 x $15).....................................  .........  .........       9.46  .........      21.96
Taxable income of M Corporation ($34.57+$21.96)..........  .........  .........  .........  .........      56.53
U.S. tax before foreign tax credit (.52 x $56.53)........  .........  .........  .........  .........      29.40
Foreign tax credit (as computed under gross-up above)....  .........  .........  .........  .........      21.96
U.S. tax payable ($29.40-$21.96).........................  .........  .........  .........  .........       7.44
Overall U.S. and foreign income tax on actual                                                                   
 distribution ($30+$7.44)................................  .........  .........  .........  .........      37.44
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                                                                
                                                      1964                                                      
                                                                                                                
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Distribution of remaining 1963 consolidated earnings and                                                        
 profits:                                                                                                       
  ($22.50-$0)............................................      22.50                                            
  ($12.50-$12.50)........................................  .........                                            
  ($35-$22.07)...........................................  .........  .........      12.93  .........      35.43
Gross-up under section 78:                                                                                      
  ($22.50/$22.50 x $2.50)................................       2.50                                            
  ($12.93/$35 x $15).....................................  .........  .........       5.54  .........       8.04
Taxable income of M Corporation ($35.43+$8.04)...........  .........  .........  .........  .........      43.47
U.S. tax before foreign tax credit ($43.47 x 0.52).......  .........  .........  .........  .........      22.60
Foreign tax credit (as computed under gross-up above)....  .........  .........  .........  .........       8.04
U.S. tax payable ($22.60-$8.04)..........................  .........  .........  .........  .........      14.56
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (c) Assume that M Corporation does comply with the special rules of 
paragraphs (b) and (c) of this section and for 1963 receives a minimum 
distribution consisting of $20 from A Corporation and $14 from C 
Corporation. In such case, the overall United States and foreign income 
tax for 1963 with respect to the minimum distribution must at least 
equal the lesser of $37.44 (0.90  x  0.52  x  $80) and the overall 
United States and foreign income tax of $37.89 that would be paid with 
respect to a pro rata minimum distribution from the group for such year. 
In such case, the determinations would be made pursuant to subparagraphs 
(1) and (2) of this paragraph.
    (1) If a pro rata minimum distribution were made for 1963 by the 
group, the overall United States and foreign income tax for such year 
with respect to such distribution would be $37.89, determined as 
follows:

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                              A          B          C          D         Total  
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Pretax and predistribution earnings and profits (and                                                            
 deficits) of the group..................................     $25.00     $25.00     $50.00      ($20)     $80.00
Consolidated foreign income taxes........................       2.50      12.50      15.00  .........      30.00
Consolidated earnings and profits before allocation of                                                          
 deficits................................................      22.50      12.50      35.00  .........      70.00
Allocation of deficit of D Corporation:                                                                         
  ($22.50/$70 x $20).....................................     (6.43)                                            
  ($12.50/$70 x $20).....................................  .........     (3.57)  .........  .........  .........
  ($35/$70 x $20)........................................  .........  .........    (10.00)  .........    (20.00)
Consolidated earnings and profits........................      16.07       8.93      25.00  .........      50.00
Effective foreign tax rate ($30/$80).....................  .........  .........  .........  .........     37.50%
Statutory percentage under section 963(b)................  .........  .........  .........  .........        68%
Pro rata minimum distribution:                                                                                  
  (0.68 x $16.07)........................................      10.93                                            
  (0.68 x $8.93).........................................  .........       6.07  .........  .........  .........
  (0.68 x $25)...........................................  .........  .........      17.00  .........      34.00
Gross-up under section 78:                                                                                      
  ($10.93/$16.07 x $2.50)................................       1.70                                            
  ($6.07/$8.93 x $12.50).................................  .........       8.50  .........  .........  .........

[[Page 463]]

                                                                                                                
  ($17/$25 x $15)........................................  .........  .........      10.20  .........      20.40
Taxable income of M Corporation ($34+$20.40).............  .........  .........  .........  .........      54.40
U.S. tax before foreign tax credit (0.52 x $54.40).......  .........  .........  .........  .........      28.29
Foreign tax credit (as computed under the gross-up above)  .........  .........  .........  .........      20.40
U.S. tax payable ($28.29-$20.40).........................  .........  .........  .........  .........       7.89
Overall U.S. and foreign income tax with respect to pro                                                         
 rata minimum distribution ($30+$7.89)...................  .........  .........  .........  .........      37.89
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (2) Corporation M's United States income tax for 1963 and 1964 with 
respect to the distribution of the 1963 earnings and profits of the 
group is determined as follows:

                                                      1963                                                      
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                               A          B          C          D        Total  
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Distributions actually made..............................     $20.00  .........     $14.00  .........     $34.00
Gross-up under section 78:                                                                                      
  ($16.07/$16.07 x $2.50)................................       2.50  .........  .........  .........  .........
  ($14/$25 x $15)........................................  .........  .........       8.40  .........      10.90
Taxable income of M Corporation ($34+$10.90).............  .........  .........  .........  .........      44.90
U.S. tax before foreign tax credit (0.52 x $44.90).......  .........  .........  .........  .........      23.35
Foreign tax credit (as computed under gross-up above)....  .........  .........  .........  .........      10.90
U.S. tax payable ($23.35-$10.90).........................  .........  .........  .........  .........      12.45
Overall U.S. and foreign income tax with respect to the                                                         
 distribution actually made ($30+$12.45), such amount                                                           
 being in excess of the minimum overall tax burden of                                                           
 $37.44..................................................  .........  .........  .........  .........      42.45
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                                                                
                                                      1964                                                      
                                                                                                                
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Earnings and profits for 1963 to which minimum                                                                  
 distribution for such year was not attributable:                                                               
  ($22.50-$20)...........................................      $2.50  .........  .........  .........  .........
  ($12.50-$0)............................................  .........     $12.50  .........  .........  .........
  ($35.00-$14)...........................................  .........  .........     $21.00  .........     $36.00
Foreign income tax for 1963 not taken into account in                                                           
 determining tax deemed paid for such year on pretax                                                            
 earnings and profits to which the minimum distribution                                                         
 for such year was attributable:                                                                                
  ([$16.07-$16.07]/$16.07 x $2.50).......................          0  .........  .........  .........  .........
  ([$8.93-$0]/$8.93 x $12.50)............................  .........      12.50  .........  .........  .........
  ([$25-$14]/$25 x $15)..................................  .........  .........       6.60  .........      19.10
Distributions to M Corporation in 1964...................       2.50      12.50      21.00  .........      36.00
Gross-up under section 78:                                                                                      
  ($2.50/$2.50 x $0).....................................          0  .........  .........  .........  .........
  ($12.50/$12.50 x $12.50)...............................  .........      12.50  .........  .........  .........
  ($21/$21 x $6.60)......................................  .........  .........       6.60  .........      19.10
Taxable income of M Corporation ($36+$19.10).............  .........  .........  .........  .........      55.10
U.S. tax before foreign tax credit (0.52 x $55.10).......  .........  .........  .........  .........      28.65
Foreign tax credit (as computed under gross-up above)....  .........  .........  .........  .........      19.10
U.S. tax payable ($28.65-$19.10).........................  .........  .........  .........  .........       9.55
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    Example 6. Throughout 1963, domestic corporation M directly owns all 
the one class of stock of controlled foreign corporations A, B, and C, 
and maintains in a foreign country a branch which qualifies under 
paragraph (f)(4) of Sec. 1.963-1 for inclusion in a group as a wholly 
owned foreign subsidiary corporation. For 1963, a year for which the 
overall limitation under section 904(a)(2) on the foreign tax credit 
applies, M Corporation makes a group election with respect to A, B, and 
C Corporations and the foreign branch. All such corporations use the 
calendar year as the taxable year. The foreign branch has pretax and 
predistribution earnings and profits of $40 for 1963, as determined 
under paragraph (f)(4)(ii) of Sec. 1.963-1. None of the foreign 
corporations is a less developed country corporation under section 
902(d). Corporation M complies with the special rules of paragraphs (b) 
and (c) of this section. The United States income tax of M Corporation 
for 1963 is as follows, based upon the facts assumed:

[[Page 464]]



----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                               A          B          C        Branch     Total  
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Pretax and predistribution consolidated earnings and                                                            
 profits of the group....................................     $20.00     $30.00        $10        $40    $100.00
Consolidated income taxes................................       2.00      15.00          5         20      42.00
Effective foreign tax rate ($42/$100)....................  .........  .........  .........  .........        42%
Statutory percentage under section 963(b)................  .........  .........  .........  .........        40%
Posttax and predistribution consolidated earnings and                                                           
 profits of the group....................................      18.00      15.00          5         20      58.00
U.S. tax which would be paid on a pro rata minimum                                                              
 distribution from consolidated earnings and profits of                                                         
 the group:                                                                                                     
  Pro rata minimum distribution (and amount which would                                                         
   be received by M Corporation):                                                                               
    (0.40 x $18).........................................       7.20  .........  .........  .........  .........
    (0.40 x $15).........................................  .........       6.00  .........  .........  .........
    (0.40 x $5)..........................................  .........  .........          2  .........  .........
    (0.40 x $40).........................................  .........  .........  .........         16      31.20
  Gross-up under section 78:                                                                                    
    ($7.20/$18 x $2).....................................        .80  .........  .........  .........  .........
    ($6/$15 x $15).......................................  .........       6.00  .........  .........  .........
    ($2/$5 x $5).........................................  .........  .........          2  .........       8.80
  Taxable income of M Corporation ($31.20+$8.80).........  .........  .........  .........  .........      40.00
  U.S. tax before foreign tax credit (0.52 x $40)........  .........  .........  .........  .........      20.80
  Foreign tax credit ($8.80, as computed under the gross-                                                       
   up, plus 40 percent of $20)...........................  .........  .........  .........  .........      16.80
  U.S. tax payable ($20.80-$16.80).......................  .........  .........  .........  .........       4.00
Overall U.S. and foreign income tax with respect to a pro                                                       
 rata minimum distribution for 1963 ($4+$42).............  .........  .........  .........  .........      46.00
Tentative tax on distribution actually received by M                                                            
 Corporation:                                                                                                   
  Actual distribution received...........................  .........  .........         $5        $40     $45.00
  Gross-up under section 78 ($5/$5 x $5).................  .........  .........          5  .........       5.00
  Taxable income of M Corporation ($45+$5)...............  .........  .........  .........  .........      50.00
  U.S. tax before foreign tax credit (0.52 x $50)........  .........  .........  .........  .........      26.00
  Tentative foreign tax credit ($5, as computed under the                                                       
   gross-up above, plus 100 percent of $20)..............  .........  .........  .........  .........      25.00
  Tentative U.S. tax payable ($26-$25)...................  .........  .........  .........  .........       1.00
Insufficient overall U.S. and foreign income tax (the                                                           
 lesser of $46 or $46.80 [0.90 x 0.52 x $100] minus $43                                                         
 [$1+$42])...............................................  .........  .........  .........  .........       3.00
Reduced foreign tax credit ($25-$3)......................  .........  .........  .........  .........      22.00
U.S. tax payable ($26-$22)...............................  .........  .........  .........  .........       4.00
Overall U.S. and foreign income tax with respect to                                                             
 actual distribution for 1963 ($4+$42)...................  .........  .........  .........  .........      46.00
Reduction in foreign tax credit for 1963 ($25-$22).......  .........  .........  .........  .........       3.00
Allocation of reduction in foreign tax credit to                                                                
 undistributed 1963 consolidated earnings and profits of                                                        
 the group:                                                                                                     
  ($18/[$18+$15] x $3.00)................................       1.64  .........  .........  .........  .........
  ($15/[$18+$15] x $3.00)................................  .........       1.36  .........  .........       3.00
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    Example 7. Domestic group M, an affiliated group of domestic 
corporations filing a consolidated return under section 1501, makes a 
group election for 1963 with respect to a group consisting of two 
controlled foreign corporations C and D, all of whose one class of stock 
is directly owned by group M, and foreign branch B, a foreign branch of 
a Western Hemisphere trade corporation (as defined in section 921) 
included in group M. No distributions are received for the taxable year 
from corporations C and D, but the foreign group makes a minimum 
distribution by reason of the deemed distribution of all of branch B's 
earnings and profits. Group M complies with the special rules of 
paragraphs (b) and (c) of this section. For 1963, a year for which the 
United States corporate income tax rate is 52 percent, the overall 
limitation under section 904(a)(2) on the foreign tax credit applies. 
All corporations use the calendar year as the taxable year. None of the 
foreign corporations is a less developed country corporation under 
section 902(d) for 1963. The income, and the United States and foreign 
income tax for 1963, are determined as follows, based upon the facts 
assumed:

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                        Branch       C          D        Total  
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Pretax and predistribution consolidated earnings and profits of the                                             
 foreign group (before Western Hemisphere trade corporation                                                     
 deduction).........................................................    $100.00     $10.00     $10.00    $120.00
Western Hemisphere trade corporation deduction ($100 x 0.14/0.52)...      26.92  .........  .........      26.92
Pretax and predistribution consolidated earnings and profits of the                                             
 foreign group (after Western Hemisphere trade corporation                                                      
 deduction).........................................................      73.08      10.00      10.00      93.08

[[Page 465]]

                                                                                                                
Consolidated foreign income taxes (38%, 20%, and zero rate,                                                     
 respectively):                                                                                                 
  (0.38 x $100).....................................................      38.00  .........  .........  .........
  (0.20 x $10)......................................................  .........       2.00  .........      40.00
  Consolidated earnings and profits of the foreign group............      35.08       8.00      10.00      53.08
Effective foreign tax rate ($40/$93.08).............................  .........  .........  .........        43%
Statutory percentage under section 963(b)...........................  .........  .........  .........        40%
Tax which would be paid with respect to a pro rata minimum                                                      
 distribution from consolidated earnings and profits of the foreign                                             
 group:                                                                                                         
  Pro rata minimum distribution:                                                                                
    (0.40 x $73.08).................................................      29.23  .........  .........  .........
    (0.40 x $8.00)..................................................  .........       3.20  .........  .........
    (0.40 x $10.00).................................................  .........  .........       4.00      36.43
  Gross-up under section 78: ($3.20/$8.00 x $2).....................  .........        .80  .........        .80
  Taxable income of group M.........................................      29.23       4.00       4.00      37.23
  U.S. tax before foreign tax credit:                                                                           
    (0.52 x $29.23).................................................      15.20  .........  .........  .........
    (0.54 x $4.00)..................................................  .........       2.16  .........  .........
    (0.54 x $4.00)..................................................  .........  .........       2.16      19.52
  Foreign tax credit ($0.80, as computed under the gross-up above,                                              
   plus 40 percent of $38)..........................................      15.20        .80  .........      16.00
  U.S. tax payable..................................................  .........       1.36       2.16       3.52
  Overall U.S. and foreign income tax with respect to pro rata                                                  
   minimum distribution ($3.52+$40).................................  .........  .........  .........      43.52
Tentative tax on distribution actually received by group M:                                                     
  Taxable income of branch..........................................      73.08  .........  .........      73.08
  U.S. tax before foreign tax credit (0.52 x $73.08)................      38.00  .........  .........      38.00
  Tentative foreign tax credit......................................      38.00  .........  .........      38.00
  Tentative U.S. tax payable........................................  .........  .........  .........          0
Insufficient overall U.S. and foreign income tax (the lesser of                                                 
 $43.52 or $43.56 [0.90 x 0.52 x $93.08] minus $40).................  .........  .........  .........       3.52
Reduced foreign tax credit ($38-$3.52)..............................  .........  .........  .........      34.48
U.S. tax payable ($38-$34.48).......................................  .........  .........  .........       3.52
Overall U.S. and foreign income tax ($3.52+$40.00)..................  .........  .........  .........      43.52
Reduction in foreign tax credit for 1963 ($38-$34.48)...............  .........  .........  .........       3.52
Allocation of reduction in foreign tax credit to 1963 undistributed                                             
 consolidated earnings and profits of the foreign group:                                                        
  ($8/[$8+$10] x $3.52).............................................  .........       1.56  .........  .........
  ($10/[$8+$10] x $3.52)............................................  .........  .........       1.96       3.52
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

[T.D. 6759, 29 FR 13335, Sept. 25, 1964; 29 FR 13896, Oct. 8, 1964, as 
amended by T.D. 6767, 29 FR 14878, Nov. 3, 1964; T.D. 7100, 36 FR 5336, 
Mar. 20, 1971]


<R05>
Sec. 1.963-5   Foreign corporations with variation in foreign tax rate because of distributions.

    (a) Limited application of section. The rules of this section shall 
apply to a foreign corporation only if--
    (1) Under the laws of a foreign country or possession of the United 
States the foreign income tax of the corporation for the taxable year 
depends upon the extent to which distributions are made by such 
corporation from its earnings and profits for the taxable year, so that 
the rate of such tax for the taxable year on income which is distributed 
differs from the rate of such tax for such year on the income which is 
not distributed, and
    (2) The corporation--
    (i) Is a single first-tier corporation, or
    (ii) Is for the taxable year in a chain or group from which the 
United States shareholder receives a minimum distribution in respect of 
which the minimum overall tax burden is determined in accordance with 
paragraph (a)(1)(ii) of Sec. 1.963-4.
    (b) Foreign income tax determined as though no distributions were 
made. The foreign income tax on the pretax and predistribution earnings 
and profits of the foreign corporation for the taxable year shall 
(solely for the purpose of determining the effective foreign tax rate 
under paragraph (c) of Sec. 1.963-2) be determined as if the foreign 
corporation made no distributions for the taxable year. However, 
notwithstanding the second sentence of paragraph (d)(1) of Sec. 1.963-2, 
where the United States shareholder owns the stock (with respect to 
which the election under section 963 is made) in such corporation by 
reason of stock owned through a chain of ownership described in section 
958(a) and the

[[Page 466]]

foreign income tax of such corporation for the taxable year decreases as 
distributions are made from its earnings and profits, the rule in the 
preceding sentence shall not apply if the electing United States 
shareholder does not actually receive for the taxable year its 
proportionate share of the earnings and profits which are actually 
distributed. In such case, the foreign income tax on pretax and 
predistribution earnings and profits shall be the actual foreign income 
tax of such corporation, computed on the basis of the distributions 
which are made. For example, assume that a second-tier foreign 
corporation in a chain has pretax and predistribution earnings of $100 
for the taxable year and that foreign law imposes on such corporation a 
foreign income tax of 50 percent of the pretax earnings and profits 
minus dividends for such year and of 20 percent of such dividends. If 
the second-tier foreign corporation distributes $20 of earnings and 
profits to a first-tier foreign corporation which is part of the same 
chain, and if the first-tier corporation retains the dividend so 
received, the foreign income tax of the second-tier foreign corporation 
shall be considered to be the tax actually paid for the taxable year, 
that is, $44 (50 percent of $80 plus 20 percent of $20). If the first-
tier foreign corporation distributes the dividend so received, the 
foreign income tax of the second-tier foreign corporation shall be 
considered to be $50 (50 percent of $100). For purposes of this 
paragraph, the principles of paragraph (b)(3) of Sec. 1.963-4 shall 
apply.
    (c) Minimum distribution--(1) Single first-tier corporation. A 
minimum distribution for a taxable year by a single first-tier 
corporation described in paragraph (a)(1) of this section shall be a 
distribution which is equal to--
    (i) The amount resulting from the multiplication of the statutory 
percentage specified in paragraph (b) of Sec. 1.963-2 for such year by 
the United States shareholder's proportionate share of the earnings and 
profits of such corporation, as determined under paragraph (d)(2)(i) of 
Sec. 1.963-2 but without the deduction for foreign income tax provided 
by paragraph (d)(1)(ii) and (iii) of such section, reduced by
    (ii) The foreign income tax on the pretax amount determined under 
subdivision (i) of this subparagraph which would be paid or accrued by 
such corporation by reason of distributing such amount, less such tax, 
for such taxable year.
    (2) Corporation in a chain or group making a pro rata minimum 
distribution. In case of a corporation described in paragraph (a)(2)(ii) 
of this section in a chain or group, such corporation's share of a pro 
rata minimum distribution by the chain or group for the taxable year 
shall be--
    (i) The amount resulting from the multiplication of the statutory 
percentage specified in paragraph (b) of Sec. 1.963-2 for the taxable 
year by the United States shareholder's proportionate share of the 
earnings and profits of such corporation, as determined under paragraph 
(d)(3) of Sec. 1.963-2 but without the deduction for foreign income tax 
provided by paragraph (d)(1)(ii) and (iii) of such section, reduced by
    (ii) The foreign income tax on the pretax amount determined under 
subdivision (i) of this subparagraph which would be paid or accrued by 
such corporation by reason of distributing such amount, less such tax, 
for such taxable year.
    (3) A chain or group making a distribution other than a pro rata 
minimum distribution. If a chain or group contains one or more foreign 
corporations described in paragraph (a)(2)(ii) of this section and such 
chain or group makes a minimum distribution other than a pro rata 
minimum distribution for the taxable year, the amount of such minimum 
distribution to the electing United States shareholder shall be at 
least--
    (i) The amount resulting from the multiplication of the statutory 
percentage specified in paragraph (b) of Sec. 1.963-2 for the taxable 
year by the consolidated earnings and profits of such chain or group 
with respect to such shareholder, as determined under paragraph (d)(3) 
of such section but without any deduction for foreign income tax 
provided by paragraph (d)(1)(ii) and (iii) of such section, reduced by

[[Page 467]]

    (ii) The foreign income tax on the pretax amount determined under 
subdivision (i) of this subparagraph which would be paid or accrued by 
the foreign corporations in the chain or group by reason of distributing 
such amount, less such tax, for such taxable year.
    (4) Illustrations. The application of this paragraph may be 
illustrated by the following examples:

    Example 1. Domestic corporation M directly owns 80 percent of the 
one class of stock of single first-tier corporation B, which for 1964 
has $100 of pretax earnings and profits on which is imposed a foreign 
income tax of 40 percent of pretax earnings and profits minus dividends 
for the taxable year and of 20 percent of the amount of such dividends. 
Both corporations use the calendar year as the taxable year. The 
effective foreign tax rate applicable to B Corporation, as determined 
under paragraph (c) of Sec. 1.963-2, is 40 percent, and the statutory 
percentage under paragraph (b) of Sec. 1.963-2 for 1964 is 38 percent. 
Corporation M receives a minimum distribution for 1964 if it receives 
from B Corporation's earnings and profits for such year $22.80, that is, 
80 percent of $28.50, the distribution which would be made if there were 
distributed that amount of earnings and profits which, together with the 
foreign income tax at the rate effectively applicable to pretax earnings 
and profits to which such distribution is attributable, equals 38 
percent of $100. Such distribution may be determined by solving for 
``d'' in the following formula:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
           d=$38-0.20d-0.40($38-d)                                      
           d=$38-0.20d-$15.20+0.40d                                     
           d=$22.80+0.20d                                               
0.80.....  d=$22.80                                                     
           d=$22.80/0.80                                                
           d=$28.50                                                     
                                                                        

    Example 2. Domestic corporation M directly owns 80 percent of the 
one class of stock of each of controlled foreign corporations A and B, 
which constitute a group and each of which for 1964 has pretax earnings 
and profits of $100. All corporations use the calendar year as the 
taxable year. Corporation A is subject to foreign income tax at a flat 
rate of 40 percent; and B Corporation is subject to a foreign income tax 
of 40 percent of $100 minus dividends for the taxable year and of 20 
percent of the amount of such dividends. The effective foreign tax rate 
with respect to the group, as determined under paragraph (c) of 
Sec. 1.963-2, is 40 percent, and the statutory percentage under 
paragraph (b) of Sec. 1.963-2 for 1964 is 38 percent. Corporation B 
distributes $25 for 1964 toward a minimum distribution from the group 
which is not a pro rata minimum distribution. The minimum distribution 
by the group for 1964 with respect to M Corporation is determined as 
follows:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
M Corporation's proportionate share of B Corporation's                  
 distribution (0.80 x $25).....................................   $20.00
                                                                --------
Pretax and predistribution consolidated earnings and profits of         
 the group (0.80 x $200).......................................   160.00
                                                                --------
Statutory percentage of pretax and predistribution consolidated         
 earnings and profits (0.33 x $160)............................    60.80
                                                                --------
Less: portion of such statutory percentage to which the $20             
 dividend received from B Corporation is attributable: Total            
 dividend paid by B Corporation                                    25.00
Plus: Foreign income tax on B Corporation's pretax and                  
 predistribution earnings and profits to which such dividend is         
 attributable, letting ``t'' represent such tax:                        
    t=0.20 ($25)+0.40t.........................................         
    t=$5+0.40t.................................................         
  0.60t=$5.....................................................         
    t=$5/0.60..................................................     8.33
                                                                --------
B Corporation's pretax and predistribution earnings and profits         
 to which such dividend is attributable........................    33.33
                                                                ========
M Corporation's proportionate share of B Corporation's pretax           
 and predistribution earnings and profits to which the dividend         
 is attributable (0.80 x $33.33)...............................    26.67
                                                                --------
The statutory percentage of the pretax and predistribution              
 consolidated earnings and profits of the group to which A              
 Corporation's distribution must be attributable...............    34.13
                                                                ========
Dividend required to be received from A Corporation ($34.13-            
 [0.40 x $34.13])..............................................    20.48
                                                                --------
Minimum distribution to M Corporation of the taxable year's             
 consolidated earnings and profits of the group ($20+$20.48)...    40.48
                                                                --------
                                                                        

    Example 3. The facts are the same as in example 2 except that the 
$25 distribution of earnings and profits is made by A Corporation. The 
amount of the minimum distribution for 1964 is determined as follows:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
M Corporation's proportionate share of A Corporation's                  
 distribution (0.80 x $25).....................................   $20.00
                                                                --------
Pretax and predistribution consolidated earnings and profits of         
 the group (0.80 x $200).......................................   160.00
                                                                --------
Statutory percentage of pretax and predistribution consolidated         
 earnings and profits (0.38 x $160)............................    60.80
                                                                --------
Less: Portion of such statutory percentage to which the $20             
 dividend received from A Corporation is attributable: Total            
 dividend paid by A Corporation................................    25.00
Plus: Foreign income tax on A Corporation's pretax and                  
 predistribution earnings and profits to which such dividend is         
 attributable (0.40 x [$25/0.60])..............................    16.67
                                                                --------
A Corporation's pretax and predistribution earnings and profits         
 to which such dividend is attributable........................    41.67
                                                                ========
M Corporation's proportionate share of A Corporation's pretax           
 and predistribution earnings and profits to which dividend is          
 attributable ($41.67 x 0.80)..................................    33.34
                                                                --------

[[Page 468]]

                                                                        
Portion of the statutory percentage of the pretax and                   
 predistribution consolidated earnings and profits of the group         
 to which B Corporation's distribution must be attributable....    27.46
                                                                ========
Dividend received from B Corporation, letting ``d'' represent           
 the dividend:                                                          
    d=$27.46-0.20d-0.40 ($27.46-d).............................         
    d=$27.46-0.20d-$10.98+0.40d................................         
    d=$16.48+0.20d.............................................         
  0.80d=$16.48.................................................         
    d=$16.48/0.80..............................................    20.60
                                                                --------
Minimum distribution to M Corporation of the taxable year's             
 consolidated earnings and profits of the group ($20+$20.60)...    40.60
                                                                        

    (d) Distributions through a chain or group. In the application of 
paragraph (b)(3)(i) of Sec. 1.963-4, relating to the allocation of 
dividend payments first to income received as a distribution from other 
foreign corporations in the chain or group, if one or more of such other 
foreign corporations is a corporation whose foreign income tax rate 
decreases as the distributions are made, the allocation under such 
paragraph shall be made first to such corporations' distributions.
    (e) Foreign tax credit--(1) Year of minimum distribution. If a 
United States shareholder receives for a taxable year a distribution of 
the earnings and profits for the taxable year of a foreign corporation 
described in paragraph (a) of this section and if for such year such 
corporation is a first-tier corporation, or a second-tier corporation 
described in section 902 (a) or (b), as the case may be, then, in 
applying paragraph (c)(2)(i) of Sec. 1.963-4, only the foreign income 
tax which is effectively applicable to pretax earnings and profits to 
which are attributable the earnings and profits which are distributed 
shall be deemed paid for such year under section 902 (a) or (b), as the 
case may be, and the foreign income tax so paid or accrued by such 
corporation shall not be averaged, for purposes of such section, with 
its foreign income tax paid or accrued for such year on its pretax 
earnings and profits to which are attributable the earnings and profits 
which are not distributed.
    (2) Year of distribution of remaining earnings and profits. If for a 
taxable year a United States shareholder receives a minimum distribution 
from a corporation described in paragraph (a) of this section, the 
pretax and predistribution earnings and profits of such corporation for 
the taxable year to which such minimum distribution is attributable and 
the foreign income tax which is taken into account, in accordance with 
paragraph (c)(2)(i) of Sec. 1.963-4, in determining tax deemed paid 
under section 902 on such pretax and predistribution earnings and 
profits shall not be taken into account in the application of section 
902 when other earnings and profits of such foreign corporation for such 
year are distributed in a subsequent taxable year of such foreign 
corporation to such shareholder.
    (3) Illustration. The application of this paragraph may be 
illustrated by the following examples:

    Example 1. (a) All the income of controlled foreign corporation B, 
wholly owned directly by domestic corporation M, is taxed by foreign 
country Y, the tax laws of which impose at the local level a corporate 
income tax of 10 percent of earnings and profits (before reduction for 
income taxes) and, at the national level, an income tax of 30 percent of 
such earnings and profits reduced by the local tax and by any profits 
which are distributed. Also, at the national level, a tax of 20 percent 
is imposed on B Corporation on the dividends which are paid for the 
taxable year. Both corporations use the calendar year as the taxable 
year. For 1963, B Corporation has earnings and profits (before reduction 
by income taxes) of $100. B Corporation is not a less developed country 
corporation under section 902(d). For 1963, M Corporation makes a first-
tier election with respect to B Corporation and receives a minimum 
distribution. Corporation B has no 1964 earnings and profits, and its 
remaining 1963 earnings and profits are distributed late in 1964. The 
amount of the minimum distribution required to be received by M 
Corporation for 1963 and the United States tax with respect to the 1963 
earnings and profits of B Corporation are determined as follows, 
assuming a United States corporate income tax rate of 52 percent 
(instead of 50 percent) for 1964 and no surtax exemption under section 
11(c) for either year:

                                  1963                                  
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
Effective foreign tax rate which obtains if no                          
 earnings and profits of B Corporation are                              
 distributed [($100 x 0.10)+ ([$100-($100 x 0.10)] x                    
 0.30)]/$100........................................                 37%
Minimum percentage of earnings and profits required                     
 under section 963(b) to be distributed, given a 37                     
 percent effective foreign tax rate.................                 68%

[[Page 469]]

                                                                        
Amount of earnings and profits (before reduction by                     
 foreign income tax) to which minimum distribution                      
 would be attributable if the effective foreign tax                     
 rate of 37 percent obtained (0.68 x $100)..........              $68.00
Minimum distribution required to be received by M                       
 Corporation, i.e., such an amount that is $68 less                     
 the foreign income tax on such $68, determined by                      
 letting ``d'' equal the dividend in the algebraic                      
 equation:                                                              
    d=$68 - (0.10  x  $68) - 0.30 ($68 - [0.10  x                       
     $68] - d) - 0.20d..............................                    
    d=$68 - $6.80 - ($20.40 - $2.04 - 0.30d) - 0.20d                    
    d=$61.20 - $20.40 + $2.04 + 0.30d - 0.20d.......                    
    d=$42.84 + 0.10d................................                    
  0.90d=$42.84......................................                    
    d=$42.84/0.90, or...............................              $47.60
Gross-up under section 78, using the actual foreign                     
 income tax imposed on pretax profits to which are                      
 attributable the earnings and profits distributed                      
 ($6.80+0.30 [$61.20-$47.60]+0.20 [$47.60]).........              $20.40
Taxable income of M Corporation for 1963                                
 ($47.60+$20.40)....................................              $68.00
U.S. tax before foreign tax credit ($68 x 0.52).....              $35.36
Foreign tax credit ($47.60/$47.60 x  $20.40)........              $20.40
U.S. tax payable for 1963 ($35.36- $20.40)..........              $14.96
Overall U.S. and foreign income tax rate                                
 [$14.96+$20.40+($32 x 0.37)]/$100..................              47.20%
                                                                        
                                  1964                                  
                                                                        
Dividend received by M Corporation ($32-[0.37 x                         
 $32])..............................................              $20.16
Gross-up under section 78, using the foreign income                     
 tax paid or accrued on pretax earnings and profits                     
 to which are attributable 1963 earnings and profits                    
 distributed during 1964 ($20.16/$20.16 x [$32 x                        
 0.37]).............................................              $11.84
Taxable income of M Corporation for 1964                                
 ($20.16+$11.84)....................................              $32.00
U.S. tax before foreign tax credit ($32 x 0.52).....              $16.64
Foreign tax credit ($20.16/$20.16 x  $11.84)........              $11.84
U.S. tax payable ($16.64-$11.84)....................               $4.80
                                                                        

    (b) If B Corporation were a less developed country corporation under 
section 902(d), there would be no gross-up under section 78 and the 
foreign tax credit of M Corporation would be $14.28 for 1963 ($47.60/
[47.60+ $20.40] x $20.40), and $7.46 for 1964 ($20.16/ 
[$20.16+$11.84] x $11.84).
    Example 2. For 1963, domestic corporation M receives a dividend of 
$21 from B Corporation which counts toward a minimum distribution from a 
group, determined by applying the special rules of paragraphs (b) and 
(c) of Sec. 1.963-4. Both corporations use the calendar year as the 
taxable year. Foreign law imposes on B Corporation an income tax of 40 
percent of the year's pretax earnings and profits, less dividends paid 
for such year, and of 20 percent of such dividends. Corporation M 
directly owns 70 percent of the one class of stock of B Corporation, 
which for 1963 has pretax and predistribution earnings and profits of 
$100. Corporation B is not a less developed country corporation under 
section 902(d). In late 1964, M Corporation receives a distribution of 
all of B Corporation's 1964 earnings and profits and of $25.20 from its 
1963 earnings and profits. The foreign income tax of B Corporation 
deemed paid for 1963 by M Corporation under section 902(a) is based on 
the foreign income tax actually paid by B Corporation on an amount of 
pretax earnings and profits which, when reduced by the tax so paid, 
equals the total dividend which is paid. The determination of tax deemed 
paid by M Corporation with respect to distributions from 1963 earnings 
and profits of B Corporation is as follows:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                  1963                                  
                                                                        
Pretax and predistribution earnings and profits of B                    
 Corporation for 1963..........................................     $100
Total dividend paid by B Corporation in 1963 ($21/0.70)........       30
Total foreign income tax paid by B Corporation for 1963                 
 (0.40[$100- $30]+[0.20 x $30]) or ($28+$6)....................       34
Foreign income tax, represented by ``t'' in the following               
 equation, to be taken into account with respect to total               
 dividend in determining tax deemed paid under section 902(a)           
 by M Corporation:                                                      
    t=(0.20 x $30)+0.40t.......................................         
    t=$6+0.40t.................................................         
  0.60t=$6.....................................................         
    t=$6/0.60, or..............................................      $10
Foreign income tax deemed paid by M Corporation for 1963 ($21/          
 $30 x $10)....................................................        7
                                                                        
                                  1964                                  
                                                                        
Remaining 1963 earnings and profits of B Corporation ([$100-            
 $34]-$30) or ($66-$30)........................................       36
Dividend received by M Corporation for 1964 (0.70 x $36).......    25.20
Foreign income tax deemed paid by M Corporation for 1964                
 ($25.20/$36 x  [$34-$10]) or ($25.20/$36 x $24)...............    16.80
                                                                        

[T.D. 6759, 29 Sept. 25, 1964; 29 FR 13896, Oct. 8, 1964, as amended by 
T.D. 6767, 29 FR 14879, Nov. 3, 1964]


<R05>
Sec. 1.963-6   Deficiency distribution.

    (a) In general. Section 963(e)(2) and this section provide a method 
under which, by virtue of a deficiency distribution, a United States 
shareholder may be relieved from the payment of a deficiency in tax for 
any taxable year arising by reason of failure to include subpart F 
income in gross income under section 951(a)(1)(A)(i), when it has been 
determined that such shareholder has failed to receive a minimum 
distribution for such year in respect of which it elected to secure the 
exclusion

[[Page 470]]

under section 963. In addition, this section provides rules with respect 
to a credit or refund of part or all of any such deficiency which has 
been paid. Under the method provided, the benefit of the exclusion of 
subpart F income from gross income of the United States shareholder is 
allowed retroactively for the taxable year in respect of which the 
election under section 963 applied, but only if the subsequent 
deficiency distribution meets the requirements of this section. The 
benefits of the retroactive exclusion will not, however, prevent the 
assessment of interest, additional amounts, and assessable penalties.
    (b) Requirements for deficiency distribution--(1) Distribution made 
on or after date of determination. If--
    (i) A United States shareholder, in making its return of the tax 
imposed by chapter 1 of the Code for any taxable year, elects to secure 
an exclusion under section 963 for such year,
    (ii) It is subsequently determined (within the meaning of paragraph 
(c) of this section) that an exclusion under section 963 of subpart F 
income with respect to stock to which such election relates does not 
apply for such taxable year because of the failure of such shareholder 
to receive a minimum distribution for such year with respect to such 
stock, and
    (iii) Such failure is due to reasonable cause, a deficiency 
distribution which is received by such shareholder with respect to such 
stock from a foreign corporation which was the single first-tier 
corporation, or a corporation in the chain or group, as the case may be, 
with respect to which the election was made, shall count toward a 
minimum distribution under section 963 for such year of election if such 
deficiency distribution is received (except as provided by subparagraph 
(2) of this paragraph) on, or within 90 days after, the date of such 
determination and prior to the filing of a claim under paragraph (d)(1) 
of this section. Such claim must be filed within 120 days after the date 
of such determination, and the deficiency distribution must be a 
dividend of such a nature (except as otherwise provided in this section) 
as would have permitted it to count toward a minimum distribution for 
the taxable year of the election if it had been received by the United 
States shareholder during such year. No distribution shall count as a 
deficiency distribution under this subparagraph unless a claim therefor 
is filed under paragraph (d)(1) of this section.
    (2) Distribution made before date of determination. A deficiency 
distribution may also be received by a United States shareholder at any 
time prior to the date on which the determination required by 
subparagraph (1) of this paragraph is made. A distribution will count as 
a deficiency distribution under this subparagraph--
    (i) To the extent that such distribution otherwise satisfies the 
requirements of this section;
    (ii) If the United States shareholder files within 90 days after 
such distribution but before the determination date an advance claim 
described in paragraph (d)(2) of this section for treatment of such 
distribution as a deficiency distribution;
    (iii) If such shareholder consents in such claim to include such 
deficiency distribution in gross income for the taxable year of the 
election to the extent necessary to complete a minimum distribution for 
such year and under section 6501 to extend the period for the making of 
assessments, and the bringing of distraint or a proceeding in court for 
collection, in respect of a deficiency and all interest, additional 
amounts, and assessable penalties for such taxable year;
    (iv) If, when requested by the district director, such shareholder 
consents under section 6501 in such claim to extend the period for the 
making of assessments, and the bringing of distraint or a proceeding in 
court for collection, in respect of a deficiency and all interest, 
additional amounts and assessable penalties for the year of receipt of 
such distribution; and
    (v) To the extent that such shareholder makes advance payment of tax 
which would result from the inclusion of such distribution in gross 
income as a minimum distribution for the year of such deficiency.

To the extent that such distribution is not necesasry under the 
determination (when made under paragraph (c) of this section) for a 
deficiency distribution, it

[[Page 471]]

shall be included in the United States shareholder's gross income for 
the taxable year of receipt of such distribution and paragraph (g) of 
this section shall not apply.
    (3) Earnings and profits of year of election to be first 
distributed. If--
    (i) In the case of a first-tier election, the United States 
shareholder's proportionate share of the earnings and profits of the 
foreign corporation which was the single first-tier corporation, or
    (ii) In the case of a chain or group election, any portion of the 
share of any corporation or corporations (which were in the chain or 
group) of the consolidated earnings and profits with respect to the 
United States shareholder,

for the taxable year of the election has not been distributed on the 
stock with respect to which the election was made, then a distribution, 
in order to be counted toward a deficiency distribution, must be made by 
such corporation or corporations and from such earnings and profits to 
the extent thereof. Once all such earnings and profits of such 
corporation or corporations have been completely distributed, a 
deficiency distribution may be made from other earnings and profits of 
such foreign corporation which was a single first-tier corporation, or 
of such corporation or corporations which were in such chain or group, 
as the case may be.
    (4) Proof of reasonable cause. Reasonable cause for failure to 
receive a minimum distribution shall be deemed to exist, in the absence 
of circumstances demonstrating bad faith, if the electing United States 
shareholder receives, within the period prescribed by paragraph 
(a)(1)(i) of Sec. 1.963-3 with respect to the year of election, at least 
80 percent of the amount of a minimum distribution (from the earnings 
and profits to which the election for such year relates) which if 
received during such period would have satisfied the conditions for the 
section 963 exclusion to apply to such year. If less than 80 percent of 
the amount of a minimum distribution is received during such period, the 
existence of a reasonable cause for failure to receive a minimum 
distribution must be established by clear and convincing evidence; 
however, the preceding sentence shall not be taken as a limitation on 
the establishment of reasonable cause by any other proof of reasonable 
cause. For example, reasonable cause will exist if a single first-tier 
corporation for its taxable year makes a distribution which would be a 
minimum distribution but for a refund of foreign income tax which it has 
paid in good faith under foreign law but which is found not to be due 
after the United States income tax return of the United States 
shareholder has been filed.
    (c) Nature and details of determination. (1) A determination that 
the section 963 exclusion does not apply to a United States shareholder 
for a taxable year due to its failure to receive a minimum distribution 
for such year shall, for the purposes of this section, be established 
by--
    (i) A decision by the Tax Court or a judgment, decree, or other 
order by any court of competent jurisdiction, which has become final;
    (ii) A closing agreement made under section 7121; or,
    (iii) An agreement which is signed by the district director, or such 
other official to whom authority to sign the agreement is delegated, and 
by, or on behalf of, such shareholder and which relates to the liability 
of such shareholder for the tax under chapter 1 of the Code for such 
year.
    (2) The date of determination by a decision of the Tax Court shall 
be the date upon which such decision becomes final, as prescribed in 
section 7481.
    (3) The date upon which a judgment of a court becomes final shall be 
determined upon the basis of the facts in the particular case. 
Ordinarily, a judgment of a United States district court shall become 
final upon the expiration of the time allowed for taking an appeal, if 
no such appeal is duly taken within such time; and a judgment of the 
United States Court of Claims shall become final upon the expiration of 
the time allowed for filing a petition for certiorari, if no such 
petition is duly filed within such time.
    (4) The date of determination by a closing agreement made under 
section 7121 shall be the date such agreement is approved by the 
Commissioner.
    (5) The date of a determination made by an agreement which is signed 
by the

[[Page 472]]

district director, or such other official to whom authority to sign the 
agreement is delegated, shall be the date prescribed by this 
subparagraph. The agreement shall be sent to the United States 
shareholder at his last known address by either registered or certified 
mail. If registered mail is used for such purpose, the date of 
registration shall be treated as the date of determination; if certified 
mail is used for such purpose, the date of the postmark on the sender's 
receipt for such mail shall be treated as the date of determination. 
However, if the deficiency distribution is received by such shareholder 
before such registration or postmark date but on or after the date the 
agreement is signed by the district director or such other official to 
whom authority to sign the agreement is delegated, the date of 
determination shall be the date on which the agreement is so signed.
    (6) The determination under this paragraph shall find that, due to 
the United States shareholder's failure to receive a minimum 
distribution, the section 963 exclusion does not apply for the taxable 
year with respect to stock to which the election under such section 
relates. A determination described in subdivision (ii) or (iii) of 
subparagraph (1) of this paragraph shall set forth the amount of the 
deficiency distribution and the amount of additional income tax for 
which the United States shareholder is liable under Chapter 1 of the 
Code by reason of not including in gross income for such year the amount 
of the deficiency distribution. If a determination described in 
subdivision (i) of subparagraph (1) of this paragraph does not establish 
the amount of the deficiency distribution and such amount of additional 
tax, such amounts may be established by an agreement which is signed by 
the district director, or such other official to whom authority to sign 
the agreement is delegated.
    (d) Claim for treatment of distribution as a deficiency 
distribution--(1) Claim filed after date of determination. A claim 
(including any amendments thereof) for treatment of a deficiency 
distribution as counting toward a minimum distribution for the taxable 
year of election shall be filed in duplicate, within 120 days after the 
date of the determination described in paragraph (c) of this section, 
with the requisite declaration prescribed by the Commissioner on the 
appropriate claim form and shall be accompanied by--
    (i) A copy of such determination and a description of how it became 
final;
    (ii) If requested by the district director, or by such other 
official to whom authority to sign the agreement referred to in 
paragraph (c)(1) or (6) of this section is delegated, a consent by the 
United States shareholder under section 6501 to extend the period for 
the making of assessments, and the bringing of distraint or a proceeding 
in court for collection, in respect of a deficiency and all interest, 
additional amounts, and assessable penalties for the taxable year of 
election; and
    (iii) Such other information as may be required by the claim form or 
the district director, or other official, in support of the claim.
    (2) Advance claim. An advance claim for treatment of a deficiency 
distribution as counting toward a minimum distribution for the taxable 
year of election shall be filed in duplicate, within 90 days after such 
distribution but before the date of determination described in paragraph 
(c) of this section, and shall satisfy all requirements of subparagraph 
(1) of this paragraph other than subdivision (i) of such subparagraph. 
However, within 120 days after the date of the determination described 
in paragraph (c) of this section, the advance claim shall be completed 
so that it satisfies all requirements of subparagraph (1) of this 
paragraph.
    (e) Computation of interest on deficiencies in tax. If a United 
States shareholder, for the taxable year of the election under section 
963, completes a minimum distribution for such year by receiving a 
deficiency distribution to which this section applies, the interest on 
the deficiency in tax due by reason of the failure to include the amount 
of such deficiency distribution in such shareholder's gross income for 
such year shall be computed for the period from the last date prescribed 
for payment of the tax for such year to the date such deficiency in tax 
is paid. No interest shall be due by reason of the failure to include 
Subpart F income in

[[Page 473]]

gross income for a taxable year in respect of which a minimum 
distribution under section 963 is completed by a deficiency distribution 
to which this section applies.
    (f) Claim for credit or refund. If a deficiency in tax is asserted 
for any taxable year by reason of failure to include Subpart F income in 
gross income under section 951(a)(1)(A)(i) and the United States 
shareholder has paid any portion of such asserted deficiency, such 
shareholder is entitled to a credit or refund of such payment to the 
extent that such payment constitutes an overpayment of tax as the result 
of the receipt of a deficiency distribution to which this section 
applies. To secure credit or refund of such overpayment of tax, the 
United States shareholder must file a claim for refund in accordance 
with Sec. 301.6402-3, in addition to the claim form required under 
paragraph (d) of this section. No interest shall be allowed on such 
credit or refund. For other rules applicable to the filing of claims for 
credit or refund of an overpayment of tax, see section 6402 and the 
regulations thereunder. For the limitations applicable to the credit or 
refund for an overpayment of tax, see section 6511 and the regulations 
thereunder.
    (g) Effect of deficiency distribution--(1) Allocation of 
distributions. The deficiency distribution shall be allocated, by 
applying the rules of Sec. 1.963-3 (and paragraph (b) of Sec. 1.963-4, 
if applicable for the year of election), as a distribution first from 
the earnings and profits (to the extent thereof) of the foreign 
corporation which was the single first-tier corporation, or of the 
distributing corporation or corporations which were in the chain or 
group, as the case may be, for the taxable year in respect of which the 
election was made, and then from earnings and profits (to the extent 
thereof) described in section 959(c)(3) and determined as provided in 
section 959 for the most recent taxable year and the first, second, 
etc., taxable years preceding such recent taxable years, in that order, 
of the distributing corporation or corporations. In applying the 
preceding sentence to taxable years other than the taxable year in 
respect of which the election was made, the deficiency distribution 
shall first be allocated, in the order of allocation prescribed by such 
sentence, first to taxable years in respect of which no election under 
section 963 was made with respect to the stock on which such 
distribution is received and then to taxable years in respect of which 
an election under such section was made.
    (2) Year of receipt. Any deficiency distribution made with respect 
to a taxable year of the United States shareholder shall be treated, 
except as provided in paragraph (b)(2) of this section, as having been 
received by the shareholder in that year for which such shareholder 
elected to secure an exclusion under section 963; and, for purposes of 
the foreign tax credit under section 901, the foreign income taxes paid 
or accrued, or deemed paid, by the United States shareholder by reason 
of a distribution of any amount treated as a deficiency distribution for 
such year shall be treated as paid or accrued, or deemed paid, for such 
year.
    (3) Year of payment. A distribution counting toward a deficiency 
distribution for a taxable year of election shall, except as provided in 
paragraph (b)(2) of this section, be treated for purposes of applying 
paragraph (a) of Sec. 1.963-3, relating to conditions under which 
earnings and profits are counted toward a minimum distribution, and 
paragraph (b)(3) of Sec. 1.963-4, relating to rules for distributing 
through a chain or group, as if it were distributed during the 
distribution period (as defined in paragraph (g) of Sec. 1.963-3) with 
respect to the distributing corporation and each foreign corporation 
through which such distribution is made to the United States 
shareholder, for the taxable year to which the election under section 
963 applies; and the foreign income taxes paid by any foreign 
corporation by reason of such distribution shall, in the application of 
section 902 and of the special rules of paragraph (c) of Sec. 1.963-4, 
be treated as paid or accrued by such foreign corporation for its 
taxable year to which such election applies. The distribution shall not 
count toward a minimum distribution for any other taxable year.
    (4) Allocation of reduction in tax credit. If any portion of a 
deficiency distribution from a corporation which was in a chain or group 
is paid from earnings

[[Page 474]]

and profits of a taxable year other than that in respect of which the 
election was made, then the minimum distribution toward which such 
deficiency distribution counts may not be treated as a pro rata minimum 
distribution for purposes of Sec. 1.963-4. Moreover, the amount of the 
overall United States and foreign income tax with respect to such 
minimum distribution must satisfy the minimum tax requirements of 
paragraph (a)(1)(i), or paragraph (ii), of Sec. 1.963-4, but, if the 
latter applies, without any reduction and deferral under paragraph 
(c)(3) of such section of the foreign tax credit allowable under section 
901 with respect to the deficiency distribution.

[T.D. 6759, 29 FR 13346, Sept. 25, 1964, as amended by T.D. 6767, 29 FR 
14879, Nov. 3, 1964; T.D. 7410, 41 FR 11020, Mar. 16, 1976]


<R05>
Sec. 1.963-7   Transitional rules for certain taxable years.

    (a) Extension of time for making, revoking, or changing election--
(1) In general. Subparagraphs (2) and (3) of this paragraph provide 
additional rules which apply only to a taxable year of a United States 
shareholder for which the last day prescribed by law for filing its 
return (including any extensions of time under section 6081) occurs on 
or before the 90th day after September 30, 1964.
    (2) Manner of making the election. The election of the United States 
shareholder to secure the exclusion under section 963 and the consent to 
the regulations under such section may be made for the taxable year--
    (i) By filing with the return (or with an amended return filed on or 
before such 90th day) for such taxable year--
    (a) A written statement stating that such election is made for such 
taxable year, and
    (b) The names of the foreign corporations to which such election 
applies, the taxable year, country of incorporation, pretax earnings and 
profits, foreign income taxes, earnings and profits, and outstanding 
capital stock, of each such corporation, and such other information 
relating to the election made as the Commissioner may prescribe, on or 
before the date of filing, by instructions or schedules to support such 
return; or
    (ii) In case of any extension of time under section 6081 with 
respect to such taxable year where the last day prescribed by law for 
filing the return by the electing United States shareholder (not 
including any extensions thereof) occurs on or before September 30, 
1964, by filing with the request for the first such extension of time a 
written statement stating that such election is made for such taxable 
year and setting forth the names of the foreign corporations to which 
each election applies.
    (3) Revocation or change of election. An election made in the manner 
provided by subparagraph (2) of this paragraph may be revoked or 
changed--
    (i) By filing with the return on or before the 90th day after 
September 30, 1964, a written statement that such election is revoked or 
changed, as the case may be, and by setting forth with respect to any 
such modified election the information prescribed by subparagraph 
(2)(i)(b) of this paragraph, or
    (ii) Where the return has been filed on or before such 90th day, by 
filing on or before such 90th day an amended return and an accompanying 
statement that such election is revoked or changed, as the case may be, 
and by setting forth with respect to any such modified election the 
information prescribed by subparagraph (2)(i)(b) of this paragraph.
    (b) Extension of time for making a minimum distribution--(1) In 
general. This paragraph applies only with respect to a taxable year of a 
United States shareholder ending on or before September 30, 1964, for 
which an election to secure an exclusion under section 963 is made 
where, in case of a first-tier election, the distribution period of such 
first-tier corporation with respect to its taxable year to which such 
election applies ends on or before the 90th day after such date, and 
where, in the case of a chain or group election, the distribution period 
ends on or before such 90th day with respect to the taxable year to 
which the election applies of any of the foreign corporations in such 
chain or group.
    (2) Conditions for obtaining extension of time. A distribution on 
stock with respect to which the election under section 963 was made 
which is received by the United States shareholder from a

[[Page 475]]

foreign corporation which was the single first-tier corporation, or a 
corporation in the chain or group, as the case may be, with respect to 
which the election was made, shall count toward a minimum distribution 
under section 963 for such year of election if--
    (i) The distribution is made on or before such 90th day,
    (ii) The shareholder, in a statement attached to its return or 
amended return for such year (which is filed on or before such 90th day) 
indicates the foreign corporation or corporations from which the 
distribution is made and states that, and the extent to which, the 
distribution is to count toward such minimum distribution,
    (iii) The distribution is of such a nature as would have permitted 
it to count toward a minimum distribution for such taxable year of the 
United States shareholder if it had been made on the last day of such 
year, and
    (iv) The United States shareholder includes the distribution in 
gross income as if it were received on the last day of such taxable year 
of election.

The distribution shall be applied against the earnings and profits of 
the single first-tier corporation or the foreign corporations in the 
chain or group for the taxable year of such corporation or corporations 
to which the election applies.
    (3) Year of receipt. To the extent that a distribution counts toward 
a minimum distribution under this paragraph with respect to a taxable 
year of the United States shareholder, it shall be treated as having 
been received by the shareholder in that year for the purpose of 
determining gross income and the assessment of interest, additional 
amounts, and assessable penalties; and, for purposes of the foreign tax 
credit under section 901, the foreign income taxes paid or accrued, or 
deemed paid, by the United States shareholder by reason of a 
distribution of any amount treated as a distribution for such year under 
this paragraph shall be treated as paid or accrued, or deemed paid, for 
such year.
    (4) Year of payment. The distribution shall be treated for purposes 
of applying paragraph (a) of Sec. 1.963-3, relating to conditions under 
which earnings and profits are counted toward a minimum distribution, 
and paragraph (b)(3) of Sec. 1.963-4, relating to rules for distributing 
through a chain or group, as if it were distributed during the 
distribution period (as defined in paragraph (g) of Sec. 1.963-3) with 
respect to the distributing corporation and each foreign corporation 
through which such distribution is made to the United States 
shareholder, for the taxable year to which the election under section 
963 applies; and the foreign income taxes paid by any foreign 
corporation by reason of such distribution shall, in the application of 
section 902 and of the special rules of paragraph (c) of Sec. 1.963-4, 
be treated as paid or accrued by such foreign corporation for its 
taxable year to which such election applies. The distribution shall not 
count toward a minimum distribution for any other taxable year.

[T.D. 6759, 29 FR 13348, Sept. 25, 1964, as amended by T.D. 6767, 29 FR 
14879, Nov. 3, 1964]


<R05>
Sec. 1.963-8   Determination of minimum distribution during the surcharge period.

    (a) Taxable years not wholly within the surcharge period. In the 
case of a taxable year beginning before the surcharge period and ending 
within the surcharge period, or beginning within the surcharge period 
and ending after the surcharge period, or beginning before January 1, 
1970, and ending after December 31, 1969, section 963(b) provides the 
method for determining the required minimum distribution. Under the 
method prescribed in section 963(b) for such years, the required minimum 
distribution is an amount equal to the sums of:
    (1) That portion of the minimum distribution which would be required 
if the provisions of section 963(b)(1) were applicable to the taxable 
year, which the number of days in such taxable year which are within the 
surcharge period and before January 1, 1970, bears to the total number 
of days in such taxable year.
    (2) That portion of the minimum distribution which would be required 
if the provisions of section 963(b)(2) were applicable to such taxable 
year, which the number of days in such taxable year which are within the 
surcharge

[[Page 476]]

period and after December 31, 1969, bears to the total number of days in 
such taxable year, and
    (3) That portion of the minimum distribution which would be required 
if the provisions of section 963(b)(3) were applicable to such taxable 
year, which the number of days in such taxable year which are not within 
the surcharge period bears to the total number of days in such taxable 
year.
    (b) Calendar year 1970. For calendar year 1970, the required minimum 
distribution shall be an amount determined in accordance with the 
following table:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                           The required 
                                                              minimum   
                                                           distribution 
   If the effective foreign tax rate is (percentage)--      of earnings 
                                                          and profits is
                                                          (percentage)--
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Under 9.................................................       84.983562
9 or over but less than 10..............................       82.967123
10 or over but less than 18.............................       80.983562
18 or over but less than 19.............................       79.471233
19 or over but less than 26.............................       77.487671
26 or over but less than 27.............................       73.958904
27 or over but less than 32.............................       70.487671
32 or over but less than 33.............................       67.463014
33 or over but less than 36.............................       63.991781
36 or over but less than 37.............................       57.942466
37 or over but less than 39.............................       51.991781
39 or over but less than 40.............................       44.934247
40 or over but less than 41.............................       37.495890
41 or over but less than 42.............................       31.446575
42 or over but less than 43.............................       19.446575
43 or over but less than 44.............................       12.893151
44 or over but less than 45.............................        6.446575
45 or over..............................................               0
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (c) Surcharge period. For purposes of this section the term 
``surcharge period'' means the period beginning January 1, 1968, and 
ending June 30, 1970.
    (d) Illustration of principles. The application of the rules set 
forth in paragraphs (a), (b), and (c) of this section may be illustrated 
by the following example. It is assumed that all computations are 
carried to sufficient accuracy:

    Example. (a) M, a domestic corporation, and A, its controlled 
corporation (the one class of stock of which is wholly owned by M), both 
have a taxable year beginning December 1, 1969, and ending November 30, 
1970. For such taxable year M makes a first-tier election with respect 
to A corporation. The effective foreign tax rate for such year is 30 
percent.
    (b) Under section 963(b) and paragraph (b) of this section the 
surcharge period ends June 30, 1970. Therefore, of the 365 days in the 
taxable year, 153 days are not within the surcharge period. Of the 
remaining 212 days, 31 are within the surcharge period and before 
January 1, 1970 and 181 days are within the surcharge period and after 
December 31, 1969. If section 963(b)(1) were applicable to the entire 
taxable year, the required minimum distribution of earnings and profits 
would be 75 percent. If section 963(b)(2) were applicable to the entire 
taxable year, the required minimum distribution would be 72 percent. If 
section 963(b)(3) were applicable to the entire taxable year, the 
required minimum distribution would be 69 percent.
    (c) Under section 963(b) and this section the required minimum 
distribution of earnings and profits is 71 percent, computed as follows:

              (75% x 31<divide>365)+(72% x 181<divide>365) 
                      +(69% x 153<divide>365)=71%.

[T.D. 7100, 36 FR 5336, Mar. 20, 1971]


<R05>
Sec. 1.964-1   Determination of the earnings and profits of a foreign corporation.

    (a) In general. For purposes of sections 951 through 964, the 
earnings and profits (or deficit in earnings and profits) of a foreign 
corporation for its taxable year shall, except as provided in paragraph 
(f) of this section, be computed substantially as if such corporation 
were a domestic corporation by--
    (1) Preparing a profit and loss statement with respect to such year 
from the books of account regularly maintained by the corporation for 
the purpose of accounting to its shareholders;
    (2) Making the adjustments necessary to conform such statement to 
the accounting principles described in paragraph (b) of this section;
    (3) Making the further adjustments necessary to conform such 
statement to the tax accounting standards described in paragraph (c) of 
this section;
    (4) Translating the amounts shown on such adjusted statement into 
United States dollars in accordance with paragraph (d) of this section, 
and
    (5) Adjusting the amount of profit or loss shown on such translated 
and adjusted statement in accordance with paragraph (e) of this section 
to reflect any exchange gain or loss determined thereunder.

The computation described in the preceding sentence may be made by 
following the procedures described in paragraphs (a)(1) through (5) of 
this section in an order other than the one listed, as long as the 
result so obtained

[[Page 477]]

would be the same. In determining earnings and profits, or the deficit 
in earnings and profits, of a foreign corporation under section 964, the 
amount of any illegal bribe, kickback, or other payment (within the 
meaning of section 162(c), as amended by section 288 of the Tax Equity 
and Fiscal Responsibility Act of 1982 in the case of payments made after 
September 3, 1982, and the regulations thereunder) paid after November 
3, 1976, by or on behalf of the corporation during the taxable year of 
the corporation directly or indirectly to an official, employee, or 
agent in fact of a government shall not be taken into account to 
decrease such earnings and profits or to increase such deficit. No 
adjustment shall be required under subparagraph (2) or (3) of this 
paragraph unless it is material. Whether an adjustment is material 
depends on the facts and circumstances of the particular case, including 
the amount of the adjustment, its size relative to the general level of 
the corporation's total assets and annual profit or loss, the 
consistency with which the practice has been applied, and whether the 
item to which the adjustment relates is of a recurring or merely a 
nonrecurring nature. For the treatment of earnings and profits whose 
distribution is prevented by restrictions and limitations imposed by a 
foreign government, see section 964(b) and the regulations thereunder.
    (b) Accounting adjustments--(1) In general. The accounting 
principles to be applied in making the adjustments required by paragraph 
(a)(2) of this section shall be those accounting principles generally 
accepted in the United States for purposes of reflecting in the 
financial statements of a domestic corporation the operations of its 
foreign affiliates, including the following:
    (i) Clear reflection of income. Any accounting practice designed for 
purposes other than the clear reflection on a current basis of income 
and expense for the taxable year shall not be given effect. For example, 
an adjustment will be required where an allocation is made to an 
arbitrary reserve out of current income.
    (ii) Physical assets, depreciation, etc. All physical assets (as 
defined in paragraph (e)(5)(ii) of this section), including inventory 
when reflected at cost, shall be taken into account at historical cost 
computed either for individual assets or groups of similar assets. The 
historical cost of such an asset shall not reflect any appreciation or 
depreciation in its value or in the relative value of the currency in 
which its cost was incurred. Depreciation, depletion, and amortization 
allowances shall be based on the historical cost of the underlying asset 
and no effect shall be given to any such allowance determined on the 
basis of a factor other than historical cost. For special rules for 
determining historical cost where assets are acquired during a taxable 
year beginning before January 1, 1950, or a majority interest in the 
foreign corporation is acquired after December 31, 1949, but before 
October 27, 1964, see subparagraph (2) of this paragraph.
    (iii) Valuation of assets and liabilities. Any accounting practice 
which results in the systematic undervaluation of assets or 
overvaluation of liabilities shall not be given effect, even though 
expressly permitted or required under foreign law, except to the extent 
allowable under paragraph (c) of this section. For example, an 
adjustment will be required where inventory is written down below market 
value. For the definition of market value, see paragraph (a) of 
Sec. 1.471-4.
    (iv) Income equalization. Income and expense shall be taken into 
account without regard to equalization over more than one accounting 
period; and any equalization reserve or similar provision affecting 
income or expense shall not be given effect, even though expressly 
permitted or required under foreign law, except to the extent allowable 
under paragraph (c) of this section.
    (v) Foreign currency. If transactions effected in a foreign currency 
other than that in which the books of the corporation are kept are 
translated into the foreign currency reflected in the books, such 
translation shall be made in a manner substantially similar to that 
prescribed by paragraph (d) of this section for the translation of 
foreign currency amounts into United States dollars.
    (2) Historical cost. For purposes of this section, the historical 
cost of an asset

[[Page 478]]

acquired by the foreign corporation during a taxable year beginning 
before January 1, 1963, shall be determined, if it is so elected by or 
on behalf of such corporation--
    (i) In the event that the foreign corporation became a majority 
owned subsidiary of a United States person (within the meaning of 
section 7701(a)(30)) after December 31, 1949, but before October 27, 
1964, and the asset was held by such foreign corporation at that time, 
as though the asset was purchased on the date during such period the 
foreign corporation first became a majority owned subsidiary at a price 
equal to its then fair market value, or
    (ii) In the event that subdivision (i) of this subparagraph is 
inapplicable but the asset was acquired by the foreign corporation 
during a taxable year beginning before January 1, 1950, as though the 
asset were purchased on the first day of the first taxable year of the 
foreign corporation beginning after December 31, 1949, at a price equal 
to the undepreciated cost (cost or other basis minus book depreciation) 
of that asset as of that date as shown on the books of account of such 
corporation regularly maintained for the purpose of accounting to its 
shareholders.

For purposes of this subparagraph, a foreign corporation shall be 
considered a majority owned subsidiary of a United States person if, 
taking into account only stock acquired by purchase (as defined in 
section 334(b)(3)), the United States person owns (within the meaning of 
section 958(a)) more than 50 percent of the total combined voting power 
of all classes of stock of the foreign corporation entitled to vote. The 
election under this subparagraph shall be made for the first taxable 
year beginning after December 31, 1962, in which the foreign corporation 
is a controlled foreign corporation (within the meaning of section 957), 
or for which it is included in a chain or group under section 
963(c)(2)(B) or (3)(B) (applied as if section 963 had not been repealed 
by the Tax Reduction Act of 1975), or has a deficit in earnings and 
profits sought to be taken into account under section 952(d) or pays a 
dividend that is included in the foreign base company shipping income of 
a controlled foreign corporation under Sec. 1.954-6(f). Once made, such 
an election shall be irrevocable. For the time and manner in which an 
election may be made on behalf of a foreign corporation, see paragraph 
(c)(3) of this section.
    (3) Illustrations. The application of this paragraph may be 
illustrated by the following examples:

    Example 1. Corporation M is a controlled foreign corporation which 
regularly maintains books of account for the purpose of accounting to 
its shareholders in accordance with the accounting practices prevalent 
in country X, the country in which it operates. As a consequence of 
those practices, the profit and loss statement prepared from these books 
of account reflects an allocation to an arbitrary reserve out of current 
income and depreciation allowances based on replacement values which are 
greater than historical cost. Adjustments are necessary to conform such 
statement to accounting principles generally accepted in the United 
States. Assuming these adjustments to be material, the unacceptable 
practices, will have to be eliminated from the statement, an increase in 
the amount of profit (or a decrease in the amount of loss) thereby 
resulting.
    Example 2. In 1973, Corporation N is a foreign corporation which is 
not a controlled foreign corporation but which is included in a chain, 
for minimum distribution purposes, under section 963(c)(2)(B). 
Corporation N regularly maintains books of account for the purpose of 
accounting to its shareholders in accordance with the accounting 
practices of country Y, the country in which it operates. As a 
consequence of those practices, the profit and loss statement prepared 
from these books of account reflects the inclusion in income of stock 
dividends and of corporate distributions representing a return of 
capital. Adjustments are necessary to conform such statement to 
accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. Assuming 
these adjustments to be material, the unacceptable practices will have 
to be eliminated from the statement, a decrease in the amount of profit 
(or increase in the amount of loss) thereby resulting.

    (c) Tax adjustments--(1) In general. The tax accounting standards to 
be applied in making the adjustments required by paragraph (a)(3) of 
this section shall be the following:
    (i) Accounting methods. The method of accounting shall reflect the 
provisions of section 446 and the regulations thereunder.
    (ii) Inventories. Inventories shall be taken into account in 
accordance with

[[Page 479]]

the provisions of sections 471 and 472 and the regulations thereunder.
    (iii) Depreciation. Depreciation shall be computed as follows:
    (a) For any taxable year beginning before July 1, 1972; depreciation 
shall be computed in accordance with section 167 and the regulations 
thereunder.
    (b) If, for any taxable year beginning after June 30, 1972, 20 
percent or more of the gross income from all sources of the corporation 
is derived from sources within the United States, then depreciation 
shall be computed in accordance with the provisions of Sec. 1.312-15.
    (c) If, for any taxable year beginning after June 30, 1972, less 
than 20 percent of the gross income from all sources of the corporation 
is derived from sources within the United States, then depreciation 
shall be computed in accordance with section 167 and the regulations 
thereunder.
    (iv) Elections. Effect shall be given to any election made in 
accordance with an applicable provision of the Code and the regulations 
thereunder and these regulations.

Except as provided in subparagraphs (2) and (3) of this paragraph, any 
requirements imposed by the Code or applicable regulations with respect 
to making an election or adopting or changing a method of accounting 
must be satisfied by or on behalf of the foreign corporation just as 
though it were a domestic corporation if such election or such adoption 
or change of method is to be taken into account in the computation of 
its earnings and profits.
    (2) Adoption of method. For the first taxable year beginning after 
December 31, 1962, in which the foreign corporation is a controlled 
foreign corporation (within the meaning of section 957), or for which it 
is included in a chain or group under section 963(c)(2)(B) or (3)(B) 
(applied as if section 963 had not been repealed by the Tax Reduction 
Act of 1975), or has a deficit in earnings and profits sought to be 
taken into account under section 952(d), or pays a dividend that is 
included in the foreign base company shipping income of a controlled 
foreign corporation under Sec. 1.954-6(f), there may be adopted or made 
by such corporation or on its behalf any method of accounting or 
election allowable under this section notwithstanding that, in previous 
years, its earnings and profits were computed, or its books or financial 
statements prepared, on a different basis and notwithstanding that such 
election is required by the Code or regulations to be made in a prior 
taxable year. For purposes of determining the amount of a deficit in 
earnings and profits taken into account pursuant to section 
952(c)(1)(B), if a different basis is used in previous years, ratable 
adjustments shall be made in the earnings and profits attributable to 
such previous years to prevent any duplication or omission of amounts 
that would otherwise result from the adoption of such method or the 
making of such election. See subparagraph (3) of this paragraph for the 
manner in which a method of accounting or an election may be adopted or 
made on behalf of the foreign corporation.
    (3) Action on behalf of corporation--(i) In general. An election 
shall be deemed made, or an adoption or change in method of accounting 
deemed effectuated, on behalf of the foreign corporation only if its 
controlling United States shareholders (as defined in subparagraph (5) 
of this paragraph)--
    (a) Satisfy for such corporation any requirements imposed by the 
Code or applicable regulations with respect to such election or such 
adoption or change in method, such as the filing of forms, the execution 
of consents, securing the permission of the Commissioner, or maintaining 
books and records in a particular manner,
    (b) File the written statement described in subdivision (ii) of this 
subparagraph at the time and in the manner prescribed therein, and
    (c) Provide the written notice required by subdivision (iii) of this 
subparagraph at the time and in the manner prescribed therein.

For purposes of the preceding sentence, the books of the foreign 
corporation shall be considered to be maintained in a particular manner 
if the controlling United States shareholders or the foreign corporation 
regularly keep the

[[Page 480]]

records and accounts required by section 964(c) and the regulations 
thereunder in that manner. Any election required to be made or 
information required to be filed with a tax return shall be deemed made 
or furnished on behalf of the foreign corporation if its controlling 
United States shareholders file the written statement described in 
subdivision (ii) of this subparagraph with respect to such election 
within the period specified therein. For a special rule postponing the 
time for taking action by or on behalf of a foreign corporation until 
the amount of its earnings and profits becomes significant, see 
subparagraph (6) of this paragraph.
    (ii) Written statement. The written statement required by 
subdivision (i) of this subparagraph shall be jointly executed by the 
controlling United States shareholders, shall be filed with the Director 
of the Internal Revenue Service Center, 11601 Roosevelt Blvd., 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19155, within 180 days after the close of the 
taxable year of the foreign corporation with respect to which the 
election is made or the adoption or change of method effected, or before 
May 1, 1965, whichever is later, and shall set forth the name and 
country or organization of the foreign corporation, the names, 
addresses, taxpayer identification numbers (in the case of statements 
required to be filed after June 20, 1983), and stock interests of the 
controlling United States shareholders, the nature of the action taken, 
the names, addresses, and (in the case of statements required to be 
filed after June 20, 1983) taxpayer identification numbers of all other 
United States shareholders notified of the election or adoption or 
change of method, and such other information as the Commissioner may by 
forms require.
    (iii) Notice. Prior to the filing of the written statement described 
in subdivision (ii) of this subparagraph, the controlling United States 
shareholders shall provide written notice of the election made or the 
adoption or change of method effected to all other persons known by them 
to be United States shareholders who own (within the meaning of section 
958(a)) stock of the foreign corporation. Such notice shall set forth 
the name and country of organization of the foreign corporation, the 
names, addresses, and stock interests of the controlling United States 
shareholders, the nature of the action taken, and such other information 
as the Commissioner may by forms require. However, the failure of the 
controlling United States shareholders to provide such notice to a 
person required to be notified thereunder shall not invalidate the 
election made or the adoption or change of method effected, if it is 
established to the satisfaction of the Commissioner that reasonable 
cause existed for such failure.
    (4) Effect of action by controlling United States shareholders. Any 
action taken by the controlling United States shareholders on behalf of 
the foreign corporation pursuant to subparagraph (3) of this paragraph 
shall be reflected in the computation of the earnings and profits of 
such corporation under this section to the extent that it bears upon the 
tax liability of a United States shareholder who either--
    (i) Was a controlling United States shareholder with respect to the 
action taken;
    (ii) Received the written notice provided by subparagraph (3)(iii) 
of this paragraph;
    (iii) Failed to file any of the returns required by section 6046 and 
the regulations thereunder within the period prescribed by section 
6046(d); or
    (iv) Was notified by the Director of the Philadelphia Service Center 
of the action taken--
    (a) Within 61 days after the last day (including extensions of time) 
prescribed with respect to the taxable year of the foreign corporation 
by subparagraph (3)(ii) of this paragraph for filing the written 
statement described in such subparagraph, or
    (b) Within 180 days after the close of the first taxable year in 
which such shareholder becomes a United States shareholder, whichever is 
later.

To the extent that the computation of the earnings and profits of the 
foreign corporation bears upon the tax liability of any United States 
shareholder other than those enumerated in the preceding sentence, the 
computation shall reflect the action taken only if such shareholder 
assents to such treatment. Such assent may be given at any

[[Page 481]]

time, but not later than 90 days after the shareholder is first apprised 
of such action by the Director of the Philadelphia Service Center. The 
shareholder shall signify his assent by filing a written statement with 
the Director of the Internal Revenue Service Center, 11601 Roosevelt 
Blvd., Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, 19155, setting forth the name and 
country of organization of the foreign corporation, his own name, 
address, and stock interest in the corporation, the nature of the action 
being assented to, and such other information as the Commissioner may by 
forms require.
    (5) Controlling United States shareholders. For purposes of this 
paragraph the controlling United States shareholders of a foreign 
corporation shall be those United States shareholders (as defined in 
section 951(b)), who, in the aggregate, own (within the meaning of 
section 958(a)) more than 50 percent of the total combined voting power 
of all classes of the stock of such corporation entitled to vote and who 
undertake to act on its behalf. In the event that the foreign 
corporation is not a controlled foreign corporation but is included in a 
chain or group under section 963(c)(2)(B) or (3)(B), the controlling 
United States shareholder with respect to such foreign corporation shall 
be deemed to be the domestic corporation which elects to receive the 
minimum distribution from such chain or group. In the event that the 
foreign corporation is neither a controlled foreign corporation nor 
included in a chain or group under section 963(c)(2)(B) or (3)(B) but 
has a deficit in earnings and profits sought to be taken into account 
under section 952(d), the controlling United States shareholder with 
respect to such foreign corporation shall be the shareholder seeking to 
take such deficit into account. In the event that the foreign 
corporation is a controlled foreign corporation but the United States 
shareholders (as defined in section 951(b)) do not, in the aggregate, 
own (within the meaning of section 958(a)) more than 50 percent of the 
total combined voting power of all classes of the stock of such 
corporation entitled to vote, the controlling United States shareholders 
of the foreign corporation shall be all those United States shareholders 
who own (within the meaning of section 958(a)) stock of such 
corporation. In the event that a foreign corporation is not a controlled 
foreign corporation but pays a dividend to a controlled foreign 
corporation that is attributable to foreign base company shipping income 
under Sec. 1.954-6(f), the controlling United States shareholders (as 
defined in this subparagraph) of the controlled foreign corporation 
shall be considered the controlling United States shareholders of the 
foreign corporation.
    (6) Action not required until significant. Notwithstanding any other 
provision of this paragraph, action by or on behalf of a foreign 
corporation (other than a foreign corporation subject to tax under 
section 882) to make an election or to adopt a method of accounting 
shall not be required until 180 days after the close of the first 
taxable year for which--
    (i) An amount is includible in gross income with respect to such 
corporation under section 951(a);
    (ii) It is sought to be established that such corporation is a less 
developed country corporation (within the meaning of section 955(c), as 
in effect before the enactment of the Tax Reduction Act of 1975);
    (iii) An amount is excluded from Subpart F income (within the 
meaning of section 952) by section 952(c), section 952(d), or section 
970(a);
    (iv) Such corporation is the subject of an election to secure an 
exclusion under section 963 (applied as if section 963 had not been 
repealed by the Tax Reduction Act of 1975); or
    (v) It is sought to be established that the corporation has foreign 
base company shipping income (within the meaning of section 954(f)).

In the event that action by or on behalf of the foreign corporation is 
not undertaken by the time specified in the preceding sentence and such 
failure is shown to the satisfaction of the Commissioner to be due to 
inadvertence or a reasonable cause, such action may be undertaken during 
any period of at least 30 days occurring after such showing is made 
which the Commissioner may specify as appropriate for this purpose. 
Where the action necessary to make an election or to adopt

[[Page 482]]

a method of accounting is undertaken by or on behalf of the foreign 
corporation in accordance with this subparagraph, such election shall be 
deemed to have been made, or such adoption of accounting method 
effected, for the first taxable year of the foreign corporation 
beginning after December 31, 1962, in which such corporation is a 
controlled foreign corporation (within the meaning of section 957) or 
for which it is included in a chain or group under section 963(c)(2)(B) 
or (3)(B) (applied as if section 963 had not been repealed by the Tax 
Reduction Act of 1975) or has a deficit in earnings and profits sought 
to be taken into account under section 952(d) or pays a dividend that is 
included in the foreign base company shipping income of a controlled 
foreign corporation under Sec. 1.954-6(f). For special rules for 
computing earnings and profits for purposes of section 1248 or income 
for purposes of applying an exclusion set forth in section 954(b) where 
the taxable year of the foreign corporation occurs prior to the making 
of elections or the adoption of methods of accounting under this 
subparagraph, see the regulations under section 952 and section 1248.
    (7) Revocation of election. Notwithstanding any other provision of 
this section, any election made by or on behalf of a foreign corporation 
(other than a foreign corporation subject to tax under section 882) may 
be modified or revoked by or on behalf of such corporation for the 
taxable year for which made whenever the consent of the Commissioner is 
secured for such modification or revocation, even though such election 
would be irrevocable but for this subparagraph.
    (8) Illustrations. The application of this paragraph may be 
illustrated by the following examples:

    Example 1. X Corporation is a controlled foreign corporation which 
maintains its books, in accordance with the laws of the country in which 
it operates, by taking inventoriable items into account under the 
``first-in, first-out'' method. A, B, and C, the United States 
shareholders of X Corporation, own 45 percent, 30 percent, and 25 
percent of its voting stock, respectively. For the first taxable year of 
X Corporation beginning after December 31, 1962, B and C adopt on its 
behalf the ``last-in, first-out'' inventory method, notifying A of the 
action taken. Even though A may object to such action, adjustments must 
be made to reflect the use of the LIFO method of inventorying in the 
computation of the earnings and profits of X Corporation with respect to 
him as well as with respect to B and C.
    Example 2. Y Corporation is a controlled foreign corporation which 
maintains its books, in accordance with the laws of the country in which 
it operates, by employing the straight-line method of depreciation. D 
and E, the United States shareholders of Y Corporation, own 51 percent 
and 10 percent of its voting stock, respectively. For the first taxable 
year of Y Corporation beginning after December 31, 1962, D adopts on its 
behalf the declining balance method of depreciation. However, not 
knowing that E is a United States shareholder of the company, D fails to 
provide him with notice of the action taken. Assuming that E has filed 
the return required by section 6046 and the regulations thereunder 
within the period prescribed by section 6046(d), adjustments in the 
computation of earnings and profits will not be required with respect to 
him unless the Director of International Operations notifies him of the 
action taken within 240 days after the close of Y's taxable year. If 
notice is not provided to E within this period, he will not be compelled 
to make the adjustments. At his option, however, he may accept the 
action taken by assenting thereto not later than 90 days after he is 
first apprised of such action by the Director of International 
Operations.

    (d) Translation into United States dollars--(1) In general--(i) 
General rule. Except as provided in subdivisions (ii), (iii), and (iv) 
of this subparagraph, the amounts to be shown on the profit and loss 
statement, adjusted pursuant to paragraphs (b) and (c) of this section, 
shall be translated into United States dollars (as required by paragraph 
(a)(4) of this section) at the appropriate exchange rate for the 
translation period (as defined in subparagraph (6) of this paragraph) to 
which they relate.
    (ii) Cost of goods sold. Amounts representing items of inventory 
reflected in the cost of goods sold shall be translated--
    (a) To the extent that such amounts represent items included in the 
opening inventory balance, so as to obtain the same amount of United 
States dollars which represented (after translation and adjustment) such 
items in the closing inventory balance for the preceding taxable year,
    (b) To the extent that such amounts represent items purchased or 
otherwise first included in inventory during the

[[Page 483]]

taxable year, at the appropriate exchange rate for the translation 
period in which the historical cost of such items was incurred, and
    (c) To the extent that such amounts represent items included in the 
closing inventory balance, at the appropriate exchange rate for the 
translation period in which the historical cost of such items was 
incurred, except that, if such amounts are written down to market value, 
such market value shall be determined at the year-end rate. 
Notwithstanding the preceding sentence, amounts representing items of 
inventory included in the closing inventory balance may be translated at 
the year-end rate even though not written down to market value; however, 
once such a rate is employed under those circumstances, translation may 
not be made for subsequent taxable years at the appropriate exchange 
rate for the translation period in which the historical cost of the 
items of inventory was incurred unless the permission of the 
Commissioner is secured.
    (iii) Depreciation, depletion, and amortization. Amounts 
representing allowances for depreciation, depletion, or amortization 
shall be translated at the appropriate exchange rate for the translation 
period in which the historical cost of the underlying asset was incurred 
or is deemed to have been incurred. For purposes of this subdivision, if 
the historical cost of an asset is determined under paragraph (b)(2) of 
this section, such cost shall be deemed to have been incurred on the 
date the asset is considered to have been purchased under that 
paragraph.
    (iv) Prepaid expenses or income. Amounts representing expenses or 
income paid or received in a prior taxable year shall be translated at 
the appropriate exchange rate for the translation period during which 
they were paid or received. Notwithstanding the preceding sentence, 
amounts representing such prepaid income or expenses may be translated 
at the year-end rate; however, once such a rate is employed, translation 
may not be made for subsequent taxable years at the appropriate exchange 
rate for the translation period during which such income or expenses 
were paid or received unless the permission of the Commissioner is 
secured.
    (2) Appropriate exchange rate--(i) In general. Where the value of 
the foreign currency relative to the United States dollar does not 
fluctuate substantially during a translation period, a single exchange 
rate shall be appropriate for all amounts representing classes of items 
which relate to such period, such rate to be a simple average determined 
by dividing the sum of the closing rates for each of the calendar months 
ending with or within such period by the number of such months. On the 
other hand, where the value of the foreign currency relative to the 
United States dollar does fluctuate substantially during a translation 
period, the exchange rate appropriate to an amount representing a class 
of items which relates to such period shall be either (a) a simple 
average determined in accordance with the preceding sentence, or (b) a 
weighted average taking into account the volume of transactions 
(reflected by the amount being translated) for the calendar months 
ending with or within such period, depending upon which average would 
produce a result more representative of that which would have been 
obtained by translating the individual transactions reflected by that 
amount at the closing rate for the month to which each such transaction 
relates. Whether the value of the foreign currency relative to the 
United States dollar fluctuates substantially during the translation 
period is a question of fact, depending upon, among other things, the 
extent to which the volume of transactions varies from month to month. 
In general, however, the degree of fluctuation will be considered 
substantial if the closing rate for any calendar month ending with or 
within the translation period varies by more than 10 percent from the 
closing rate for any preceding calendar month ending within that period.
    (ii) Monthly rate. Notwithstanding subdivision (i) of this 
subparagraph, if it is so elected by or on behalf of the foreign 
corporation, and if the closing rate for any calendar month ending with 
or within a translation period does not vary by more than 3 percent from 
the closing rate for any preceding

[[Page 484]]

calendar month ending within that period, the appropriate exchange rate 
for amounts representing all classes of items relating to such period 
shall be any exchange rate which is designated in the election and which 
does not vary by more than 3 percent from the closing rate for any 
calendar month ending with or within such period. An election under this 
subdivision may be made with respect to any translation period of any 
taxable year of the foreign corporation beginning after December 31, 
1962. Such election shall be effective only with respect to the 
translation period for which it is made, and once made shall be 
irrevocable with respect to that period. See paragraph (c)(3) of this 
section for the time and manner in which an election may be made on 
behalf of the foreign corporation.
    (iii) Class of items. For purposes of this subparagraph, the term 
``class of items'' means any category which is reflected separately on 
books of account or financial statements. For example, sales is a class 
of items which is reflected separately on the profit and loss statement, 
and accounts receivable is a class of items which is reflected 
separately on the balance sheet.
    (3) Closing rate. The closing rate for any calendar month shall be 
the exchange rate on the last day of that month determined by reference 
to a qualified source of exchange rates within the meaning of 
subparagraph (5) of this paragraph.
    (4) Year-end rate. The year-end rate shall be the closing rate for 
the last calendar month of the taxable year.
    (5) Qualified source of exchange rates. A qualified source of 
exchange rates shall be any source which is demonstrated to the 
satisfaction of the district director to reflect actual transactions 
conducted in a free market and involving representative amounts. In the 
absence of such a demonstration, the exchange rates taken into account 
in the computation of the earnings and profits of the foreign 
corporation shall be determined by reference to the free market rate set 
forth in the pertinent monthly issue of ``International Financial 
Statistics'' or a successor publication of the International Monetary 
Fund, or such other source of exchange rates reflecting actual 
transactions conducted in a free market and involving representative 
amounts as the Commissioner may designate as appropriate for this 
purpose.
    (6) Translation period--(i) In general. Except as provided in 
subdivision (ii) of this subparagraph, the translation period shall be a 
taxable year.
    (ii) Currency fluctuations. If it is so elected by or on behalf of 
the foreign corporation, the taxable year shall be divided into groups 
consisting of a calendar month or consecutive calendar months as 
specified in the election, each such group constituting a separate 
translation period. Where the value of the foreign currency relative to 
the United States dollar fluctuates substantially during the taxable 
year, the use of the weighted average referred to in subparagraph (2)(i) 
of this paragraph ordinarily may be avoided by dividing the taxable year 
into translation periods so that the first translation period begins 
with the first day of such year and each subsequent translation period 
begins with the first day of the first calendar month thereafter ending 
with or within such year for which the closing rate varies by more than 
10 percent from the closing rate for any month in the preceding 
translation period. An election under this subdivision may be made with 
respect to any taxable year of the foreign corporation beginning after 
December 31, 1962. Such election shall be effective only with respect to 
the taxable year for which it is made, and once made shall be 
irrevocable with respect to such year. For the time and manner in which 
an election may be made on behalf of the foreign corporation, see 
paragraph (c)(3) of this section.
    (7) Actual transactions. Notwithstanding any other provisions of 
this paragraph--
    (i) Dollar transactions. Any transaction involving the payment or 
receipt of United States dollars shall be reflected in the profit and 
loss statement by the amount of United States dollars involved in such 
transaction.
    (ii) Conversion transactions. Any transaction involving the 
conversion of a foreign currency into United States dollars, or the 
conversion of United States dollars into a foreign currency, shall be 
reflected in the profit and loss

[[Page 485]]

statement by an amount expressed in United States dollars and determined 
by translation at the exchange rate at which conversion was effected if 
the foreign corporation knows, or reasonably should know, that exchange 
rate.
    (iii) Daily rate. Any transaction other than one described in 
subdivision (i) or (ii) may be translated into United States dollars at 
the exchange rate for the day on which that transaction occurred, such 
rate to be determined by reference to a qualified source of exchange 
rates within the meaning of subparagraph (5) of this paragraph.

No transaction shall be required to be taken into account under 
subdivision (i) or (ii) unless the United States dollars involved are 
material in amount.
    (8) Other methods. Notwithstanding the other provisions of this 
paragraph, translation into United States dollars may be made in 
accordance with a system or method not otherwise described in this 
paragraph, provided that such system or method (i) was employed by the 
corporation for purposes of accounting to its shareholders prior to 
January 1, 1963, and (ii) is shown to the satisfaction of the 
Commissioner to clearly reflect the earnings and profits of the 
corporation.
    (9) Illustrations. The application of this paragraph may be 
illustrated by the following examples:

    Example 1. M Corporation, a controlled foreign corporation organized 
on January 1, 1963, employs the calendar year as its taxable year and 
maintains its books of account in abbas, the currency of the country in 
which it operates. During 1963 M Corporation's monthly sales amounted to 
100,000 abbas per month, its total payroll and other expenses for the 
year amounted to 180,000 abbas, and its total inventory purchases 
amounted to 1,050,000 abbas. Also during 1963, M Corporation purchased 
depreciable assets for 1,000,000 abbas. The value of the abba relative 
to the United States dollar fluctuated only slightly in 1963; the 
monthly closing rate moved between 19.8 abbas and 20.2 abbas per United 
States dollar and stood at 19.9 abbas per United States dollar for most 
of the year and at yearend. An election under subparagraph (2)(ii) of 
this paragraph is made on behalf of M Corporation to use the par rate of 
20 abbas per United States dollar as the exchange rate appropriate for 
1963. Assuming that none of the amounts shown therein reflects a 
transaction described in subparagraph (7) of this paragraph, M 
Corporation's adjusted profit and loss statement for 1963 would be 
translated into United States dollars as follows:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                            Local     Exchange    U.S.  
                                           currency     rate     dollars
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Sales...................................  1,200,000       20:1    60,000
                                         -----------           ---------
Cost of goods sold:                                                     
  Purchases.............................  1,050,000       20:1    52,500
  Less: Closing inventory...............  (350,000)       20:1  (17,500)
                                         -----------           ---------
                                            700,000  .........    35,000
Wages and other expenses................    180,000       20:1     9,000
Depreciation............................    200,000       20:1    10,000
                                         -----------           ---------
    Total costs and expenses............  1,080,000  .........    54,000
                                         -----------           ---------
    Operating profit....................    120,000  .........     6,000
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    Example 2. The facts are the same as in example 1 and in addition 
during 1964 M Corporation had annual sales of 1,470,000 abbas, annual 
wages and other expenses of 252,000 abbas, and inventory purchases of 
910,000 abbas. Also during 1964, M Corporation purchased additional 
depreciable assets for 430,000 abbas, the bulk of such purchases being 
made in the last half of the year. The value of the abba relative to the 
United States dollar gradually declined in 1964, the monthly closing 
rate moving from 19.9 abbas per United States dollar down to 22 abbas 
per United States dollar. For most classes of items, the appropriate 
exchange rate is a simple average of monthly closing rates or 21 abbas 
per United States dollar. However, since the bulk of the depreciable 
asset purchases were made in the last half of the year, the rate 
representative of those transactions is a weighted average of 21.5 abbas 
per United States dollar. Assuming that none of the amounts shown 
therein reflects a transaction described in subparagraph (7) of this 
paragraph and that closing inventory is translated at historical rates, 
M Corporation's adjusted profit and loss statement for 1964 would be 
translated into United States dollars as follows:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                            Local     Exchange    U.S.  
                                           currency     rate     dollars
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Sales...................................  1,470,000       21:1    70,000
                                         -------------------------------
Cost of goods sold:                                                     
  Opening inventory.....................    350,000       20:1    17,500
  Purchases.............................    910,000       21:1    43,333
  Less: Closing inventory...............  (418,000)       21:1  (19,905)
                                         -----------           ---------
                                            842,000  .........    40,928
Wages and other expenses................    252,000       21:1    12,000
Depreciation:                                                           
  1963 assets...........................    150,000       20:1     7,500
  1964 assets...........................     86,000     21.5:1     4,000
                                         -----------           ---------

[[Page 486]]

                                                                        
    Total costs and expenses............  1,330,000  .........    64,428
                                         -----------           ---------
   Operating profit.....................    140,000  .........     5,572
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    Example 3. The facts are the same as in examples 1 and 2 except that 
the 1964 sales of M Corporation amounted to 1,260,000 abbas plus $10,500 
in United States dollars. Assuming that closing inventory is translated 
at historical rates, M Corporation's adjusted profit and loss statement 
for 1964 would be translated as follows:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                            Local     Exchange    U.S.  
                                           currency     rate     dollars
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Sales--Abbas............................  1,260,000       21:1    60,000
Sales--U.S. dollars.....................    215,250      (\1\)    10,500
                                         -----------           ---------
   Total sales..........................  1,475,250  .........    70,500
                                         -----------           ---------
Cost of goods sold:                                                     
  Opening inventory.....................    350,000       20:1    17,500
  Purchases.............................    910,000       21:1    43,333
  Less: Closing inventory...............  (418,000)       21:1    19,905
                                         -----------           ---------
                                            842,000  .........    40,928
Wages and other expenses................    252,000       21:1    12,000
Depreciation:                                                           
  1963 assets...........................    150,000       20:1     7,500
  1964 assets...........................     86,000     21.5:1     4,000
                                         -----------           ---------
    Total costs and expenses............  1,330,000  .........    64,428
                                         -----------           ---------
    Operating profit....................    145,250  .........     6,072
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\Transaction.                                                         

    Example 4. The facts are the same as in examples 1 and 2. M 
Corporation continues to operate during 1965 and the value of the abba 
relative to the United States dollar declines materially during that 
year; the monthly closing rate drops from 22 abbas per United States 
dollar to 26 abbas per United States dollar, a decrease of more than 10 
percent. An election under subparagraph (6)(ii) of this paragraph is 
made on behalf of M Corporation to divide the year into translation 
periods, the applicable periods being January 1 through July 31 and 
August 1 through December 31. For most classes of items, the appropriate 
exchange rate for each of these translation periods is a simple average 
of monthly closing rates, or 23 abbas and 25 abbas per United States 
dollar, respectively. However, all of the depreciable asset purchases 
were made at the end of the first translation period--January 1 through 
July 31--and, therefore, the rate representative of those transactions 
is a weighted average of 24 abbas per United States dollar. The classes 
of items reflecting M Corporation's 1965 financial transactions and the 
representative rates of exchange for such classes of items are as 
follows:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                      Local     Exchange
                                                     currency     rate  
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Sales:                                                                  
  Jan. 1-July 31..................................  1,000,000       23:1
  Aug. 1-Dec. 31..................................    500,000       25:1
Inventory purchases:                                                    
  Jan. 1-July 31..................................    559,000       23:1
  Aug. 1-Dec. 31..................................    361,000       25:1
Expenses:                                                               
  Jan. 1-July 31..................................    115,000       23:1
  Aug. 1-Dec. 31..................................    145,000       25:1
Fixed asset purchases.............................    216,000       24:1
Closing inventory.................................    430,000     (\1\) 
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\Historical.                                                          

Assuming that M Corporation uses the first-in, first-out method of 
inventory valuation, the closing inventory is assumed in normal 
circumstances to consist of purchases made during the most recent 
translation period as follows:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                             Local    Exchange    U.S.  
                                           currency     rate     dollars
------------------------------------------------------------------------
All of the August-December purchases.....   361,000       25:1    14,440
Balance from January- July purchases.....    69,000       23:1     3,000
                                          ----------           ---------
   Total closing inventory...............   430,000  .........    17,440
------------------------------------------------------------------------

Assuming that none of the amounts shown therein reflects a transaction 
described in subparagraph (7) of this paragraph, and that closing 
inventory is translated at historical rates, M Corporation's adjusted 
profit and loss statement for 1965 would be translated into United 
States dollars as follows:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                            Local     Exchange    U.S.  
                                           currency     rate     dollars
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Sales:                                                                  
  Jan. 1-July 31........................  1,000,000       23:1    43,478
  Aug. 1-Dec. 31........................    500,000       25:1    20,000
                                         -----------           ---------
                                          1,500,000  .........    63,478
                                         -----------           ---------
Cost of goods sold:                                                     
  Opening inventory purchases...........    418,000       21:1    19,905
  Jan. 1-July 31........................    559,000       23:1    24,304
  Aug. 1-Dec. 31........................    361,000       25:1    14,440
Less: Closing inventory.................  (430,000)      (\1\)  (17,440)
                                         -----------           ---------
                                            908,000  .........    41,209
Wages and other expenses:                                               
  Jan. 1-July 31........................    115,000       23:1     5,000
  Aug. 1-Dec. 31........................    145,000       25:1     5,800
Depreciation:                                                           
  1963 assets...........................    120,000       20:1     6,000
  1964 assets...........................     64,500     21.5:1     3,000
  1965 assets...........................     43,200       24:1     1,800
                                         -----------           ---------
  Total costs and expenses..............  1,395,700  .........    62,809
                                         -----------           ---------
  Operating profit......................    104,300  .........      669 
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\Historical.                                                          


[[Page 487]]

    (e) Exchange gain or loss--(1) In general. The exchange gain or loss 
determined in accordance with subparagraph (2) of this paragraph shall 
be applied against and reduce, or applied to and increase, as the case 
may be, the amount of profit or loss shown on the profit and loss 
statement prepared pursuant to paragraph (a)(1) of this section, as 
adjusted and translated pursuant to paragraph (a)(2), (3), and (4) of 
this section. For the manner in which the exchange gain or loss is to be 
allocated to or applied against Subpart F income, see section 952 and 
the regulations thereunder.
    (2) Determination of exchange gain or loss. The exchange gain (or 
loss) for the taxable year shall be the amount which equals--
    (i) The retained earnings for the taxable year as determined under 
subparagraph (3) of this paragraph, plus
    (ii) The amount of any distributions made during the taxable year 
translated at the exchange rate appropriate to the translation period 
during which such distributions were made (or taken into account) in 
accordance with paragraph (d)(7) of this section, if applicable, minus
    (iii) The amount representing retained earnings for the preceding 
taxable year as determined under subparagraph (3) of this paragraph, 
minus
    (iv) The amount of profit (or plus the amount of any loss) shown on 
the profit and loss statement for the taxable year prepared pursuant to 
paragraph (a)(1) of this section and adjusted and translated pursuant to 
paragraph (a)(2), (3), and (4) of this section.
    (3) Retained earnings. The retained earnings for any taxable year 
shall be determined by first--
    (i) Preparing a balance sheet as of the end of such year from the 
books of account regularly maintained by the foreign corporation for the 
purpose of accounting to its shareholders;
    (ii) Making the adjustments necessary to conform such balance sheet 
to the accounting principles described in paragraph (b) of this section;
    (iii) Making the further adjustments necessary to conform such 
balance sheet to the tax accounting standards described in paragraph (c) 
of this section; and
    (iv) Translating the amounts shown on the balance sheet (other than 
amounts representing retained earnings) into United States dollars in 
accordance with subparagraph (4) of this paragraph.

The retained earnings shall be an amount equal to the excess of the 
aggregate amount representing assets on the balance sheet (as adjusted 
and translated under this subparagraph) over the aggregate amount 
representing liabilities, reserves (other than reserves out of current 
or accumulated earnings), and paid- in capital on the balance sheet (as 
adjusted and translated under this subparagraph).
    (4) Translation of balance sheet. Amounts shown on the balance sheet 
as adjusted pursuant to subparagraphs (3)(ii) and (iii) of this 
paragraph (other than amounts representing retained earnings) shall be 
translated into United States dollars as follows:
    (i) Financial assets. Amounts representing financial assets shall be 
translated at the year-end rate.
    (ii) Physical assets. Amounts representing physical assets (other 
than inventory) shall be translated at the appropriate exchange rate for 
the translation period in which the historical cost of the asset was 
incurred or is deemed to have been incurred. For special rules for 
determining date on which the historical cost of certain assets acquired 
during taxable years beginning before January 1, 1950, or owned at the 
time a majority interest in the corporation was acquired after December 
31, 1949, but before October 27, 1964, is deemed to have been incurred, 
see paragraph (b)(2) of this section.
    (iii) Depreciation and similar reserves. Amounts representing 
depreciation, depletion, and amortization reserves shall be translated 
at the appropriate exchange rate for the translation period in which the 
historical cost of the underlying asset was incurred or is deemed to 
have been incurred.
    (iv) Inventory. Amounts representing items of inventory included in 
the closing inventory balance shall be translated in accordance with 
paragraph (d)(1)(ii) of this section.

[[Page 488]]

    (v) Bad debt reserves. Amounts representing bad debts reserves shall 
be translated at the year-end rate.
    (vi) Prepaid income or expense. Amounts representing expenses or 
income paid or received in a prior taxable year shall be translated in 
accordance with paragraph (d)(1)(iv) of this section.
    (vii) Short-term liabilities. Amounts representing short-term 
liabilities shall be translated at the year-end rate.
    (viii) Long-term liabilities. Amounts representing long-term 
liabilities shall be translated at the appropriate exchange rate for the 
translation period in which such liabilities were incurred.
    (ix) Paid-in capital. Amounts representing paid-in capital shall be 
translated at the appropriate exchange rate for the translation period 
in which such capital was paid in.

Notwithstanding any other provisions of this subparagraph, where the 
amount representing an item shown on the balance sheet reflects a 
transaction described in paragraph (d)(7) of this section, such 
transaction shall be taken into account in accordance with that 
paragraph.
    (5) Definitions. For purposes of this paragraph--
    (i) Financial assets. A financial asset shall be any asset 
reflecting a fixed amount of foreign currency, such as cash on hand, 
bank deposits, and loans and accounts receivable. Securities (within the 
meaning of section 1236(c)) shall be considered physical assets if they 
have been or are reasonably expected to be held for at least six months; 
if not they shall be considered financial assets whether or not they 
reflect a fixed amount of foreign currency. Moreover, advances on open 
account to any corporation in which the foreign corporation and any 
related persons (within the meaning of section 954(d)(3) and the 
regulations thereunder) with respect thereto own at least 10 percent of 
the combined voting power of all classes of stock entitled to vote shall 
not be considered financial assets if such advances have remained open 
for more than one year.
    (ii) Physical assets. A physical asset shall be any asset other than 
a financial asset and shall include goodwill, patents, and other 
intangibles.
    (iii) Short-term liabilities. A short-term liability shall be any 
indebtedness of the foreign corporation which is due or overdue as of 
the date of the balance sheet or which will become due within 1 year 
thereafter.
    (iv) Long-term liabilities. A long- term liability is any 
indebtedness of the foreign corporation other than a short- term 
liability.

For the definition of ``appropriate exchange rate'', ``year-end rate'', 
and ``translation period'', see paragraphs (d)(2), (4), and (6), 
respectively, of this section.
    (6) Illustrations. The application of this paragraph may be 
illustrated by the following examples:

    Example 1. N Corporation is a controlled foreign corporation which 
uses the calendar year as its taxable year and which maintains its books 
in yuccas, the currency of the country in which it operates. For 1963, 
its operating profit is 140,000 yuccas or $55,720. At the end of the 
year, its balance sheet, as translated and adjusted pursuant to 
subparagraph (3) of this paragraph, is as follows:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                           Local     Exchange     U.S.  
                                          currency     rate     dollars 
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Cash...................................     77,000     2.20:1     35,000
Accounts receivable....................    209,000     2.20:1     95,000
Inventory..............................    418,000      (\1\)    199,050
Fixed assets...........................  1,430,000      (\1\)    700,000
Less: Accumulated depreciation.........  (436,000)      (\1\)  (215,000)
                                        -----------           ----------
    Total assets.......................  1,698,000  .........    814,050
                                        ===========           ==========
Current liabilities....................    338,000     2.20:1    153,640
Long-term liabilities..................    300,000      (\1\)    150,000
Paid-in capital........................    800,000      (\1\)    400,000
Retained earnings......................    260,000  .........    110,410
                                        -----------           ----------
    Total liabilities and net worth....  1,698,000  .........    814,050
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\Historical.                                                          

N Corporation's retained earnings for 1962 are determined on the basis 
of its balance sheet as of the end of that year, translated as follows:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                           Local     Exchange     U.S.  
                                          currency     rate     dollars 
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Cash...................................     70,000     2.00:1     35,000
Accounts receivable....................    180,000     2.00:1     90,000
Inventory..............................    350,000      (\1\)    175,000
Fixed assets...........................  1,000,000      (\1\)    500,000
Less: Accumulated depreciation.........  (200,000)      (\1\)  (100,000)
                                        -----------           ----------
    Total assets.......................  1,400,000  .........    700,000
                                        ===========           ==========

[[Page 489]]

                                                                        
Current liabilities....................    180,000     2.00:1     90,000
Long-term liabilities..................    300,000      (\1\)    150,000
Paid-in capital........................    800,000      (\1\)    400,000
Retained earnings......................    120,000  .........     60,000
                                        -----------           ----------
    Total liabilities and net worth....  1,400,000  .........    700,000
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\Historical.                                                          

    The exchange gain or loss of N Corporation for 1963 may be computed 
as follows:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
Retained earnings--1963............................  ........   $110,410
Less:                                                                   
  Retained earnings--1962..........................   $60,000  .........
  Operating profit--1963...........................    55,720    115,720
                                                    --------------------
Exchange loss......................................  ........    (5,310)
                                                    --------------------
                                                                        

    Example 2. Assume the same facts as in example 1. For 1964, N 
Corporation's operating profit is 104,300 yuccas or $15,740. It pays a 
dividend of 26,000 yuccas during a translation period when the 
appropriate exchange rate is 2.60 yuccas per United States dollar. At 
yearend, its balance sheet, as translated and adjusted pursuant to 
subparagraph (3) of this paragraph, is as follows:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                           Local     Exchange     U.S.  
                                          currency     rate     dollars 
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Cash...................................     91,000     2.60:1     35,000
Accounts receivable....................    260,000     2.60:1    100,000
Inventory..............................    430,000      (\1\)    174,400
Fixed assets...........................  1,646,000      (\1\)    790,000
Less: Accumulated depreciation.........  (663,700)      (\1\)  (323,000)
                                        -----------           ----------
    Total assets.......................  1,763,300  .........    776,400
                                        ===========           ==========
Current liabilities....................    325,000     2.60:1    125,000
Long-term liabilities..................    300,000      (\1\)    150,000
Paid-in capital........................    800,000      (\1\)    400,000
Retained earnings......................    338,300  .........    101,400
                                        -----------           ----------
    Total liabilities and net worth....  1,763,300  .........    776,400
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\Historical.                                                          


    The exchange gain or loss of N Corporation for 1964 would be 
computed as follows:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
Retained earnings--1964...........................  .........   $101,400
Add:                                                                    
  Dividends--1964.................................  .........     10,000
                                                   ---------------------
  Predistribution earnings........................  .........    111,400
Less:                                                                   
  Retained earnings--1963.........................   $110,410  .........
  Operating profit--1964..........................     15,740    126,150
                                                   ---------------------
Exchange loss.....................................  .........   (14,750)
                                                   ---------------------
                                                                        

    (f) Determination of earnings and profits as if a domestic 
corporation--(1) In general. If the books of account regularly 
maintained by a foreign corporation for the purpose of accounting to its 
shareholders are kept in U.S. dollars and in accordance with accounting 
principles generally accepted in the United States, and if it is so 
elected by or on behalf of such corporation, the earnings and profits of 
the foreign corporation for a taxable year shall, except as otherwise 
provided in paragraph (f)(2) of this section, be determined in every 
respect as if it were a domestic corporation. Such election shall be 
effective only for the taxable year with respect to which the election 
is made. Once made, such election shall be irrevocable. See paragraph 
(c)(3) of this section for the time and manner in which an election may 
be made on behalf of a foreign corporation.
    (2) Illegal payments. The amount of any illegal bribe, kickback, or 
other payment (within the meaning of section 162(c), as amended by 
section 288 of the Tax Equity and Fiscal Responsibility Act of 1982 in 
the case of payments made after September 3, 1982, and the regulations 
thereunder) paid after November 3, 1976, by or on behalf of the 
corporation during the taxable year of the corporation directly or 
indirectly to an official, employee, or agent in fact of a government 
shall not be taken into account to decrease earnings and profits or 
increase the deficit in earnings and profits otherwise determined under 
paragraph (f)(1) of this section.

[T.D. 6764, 29 FR 14628, Oct. 27, 1964; 29 FR 15204, Nov. 11, 1964, as 
amended by T.D. 6787, 29 FR 18502, Dec. 29, 1964; T.D. 6995, 34 FR 832, 
Jan. 18, 1969; T.D. 7221, 37 FR 24747, Nov. 21, 1972; T.D. 7322, 39 FR 
30931, Aug. 27, 1974; T.D. 7545, 43 FR 19652, May 8, 1978; T.D. 7862, 47 
FR 56491, Dec. 17, 1982; T.D. 7893, 48 FR 22510, May 19, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 1.964-1T  Special rules for computing earnings and profits of controlled foreign corporations in taxable years beginning after December 31, 1986 
          (temporary).

    (a)-(f) [Reserved]
    (g)(1) Earnings and profits computed in functional currency--(i) 
Rule. For taxable years of a controlled foreign corporation (within the 
meaning of section 957) beginning after December 31, 1986, earnings and 
profits shall be computed in the controlled foreign corporation's 
functional currency (determined

[[Page 490]]

under section 985 and the regulations thereunder) in accordance with 
Sec. 1.964-1 as modified by this paragraph (g). Accordingly, Sec. 1.964-
1 (d), (e), and (f) and (to the extent inconsistent with this paragraph 
(g)) Sec. 1.964-1(c) do not apply for taxable years of a controlled 
foreign corporation beginning after December 31, 1986. For purposes of 
this section, the term ``earnings and profits'' includes a deficit in 
earnings and profits.
    (ii) Cross reference. In the case of a controlled foreign 
corporation with a functional currency other than the United States 
dollar (dollar), see sections 986(b) and 989(b) for rules regarding the 
time and manner of translating distributions or inclusions of the 
controlled foreign corporation's earnings and profits into dollars.
    (2) Election required when first significant. Tax accounting methods 
or elections may be adopted or made by, or on behalf of, a controlled 
foreign corporation in the manner prescribed by the Code and regulations 
no later than 180 days after the close of the first taxable year of the 
controlled foreign corporation in which the computation of its earnings 
and profits is significant for United States income tax purposes with 
respect to its controlling United States shareholders (as defined in 
Sec. 1.964-1(c)(5)). For taxable years of a controlled foreign 
corporation beginning before January 1, 1989, only the events listed in 
Sec. 1.964-1(c)(6) are considered to cause a controlled foreign 
corporation's earnings and profits to have United States tax 
significance. For taxable years of a controlled foreign corporation 
beginning after December 31, 1988, events that cause a controlled 
foreign corporation's earnings and profits to have United States tax 
significance include, without limitation--
    (i) The events listed in Sec. 1.964-1(c)(6),
    (ii) A distribution from the controlled foreign corporation to its 
shareholders with respect to their stock,
    (iii) Any event making the controlled foreign corporation subject to 
tax under section 882,
    (iv) An election by the controlled foreign corporation's controlling 
United States shareholders to use the tax book value method of 
allocating interest expense under section 864(e)(4), and
    (v) A sale or exchange of the controlled foreign corporation's stock 
by the controlling United States shareholders.
The filing of the information return required by section 6038 shall not 
itself constitute a significant event.
    (3) Effect of failure to make required election. If an accounting 
method or election is not timely adopted or made by, or on behalf of, a 
controlled foreign corporation, and such failure is not shown to the 
satisfaction of the Commissioner to be due to reasonable cause under 
Sec. 1.964-1(c)(6), earnings and profits shall be computed in accordance 
with this section. Such computation shall be made as if no elections had 
been made and any permissible accounting methods not requiring an 
election and reflected in the books of account regularly maintained by 
the controlled foreign corporation for the purpose of accounting to its 
shareholders had been adopted. Thereafter, any change in a particular 
accounting method or methods may be made by, or on behalf of, the 
controlled foreign corporation only with the Commission's consent.
    (4) Computation of earnings and profits by a minority shareholder 
prior to majority election or significant event. A minority United 
States shareholder (as defined in section 951(b)) of a controlled 
foreign corporation may be required to compute a controlled foreign 
corporation's earnings and profits before the controlled foreign 
corporation or its controlling United States shareholders make, or are 
required under this section to make, an election or adopt a method of 
accounting for United States tax purposes. In such a case, the minority 
United States shareholder must compute earnings and profits in 
accordance with this section. Such computation shall be made as if no 
elections had been made and any permissible accounting methods not 
requiring an election and reflected in the books of account regularly 
maintained by the controlled foreign corporation for the purpose of 
accounting to its shareholders had been adopted. However, a later, 
properly filed, and timely election or adoption of method by, or on 
behalf of,

[[Page 491]]

the controlled foreign corporation shall not be treated as a change in 
accounting method.
    (5) Binding effect. For taxable years beginning after December 31, 
1986, except as otherwise provided in the Code or regulations, earnings 
and profits of a controlled foreign corporation shall be computed 
consistently under the rules of sections 964(a) and 986(b) for all 
federal income tax purposes. An election or adoption of a method of 
accounting for United States tax purposes by a controlled foreign 
corporation, or on its behalf pursuant to Sec. 1.964-1(c) or any other 
provision of the regulations (e.g., Sec. 1.985-2(c)(3)), shall bind both 
the controlled foreign corporation and its United States shareholders as 
to the computation of the controlled foreign corporation's earnings and 
profits under section 964(a) for the year of the election or adoption 
and in subsequent taxable years unless the Commissioner consents to a 
change. The preceding sentence shall apply regardless of--
    (i) Whether the election or adoption of a method of accounting was 
made in a pre-1987 or a post-1986 taxable year;
    (ii) Whether the controlled foreign corporation was a controlled 
foreign corporation at the time of the election or adoption of method;
    (iii) When ownership was acquired; or
    (iv) Whether the United States shareholder received the written 
notice required by Sec. 1.964-1(c)(3).
Adjustments to the appropriate separate category (as defined in 
Sec. 1.904-5(a)(1)) of earnings and profits and income of the controlled 
foreign corporation shall be required using the principles of section 
481 to prevent any duplication or omission of amounts attributable to 
previous years that would otherwise result from any such election or 
adoption.
    (6) Examples. The following examples illustrate the rules of this 
section.

    Example 1--(i) P, a calendar year domestic corporation, owns all of 
the outstanding stock of FX, a calendar year controlled foreign 
corporation. None of the significant events specified in Sec. 1.964-
1(c)(6) or this section has occurred. In addition, neither P nor FX has 
ever made or adopted, or been required to make or adopt, an election or 
method of accounting for United States tax purposes with respect to FX. 
On June 1, 1990, FX makes a distribution to P. FX does not act to make 
any election or adopt a method of accounting for United States tax 
purposes.
    (ii) P must compute FX's earnings and profits in order to determine 
if any portion of the distribution is taxable as a dividend and to 
determine P's foreign tax credit on such portion under section 902. P 
must satisfy the requirements of Sec. 1.964-1(c)(3) and file the written 
statement and notice described therein within 180 days after the close 
of FX's 1990 taxable year in order to make an election or to adopt a 
method of accounting on behalf of FX. Any such election or adoption will 
govern the computation of earnings and profits of FX for all federal 
income tax purposes (including, e.g., the determination of foreign tax 
credits on subpart F inclusions) in 1990 and subsequent taxable years 
unless the Commissioner consents to a change.
    (iii) If P fails to satisfy the regulatory requirements in a timely 
manner and such failure is not shown to the satisfaction of the 
Commissioner to be due to reasonable cause, the earnings and profits of 
FX shall be computed as if no elections were made and any permissible 
methods of accounting not requiring an election and reflected in its 
books were adopted. Any subsequent attempt by FX or P to change an 
accounting method shall be effective only if the Commissioner consents 
to the change.
    Example 2--(i) The facts are the same as in Example 1, except that P 
elects to allocate its interest expense under section 864(e)(4) for its 
1989 taxable year under the tax book value method of Sec. 1.861-12T(c) 
of the Temporary Income Tax Regulations.
    (ii) P must compute the earnings and profits of FX in order to 
determine the adjustment to P's basis in the stock of FX for P's 1989 
taxable year. P must satisfy the requirements of Sec. 1.964-1(c)(3) and 
file the written statement and notice described therein within 180 days 
after the close of FX's 1989 taxable year in order to make an election 
or to adopt a method of accounting on behalf of FX. Any such election or 
adoption will govern the computation of FX's earnings and profits in 
1989 and subsequent taxable years for all federal income tax purposes 
(including, e.g., the characterization of the June 1, 1990 distribution 
and the determination of P's foreign tax credit, if any, with respect 
thereto) unless the Commissioner consents to a change.
    (iii) If P fails to satisfy the regulatory requirements in a timely 
manner and such failure is not shown to the satisfaction of the 
Commissioner to be due to reasonable cause, the earnings and profits of 
FX shall be computed as if no elections were made and any permissible 
methods of accounting not requiring an election and reflected in its 
books were adopted. Any subsequent attempt by FX or P to change an 
accounting method

[[Page 492]]

shall be effective only if the Commissioner consents to the change.
    Example 3--(i) The facts are the same as in Example 2, except that P 
elects to allocate its interest expense under section 864(e)(4) for its 
1988 taxable year under the tax book value method of Sec. 1.861-12T (c) 
of the Temporary Income Tax Regulations.
    (ii) P must compute the earnings and profits of FX in order to 
determine the adjustment to P's basis in the stock of FX for P's 1988 
taxable year. P must satisfy the requirements of Sec. 1.964-1(c)(3) and 
file the written statement and notice described therein within 180 days 
after the close of FX's 1988 taxable year in order to make an election 
or to adopt a method of accounting on behalf of FX. Any such election or 
adoption will govern the computation of FX's earnings and profits in 
1988 and subsequent taxable years for all federal income tax purposes 
(including, e.g., P's basis adjustment for purposes of section 864(e)(4) 
in 1989 and the characterization of the June 1, 1990 distribution and 
the determination of P's foreign tax credit, if any, with respect 
thereto) unless the Commissioner consents to a change.
    (iii) If P fails to satisfy the regulatory requirements in a timely 
manner and such failure is not shown to the satisfaction of the 
Commissioner to be due to reasonable cause, the earnings and profits of 
FX for 1988 shall be computed as if no elections were made and any 
permissible methods of accounting not requiring an election and 
reflected in its books were adopted. However, a properly filed, timely 
election or adoption of method by, or on behalf of, FX with respect to 
its 1989 taxable year, when P's basis adjustment for purposes of section 
864(e)(4) first constitutes a significant event, shall not be treated as 
a change in accounting method. No recomputation of P's basis adjustment 
for 1988 shall be required by reason of any such election or adoption of 
method with respect to FX's 1989 taxable year, but prospective 
adjustments to FX's earnings and profits and income shall be made to the 
extent required by Sec. 1.964-1T(g)(5).
    Example 4--(i) The facts are the same as in Example 3, except that 
FX had subpart F income taxable to P in 1986, and P computed FX's 
earnings and profits for purposes of determining the amount of the 
inclusion and the foreign taxes deemed paid by P in 1986 under section 
960 pursuant to Sec. 1.964-1 (a) through (e).
    (ii) Any election made or method of accounting adopted on behalf of 
FX by P pursuant to Sec. 1.964-1(c) in 1986 is binding on P and FX for 
purposes of computing FX's earnings and profits in 1986 and subsequent 
taxable years. Thus, in determining P's basis adjustment for purposes of 
section 864(e)(4) in 1988 and 1989 and its deemed-paid credit with 
respect to the 1990 dividend, FX's earnings and profits must be computed 
consistently with the method used by P with regard to the 1986 subpart F 
inclusion. (However, Sec. 1.964-1 (d), (e), and (f) do not apply in 
computing FX's earnings and profits in post-1986 taxable years.)
    Example 5--(i) The facts are the same as in Example 4, except that 
FX made a dividend distribution to P on June 1, 1985, and P computed 
FX's earnings and profits for purposes of computing the foreign taxes 
deemed paid by P in 1985 under section 902 with respect to the 
distribution under Sec. 1.964-1 exclusive of paragraphs (d), (e), and 
(f) pursuant to a timely election under Sec. 1.902-1(g)(1).
    (ii) Any election made or method of accounting adopted on behalf of 
FX by P pursuant to Sec. 1.964-1(c) in 1985 is binding on P and FX for 
purposes of computing FX's earnings and profits in 1985 and subsequent 
taxable years. Thus, in determining P's basis adjustment for purposes of 
section 864(e)(4) in 1988 and 1989 and its deemed-paid credit with 
respect to the 1986 subpart F inclusion and the 1990 dividend, FX's 
earnings and profits must be computed consistently with the method used 
by P with regard to the 1985 dividend. If, rather than choosing under 
Sec. 1.902-1(g)(1) to use the section 964 rules, P computed FX's 
earnings and profits for purposes of section 902 in 1985 in all respects 
as if FX were a domestic corporation, then P would have been free to 
make elections or adopt a method of accounting on behalf of FX under 
Sec. 1.964-1(c) with respect to the subpart F inclusion in 1986. Any 
such election or adoption would be binding on P and FX as to the 
computation of FX's earnings and profits in 1986 and subsequent taxable 
years.

[T.D. 8283, 55 FR 2516, Jan. 25, 1990; 55 FR 7711, Mar. 5, 1990]


<R05>
Sec. 1.964-2   Treatment of blocked earnings and profits.

    (a) General rule. If, in accordance with paragraph (d) of this 
section, it is established to the satisfaction of the district director 
that any amount of the earnings and profits of a controlled foreign 
corporation for the taxable year (determined under Sec. 1.964-1) was 
subject to a currency or other restriction or limitation imposed under 
the laws of any foreign country (within the meaning of paragraph (b) of 
this section) on its distribution to United States shareholders who own 
(within the meaning of section 958(a)) stock of such corporation, such 
amount shall not be included in earnings and profits for purposes of 
sections 952, 955 (as in effect both before and after the enactment of 
the Tax Reduction Act of 1975), and 956 for such taxable year. For rules

[[Page 493]]

governing the treatment of amounts with respect to which such 
restriction or limitation is removed, see paragraph (c) of this section.
    (b) Rules of application. For purposes of paragraph (a) of this 
section--
    (1) Period of restriction or limitation. An amount of earnings and 
profits of a controlled foreign corporation for any taxable year shall 
not be included in earnings and profits for purposes of sections 952, 
955 (as in effect both before and after the enactment of the Tax 
Reduction Act of 1975), and 956 only if such amount of earnings and 
profits is subject to a currency or other restriction or limitation 
(within the meaning of subparagraph (2) of this paragraph) throughout 
the 150-day period beginning 90 days before the close of the taxable 
year and ending 60 days after the close of such taxable year.
    (2) Restriction or limitation defined. Whether earnings and profits 
of a controlled foreign corporation are subject to a currency or other 
restriction or limitation imposed under the laws of a foreign country 
must be determined on the basis of all the facts and circumstances in 
each case. Generally, such a restriction or limitation must prevent--
    (i) The ready conversion (directly or indirectly) of such currency 
into United States dollars, or into property of a type normally owned by 
such corporation in the operation of its business or other money which 
is readily convertible into United States dollars; or
    (ii) The distribution of dividends by such corporation to its United 
States shareholders.

For purposes of this subparagraph, if a United States shareholder owns 
(within the meaning of section 958(a)), or is considered as owning by 
applying the rules of ownership of section 958(b), 80 percent or more of 
the total combined voting power of all classes of stock of a foreign 
corporation in a chain of ownership described in section 958(a), the 
distribution of dividends by such corporation to such shareholder will 
not be considered prevented solely by reason of the existence of a 
currency or other restriction or limitation at an intermediate tier in 
such chain if dividends may be distributed directly to such 
shareholders.
    (3) Foreign laws. A currency or other restriction or limitation on 
the distribution of earnings and profits may be imposed in a foreign 
country by express statutory provisions, executive orders or decrees, 
rules or regulations of a governmental agency, court decisions, the 
actions of appropriate officials who are acting within the scope of 
their authority, or by any similar official action. A currency 
restriction will not be considered to exist unless export restrictions 
are also imposed which prevent the exportation of property of a type 
normally owned by the controlled foreign corporation in the operation of 
its business which could be readily converted into United States 
dollars.
    (4) Voluntary restriction or limitation. A currency or other 
restriction or limitation arising from the voluntary act of the 
controlled foreign corporation or its United States shareholders during 
a taxable year beginning after December 31, 1962, will not be taken into 
account. For example, if a controlled foreign corporation--
    (i) Issues a stock dividend which has the effect of capitalizing 
earnings and profits;
    (ii) Elects to restrict its earnings and profits or to make certain 
investments as a means of avoiding current tax or securing a reduced 
rate of tax; or
    (iii) Allocates earnings and profits to an optional or arbitrary 
reserve; such restriction is voluntary and will not be taken into 
account.
    (5) Treatment of earnings and profits in cases of certain mandatory 
reserves--(i) In general. If a controlled foreign corporation is 
required under the laws of a foreign country to establish a reserve out 
of earnings and profits for the taxable year, such earnings and profits 
shall be considered subject to a restriction or limitation by reason of 
such requirement only to the extent that the amount required to be 
included in such reserve at the close of the taxable year exceeds the 
accumulated earnings and profits (determined in accordance with 
subdivision (ii) of this subparagraph) of such corporation at the close 
of the preceding taxable year.
    (ii) Determination of earnings and profits. For purposes of 
determining the accumulated earnings and profits of a

[[Page 494]]

controlled foreign corporation under subdivision (i) of this 
subparagraph, such earnings and profits shall not include any amounts 
which are attributable to--
    (a) Amounts which, for any prior taxable year, have been included in 
the gross income of a United States shareholder under section 951(a) and 
have not been distributed;
    (b) Amounts which, for any prior taxable year, have been included in 
the gross income of a United States shareholder of such foreign 
corporation under section 551(b) and have not been distributed; or
    (c) Amounts which become subject to a voluntary restriction or 
limitation (within the meaning of subparagraph (4) of this paragraph) 
during a taxable year beginning before January 1, 1963.

The rules of this subdivision apply only in determining the accumulated 
earnings and profits of a controlled foreign corporation for purposes of 
this subparagraph. See section 959 and the regulations thereunder for 
limitations on the exclusion from gross income of previously taxed 
earnings and profits.
    (6) Exhaustion of procedures for distributing earnings and profits. 
Earnings and profits of a controlled foreign corporation for a taxable 
year will not be considered subject to a currency or other restriction 
or limitation on their distribution unless the United States 
shareholders of such corporation demonstrate either that the available 
procedures for distributing such earnings and profits have been 
exhausted or that the use of such procedures will be futile. As a 
general rule, such procedures will be considered to have been exhausted 
if the foreign corporation applies for dollars (or foreign currency 
readily convertible into dollars) at the appropriate rate of exchange 
and complies with the applicable laws and regulations governing the 
acquisition and transfer of such currency including submission of the 
necessary documentation to the exchange authority. The fact that 
available procedures for distributing earnings and profits were 
exhausted without success with respect to a prior year is not, of 
itself, sufficient evidence that such procedures would not be successful 
with respect to the current taxable year.
    (c) Removal of restriction or limitation--(1) In general. If, during 
any taxable year, a currency or other restriction or limitation (within 
the meaning of paragraph (b) of this section) imposed under the laws of 
a foreign country on the distribution of earnings and profits of a 
controlled foreign corporation to its United States shareholders is 
removed--
    (i) Treatment of deferred income. Each United States shareholder of 
such corporation on the last day in such year that such corporation is a 
controlled foreign corporation shall include in his gross income for 
such taxable year the amounts attributable to such earnings and profits 
which would have been includible in his gross income under section 
951(a) for prior taxable years but for the existence of the currency or 
other restriction or limitation except that the amounts included under 
this subdivision (i) shall not exceed his pro rata share of--
    (a) The earnings and profits upon which the restriction was removed 
determined on the basis of his stock ownership on the last day of the 
immediately preceding taxable year, and
    (b) The applicable limitations under paragraph (c) of Sec. 1.952-1, 
paragraph (b)(2) of Sec. 1.955-1, paragraph (b)(2) of Sec. 1.955A-1, or 
paragraph (b) of Sec. 1.956-1, determined as of the last day of the 
immediately preceding taxable year, taking into account the provisions 
of subdivision (ii) of this subparagraph.
    (ii) Treatment of earnings and profits. For purposes of sections 
952, 955 (as in effect both before and after the enactment of the Tax 
Reduction Act of 1975), and 956, the earnings and profits which are no 
longer subject to a currency or other restriction or limitation shall be 
treated as included in the corporation's earnings and profits for the 
year in which such earnings and profits were derived.

Amounts with respect to which a currency or other restriction or 
limitation is removed shall be translated into United States dollars at 
the appropriate exchange rate for the translation period during which 
such currency or other restriction or limitation is removed. See 
paragraph (d) of Sec. 1.964-1. Amounts with respect to which a

[[Page 495]]

currency or other restriction or limitation is removed shall not be 
taken into account in determining whether a deficiency distribution 
(within the meaning of Sec. 1.963-6 (applied as if section 963 had not 
been repealed by the Tax Reduction Act of 1975)) is required to be made 
for the year in which such earnings and profits were derived.
    (2) Removal of restriction or limitation defined. An amount of 
earnings and profits shall be considered no longer subject to a 
limitation or restriction if and to the extent that--
    (i) Money or property in such foreign country is readily convertible 
into United States dollars, or into other money or property of a type 
normally owned by such corporation in the operation of its business 
which is readily convertible into United States dollars;
    (ii) Notwithstanding the existence of any laws or regulations 
forbidding the exchange of money or property into United States dollars, 
conversion is actually made into United States dollars, or other money 
or property of a type normally owned by such corporation in the 
operation of its business which is readily convertible into United 
States dollars; or
    (iii) A mandatory reserve requirement (described in paragraph (b)(5) 
of this section) is removed either by a change in law of the foreign 
country imposing such requirement or by an accumulation of earnings and 
profits not subject to such requirement.
    (3) Distribution in foreign country. If, during any taxable year, 
earnings and profits previously subject to a currency or other 
restriction or limitation are distributed in a foreign country to one or 
more United States shareholders of a controlled foreign corporation 
directly, or indirectly through a chain of ownership described in 
section 958(a), such earnings and profits shall be considered no longer 
subject to a restriction or limitation. However, distributed amounts may 
be excluded from such shareholder's gross income for the taxable year of 
receipt if such shareholder elects a method of accounting under which 
the reporting of blocked foreign income is deferred until the income 
ceases to be blocked.
    (4) Source of distribution. If, during any taxable year, earnings 
and profits previously subject to a currency or other restriction or 
limitation is distributed to one or more United States shareholders of a 
controlled foreign corporation directly, or indirectly through a chain 
of ownership described in section 958(a), the source of such 
distribution shall be determined in accordance with the rules of 
Sec. 1.959-3.
    (5) Illustration. The provisions of this paragraph may be 
illustrated by the following example:

    Example. (a) M, a United States person, owns all of the only class 
of stock of A Corporation, a foreign corporation incorporated under the 
laws of foreign country X on January 1, 1963. Both M and A Corporations 
use the calendar year as a taxable year and A Corporation is a 
controlled foreign corporation throughout the period here involved.
    (b) During 1963, A Corporation derives income of $100,000 all of 
which is subpart F income and has earnings and profits of $100,000. 
Under the laws of X Country, currency cannot be exported without a 
license. During the last 90 days of 1963 and the first 60 days of 1964, 
A Corporation can obtain a license to distribute only an amount 
equivalent to $10,000. M must include $10,000 in his gross income for 
1963 under section 951(a)(1)(A)(i) and $90,000 of A Corporation's 
earnings and profits for 1963 are not taken into account for purposes of 
sections 952, 955, and 956.
    (c) During 1964, A Corporation has no income and no earnings and 
profits. On June 1, 1964, A Corporation converts an amount equivalent to 
$20,000 into property of a type normally owned by such corporation in 
the operation of its business which is readily convertible into United 
States dollars but does not distribute such amount. Corporation A must 
include $20,000 in its earnings and profits for 1963 for purposes of 
sections 952, 955, and 956. M must include $20,000 in his gross income 
for 1964.
    (d) During 1965, A Corporation has no income and no earnings and 
profits. On December 15, 1965, A Corporation distributes an amount 
equivalent to $15,000 to M in X Country. Neither M nor A Corporation can 
obtain a license to export currency from X Country. In his return for 
the taxable year 1965, M elects a method of accounting under which the 
reporting of blocked foreign income is deferred until the income ceases 
to be blocked. Accordingly, M does not include the $15,000 in his gross 
income for 1965.
    (e) During 1966, A Corporation has no income and no earnings and 
profits. On February 1, 1966, notwithstanding the laws and regulations 
of X Country which forbid the exchange of X Country's currency into 
United States dollars, M converts an amount equivalent to $15,000 into a 
currency which is

[[Page 496]]

readily convertible into United States dollars. Since the income has 
ceased to be blocked, M must include $15,000 in his gross income for 
1966.

    (d) Manner of claiming existence of restriction or limitation on 
distribution of earnings and profits. A United States shareholder 
claiming that an amount of the earnings and profits of a controlled 
foreign corporation for the taxable year was subject to a currency or 
other restriction or limitation imposed under the laws of a foreign 
country on its distribution shall file a statement with his return for 
the taxable year with or within which the taxable year of the foreign 
corporation ends which shall include--
    (1) The name and address of the foreign corporation,
    (2) A description of the classes of stock of the foreign corporation 
and a statement of the number of shares of each class owned (within the 
meaning of section 958(a)) or considered as owned (by applying the rules 
of ownership of section 958(b)) by the United States shareholder,
    (3) A description of the currency or other restriction or limitation 
on the distribution of earnings and profits,
    (4) The total earnings and profits of the foreign corporation for 
the taxable year (before any amount is excluded from earnings and 
profits under this section) and the United States shareholder's pro rata 
share of such total earnings and profits,
    (5) The United States shareholder's pro rata share of the amount of 
earnings and profits subject to a restriction or limitation on 
distribution,
    (6) The amounts which would be includible in the United States 
shareholder's gross income under section 951(a) but for the existence of 
the currency or other restriction or limitation,
    (7) A description of the available procedures for distributing 
earnings and profits and a statement setting forth the steps taken to 
exhaust such procedures or a statement setting forth the reasons that 
the use of such procedures would be futile, and
    (8) The amount of distributions made in a foreign country and a 
statement as to whether a method of accounting has been elected under 
which the reporting of blocked income is deferred until such income 
ceases to be blocked, including an identification of the taxable year 
and place of filing of such election.

In addition, such United States shareholder shall furnish to the 
district director such other information as he may require to verify the 
status of a currency or other restriction or limitation.

[T.D. 6892, 31 FR 11142, Aug. 23, 1966, as amended by T.D. 7545, 43 FR 
19652, May 8, 1978; T.D. 7893, 48 FR 22510, May 19, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 1.964-3  Records to be provided by United States shareholders.

    (a) Shareholder's responsibility for providing records. For purposes 
of verifying his income tax liability in respect of amounts includible 
in income under section 951 for the taxable year of a controlled foreign 
corporation each United State shareholder (as defined in section 951(b)) 
who owns (within the meaning of section 958(a)) stock of such 
corporation shall, within a reasonable time after demand by the district 
director, provide the district director--
    (1) Such permanent books of account or records as are sufficient to 
satisfy the requirements of section 6001 and section 964(c), or true 
copies thereof, as are reasonably demanded, and
    (2) If such books or records are not maintained in the English 
language, either (i) an accurate English translation of such books or 
records or (ii) the services of a qualified interpreter satisfactory to 
the district director.

If such books or records are being used by another district director, 
the United States shareholder upon whom the district director has made a 
demand to provide such books or records shall file a statement of such 
fact with his district director, indicating the location of such books 
or records. For the length of time the United States shareholder of a 
controlled foreign corporation must cause such books or records as are 
under his control to be retained, see paragraph (e) of Sec. 1.6001-1.
    (b) Records to be provided. Except as otherwise provided in 
paragraph (c) of this section, the requirements of section 6001 and 
section 964(c) for record keeping shall be considered satisfied if

[[Page 497]]

the books or records produced are sufficient to verify for the taxable 
year--
    (1) The subpart F income of the controlled foreign corporation and, 
if any part of such income is excluded from the income of the United 
States shareholder under section 963 or section 970(a), the application 
of such exclusion,
    (2) The previously excluded subpart F income of such corporation 
withdrawn from investment in less developed countries,
    (3) The previously excluded subpart F income of such corporation 
withdrawn from investment in foreign base company shipping operations,
    (4) The previously excluded export trade income of such corporation 
withdrawn from investment, and
    (5) The increase in earnings invested by such corporation in United 
States property.
    (c) Special rules. Verification of the subpart F income of the 
controlled foreign corporation for the taxable year shall not be 
required if--
    (1) It can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the district 
director that--
    (i) The locus and nature of such corporation's activities were such 
as to make it unlikely that the foreign base company income of such 
corporation (determined in accordance with paragraph (c)(3) of 
Sec. 1.952-3) exceeded 5 percent of its gross income (determined in 
accordance with paragraph (b)(1) of Sec. 1.952-3) for the taxable year. 
(For taxable years to which Sec. 1.952-3 does not apply, such amounts 
shall be determined under 26 CFR Sec. 1.954-1(d)(3)(i) and (ii) (Revised 
as of April 1, 1975))), and
    (ii) If such corporation reinsures or issues insurance or annuity 
contracts in connection with United States risks, the 5-percent minimum 
premium requirement prescribed in paragraph (b) of Sec. 1.953-1 has not 
been exceeded for the taxable year, or
    (2) The United States shareholder's pro rata share of such subpart F 
income is excluded in full from his income under section 963 and the 
books or records verify the application of such exclusion.

[T.D. 6824, 30 FR 6480, May 11, 1965, as amended by T.D. 7893, 48 FR 
22510, May 19, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 1.964-4   Verification of certain classes of income.

    (a) In general. The provisions of this section shall apply for 
purposes of determining when books or records are sufficient for 
purposes of Sec. 1.964-3 to verify the classes of income described in 
such section.
    (b) Subpart F income. Books or records sufficient to verify the 
subpart F income of a controlled foreign corporation must establish for 
the taxable year--
    (1) Its gross income and deductions,
    (2) The income derived from the insurance of United States risks (as 
provided in paragraph (c) of this section),
    (3) The foreign base company income (as provided in paragraph (d) of 
this section), and
    (4) In the case of a United States shareholder claiming the benefit 
of the exclusion provided in section 952(b) or the limitation provided 
in section 952(c)--
    (i) The items of income excluded from subpart F income by paragraph 
(b) of Sec. 1.952-1 as income derived from sources within the United 
States, the United States income tax incurred with respect thereto, and 
the deductions properly allocable thereto and connected therewith, and
    (ii) The earnings and profits, or deficit in earnings and profits, 
of any foreign corporation necessary for the determinations provided in 
paragraphs (c) and (d) of Sec. 1.952-1.
    (c) Income from insurance of United States risks. Books or records 
sufficient to verify the income of a controlled foreign corporation from 
the insurance of United States risks must establish for the taxable 
year--
    (1) That the 5-percent minimum premium requirement prescribed in 
paragraph (b) of Sec. 1.953-1 has not been exceeded, or
    (2) The taxable income, as determined under Sec. 1.953-4 or 
Sec. 1.953-5, which is attributable to the reinsuring or the issuing of 
any insurance or annuity contracts in connection with United States 
risks, as defined in Sec. 1.953-2 or Sec. 1.953-3.
    (d) Foreign base company income and exclusions therefrom. Books or 
records sufficient to verify the income of a controlled foreign 
corporation which is

[[Page 498]]

foreign base company income must establish for the taxable year the 
following items:
    (1) Foreign personal holding company income. The foreign personal 
holding company income to which section 954(c) and Sec. 1.954-2 apply, 
for which purpose there must be established the gross income from--
    (i) All rents and royalties,
    (ii) Rents and royalties received in the active conduct of a trade 
or business from an unrelated person, as determined under section 
954(c)(3)(A) and paragraph (d)(1) of Sec. 1.954-2,
    (iii) Rents and royalties received from a related person for the use 
of property in the country of incorporation of the controlled foreign 
corporation, as determined under section 954(c)(4)(C) and paragraph 
(e)(3) of Sec. 1.954-2,
    (iv) All dividends, interest, and except where the controlled 
foreign corporation is a regular dealer in stock or securities, all 
gains and losses from the sale or exchange of stock or securities,
    (v) Dividends, interest, and gains from the sale or exchange of 
stock or securities, received in the conduct of a banking, financing, or 
insurance business from an unrelated person, as determined under section 
954(c)(3)(B) and paragraph (d)(2) and (3) of Sec. 1.954-2,
    (vi) Dividends and interest received from a related corporation 
organized in the country of incorporation of the controlled foreign 
corporation, as determined under section 954(c)(4)(A) and paragraph 
(e)(1) of Sec. 1.954-2,
    (vii) Interest received in the conduct of a banking or other 
financing business from a related person, as determined under section 
954(c)(4)(B) and paragraph (e)(2) of Sec. 1.954-2,
    (viii) All annuities,
    (ix) All gains from commodities transactions described in section 
553(a)(3),
    (x) All income from estates and trusts described in section 
553(a)(4),
    (xi) All income from personal service contracts described in section 
553(a)(5), and
    (xii) All compensation for the use of corporate property by 
shareholders described in section 553(a)(6).
    (2) Foreign base company sales income. The foreign base company 
sales income to which section 954(d) and Sec. 1.954-3 apply, for which 
purpose there must be established the gross income from--
    (i) All sales by the controlled foreign corporation of its personal 
property and all purchases or sales of personal property by such 
corporation on behalf of another person,
    (ii) Purchases and/or sales of personal property in connection with 
transactions not involving related persons (as defined in paragraph 
(e)(2) of Sec. 1.954-1),
    (iii) Purchases and/or sales of personal property manufactured, 
produced, etc., in the country of incorporation of the controlled 
foreign corporation, as determined under paragraph (a)(2) of Sec. 1.954-
3,
    (iv) Purchases and/or sales of personal property for use, etc., in 
the country of incorporation of the controlled foreign corporation, as 
determined under paragraph (a)(3) of Sec. 1.954-3, and
    (v) Sales of personal property manufactured or produced by the 
controlled foreign corporation, as determined under paragraph (a)(4) of 
Sec. 1.954-3.

Where an item of income falls within more than one of subdivisions (ii) 
through (v) of this subparagraph, it shall be sufficient to establish 
that it falls within any one of them. If a branch or similar 
establishment is treated as a wholly owned subsidiary corporation 
through the application of section 954(d)(2) and paragraph (b) of 
Sec. 1.954-3, the requirements of this subparagraph shall be satisfied 
separately for each branch or similar establishment so treated and for 
the remainder of the controlled foreign corporation.
    (3) Foreign base company services income. The foreign base company 
services income to which section 954(e) and Sec. 1.954-4 apply, for 
which purpose there must be established the gross income from--
    (i) All services performed by the controlled foreign corporation,
    (ii) Services other than those (as determined under paragraph (b) of 
Sec. 1.954-4) performed for, or on behalf of, a related person,
    (iii) Services performed in the country of incorporation of the 
controlled foreign corporation, as determined under paragraph (c) of 
Sec. 1.954-4, and

[[Page 499]]

    (iv) Services performed in connection with the sale or exchange of, 
or with an offer or effort to sell or exchange, personal property 
manufactured, produced, etc., by the controlled foreign corporation, as 
determined under paragraph (d) of Sec. 1.954-4.

Where an item of income falls within more than one of subdivisions (ii) 
through (iv) of this subparagraph, it shall be sufficient to establish 
that it falls within any one of them.
    (4) Foreign base company oil related income. (i) The foreign base 
company oil related income described in section 954(g) and Sec. 1.954-8, 
for which purpose there must be established, with respect to each 
foreign country, the gross income derived from--
    (A) The processing of minerals extracted (by the taxpayer or by any 
other person) from oil or gas wells into their primary products, as 
determined under section 907(c)(2)(A),
    (B) The transportation of such minerals or primary products, as 
determined under section 907(c)(2)(B),
    (C) The distribution or sale of such minerals or primary products, 
as determined under section 907(c)(2)(C),
    (D) The disposition of assets used by the taxpayer in a trade or 
business described in subdivision (A), (B) or (C), as determined under 
section 907(c)(2)(D),
    (E) Dividends, interests, partnership distributions, and other 
amounts, as determined under section 907(c)(3).

Where an item of income falls within more than one of the listings in 
paragraphs (d)(4)(i)(A) through (E) of this section, it shall be 
sufficient to establish that it falls within any one of them.
    (ii) If any of the items of income listed in paragraph (d)(4)(i) of 
this section arising from sources within a foreign country relates to 
oil, gas, or a primary product thereof and is described in section 
954(g)(1)(A) or (B) and Sec. 1.954-8(a)(1)(i) or (ii) (and, hence, is 
not foreign base company oil related income), then there must be 
established facts sufficient to verify the amount of such item of income 
which is not foreign base company oil related income. In this regard, 
the total quantities of oil, gas and primary products thereof which gave 
rise to such item of income and the portions of such quantities which 
were extracted or sold within the foreign country must be established.
    (5) Qualified investments in less developed countries. For rules in 
effect for taxable years of foreign corporations beginning before 
January 1, 1976, see 26 CFR 1.964-4(d)(4) (Revised as of April 1, 1975).
    (6) Income derived from aircraft or ships. For rules in effect for 
taxable years of foreign corporations beginning before January 1, 1976, 
see CFR Sec. 1.964-4(d)(5) (Revised as of April 1, 1975).
    (7) Foreign base company shipping income. The foreign base company 
shipping income to which section 954(f) and Sec. 1.954-6 apply, for 
which purpose there must be established--
    (i) Gross income derived from, or in connection with, the use (or 
hiring or leasing for use) of any aircraft or vessel in foreign 
commerce, as determined under Sec. 1.954-6(c),
    (ii) Gross income derived from, or in connection with, the 
performance of services directly related to the use of any aircraft or 
vessel in foreign commerce, as determined under Sec. 1.954-6(d),
    (iii) Gross income incidental to income described in subdivisions 
(i) and (ii) of this subparagraph, as determined under Sec. 1.954-6(e),
    (iv) Gross income derived from the sale, exchange, or other 
disposition of any aircraft or vessel used (by the seller or by a person 
related to the seller) in foreign commerce,
    (v) Dividends, interest, and gains described in Secs. 1.954-6(f) and 
1.954(b) (1)(viii),
    (vi) Income described in Sec. 1.954-6(g) (relating to partnerships, 
trusts, etc.), and
    (vii) Exchange gain, to the extent allocable to foreign base company 
shipping income, as determined under Sec. 1.952-2(c)(2)(v)(b).

If the controlled foreign corporation has income derived from or in 
connection with, the use (or hiring or leasing for use) of any aircraft 
or vessel in foreign commerce, or derived from, or in connection with, 
the performance of services directly related to the use of any aircraft 
or vessel in foreign commerce, it shall be necessary to establish, from 
the books and records of the controlled foreign corporation, that

[[Page 500]]

such aircraft or vessel was used in foreign commerce within the meaning 
of subparagraphs (3) and (4) of Sec. 1.954-6(b).
    (8) Income on which taxes are not substantially reduced. The gross 
income excluded from foreign base company income under section 954(b)(4) 
and paragraph (b)(3) or (4) of Sec. 1.954-1 in the case of a controlled 
foreign corporation not availed of to substantially reduce income taxes, 
the income or similar taxes incurred with respect thereto, and all other 
factors necessary to verify the application of such exclusion.
    (9) Qualified investments in foreign base company shipping 
operations. The foreign base company shipping income that is excluded 
from foreign base company income under section 954(b)(2) and Sec. 1.954-
1(b)(1).
    (10) Special rule for shipping income. The distributions received 
through a chain of ownership described in section 958(a) which are 
excluded from foreign base company income under section 954(b)(6)(B) and 
Sec. 1.954-1(b)(2).
    (11) Deductions. The deductions allocable, under paragraph (c) of 
Sec. 1.954-1, to each of the classes and subclasses of gross income 
described in subparagraphs (1) through (9) of this paragraph.
    (e) Exclusion under section 963. Books or records sufficient to 
verify the application of the exclusion provided by section 963 with 
respect to the subpart F income for the taxable year of a controlled 
foreign corporation must establish that the conditions set forth in 
paragraph (a)(2) of Sec. 1.963-1 have been met.
    (f) Exclusion under section 970(a). Books or records sufficient to 
verify the application for the taxable year of the exclusion provided by 
section 970(a) in respect of export trade income which is foreign base 
company income must establish for such year--
    (1) That the controlled foreign corporation is an export trade 
corporation, as defined in section 971(a) and paragraph (a) of 
Sec. 1.971-1,
    (2) The export trade income, as determined under section 971(b) and 
paragraph (b) of Sec. 1.971-1, which constitutes foreign base company 
income,
    (3) The export promotion expenses, as determined under section 
971(d) and paragraph (d) of Sec. 1.971-1, which are allocable to the 
excludable export trade income,
    (4) The gross receipts, and the gross amount on which is computed 
compensation included in gross receipts, from property in respect of 
which the excludable export trade income is derived, as described in 
section 970(a)(1)(B) and paragraph (b)(2)(ii) of Sec. 1.970-1, and
    (5) The increase in investments in export trade assets, as 
determined under section 970(c)(2) and paragraph (d)(2) of Sec. 1.970-1.
    (g-1) Withdrawal of previously excluded subpart F income from 
qualified investment in less developed countries. Books or records 
sufficient to verify the previously excluded subpart F income of the 
controlled foreign corporation withdrawn from investment in less 
developed countries for the taxable year must establish--
    (1) The sum of the amounts of income excluded from foreign base 
company income under section 954(b)(1) and paragraph (b)(1) of 
Sec. 1.954-1 (as in effect for taxable years beginning before January 1, 
1976; see 26 CFR 1.954-1(b)(1) (Revised as of April 1, 1975)) for all 
prior taxable years,
    (2) The sum of the amounts of previously excluded subpart F income 
withdrawn from investment in less developed countries for all prior 
taxable years, as determined under section 955(a) (as in effect before 
the enactment of the Tax Reduction Act of 1975) and paragraph (b) of 
Sec. 1.955-1, and
    (3) The amount withdrawn from investment in less developed countries 
for the taxable year as determined under section 955(a) (as in effect 
before the enactment of the Tax Reduction Act of 1975) and paragraph (b) 
of Sec. 1.955-1.
    (g-2) Withdrawal of previously excluded subpart F income from 
investment in foreign base company shipping operations. Books or records 
sufficient to verify the previously excluded subpart F income of the 
controlled foreign corporation withdrawn from investment in foreign base 
company shipping operations for the taxable year must establish--
    (1) The sum of the amounts of income excluded from foreign base 
company income under section 954(b)(2) and

[[Page 501]]

paragraph (b)(1) of Sec. 1.954-1 for all prior taxable years,
    (2) The sum of the amounts of previously excluded subpart F income 
withdrawn from investment in foreign base company shipping operations 
for all prior taxable years, as determined under section 955(a) and 
paragraph (b) of Sec. 1.955A-1,
    (3) The amount withdrawn from investment in foreign base company 
shipping operations for the taxable year as determined under section 
955(a) and paragraph (b) of Sec. 1.955A-1, and
    (4) If the carryover (as described in Sec. 1.955A-1(b)(3)) of 
amounts relating to investments in less developed country shipping 
companies (as described in Sec. 1.995-5(b)) is applicable, (i) the 
amount of the corporation's qualified investments (determined under 
Sec. 1.955-2 other than paragraph (b)(5) thereof) in less developed 
country shipping companies at the close of the last taxable year of the 
corporation beginning before January 1, 1976, and (ii) the amount of the 
limitation with respect to previously excluded subpart F income 
(determined under Sec. 1.955-1(b)(1)(i)(b)) for the first taxable year 
of the corporation beginning after December 31, 1975.
    (h) Withdrawal of previously excluded export trade income from 
investment. Books or records sufficient to verify the previously 
excluded export trade income of the controlled foreign corporation 
withdrawn from investment for the taxable year must establish the United 
States shareholder's proportionate share of--
    (1) The sum of the amounts by which the subpart F income of such 
corporation was reduced for all prior taxable years under section 970(a) 
and paragraph (b) of Sec. 1.970-1,
    (2) The sum of the amounts described in section 970(b)(1)(B),
    (3) The sum of the amounts of previously excluded export trade 
income of such corporation withdrawn from investment under section 
970(b) and paragraph (c) of Sec. 1.970-1 for all prior taxable years, 
and
    (4) The amount withdrawn from investment under section 970(b) and 
paragraph (c) of Sec. 1.970-1 for the taxable year.
    (i) Increase in earnings invested in United States property. Books 
or records sufficient to verify the increase for the taxable year in 
earnings invested by the controlled foreign corporations in United 
States property must establish--
    (1) The amount of such corporation's earnings invested in United 
States property (as defined in section 956(b)(1) and paragraph (a) of 
Sec. 1.956-2) at the close of the current and preceding taxable years, 
as determined under paragraph (b) of Sec. 1.956-1,
    (2) The amount of excluded property described in section 956(b)(2) 
and paragraph (b) of Sec. 1.956-2 held by such corporation at the close 
of such years,
    (3) The earnings and profits, to which section 959(c)(1) and 
paragraph (b)(1) of Sec. 1.959-3 apply, distributed by such corporation 
during the preceding taxable year, and
    (4) The amount of increase in earnings invested by such corporation 
in United States property which is excluded from the United States 
shareholder's gross income for the taxable year under section 959(a)(2) 
and paragraph (c) of Sec. 1.959-1.

[T.D. 6824, 30 FR 6481, May 11, 1965, as amended by T.D. 7211, 37 FR 
21436, Oct. 11, 1972; T.D. 7893, 48 FR 22511, May 19, 1983; T.D. 8331, 
56 FR 2849, Jan. 25, 1991]


<R05>
Sec. 1.964-5   Effective date of subpart F.

    Sections 951 through 964 and Secs. 1.951 through 1.964-4 shall apply 
with respect to taxable years of foreign corporations beginning after 
December 31, 1962, and to taxable years of United States shareholders 
within which or with which such taxable years of such corporations end.

[T.D. 7120, 36 FR 10862, June 4, 1971]

                        export trade corporations


<R05>
Sec. 1.970-1   Export trade corporations.

    (a) In general. Sections 970 through 972 provide in general that if 
a controlled foreign corporation is an export trade corporation for any 
taxable year, the subpart F income of such corporation shall, subject to 
limitations provided by section 970(a) and paragraph (b) of this 
section, be reduced by so much of such corporation's export trade income 
as constitutes foreign

[[Page 502]]

base company income. To the extent subpart F income of an export trade 
corporation is reduced under section 970 and this section, an amount is 
required by section 970(b) and paragraph (c) of this section to be 
included in gross income of United States shareholders of the 
corporation if there is a subsequent decrease in such corporation's 
investments in export trade assets. See section 971(a) and paragraph (a) 
of Sec. 1.971-1 for definition of the term ``export trade corporation'', 
section 971(b) and paragraph (b) of Sec. 1.971-1 for definition of the 
term ``export trade income'', and section 971(c) and paragraph (c) of 
Sec. 1.971-1 for definition of the term ``export trade assets''.
    (b) Amount by which export trade income shall reduce subpart F 
income--(1) Deductible amount. The subpart F income, determined as 
provided in section 952 and the regulations thereunder but without 
regard to section 970 and this paragraph, of a controlled foreign 
corporation which is an export trade corporation for its taxable year 
shall be reduced by an amount equal to so much of its export trade 
income as constitutes foreign base company income for such taxable year, 
but only to the extent that such amount of export trade income does not 
exceed the limitation determined under subparagraph (2) of this 
paragraph for such taxable year. See section 972 and Sec. 1.972-1 for 
rules relating to the consolidation of export trade corporations for 
purposes of determining the limitations described in subparagraph (2) of 
this paragraph.
    (2) Limitation on the amount of export trade income deductible from 
subpart F income. The amount by which subpart F income of an export 
trade corporation may be reduced for any taxable year under subparagraph 
(1) of this paragraph may not exceed whichever of the following 
limitations is the smallest:
    (i) The amount which is equal to 150 percent of the export promotion 
expenses, as defined in section 971(d) and paragraph (d) of Sec. 1.971-
1, of the export trade corporation paid or incurred during the taxable 
year which are properly allocable to the receipt or the production of so 
much of its export trade income as constitutes foreign base company 
income for such taxable year;
    (ii) The amount which is equal to 10 percent of the gross receipts 
(other than from commissions, fees, or other compensation for services), 
plus 10 percent of the gross amount upon the basis of which are computed 
commissions, fees, or other compensation for services included in gross 
receipts, of the export trade corporation received or accrued during the 
taxable year from, or in connection with, the sale, installation, 
operation, maintenance, or use of property in respect of which such 
corporation derives export trade income which constitutes foreign base 
company income for such taxable year; or
    (iii) The amount which bears the same ratio to the increase in 
investments in export trade assets, as defined in section 970(c)(2) and 
paragraph (d)(2) of this section, of the export trade corporation for 
its taxable year as the export trade income which constitutes foreign 
base company income of such corporation for such taxable year bears to 
the entire export trade income of the corporation for such year.

Under subdivision (ii) of this subparagraph, in the case of minimum or 
maximum fee arrangements, the determination shall be made on the basis 
of the actual gross amounts with respect to which such fees are paid, 
rather than on the basis of the amounts upon which such minimum or 
maximum fees are computed. All determinations of limitations under this 
subparagraph shall be made on an aggregate basis and not with respect to 
separate items or categories of income described in paragraph (b)(1) of 
Sec. 1.971-1.
    (3) Determination of export promotion expense limitation. For 
purposes of determining the limitation contained in subparagraph (2)(i) 
of this paragraph for any taxable year of the export trade corporation, 
there shall be taken into account with respect to those items or 
categories of export trade income which constitute foreign base company 
income the entire amount of those export promotion expenses which are 
directly related to such items or categories of income and a ratable 
part of any other export promotion expenses which are indirectly related 
to such items or categories of income, except that no export promotion 
expense shall

[[Page 503]]

be allocated to an item or category of income to which it clearly does 
not apply and no deduction allowable to such corporation under section 
882(c) and the regulations thereunder shall be taken into account.
    (4) Application of section 482. The limitations provided in section 
970(a) and subparagraph (2) of this paragraph shall not affect the 
authority of the district director to apply the provisions of section 
482 and the regulations thereunder, relating to allocation of income and 
deductions among taxpayers.
    (5) Illustrations. The application of this paragraph may be 
illustrated by the following examples:

    Example 1. Foreign corporation A is a wholly owned subsidiary of 
domestic corporation M. Both corporations use the calendar year as the 
taxable year. For 1963, A Corporation's subpart F income determined 
under section 952 and the regulations thereunder is $35, the total of 
its gross receipts and gross amounts referred to in subparagraph (2)(ii) 
of this paragraph is $310, its export promotion expenses properly 
allocable to its export trade income which constitutes foreign base 
company income are $18, its increase in investments in export trade 
assets is $32, and its export trade income is $40, of which $30 
constitutes foreign base company income and $10 does not constitute 
foreign base company income. The subpart F income of A Corporation for 
1963 as reduced under section 970(a) is $11, determined as follows:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
(i) Subpart F income....................................             $35
(ii) Less: $30 export trade income which constitutes                    
 foreign base company income, but deduction not to                      
 exceed the smallest of the following limitations                       
 (smallest of (a), (b), or (c)):                                        
    (a) 150 percent of allocable export promotion                       
     expenses referred to in subparagraph (2)(i) of this                
     paragraph (150% of $18)............................     $27        
    (b) 10 percent of gross receipts and gross amounts                  
     referred to in subparagraph (2)(ii) of this                        
     paragraph (10% of $310)............................     $31        
    (c) Amount which bears to the increase in                           
     investments in export trade assets ($32) the same                  
     ratio as the export trade income which constitutes                 
     foreign base company income ($30) bears to total                   
     export trade income ($40) (75% [$30/$40] of $32)...     $24     $24
                                                                 =======
(iii) Subpart F income as reduced under section 970(a)..  ......      11
                                                                        

    Example 2. The facts are the same as in example 1, except that A 
Corporation's export promotion expenses properly allocable to export 
trade income which constitutes foreign base company income are $14 
instead of $18. The applicable limitation on the amount deductible from 
A Corporation's subpart F income for 1963 is $21 (150% of $14) instead 
of $24. The subpart F income as reduced under section 970(a) is $14 ($35 
less $21).
    Example 3. The facts are the same as in example 1, except that the 
total amount of A Corporation's gross receipts and gross amounts 
referred to in subparagraph (2)(ii) of this paragraph is $200 instead of 
$310. The applicable limitation on the amount deductible from A 
Corporation's subpart F income for 1963 is $20 (10 percent of $200) 
instead of $24. The subpart F income as reduced under section 970(a) is 
$15 ($35 less $20).
    Example 4. The facts are the same as in example 1, except that A 
Corporation derives its export trade income which constitutes foreign 
base company income of $30 in a service arrangement with M Corporation 
under which it receives as a fee 5 percent of the gross receipts from M 
Corporation's sales or a minimum fee of $30. Such gross receipts are 
$220. The gross amounts taken into account in determining the limitation 
under subparagraph (2)(ii) of this paragraph are $220. The applicable 
limitation on the amount deductible from A Corporation's subpart F 
income for 1963 is $22 (10 percent of $220) instead of $24. The subpart 
F income as reduced under section 970(a) is $13 ($35 minus $22).
    Example 5. The facts are the same as in example 1, except that A 
Corporation derives its export trade income which constitutes foreign 
base company income of $30 in a service arrangement with M Corporation 
under which it receives as a fee 9 percent of the gross receipts from M 
Corporation's sales or a maximum fee of $30. Such gross receipts are 
$400. In such instance, the limitation under (ii)(b) of example 1 is $40 
(10 percent of $400) instead of $31. The applicable limitation on the 
amount deductible from A Corporation's subpart F income for 1963 is $24, 
the smallest of the three limitations. The subpart F income as reduced 
under section 970(a) is $11 ($35 less $24).

    (c) Withdrawal of previously excluded export trade income--(1) 
Inclusion of withdrawal in income of United States shareholders. If--
    (i) A controlled foreign corporation was an export trade corporation 
for any taxable year,
    (ii) Such corporation in any such taxable year derived subpart F 
income which, under the provisions of section 970(a) and paragraph (b) 
of this section, was reduced, and
    (iii) Such corporation has in a subsequent taxable year a decrease 
in investments in export trade assets,


[[Page 504]]


every person who is a United States shareholder, as defined in section 
951(b), of such corporation on the last day of such subsequent taxable 
year on which such corporation is a controlled foreign corporation shall 
include in his gross income, under section 951(a)(1)(A)(ii) and the 
regulations thereunder as an amount to which section 955 (as in effect 
before the enactment of the Tax Reduction Act of 1975) applies, his pro 
rata share of the amount of such decrease in investments but only to the 
extent that such pro rata share does not exceed the limitations 
determined under subparagraph (2) of this paragraph. A United States 
shareholder's pro rata share of a controlled foreign corporation's 
decrease for any taxable year in investments in export trade assets 
shall be his pro rata share of such corporation's decrease for such year 
determined under section 970(c)(3) and paragraph (d)(3) of this section.
    (2) Limitations applicable in determining amount includible in 
income--(i) General. A United States shareholder's pro rata share of a 
controlled foreign corporation's decrease in investments in export trade 
assets for any taxable year of such corporation shall, for purposes of 
determining an amount to be included in the gross income for any taxable 
year of such shareholder, not exceed the lesser of the limitations 
determined under (a) and (b) of this subdivision:
    (a) Such shareholder's pro rata share of the sum of the controlled 
foreign corporation's earnings and profits (or deficit in earnings and 
profits) for the taxable year, computed as of the close of the taxable 
year without diminution by reason of any distributions made during the 
taxable year, plus his pro rata share of the sum of its earnings and 
profits (or deficits in earnings and profits) accumulated for prior 
taxable years beginning after December 31, 1962, or
    (b)(1) Such shareholder's pro rata share of the sum of the amounts 
by which the subpart F income of such controlled foreign corporation for 
prior taxable years was reduced under section 970(a) and paragraph (b) 
of this section, plus
    (2) Such shareholder's pro rata share of the sum of the amounts 
which were not included in the subpart F income of such controlled 
foreign corporation for such prior taxable years by reason of the 
application of section 972 and Sec. 1.972-1, minus
    (3) Such shareholder's pro rata share of the sum of the amounts 
which were previously included in his gross income for prior taxable 
years under section 951(a)(1)(A)(ii) by reason of the application of 
section 970(b) and this paragraph with respect to such controlled 
foreign corporation.

The net amount determined under (b) of this subdivision with respect to 
any stock owned by the United States shareholder shall be determined 
without taking into account any amount attributable to a period prior to 
the date on which such shareholder acquired such stock. See section 1248 
and the regulations thereunder for rules governing the treatment of gain 
from sales or exchanges of stock in certain foreign corporations.
    (ii) Treatment of earnings and profits. For purposes of determining 
earnings and profits of a controlled foreign corporation under 
subdivision (i) (a) of this subparagraph, such earnings and profits 
shall be considered not to include any amounts which are attributable 
to--
    (a) Amounts which are, or have been, included in the gross income of 
a United States shareholder of such controlled foreign corporation under 
section 951(a) (other than an amount included in the gross income of a 
United States shareholder under section 951(a)(1)(A)(ii) or section 
951(a)(1)(B) for the taxable year) and have not been distributed, or
    (b)(1) Amounts which for the current taxable year, are included in 
the gross income of a United States shareholder of such controlled 
foreign corporation under section 551(b) or would be so included under 
such section but for the fact that such amounts were distributed to such 
shareholder during the taxable year, or
    (2) Amounts which, for any prior taxable year, have been included in 
the

[[Page 505]]

gross income of a United States shareholder of such controlled foreign 
corporation under section 551(b) and have not been distributed.

The rules of this subdivision apply only in determining the limitation 
on a United States shareholder's pro rata share of a controlled foreign 
corporation's decrease in investments in export trade assets. See 
section 959 and the regulations thereunder for limitations on the 
exclusion of previously taxed earnings and profits.
    (iii) Rules of application. The determinations made under 
subdivision (i) of this subparagraph for purposes of determining the 
United States shareholder's pro rata share of a controlled foreign 
corporation's decrease in investments in export trade assets for any 
taxable year shall be made on the basis of the stock such shareholder 
owns, within the meaning of section 958(a) and the regulations 
thereunder, in the controlled foreign corporation on the last day in the 
taxable year on which such corporation is a controlled foreign 
corporation even though such shareholder owned more or less stock in 
such corporation prior to that date. See section 972 and paragraph 
(b)(3) of Sec. 1.972-1 for rules relating to the allocation of a 
decrease in investments in export trade assets of export trade 
corporations in a consolidated chain of such corporations. See section 
951(a)(3) and the regulations thereunder for an additional limitation 
upon the amount of a United States shareholder's pro rata share 
determined under this paragraph.
    (3) Illustrations. The application of this paragraph may be 
illustrated by the following examples:

    Example 1. Foreign corporation A, which has one class of stock 
outstanding, is a wholly owned subsidiary of domestic corporation M 
throughout 1963 and 1964. Both corporations use the calendar year as the 
taxable year. For 1963, A Corporation qualifies as an export trade 
corporation and its subpart F income, determined in accordance with the 
provisions of section 952 and the regulations thereunder, is reduced by 
$20 under the provisions of section 970(a) and paragraph (b) of this 
section. Section 972 is assumed not to apply to A Corporation. For 1964, 
A Corporation has a decrease of $8 in investments in export trade 
assets. For 1963 and 1964, A Corporation has earnings and profits of $30 
(determined under the provisions of subparagraph (2) of this paragraph). 
Corporation M's pro rata share of A Corporation's decrease in 
investments in export trade assets for 1964 which is includible in M 
Corporation's gross income for 1964 under section 951(a)(1)(A)(ii) by 
reason of the application of section 970(b) is $8, determined as 
follows:

(i) Corporation M's pro rata share of A                                 
 Corporation's decrease in investments in export                        
 trade assets for 1964 (100% of $8)................  .....  .....     $8
(ii) Limitation on amount includible in gross                           
 income of M Corporation for 1964 (smaller of (a)                       
 or (b)):                                                               
  (a) Corporation M's pro rata share of A                               
   Corporation's earnings and profits for 1963 and                      
   1964 determined under subparagraph (2) of this                       
   paragraph (100% of $30).........................  .....    $30       
  (b) Corporation M's pro rata share of amounts by                      
   which the subpart F income of A Corporation for                      
   1963 was reduced under section 970(a) (100% of                       
   $20)............................................    $20              
  Plus: Corporation M's pro rata share of amounts                       
   which were not included in subpart F income of A                     
   Corporation for 1963 by reason of the                                
   application of section 972......................      0              
                                                    -------             
      Total........................................     20              
  Less: Corporation M's pro rata share of the sum                       
   of amounts which were previously included in                         
   gross income of M Corporation under section                          
   951(a)(1)(A)(ii) by reason of the application of                     
   section 970(b) with respect to A Corporation....      0     20       
                                                    --------------      
(iii) Corporation M's pro rata share includible in                      
 gross income for 1964 under section                                    
 951(a)(1)(A)(ii) by reason of the application of                       
 section 970(b) (smaller of (i) or (ii))...........  .....  .....      8
                                                                        

    Example 2. Assume the same facts as in example 1, except that on 
February 14, 1965, M Corporation sells 25 percent of its stock in A 
Corporation to N Corporation. Corporation N is a domestic corporation 
which also uses the calendar year as a taxable year. For 1965, A 
Corporation has a decrease of $16 in investments in export trade assets. 
Corporation A's earnings and profits for 1963 and 1964 (determined under 
the provisions of subparagraph (2) of this paragraph) are $22 ($30 minus 
$8). Corporation A's earnings and profits for 1965 are $6 (determined 
under the provisions of subparagraph (2) of this paragraph). For 1965, M 
Corporation's pro rata share of A Corporation's decrease in investments 
in export trade assets which is includible in M Corporation's gross 
income under section 951(a)(1)(A)(ii) is $9, and N Corporation's pro 
rata share includible in gross income under such section is $0, 
determined as follows:

[[Page 506]]



                              M Corporation                             
(i) Corporation M's pro rata share of A                                 
 Corporation's decrease in investments in export                        
 trade assets for 1965 (75% of $16)................  .....  .....    $12
(ii) Limitation on amount includible in gross                           
 income of M Corporation for 1965 (smaller of (a)                       
 or (b)):                                                               
  (a) Corporation M's pro rata share of A                               
   Corporation's earnings and profits for 1963,                         
   1964, and 1965 determined under subparagraph (2)                     
   of this paragraph (75% of $28)..................  .....    $21       
  (b) Corporation M's pro rata share of amounts by                      
   which the subpart F income of A Corporation for                      
   1963 was reduced under section 970(a) (75% of                        
   $20)............................................    $15              
    Plus: Corporation M's pro rata share of amounts                     
     which were not included in subpart F income of                     
     A Corporation for 1963 and 1964 by reason of                       
     the application of section 972................      0              
                                                    -------             
      Total........................................    $15              
  Less: Corporation M's pro rata share of the sum                       
   of amounts which were previously included in                         
   gross income of M Corporation under section                          
   951(a)(1)(A)(ii) by reason of the application of                     
   section 970(b) with respect to A Corporation                         
   (75% of $8).....................................      6      9       
                                                    -------             
(iii) Corporation M's pro rata share includible in                      
 gross income for 1965 under section                                    
 951(a)(1)(A)(ii) by reason of the application of                       
 section 970(b) (smaller of (i) or (ii))...........  .....  .....      9
                                                                        
                              N Corporation                             
                                                                        
(i) Corporation N's pro rata share of A                                 
 Corporation's decrease in investments in export                        
 trade assets for 1965 (25% of $16)................  .....  .....      0
(ii) Limitation on amount includible in gross                           
 income of N Corporation for 1965 (smaller of (a)                       
 or (b)):                                                               
  (a) Corporation N's pro rata share of A                               
   Corporation's earnings and profits for 1963,                         
   1964, and 1965 determined under subparagraph (2)                     
   of this paragraph (25% of $28)..................  .....     07       
  (b) Corporation N's pro rata share of amounts by                      
   which the subpart F income of A Corporation for                      
   1963 was reduced under section 970(a) (amounts                       
   prior to 2/14/65 not being taken into account)..      0              
    Plus: Corporation N's pro rata share of amounts                     
     which were not included in subpart F income of                     
     A Corporation for 1963 and 1964 by reason of                       
     the application of section 972 (amounts prior                      
     to 2/14/65 not being taken into account)......      0              
                                                    -------             
      Total........................................      0              
  Less: Corporation N's pro rata share of the sum                       
   of amounts which were previously included in                         
   gross income of N Corporation under section                          
   951(a)(1)(A)(ii) by reason of the application of                     
   section 970(b) with respect to A Corporation                         
   (amounts prior to 2/14/65 not being taken into                       
   account)........................................      0      0       
(iii) Corporation N's pro rata share includible in                      
 gross income for 1965 under section                                    
 951(a)(1)(A)(ii) by reason of the application of                       
 section 970(b) (smaller of (i) or (ii))...........  .....  .....      0
                                                                        

    (d) Investments in export trade assets--(1) Amount of investments. 
For purposes of sections 970 through 972 and Secs. 1.970-1 to 1.972-1, 
inclusive, export trade assets shall be taken into account on the 
following bases:
    (i) Working capital. Working capital to which section 971(c)(1) 
applies shall be taken into account at the adjusted basis of current 
assets, determined as of the applicable determination date, less any 
current liabilities (except as provided in subdivision (iii) of this 
subparagraph).
    (ii) Other export trade assets. Inventory to which section 971(c)(2) 
applies, facilities to which section 971(c)(3) applies, and evidences of 
indebtedness to which section 971(c)(4) applies, shall be taken into 
account at their adjusted bases as of the applicable determination date, 
reduced by any liabilities (except as provided in subdivision (iii) of 
this subparagraph) to which such property is subject on such date. To be 
taken into account under this subparagraph, a liability must constitute 
a specific charge against the property involved. Thus, a liability 
evidenced by an open account or a liability secured only by the general 
credit of the controlled foreign corporation will not be taken into 
account. On the other hand, if a liability constitutes a specific charge 
against several items of property and cannot definitely be allocated to 
any single item of property, the liability shall be apportioned against 
each of such items of property in that ratio which the adjusted basis of 
such item on the applicable determination date bears to the adjusted 
basis of all such items on such date. A liability in excess of the 
adjusted basis of the property which is subject to such liability will 
not be taken into account for the

[[Page 507]]

purpose of reducing the adjusted basis of other property which is not 
subject to such liability. See paragraph (c)(6) of Sec. 1.971-1 for 
treatment of export trade assets which constitute working capital to 
which section 971(c)(1) applies and which also constitute inventory to 
which section 971(c)(2) applies or evidences of indebtedness to which 
section 971(c)(4) applies.
    (iii) Treatment of certain liabilities. For purposes of subdivisions 
(i) and (ii) of this subparagraph, a current liability, or a specific 
charge created with respect to any item of property, principally for the 
purpose of artificially increasing or decreasing the amount of a 
controlled foreign corporation's investments in export trade assets 
shall be taken into account in such a manner as to properly reflect the 
controlled foreign corporation's investments in export trade assets; 
whether a specific charge or current liability is created principally 
for such purpose will depend upon all the facts and circumstances of 
each case. One of the factors that will be considered in making such a 
determination with respect to a loan is whether the loan is from a 
related person, as defined in section 954(d)(3) and paragraph (e) of 
Sec. 1.954-1.
    (iv) Statement required. If for purposes of this section a United 
States shareholder of a controlled foreign corporation reduces the 
adjusted basis of property which constitutes an export trade asset on 
the ground that such property is subject to a liability, he shall attach 
to his return a statement setting forth the adjusted basis of the 
property before the reduction and the amount and nature of the 
reduction.
    (2) Increase in investments in export trade assets. For purposes of 
section 970(a) and paragraph (b) of this section, the amount of increase 
in investments in export trade assets of a controlled foreign 
corporation for a taxable year shall be, except as provided in 
Sec. 1.970-2, the amount by which--
    (i) The amount of its investments in export trade assets at the 
close of such taxable year, exceeds
    (ii) The amount of its investments in export trade assets at the 
close of the preceding taxable year.
    (3) Decrease in investments in export trade assets. For purposes of 
section 970(b) and paragraph (c) of this section, the amount of the 
decrease in investments in export trade assets of a controlled foreign 
corporation for a taxable year shall be, except as provided in 
Sec. 1.970-2, the amount by which--
    (i) The amount of its investments in export trade assets at the 
close of the preceding taxable year, minus
    (ii) An amount equal to the excess of recognized losses over 
recognized gains on sales, exchanges, involuntary conversions, assets or 
other dispositions, of export trade during the taxable year, exceeds
    (iii) The amount of its investments in export trade assets at the 
close of the taxable year.

For purposes of subdivision (ii) of this subparagraph, recognized losses 
include a write-down of inventory to lower of cost or market in 
accordance with a method of inventory valuation established or adopted 
by or on behalf of such foreign corporation under paragraph (c) of 
Sec. 1.964-1.

[T.D. 6755, 29 FR 12704, Sept. 9, 1964, as amended by T.D. 6795, 30 FR 
947, Jan. 29, 1965; T.D. 6892, 31 FR 11144, Aug. 23, 1966; T.D. 7293, 38 
FR 32802, Nov. 28, 1973; T.D. 7893, 48 FR 22511, May 19, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 1.970-2   Elections as to date of determining investments in export trade assets.

    (a) Nature of elections--(1) In general. In lieu of determining the 
increase under the provisions of paragraph (d)(2) of Sec. 1.970-1, or 
the decrease under the provisions of paragraph (d)(3) of Sec. 1.970-1, 
in a controlled foreign corporation's investments in export trade assets 
for a taxable year in the manner provided in such provisions, a United 
States shareholder of such corporation may elect, under the provisions 
of section 970(c)(4) and this section, to determine such increase or 
decrease in accordance with the provisions of subparagraph (2) of this 
paragraph or, in the case of export trade assets which are facilities 
described in section 971(c)(3), in accordance with the provisions of 
subparagraph (3) of this paragraph. Separate elections may be made under 
subparagraph (2) and/or (3) of this paragraph with respect to each 
controlled foreign corporation with respect to which a

[[Page 508]]

person is a United States shareholder, within the meaning of section 
951(b).
    (2) Election of 75-day rule. A United States shareholder of a 
controlled foreign corporation may elect with respect to a taxable year 
of such corporation to make the determinations under subparagraphs 
(2)(i) and (3)(iii) of paragraph (d) of Sec. 1.970-1 of the amount of 
such corporation's investments in export trade assets as of the 75th day 
after the close of the taxable year referred to in such subparagraphs of 
paragraph (d) of Sec. 1.970-1. The election provided by this 
subparagraph may be made with respect to export trade assets other than 
facilities described in section 971(c)(3) or with respect to export 
trade assets which are facilities or with respect to both types of 
export trade assets (but the election under this paragraph with respect 
to export trade assets which are facilities or with respect to both 
types of export trade assets may be made only if the election provided 
by subparagraph (3) of this paragraph is not made). If the election 
provided by this subparagraph is made, the amount of export trade assets 
with respect to which such election is made at the close of the 
preceding taxable year which is described in subparagraphs (2)(ii) and 
(3)(i) of paragraph (d) of Sec. 1.970-1 shall be the amount of export 
trade assets which was considered by application of the 75-day rule to 
be the amount of export trade assets at the close of such preceding 
taxable year; except that for the first taxable year of the controlled 
foreign corporation for which the 75-day rule is elected the amount of 
investments in export trade assets with respect to which such election 
is made at the close of such preceding year described in subparagraphs 
(2)(ii) and (3)(i) of paragraph (d) of Sec. 1.970-1 shall be the amount 
of investments in export trade assets at the actual close of such 
preceding year. In the case of a taxable year of such corporation 
beginning after December 31, 1962, and before December 31, 1963, the 
amount of investments in export trade assets with respect to which such 
election is made alternatively may be determined by the United States 
shareholder as of the 75th day after the close of the preceding taxable 
year referred to in subparagraphs (2)(ii) and (3)(i) of paragraph (d) of 
Sec. 1.970-1 rather than as of the close of such preceding taxable year.
    (3) Election for export trade assets which are facilities. A United 
States shareholder of a controlled foreign corporation may elect with 
respect to a taxable year of such corporation to make the determinations 
under subparagraphs (2)(i) and (3)(iii) of paragraph (d) of Sec. 1.970-1 
of the amount of such corporation's investments in export trade assets 
which are facilities described in section 971(c)(3) as of the close of 
such corporation's taxable year following the taxable year referred to 
in such subparagraphs of paragraph (d) of Sec. 1.970-1. The election 
provided by this subparagraph may be made only if the United States 
shareholder does not elect the 75-day rule of subparagraph (2) of this 
paragraph with respect to export trade assets which are facilities. If 
the election provided by this subparagraph is made, the amount of 
investments in export trade assets which are facilities at the close of 
the preceding taxable year which is described in subparagraphs (2)(ii) 
and (3)(i) of paragraph (d) of Sec. 1.970-1 shall be the amount of 
export trade assets which are facilities which was considered, by reason 
of the application of the following-year rule provided in this 
subparagraph with respect to such preceding taxable year, to be the 
amount of export trade assets which are facilities at the close of such 
preceding taxable year; except that for the first taxable year of the 
controlled foreign corporation for which such following-year rule is 
elected the amount of investments in export trade assets which are 
facilities at the close of the preceding taxable year described in 
subparagraphs (2)(ii) and (3)(i) of paragraph (d) of Sec. 1.970-1 shall 
be the amount of investments in export trade assets which are facilities 
at the actual close of such preceding taxable year.
    (b) Time and manner of making elections--(1) Without consent. A 
United States shareholder may, with respect to any controlled foreign 
corporation, make one or both of the elections described in paragraph 
(a)(2) or (3) of this section without the consent of the Commissioner by 
filing a statement to

[[Page 509]]

such effect with his return for his taxable year in which or with which 
ends the first taxable year of such corporation in which--
    (i) Such shareholder owns, within the meaning of section 958(a), or 
is considered as owning, by applying the rules of section 958(b), 10 
percent or more of the total combined voting power of all classes of 
stock entitled to vote of such corporation, and
    (ii) Such corporation realizes subpart F income which is reduced 
under section 970(a) and paragraph (b) of Sec. 1.970-1.

The statement shall contain the name and address of the controlled 
foreign corporation, identification of such first taxable year of such 
corporation, and an indication as to which election or elections 
described in paragraph (a) of this section the United States shareholder 
is making. If such return has been filed on or before the 90th day after 
the date these regulations are published in the Federal Register, such 
United States shareholder shall file such statement with the district 
director with which the return was filed on or before such 90th day.
    (2) With consent. A United States shareholder may make one or both 
of the elections described in paragraph (a)(2) or (3) of this section 
with respect to any controlled foreign corporation at any time with the 
consent of the Commissioner. Consent will not be granted unless the 
shareholder and the Commissioner agree to the terms, conditions, and 
adjustments under which the election will be effected. The application 
for consent to elect shall be made by the shareholder's mailing a letter 
for such purpose to the Commissioner of Internal Revenue, Washington, DC 
20224. The application shall be mailed before the close of the first 
taxable year of the controlled foreign corporation with respect to which 
the shareholder desires to determine an exclusion under section 970(a) 
in accordance with one or both of the elections provided in paragraph 
(a) of this section. The application shall include the following 
information:
    (i) The name, address, and taxable year of the United States 
shareholder;
    (ii) The name, address, and taxable year of the controlled foreign 
corporation;
    (iii) A statement indicating which of the elections the shareholder 
desires to make;
    (iv) The amount of the foreign corporation's investments in export 
trade assets (by a category which includes export trade assets other 
than facilities and a category which includes only export trade assets 
which are facilities) at the close of its preceding taxable year;
    (v) The shareholder's pro rata share of the sum of the amounts by 
which the subpart F income of the foreign corporation, for all prior 
taxable years during which such shareholder was a United States 
shareholder of such corporation, was reduced under section 970(a) and 
paragraph (b) of Sec. 1.970-1;
    (vi) The shareholder's pro rata share of the sum of the amounts 
which were not included in the subpart F income of the foreign 
corporation, for all prior taxable years during which such shareholder 
was a United States shareholder of such corporation, by reason of the 
application of section 972 and Sec. 1.972-1; and
    (vii) The shareholder's pro rata share of the sum of the amounts 
which were previously included in his gross income, for all prior 
taxable years during which such shareholder was a United States 
shareholder of such corporation, under section 951(a)(1)(A)(ii) by 
reason of the application of section 970(b) and paragraph (b) of 
Sec. 1.970-1 to the foreign corporation.
    (c) Effect of elections--(1) In general. Except as provided in 
subparagraphs (3) and (4) of this paragraph, an election made under 
paragraph (a) of this section with respect to a controlled foreign 
corporation shall be binding on the United States shareholder and--
    (i) In the case of the election described in paragraph (a)(2) of 
this section, shall apply to all investments in export trade assets with 
respect to which such election is made acquired, or disposed of, by such 
corporation during the 75-day period following its taxable year for 
which subpart F income is first computed under the election and during 
all succeeding corresponding 75-day periods of such corporation, or

[[Page 510]]

    (ii) In the case of the election described in paragraph (a)(3) of 
this section, shall apply to all investments in export trade assets 
which are facilities acquired, or disposed of, by such corporation 
during the taxable year following its taxable year for which subpart F 
income is first computed under the election and during all succeeding 
corresponding taxable years of such corporation.
    (2) Returns. Any return of a United States shareholder required to 
be filed before the completion of a period with respect to which 
determinations are to be made as to a controlled foreign corporation's 
investments in export trade assets for purposes of computing such 
shareholder's taxable income shall be filed on the basis of an estimate 
of the amount of such corporation's investments in export trade assets 
at the close of the period. If the actual amount of such investments is 
not the same as the amount of the estimate, the shareholder shall 
immediately notify the Commissioner. The Commissioner will thereupon 
redetermine the amount of such shareholder's tax for the year or years 
with respect to which the incorrect amount was taken into account. The 
amount of tax, if any, due upon such redetermination shall be paid by 
the shareholder upon notice and demand by the district director. The 
amount of tax, if any, shown by such redetermination to have been 
overpaid shall be credited or refunded to the shareholder in accordance 
with the provisions of sections 6402 and 6511 and the regulations 
thereunder.
    (3) Revocation--(i) In general--(a) Consent required. Upon 
application by the United States shareholder, an election made under 
paragraph (a) of this section may, subject to the approval of the 
Commissioner, be revoked. Approval will not be granted unless the 
shareholder and the Commissioner agree to the terms, conditions, and 
adjustments under which the revocation will be effected.
    (b) Revocation of 75-day rule. In the case of the revocation of an 
election described in paragraph (a)(2) of this section, the change in 
the controlled foreign corporation's investments in export trade assets 
with respect to which such election was made for its first taxable year 
for which subpart F income or a decrease in investments in export trade 
assets is computed without regard to the election previously made shall, 
unless the agreement with the Commissioner provides otherwise, be 
considered to be the amount by which--
    (1) Such corporation's investments in export trade assets with 
respect to which such election was made at the close of such taxable 
year exceeds or, if applicable, is exceeded by
    (2) Such corporation's investments in export trade assets with 
respect to which such election was made at the close of the 75th day 
after the close of the preceding taxable year of such corporation.
    (c) Revocation of following-year rule. In the case of the revocation 
of an election described in paragraph (a)(3) of this section, the change 
in the controlled foreign corporation's investments in export trade 
assets which are facilities for its first taxable year for which subpart 
F income or a decrease in investments in export trade assets is computed 
without regard to the election previously made shall, unless the 
agreement with the Commissioner provides otherwise, be considered to be 
zero.
    (ii) Time and manner of applying for consent to revocation--(a) 
Application to Commissioner. The application for consent to revocation 
of an election shall be made by the United States shareholder's mailing 
a letter for such purpose to the Commissioner of Internal Revenue, 
Washington, DC, 20224. The application shall be mailed before the close 
of the first taxable year of the controlled foreign corporation with 
respect to which the shareholder desires to determine an exclusion under 
section 970(a) or an inclusion under section 970(b) without regard to 
such election.
    (b) Information required. The application shall include the 
following information:
    (1) The name, address, and taxable year of the United States 
shareholder;
    (2) The name, address, and taxable year of the controlled foreign 
corporation;

[[Page 511]]

    (3) A statement indicating the election the shareholder desires to 
revoke under this subparagraph;
    (4) The information required under subdivisions (iv) through (vii) 
of paragraph (b)(2) of this section;
    (5) In the case of an application for consent to revocation of an 
election made under paragraph (a)(2) of this section, the amount of the 
foreign corporation's investments in export trade assets with respect to 
which such election was made at the close of the 75th day after the 
close of such corporation's taxable year immediately preceding the 
taxable year of such corporation; and
    (6) The reasons for the request for consent to revocation.
    (4) Transfer of stock--(i) Election of 75-day rule in force. (a) If 
during any taxable year of a controlled foreign corporation--
    (1) A United States shareholder who has made the election described 
in paragraph (a)(2) of this section with respect to such corporation 
sells, exchanges, or otherwise disposes of all or part of his stock in 
such corporation, and
    (2) The foreign corporation is a controlled foreign corporation 
immediately after the sale, exchange, or other disposition,

then, with respect to the stock so sold, exchanged, or disposed of, the 
successor in interest shall consider the controlled foreign 
corporation's change during the first 75 days of such taxable year in 
investments in export trade assets with respect to which such election 
is made to be zero.
    (b) If the United States shareholder's successor in interest makes 
an election under paragraph (a)(2) of this section in order to determine 
an exclusion under section 970(a) for the taxable year of such 
corporation in which the acquires such stock, the amount of the 
controlled foreign corporation's investments in export trade assets with 
respect to which such election is made at the close of its preceding 
taxable year shall be considered, with respect to the stock so acquired, 
to be the amount of such corporation's investments in export trade 
assets with respect to which such election is made at the close of the 
75th day after the close of such preceding taxable year.
    (c) If the United States shareholder's successor in interest makes 
an election under paragraph (a)(2) of this section in order to determine 
an exclusion under section 970(a) for a taxable year of such corporation 
subsequent to the taxable year in which he acquired the stock, the 
amount of the controlled foreign corporation's investments in export 
trade assets with respect to which such election is made at the close of 
its taxable year immediately preceding such subsequent taxable year 
shall, with respect to the stock so acquired, be the amount of such 
corporation's investments in such assets at the actual close of such 
preceding taxable year.
    (ii) Election in force with respect to export trade assets which are 
facilities--(a) If during any taxable year of a controlled foreign 
corporation--
    (1) A United States shareholder who has made the election described 
in paragraph (a)(3) of this section with respect to such corporation 
sells, exchanges, or otherwise disposes of all or part of his stock in 
such corporation, and
    (2) The foreign corporation is a controlled foreign corporation 
immediately after the sale, exchange or other disposition,

then, with respect to the stock so sold, exchanged, or disposed of, the 
successor in interest shall consider the controlled foreign 
corporation's change for such taxable year in investments in export 
trade assets which are facilities to be zero.
    (b) If the United States shareholder's successor in interest makes 
an election under paragraph (a)(3) of this section in order to determine 
an exclusion under section 970(a) for the taxable year of such 
corporation in which he acquires such stock, the amount of the 
controlled foreign corporation's investments in export trade assets 
which are facilities at the close of its preceding taxable year shall be 
considered, with respect to the stock so acquired, to be the amount of 
such corporation's investments in export trade assets which are 
facilities at the close of the taxable year in which such stock is 
acquired.
    (c) If the United States shareholder's successor in interest makes 
an election

[[Page 512]]

under paragraph (a)(3) of this section in order to determine an 
exclusion under section 970(a) for a taxable year of such corporation 
subsequent to the taxable year in which he acquired the stock, the 
amount of the controlled foreign corporation's investments in export 
trade assets which are facilities at the close of its taxable year 
immediately preceding such subsequent taxable year shall, with respect 
to the stock so acquired, be the amount of such corporation's 
investments in such assets at the actual close of such preceding taxable 
year.
    (d) Illustrations. The principles contained in this section are 
illustrated by the examples set forth in paragraph (d) of Sec. 1.955.3.

[T.D. 6755, 29 FR 12707, Sept. 9, 1964]


<R05>
Sec. 1.970-3   Effective date of subpart G.

    Sections 970 through 972 and Secs. 1.970-1 through 1.972-1 shall 
apply with respect to taxable years of foreign corporations beginning 
after December 31, 1962, and to taxable years of United States 
shareholders within which or with which such taxable years of such 
corporations end.

[T.D. 6755, 29 FR 12709, Sept. 9, 1964]


<R05>
Sec. 1.971-1   Definitions with respect to export trade corporations.

    (a) Export trade corporations--(1) In general. For purposes of 
sections 970 through 972 and Secs. 1.970-1 to 1.972-1, inclusive, the 
term ``export trade corporation'' means a controlled foreign corporation 
which for the period specified in subparagraph (2) of this paragraph 
satisfies the conditions specified in subparagraph (3) of this 
paragraph. However, no controlled foreign corporation may qualify as an 
export trade corporation for any taxable year beginning after October 
31, 1971, unless it qualified as an export trade corporation for any 
taxable year beginning before such date. In addition, if a corporation 
fails to qualify as an export trade corporation for a period of any 3 
consecutive taxable years beginning after October 31, 1971, then for any 
taxable year beginning after such 3-year period, such corporation shall 
not be included within the term ``export trade corporation''.
    (2) Three-year period. The period referred to in subparagraph (1) of 
this paragraph is the 3-year period ending with the close of the 
controlled foreign corporation's current taxable year, or such part of 
such 3-year period as occurs on and after the beginning of the 
corporation's first taxable year beginning after December 31, 1962, 
whichever period is shorter.
    (3) Gross income requirements. The conditions referred to in 
subparagraph (1) of this paragraph are that the controlled foreign 
corporation derives--
    (i) 90 percent or more of its gross income from sources without the 
United States, and
    (ii)(a) 75 percent of more of its gross income from transactions, 
activities, or interest described in section 971(b) and paragraph (b) of 
this section, or
    (b) 50 percent or more of its gross income from transactions, 
activities, or interest described in section 971(b) and paragraph (b) of 
this section in respect of agricultural products grown in the United 
States.
    (4) Determination of sources of gross income. The sources of gross 
income of a controlled foreign corporation shall be determined for 
purposes of subparagraph (3)(i) of this paragraph in accordance with the 
rules for determining sources of gross income set forth in sections 861 
through 864 and the regulations thereunder.
    (b) Export trade income--(1) General rule. For purposes of sections 
970 through 972 and Secs. 1.970-1 to 1.972-1, inclusive, the term 
``export trade income'' means the gross export trade income of a 
controlled foreign corporation derived from transactions, activities, or 
interest described in subdivisions (i) through (vii) of this 
subparagraph, less deductions allowed under subdivision (viii) of this 
subparagraph.
    (i) Sale of export property. Gross export trade income of a 
controlled foreign corporation includes gross income it derives from the 
sale of export property (as defined in paragraph (e) of this section) 
which it purchases, if the sale is made to an unrelated person for use, 
consumption, or disposition outside the United States. See section 
971(b)(1). As a general rule, property will be presumed to have been 
sold for use, consumption, or disposition in the country

[[Page 513]]

of destination of the sale. However, if at the time of the sale the 
controlled foreign corporation knows, or should have known from the 
facts and circumstances surrounding the sales transaction, that the 
property will probably be used, consumed, or disposed of in the United 
States, such property will be presumed to have been sold for use, 
consumption, or disposition in the United States unless the controlled 
foreign corporation establishes that such property was used, consumed, 
or disposed of outside the United States. For purposes of this 
subdivision, export property must be sold by a controlled foreign 
corporation in essentially the same form in which such property is 
purchased. Whether export property sold is in essentially the same form 
in which such property is purchased shall be determined on the basis of 
all the facts and circumstances in each case. Storage, handling, 
transportation, packaging, or servicing of property will be considered 
not to alter the form in which property is purchased. However, 
manufacture or production, within the meaning of paragraph (a)(4) of 
Sec. 1.954-3, will be considered to alter the form in which property is 
purchased and no part of the gross income from the sale of such property 
will be treated as export trade income. The application of this 
subdivision may be illustrated by the following example:

    Example. Controlled foreign corporation A, incorporated under the 
laws of foreign country Y, purchases articles manufactured in the United 
States from domestic corporation M and sells them in the form in which 
purchased to foreign corporation B, unrelated to A Corporation, for use 
in foreign countries, X, Y, and Z. The gross income of A Corporation 
from the purchase and sale of the articles constitutes gross export 
trade income.

    (ii) Commissions and other income derived in connection with the 
sale of export property. Gross export trade income of a controlled 
foreign corporation includes gross commissions, fees, compensation, or 
other income derived by such corporation from the performance for any 
person of commercial, industrial, financial, technical, scientific, 
managerial, engineering, architectural, skilled, or other services in 
respect of a sale by such corporation in a transaction described in 
subdivision (i) of this subparagraph or in respect of the sale by any 
other person of export property to a person unrelated to the controlled 
foreign corporation for use, consumption, or disposition outside the 
United States. Such gross export trade income includes payments received 
for surveys made prior to, and in connection with, the sale of such 
export property (whether or not such sales are ultimately consummated). 
See section 971(b)(1). The term ``any person'' or ``any other person'' 
as used in this subdivision includes a related person as defined in 
section 954(d)(3) and paragraph (e) of Sec. 1.954-1. The application of 
this subdivision may be illustrated by the following examples:

    Example 1. Controlled foreign corporation A, incorporated under the 
laws of foreign country X, receives from M Corporation a commission 
equal to 6 percent of the gross selling price of all personal property 
shipped by M Corporation as a result of services performed by A 
Corporation in soliciting orders in foreign countries X, Y, and Z. In 
fulfillment of such orders, M Corporation ships products manufactured by 
it in the United States. Corporation A does not assume title to the 
property sold. Gross commissions received by A Corporation from M 
Corporation in connection with the sale of such property to persons 
unrelated to A Corporation for use, consumption, or disposition outside 
the United States constitute gross export trade income.
    Example 2. Foreign corporation B, incorporated under the laws of 
foreign country X, is a wholly owned subsidiary of domestic corporation 
N. Corporation N, is engaged in the business of manufacturing heavy duty 
electrical equipment in the United States. By contract, N Corporation 
engages B Corporation for the purpose of conducting engineering, 
technical, and financial studies required by N Corporation in the 
preparation of bids to supply foreign country Y with electrical 
equipment for a construction project to be undertaken by such country. 
Corporation N pays B Corporation a fee for the services, all of which 
are performed in country Y, which is based upon the number of hours of 
work performed without regard to whether a sale is ultimately 
consummated. Corporation N does not receive a contract from country Y on 
its bid to supply equipment. Income derived by B Corporation from 
performance of the service contract constitutes gross export trade 
income.

    (iii) Commissions and other income derived in connection with the 
installation or maintenance of export property. Gross

[[Page 514]]

export trade income of a controlled foreign corporation includes gross 
commissions, fees, compensation, or other income derived by such 
corporation from the performance for any person of commercial, 
industrial, financial, technical, scientific, managerial, engineering, 
architectural, skilled, or other services in respect of the installation 
or maintenance of export property which has been sold by such 
corporation in a transaction described in subdivision (i) of this 
subparagraph or by any other person to a person unrelated to the 
controlled foreign corporation for use, consumption, or disposition 
outside the United States. See section 971(b)(1). The term ``any 
person'' or ``any other person'' as used in this subdivision includes a 
related person as defined in section 954(d)(3) and paragraph (e) of 
Sec. 1.954-1.
    (iv) Commissions and other income derived in connection with the use 
of patents, copyrights, and other like property. Gross export trade 
income of a controlled foreign corporation includes gross commissions, 
fees, compensation, or other income derived by such corporation from the 
performance for any person of commercial, industrial, financial, 
technical, scientific, managerial, engineering, architectural, skilled, 
or other services in connection with the use outside of the United 
States by an unrelated person of patents, copyrights, secret processes 
and formulas, goodwill, trademarks, trade brands, franchises, and other 
like property, including gross income derived from obtaining licensees 
for patents, but only if the patent, copyright, or other like property 
is acquired, or developed, and owned by the manufacturer, producer, 
grower, or extractor of any export property, in respect of which the 
controlled foreign corporation also derives gross export trade income 
within the meaning of subdivision (i), (ii), or (iii) of this 
subparagraph. See section 971(b)(2). The application of this subdivision 
may be illustrated by the following example:

    Example. Foreign corporation A incorporated under the laws of 
foreign country X, is a wholly owned subsidiary of domestic corporation 
M. Corporation M, the owner of a patent registered in foreign country X, 
grants B Corporation, a corporation unrelated to A Corporation, the 
right to use such patent in foreign country Y in exchange for payment of 
a royalty. By a separate contract with B Corporation, A Corporation 
agrees for a gross fee of $100,000 to furnish, by maintaining a staff of 
technical representatives at the offices of B Corporation, technical 
services to B Corporation in connection with B Corporation's use of the 
patent. Corporation A also derives export trade income from the sale of 
export property which it purchases from M Corporation, the manufacturer 
of such property, and sells to C Corporation, an unrelated person, for 
use in country Y by C Corporation. The gross fee of $100,000 received by 
A Corporation for the furnishing of technical services in connection 
with B Corporation's use of M Corporation's patent constitutes gross 
export trade income since the service for which the fee is paid is 
performed in connection with the use outside the United States by an 
unrelated person (B Corporation) of a patent owned by a manufacturer (M 
Corporation) of export property in respect of which the controlled 
foreign corporation (A Corporation) derives gross export trade income 
from the sale to an unrelated person (C Corporation) for use outside the 
United States of export property purchased by it from the manufacturer 
(M Corporation).

    (v) Income attributable to use of export property by an unrelated 
person. Gross export trade income of a controlled foreign corporation 
includes gross commissions, fees, rents, compensation, or other income 
which is received by such corporation from an unrelated person and is 
attributable to the use of export property by such unrelated person. See 
section 971(b)(3). The application of this subdivision may be 
illustrated by the following example:

    Example. Foreign corporation A, incorporated under the laws of 
foreign country X, is a wholly owned subsidiary of domestic corporation 
M. Corporation A acquires by purchase bottling machines manufactured in 
the United States and leases the machines to B Corporation, a 
corporation unrelated to A Corporation, for use by B Corporation in 
foreign country Y. Gross rental income of A Corporation from the lease 
of the machines to B Corporation constitutes gross export trade income.

    (vi) Income attributable to the use of export property in the 
rendition of technical, scientific, or engineering services--(a) 
General. Gross export trade income

[[Page 515]]

of a controlled foreign corporation includes gross commissions, fees, 
compensation, or other income which is received by such corporation from 
an unrelated person and is attributable to the use of export property in 
the performance of technical, scientific, or engineering services to 
such unrelated person. See section 971(b)(3).
    (b) Rule of apportionment. If a commission, fee, or other income 
received by a controlled foreign corporation from an unrelated person 
under a contract or arrangement for the performance of technical, 
scientific, or engineering services is not solely attributable to the 
use of export property in the performance of such services and the 
amount of the gross income attributable to such use of export property 
cannot be established by reference to transactions between other 
unrelated persons, such gross income shall be an amount which bears the 
same ratio to total gross income from the contract or arrangement as the 
cost of the export property consumed in the performance of such 
services, including a reasonable allowance for depreciation with respect 
to the export property so used, bears to the total costs and expenses 
attributable to the production of income under the contract or 
arrangement.
    (c) Illustration. The application of this subdivision may be 
illustrated by the following example:

    Example. Foreign corporation A, incorporated under the laws of 
foreign country X, is a wholly owned subsidiary of domestic corporation 
M. Corporation A is engaged in the seismograph service business in 
foreign country X. In an effort to establish the probable existence of 
oil in a concession area it owns in foreign country Y, B Corporation 
which is unrelated to A Corporation enters into a contract with A 
Corporation whereby A Corporation is required to make seismographic 
tests of the area in country Y for a fixed fee of $100,000. In 
performance of the contract, A Corporation hires a skilled crew to carry 
out the contract and utilizes equipment and supplies (for example, 
trucks, seismographic equipment, etc.) which constitute export property. 
Corporation A cannot establish by reference to transactions between 
other unrelated persons, the income attributable to the use of the 
export property in the performance of the contract. Corporation A's 
total costs and expenses (for example, salaries of the crew, 
administrative expenses, all supplies, total depreciation on property 
used in performance of the contract, etc.) incurred in performance of 
the contract are $80,000. The cost of export property consumed in 
performance of the contract (for example, dynamite, motor oil, and other 
supplies which were produced in the United States, reasonable 
depreciation on trucks and seismographic equipment manufactured in the 
United States and used in performance of the contract, etc.) is $30,000. 
Corporation A's gross export trade income from the contract is $37,500, 
that is, the amount which bears the same ratio to total gross income 
from the contract ($100,000) as the cost of the export property consumed 
in the rendition of the services ($30,000) bears to total costs and 
expenses attributable to the contract ($80,000).

    (vii) Interest from export trade assets. Gross export trade income 
of a controlled foreign corporation includes interest derived by it from 
export trade assets described in section 971(c)(4) and paragraph (c)(5) 
of this section. See section 971(b)(4).
    (viii) Deductions to be taken into account. Export trade income of a 
controlled foreign corporation for any taxable year shall be the amount 
determined by deducting from the items or categories of gross income 
described in subdivisions (i) through (vii) of this subparagraph the 
entire amount of those expenses, taxes, and other deductions properly 
allocable to such items or categories of income. For purposes of this 
section, expenses, taxes, and other deductions shall first be allocated 
to items or categories of gross income to which they directly relate; 
then, expenses, taxes, and other deductions which cannot definitely be 
allocated to some item or category of gross income shall be ratably 
apportioned among all items or categories of gross income, except that 
no expense, tax, or other deduction shall be allocated to an item or 
category of income to which it clearly does not apply and no deduction 
allowable to such controlled foreign corporation under section 882(c) 
and the regulations thereunder shall be taken into account.
    (2) Cross reference. For rules governing the determination of gross 
income and taxable income of a foreign corporation, see Sec. 1.952-2.
    (c) Export trade assets--(1) In general. For purposes of sections 
970 through 972

[[Page 516]]

and Secs. 1.970-1 to 1.972-1, inclusive, the term ``export trade 
assets'' means--
    (i) Working capital reasonably necessary for the production of 
export trade income,
    (ii) Inventory of export property held for use, consumption, or 
disposition outside the United States,
    (iii) Facilities located outside the United States for the storage, 
handling, transportation, packaging, servicing, sale, or distribution of 
export property, and
    (iv) Evidences of indebtedness executed by unrelated persons in 
connection with payment for purchases of export property for use, 
consumption, or disposition outside the United States, or in connection 
with the payment for services described in section 971(b)(2) or (3) and 
paragraph (b)(1)(iv), (v), or (vi) of this section.
    (2) Working capital. For purposes of subparagraph (1)(i) of this 
paragraph, working capital of a controlled foreign corporation is the 
excess of its current assets over its current liabilities. Liabilities 
maturing in one year or less shall be considered current liabilities. A 
determination of the amount of working capital of a controlled foreign 
corporation which is reasonably necessary for the production of export 
trade income will depend upon the nature and volume of the activities of 
the controlled foreign corporation which produce export trade income as 
they exist on the applicable determination date. In determining working 
capital which is reasonably necessary for the production of export trade 
income, the anticipated future needs of the business will be taken into 
account to the extent that such needs relate to the year of the 
controlled foreign corporation following the applicable determination 
date; anticipated future needs relating to a later period will not be 
taken into account unless it is clearly established that such needs are 
reasonably related to the production of export trade income as of the 
applicable determination date.
    (3) Inventory of export property. For purposes of subparagraph 
(1)(ii) of this paragraph, the inclusion of items in inventory shall be 
determined in accordance with rules applicable to domestic corporations. 
See Secs. 1.471-1 through 1.471-9. Inventory of export property of a 
controlled foreign corporation includes export property held for use, 
consumption, or disposition outside the United States regardless of 
where it is located on the applicable determination date. Thus, such 
property may be physically located in the United States on such date. 
However, for property physically located in the United States to 
constitute export property, it must have been acquired by the controlled 
foreign corporation with a clear intent that it would dispose of the 
property for use, consumption, or disposition outside the United States. 
As a general rule, if during the year following the applicable 
determination date export property which was physically located in the 
United States on such date is actually exported for use, consumption, or 
disposition outside the United States, such property will be deemed held 
for such purpose on the applicable determination date. On the other 
hand, the indefinite warehousing of export property in the United States 
by the controlled foreign corporation, or the subsequent sale of export 
property by such corporation for use, consumption, or disposition in the 
United States, will evidence a lack of intent by such corporation on the 
applicable determination date to hold such property for use, 
consumption, or disposition outside the United States.
    (4) Facilities located outside the United States--(i) In general. 
For purposes of subparagraph (1)(iii) of this paragraph, a facility, as 
defined in subdivision (ii)(a) of this subparagraph, will be considered 
an export trade asset only--
    (a) If such facility is located outside the United States, and
    (b) To the extent that such facility is used, within the meaning of 
subdivision (ii)(c) of this subparagraph, by the controlled foreign 
corporation for the storage, handling, transportation, packaging, 
servicing, sale, or distribution of export property in essentially the 
same form in which such property is acquired by such corporation.

Thus, a facility in which property is manufactured or produced, even 
though export property is used or consumed in the production or becomes 
a component part of the manufactured

[[Page 517]]

article, will not qualify as an export trade asset.
    (ii) Special rules--(a) Facility defined. For purposes of 
subdivision (i) of this subparagraph, the term ``facility'' includes any 
asset or group of assets used for the storage, handling, transportation, 
packaging, servicing, sale, or distribution of export property. Thus, 
such term includes warehouse, storage, or sales facilities (for example, 
sales office equipment), transportation equipment (for example, motor 
trucks, vessels, etc.), and machinery and equipment (for example, 
packaging equipment, servicing equipment, cranes, forklift trucks used 
in warehouses, etc.).
    (b) Determination of location of transportation facilities. A 
transportation facility shall be considered to be located outside the 
United States for purposes of subdivision (i)(a) of this subparagraph if 
such property is predominantly located outside the United States. As a 
general rule, on an applicable determination date a transportation 
facility will be considered to be predominantly located outside the 
United States if 70 percent or more of the miles traversed (during the 
12-month period immediately preceding such determination date or for 
such part of such period as such facility is owned by the controlled 
foreign corporation) in the use of such facility are traversed outside 
the United States or if such facility is located outside the United 
States at least 70 percent of the time during such period or such part 
thereof.
    (c) Determination of use. For purposes of subdivision (i)(b) of this 
subparagraph, the extent to which a facility is used in carrying on the 
activities described in such subdivision depends on the use made of the 
facility for the 12-month period immediately preceding the applicable 
determination date or for such part of such period as such facility is 
owned by the controlled foreign corporation. The method of measuring 
such use will depend upon the facts and circumstances in each case. 
However, such determinations of use will generally be made for a 
facility as a whole and not on the basis of individual items used in the 
operation of a facility. Thus, a determination as to the use of a 
warehouse facility will generally be made with respect to the entire 
facility and not separately for the items used in such warehouse, such 
as forklift trucks, storage bins, etc.
    (5) Evidences of indebtedness. For purposes of subparagraph (1)(iv) 
of this paragraph, the term ``evidence of indebtedness'' shall mean a 
note, installment sales contract, a time bill of exchange evidencing a 
sale on credit, or similar written instrument executed by an unrelated 
person which evidences the obligation of an unrelated person to pay for 
export property which an unrelated person purchases for use, 
consumption, or disposition outside the United States or to pay for 
services described in section 971(b)(2) or (3) and paragraph (b)(1)(iv), 
(v), or (vi) of this section which are performed for an unrelated 
person. Receivables which arise out of the delivery of export property, 
or the performance of services, which are evidenced by invoices, bills 
of lading, bills of exchange which do not evidence a sale on credit, 
sales slips, and similar documents created by the unilateral act of a 
creditor shall not be considered evidences of indebtedness for purposes 
of section 971(c)(4).
    (6) Duplication of treatment and priority of application. No asset 
which constitutes an export trade asset shall be taken into account more 
than once in determining the investments in export trade assets of a 
controlled foreign corporation. Assets which constitute working capital 
and also constitute inventory to which section 971(c)(2) applies or 
evidences of indebtedness to which section 971(c)(4) applies shall be 
taken into account in determining whether the amount of working capital 
of the controlled foreign corporation is reasonably necessary for the 
production of export trade income. However, to the extent that the 
amount of inventory to which section 971(c)(2) applies or evidences of 
indebtedness to which section 971(c)(4) applies is not included in 
working capital to which section 971(c)(1) applies on the ground that 
such amount is not reasonably necessary for the production of export 
trade income, the amount shall be included under section 971(c)(2) or

[[Page 518]]

971(c)(4), as the case may be, in a controlled foreign corporation's 
investments in export trade assets.
    (d) Export promotion expenses--(1) In general. For purposes of 
sections 970 through 972 and Secs. 1.970-1 to 1.972-1, inclusive, the 
term ``export promotion expenses'' means, subject to the provisions of 
subparagraph (2) of this paragraph, all the ordinary and necessary 
expenses paid or incurred during the taxable year by the controlled 
foreign corporation which are reasonably allocable to the receipt or 
production of export trade income including--
    (i) A reasonable allowance for salaries or other compensation for 
personal services actually rendered for such purpose,
    (ii) Rentals or other payments for the use of property actually used 
for such purpose, and
    (iii) A reasonable allowance for the exhaustion, wear and tear, or 
obsolescence of property actually used for such purpose.

In determining for purposes of this subparagraph whether expenses are 
reasonably allocable to the receipt or production of export trade 
income, consideration shall be given to the facts and circumstances of 
each case. As a general rule, if export trade income results from the 
sale of export property, export promotion expenses allocable to such 
income shall include warehousing, advertising, selling, billing, 
collection, other administrative, and similar costs properly allocable 
to the marketing activity, but shall not include cost of goods sold, 
income or similar tax, any expense which does not advance the 
distribution or sale of export property for use, consumption, or 
disposition outside the United States, or any expense for which the 
controlled foreign corporation is reimbursed. If export trade income 
results from the rental of export property, export promotion expenses 
allocable to such income shall include a reasonable allowance for 
depreciation and servicing of such property, and the administrative and 
similar costs properly allocable to the rental activity. If export trade 
income results from the performance of services, export promotion 
expenses shall include a reasonable allowance for compensation of the 
persons performing services for the controlled foreign corporation in 
the execution of the service contract or arrangement and administrative 
expenses reasonably allocable to the service activity. In no case shall 
income taxes be included in export promotion expenses.
    (2) Expenses incurred within the United States. No expense incurred 
within the United States shall be treated as an export promotion expense 
for purposes of section 971(d) and subparagraph (1) of this paragraph 
unless at least--
    (i) 90 percent of all salaries and other personal service 
compensation incurred in the receipt or the production of export trade 
income,
    (ii) 90 percent of rents and other payments for the use of property 
used in the receipt or the production of export trade income,
    (iii) 90 percent of the allowances for the exhaustion, wear and 
tear, or obsolescence of property used in the receipt or the production 
of export trade income, and
    (iv) 90 percent of all other ordinary and necessary expenses 
reasonably allocable to the receipt or the production of export trade 
income,

is incurred outside the United States. For this purpose, personal 
service compensation will be considered incurred at the place where the 
service is performed (for example, salaries will be considered incurred 
at the place where the employee works; payments for art work will be 
considered incurred at the place where the art work is prepared, etc.); 
rent, depreciation, and other expenses related to real or personal 
property will be considered incurred at the place where the property is 
located; and expenses for media advertising will be considered incurred 
at the place where the advertising is consumed. For such purpose, 
newspaper or periodical advertising will be considered consumed where 
the newspaper or periodical is principally distributed, and television 
and radio advertising will be considered consumed at the place where the 
audience is primarily located. Technicalities of contract or payment, 
for example, the place where a contract is executed or the location of a 
bank account from which payment is made, shall not be determinative of 
the place where an expense is incurred.

[[Page 519]]

    (e) Export property. For purposes of sections 970 through 972 and 
Secs. 1.970-1 to 1.972-1, inclusive, the term ``export property'' means 
property, or any interest in property, which is manufactured, produced, 
grown, or extracted in the United States. Whether property will be 
considered manufactured or produced in the United States will depend on 
the facts and circumstances of each case. As a general rule, if--
    (1) The property sold, serviced, used, or rented by the controlled 
foreign corporation is substantially transformed in the United States 
prior to its export from the United States, or
    (2) The operations conducted in the United States with respect to 
the property sold, serviced, used, or rented by the controlled foreign 
corporation, whether performed in the United States by one person or a 
series of persons in a chain of distribution, are substantial in nature 
and are generally considered to constitute the manufacture or production 
of property,

then the property sold, serviced, used, or rented will be considered to 
have been manufactured or produced in the United States. The rules under 
paragraph (a)(4)(ii) of Sec. 1.954-3, relating to the substantial 
transformation of property, and paragraph (a)(4)(iii) of such section, 
dealing with a substantive test for determining whether property will be 
treated as having been manufactured or produced, shall apply for 
purposes of making determinations under this paragraph.
    (f) Unrelated person. For purposes of sections 970 through 972 and 
Secs. 1.970-1 to 1.972-1, inclusive, the term ``unrelated person'' means 
a person other than a related person as defined in section 954(d)(3) and 
paragraph (e) of Sec. 1.954-1.

[T.D. 6755, 29 FR 12710, Sept. 9, 1964, as amended by T.D. 7293, 38 FR 
32802, Nov. 28, 1973; T.D. 7533, 43 FR 6603, Feb. 15, 1978]


<R05>
Sec. 1.972-1   Consolidation of group of export trade corporations.

    (a) Election to consolidate--(1) In general. One or more United 
States shareholders (as defined in section 951(b)) owning (within the 
meaning of section 958(a)) or who are considered as owning by applying 
the rules of ownership of section 958(b) more than 50 percent of the 
total combined voting power of all classes of stock entitled to vote of 
an export trade corporation, which is the top-tier corporation in a 
chain (within the meaning of subparagraph (2) of this paragraph) of 
export trade corporations, may, subject to the provisions of this 
section, elect to consolidate such chain for purposes of determining--
    (i) The limitations, described in section 970(a) and paragraph 
(b)(2) of Sec. 1.970-1, on the amount by which subpart F income of an 
export trade corporation in such chain shall be reduced as provided in 
section 970(a) and paragraph (b)(1) of Sec. 1.970-1, and
    (ii) The amount includible in gross income of such shareholders 
under section 951(a)(1)(A)(ii) with respect to such a corporation's 
decrease in investments in export trade assets to which section 970(b) 
applies as described in paragraph (c) of Sec. 1.970-1.
    (2) ``Chain'' defined. A chain of export trade corporations shall 
include--
    (i) The top-tier export trade corporation referred to in 
subparagraph (1) of this paragraph which is the first export trade 
corporation in a chain of ownership described in section 958(a);
    (ii) All export trade corporations 80 percent or more of the total 
combined voting power of all classes of stock entitled to vote of which 
is owned directly by such top-tier export trade corporation on the last 
day of its taxable year; and
    (iii) All export trade corporations 80 percent or more of the total 
combined voting power of all classes of stock entitled to vote of which 
is owned directly by the export trade corporations described in 
subdivision (ii) of this subparagraph on the last day of the taxable 
year of the export trade corporation described in subdivision (i) of 
this subparagraph.

For purposes of this section, a reference to a top-tier corporation 
shall mean an export trade corporation described in subdivision (i) of 
this subparagraph, a reference to a second-tier corporation shall mean 
an export trade corporation described in subdivision (ii) of this 
subparagraph, and a reference to a third-tier corporation shall mean an 
export trade corporation described in subdivision (iii) of this 
subparagraph.

[[Page 520]]

    (3) Inclusion requirement. If an election is made by a United States 
shareholder under this paragraph with respect to a chain of export trade 
corporations (as defined in subparagraph (2) of this paragraph), all 
export trade corporations which are included in the chain must be 
included in the consolidation. If such an election is made, the 
determinations under section 970 shall be made on a consolidated basis 
with respect to the entire interest which the electing United States 
shareholder owns in each of the export trade corporations in the chain, 
including any minority interests owned directly or indirectly by such 
shareholder in second-tier and third-tier corporations in the chain. A 
United States shareholder may elect to consolidate his interest in 
export trade corporations in one chain of such corporations without 
electing to consolidate his interest in export trade corporations in 
other chains.
    (4) Conditions for making initial election--(i) Without consent. The 
initial election to consolidate a chain of export trade corporations may 
be made without the consent of the Commissioner only if, immediately 
before the election to consolidate, each of the export trade 
corporations to be included in the consolidation is using the same 
taxable year and has the same elections under section 970(c)(4) and 
Sec. 1.970-2 in force, or not in force, as the case may be. The election 
shall be made by the electing shareholder or shareholders with respect 
to the taxable year in which or with which ends the first taxable year 
of the top-tier corporation to which the election to consolidate applies 
and at the time of filing such shareholders' returns for such taxable 
year or within 90 days after final regulations under this section are 
published in the Federal Register, whichever date occurs later. Each 
United States shareholder making such an election shall attach to his 
return a statement showing:
    (a) The name, address, and taxable year of each export trade 
corporation in the chain of such corporations for which an election is 
made,
    (b) The amount and percentage of each class of stock owned by such 
shareholder (within the meaning of section 958), corporation by 
corporation, in each of such export trade corporations, and
    (c) A list of the names and addresses, and a description of the 
ownership interests, of all other United States shareholders, if any, 
who are making the same election to consolidate and a statement that 
such shareholders are also making the election.
    (ii) With consent. If, immediately before the election to 
consolidate, each of the export trade corporations in a chain of such 
corporations does not use the same taxable year or does not have the 
same elections under section 970(c)(4) and Sec. 1.970-2 in force, or not 
in force, as the case may be, the initial election to consolidate such 
chain may be exercised by the electing shareholder or shareholders only 
with the consent of the Commissioner. Consent will not be granted unless 
each electing United States shareholder and the Commissioner agree to 
the terms, conditions, and adjustments under which such consolidation is 
to be effected and unless, subject to such terms, conditions, and 
adjustments as the Commissioner may prescribe, each of the export trade 
corporations in the chain adopts a common taxable year and has the same 
elections under section 970(c)(4) and Sec. 1.970-2 in force, or not in 
force, as the case may be. The application for consent to consolidate 
shall be made by mailing a letter, signed by each of the electing United 
States shareholders, to the Commissioner of Internal Revenue, 
Washington, DC 20224. The application shall be mailed before the close 
of the first taxable year of the top-tier corporation with respect to 
which the electing shareholder or shareholders desire to make a 
consolidation or before the close of the 90th day after final 
regulations under this section are published in the Federal Register, 
whichever date occurs later, and shall include the statement described 
in subdivision (i) of this subparagraph.
    (5) Effect of election. If an election to consolidate a chain of 
export trade corporations is made for a taxable year of a United States 
shareholder, such election shall, except as provided in subparagraph (6) 
of this paragraph, be binding on such shareholder for such

[[Page 521]]

taxable year and for all succeeding taxable years. If, in a subsequent 
taxable year of the United States shareholder, an export trade 
corporation for the first time qualifies as a second-tier or third-tier 
corporation in such chain on the last day of the taxable year of the 
top-tier corporation which ends in or with the subsequent taxable year 
of such shareholder, the shareholder's interest in such export trade 
corporation shall be included in the consolidation to which the election 
applies, but only if such export trade corporation as of such last day 
uses the same taxable year and has the same elections under section 
970(c)(4) and Sec. 1.970-2 in force, or not in force, as the case may 
be, as such top-tier corporation. The United States shareholder shall, 
with respect to such additional export trade corporation, submit with 
his return for such subsequent taxable year the statement described in 
subparagraph (4)(i) of this paragraph.
    (6) Termination of election. An election under this paragraph to 
consolidate a chain of export trade corporations shall terminate for the 
first taxable year of the foreign corporation which during the period of 
consolidation is a top-tier corporation--
    (i) At the close of which any foreign corporation which was included 
in such consolidation for the preceding taxable year ceases to qualify 
as an export trade corporation or to be eligible under this paragraph 
for inclusion in such chain,
    (ii) At the close of which an export trade corporation for the first 
time qualifies as a second-tier or third-tier corporation in such chain 
but does not as of such close of the year use the same taxable year or 
have the same elections under section 970(c)(4) and Sec. 1.970-2 in 
force, or not in force, as the case may be, as such top-tier 
corporation, or
    (iii)(a) In respect of which the Commissioner, upon application made 
by a United States shareholder who made the election to consolidate, or 
his successor in interest, consents to a termination of the election. 
Approval will not be granted unless the United States shareholder and 
the Commissioner agree to the terms, conditions, and adjustments under 
which the termination will be effected.
    (b) The application for consent to termination shall be made by the 
United States shareholder's mailing a letter for such purpose to the 
Commissioner of Internal Revenue, Washington, DC 20224. The application 
shall be mailed before the close of the taxable year of the foreign 
corporations with respect to which the shareholder desires to terminate 
the consolidation and shall include the following information:
    (1) The name, address, and taxable year of each export trade 
corporation in the chain of such corporations for which the election was 
made,
    (2) The amount and percentage of each class of stock owned by such 
shareholder (within the meaning of section 958), corporation by 
corporation, in each of such export trade corporations, and
    (3) A list of the names and addresses, and a description of the 
ownership interests, of all other United States shareholders, if any, 
who participated in making the election with such United States 
shareholder, or their successors in interest, and a statement whether 
such other persons are or are not terminating the election.
    (7) Election subsequent to initial election. If a United States 
shareholder elects under subparagraph (4) of this paragraph to 
consolidate his interest in a chain of export trade corporations and the 
election to consolidate such corporations terminates under the 
provisions of subparagraph (6) of this paragraph, such shareholder may 
not thereafter elect under this section to consolidate his interest in 
any corporation which was in that chain of export trade corporations 
unless he receives the consent of the Commissioner to do so. Application 
to obtain such consent of the Commissioner shall be made by a letter 
mailed to the Commissioner of Internal Revenue, Washington, DC, 20224, 
before the close of the first taxable year of the top-tier corporation 
of the chain of export trade corporations in which the election to 
include such interest is to apply. Such application for consent shall 
include a statement showing:
    (i) With respect to such chain, the information required to be shown 
in the

[[Page 522]]

statement described in subparagraph (4)(i) of this paragraph, and
    (ii) The United States shareholder's interest in such chain which 
was previously included in a consolidation, the taxable years of such 
previous consolidation, and the manner in which such previous 
consolidation was terminated.
    (8) Illustration. The application of this paragraph may be 
illustrated by the following example:

    Example. Domestic corporation M owns 60 percent of the only class of 
stock of foreign corporation A, and 100 percent of the only class of 
stock of foreign corporation F, respectively. Corporation A owns 80 
percent of the only class of stock of foreign corporations B and C, 
respectively. Corporation M also owns 20 percent of the stock of B 
Corporation. Corporation B owns 80 percent of the only class of stock of 
foreign corporation D. Corporations B and C each own 50 percent of the 
only class of stock of foreign corporation E. Corporation F owns 100 
percent of the only class of stock of foreign corporation G, which owns 
100 percent of the only class of stock of foreign corporation H. 
Corporation F also owns 20 percent of the stock of C Corporation. 
Domestic corporations N and R own 30 percent and 10 percent, 
respectively, of the stock of A Corporation. All corporations use the 
calendar year as a taxable year, and all foreign corporations qualify as 
export trade corporations for 1963. Corporation M may elect for 1963 to 
consolidate its interest in the chain (the ``A'' chain) of export trade 
corporations which includes corporations A, B, C, D, and E; and 
Corporation M need not, but may, elect to consolidate its interest in 
the chain (the ``F'' chain) of export trade corporations which includes 
corporations F, G, and H. Consolidation of M Corporation's interest in 
the ``A'' chain with its interest in the ``F'' chain is not permitted. 
If M Corporation elects to consolidate the ``A'' chain, M Corporation 
must include in the consolidation its 20 percent directly owned interest 
in B Corporation and its 20 percent indirectly owned (through F 
Corporation) interest in C Corporation. Either N Corporation or R 
Corporation, or both, may join M Corporation in electing to consolidate 
their interests in the ``A'' chain. However, neither N Corporation nor R 
Corporation may elect to consolidate the ``A'' chain unless M 
Corporation also agrees to so elect, because corporations N and R, 
neither jointly nor separately, own more than 50 percent of the total 
combined voting power of all classes of stock entitled to vote of A 
Corporation. If corporations M, N, and R elect to consolidate the ``A'' 
chain, the determinations specified in subparagraph (1) of this 
paragraph will be made on a consolidated basis with respect to such 
corporations' respective interest in the chain as shown in the following 
tabulation:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                               D        
                                               A %  B %  C %   %    E % 
------------------------------------------------------------------------
M Corporation's interest:                                               
  Direct interest............................   60                      
  (60% x 80%)+20% direct interest............        68                 
  (60% x 80%)+20% indirect interest..........             68            
  (68% x 80%)................................                 54.       
                                                              4         
                                                                        
  (68% x 50%)+(68% x 50%)....................                         68
N Corporation's interest:                                               
  Direct interest............................   30                      
  (30% x 80%)................................        24                 
  (30% x 80%)................................             24            
  (24% x 80%)................................                 19.       
                                                                2       
  (24% x 50%)+(24% x 50%)....................                         24
R Corporation's interest:                                               
  Direct interest............................   10                      
  (10% x 80%)................................       8                   
                                                                        
  (10% x 80%)................................              8            
  (8% x 80%).................................                 6.4       
  (8% x 50%)+(8% x 50%)......................                          8
                                              --------------------------
    Total interests to which consolidation                              
     applies.................................  100  100  100   80    100
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (b) Effect of consolidation--(1) Determination of subpart F income, 
export trade income, etc. An election under paragraph (a) of this 
section to consolidate export trade corporations in a chain of such 
corporations shall have no effect on the determination of the character 
of income as subpart F income or on the determination of export trade 
income, export trade income which constitutes foreign base company 
income, or earnings and profits of

[[Page 523]]

the individual export trade corporations in the chain. Thus, the 
consolidation of export trade corporations under this section shall not 
have the effect of reducing earnings and profits of such corporations or 
of changing the characterization of income from that which is, for 
example, foreign base company income to that which is not. The 
application of this paragraph may be illustrated by the following 
example:

    Example. Corporation A, incorporated under the laws of foreign 
country X, and corporation B, incorporated under the laws of foreign 
country Y, are both wholly owned subsidiaries of domestic corporation M. 
Corporations A and B both qualify under section 971(a) as export trade 
corporations. Corporation A purchases personal property produced in the 
United States from an unrelated person and sells the property to B 
Corporation for use outside of country X. Corporation B resells the 
property to an unrelated person for use in foreign country Z. 
Corporations A and B each derive foreign base company sales income 
described in Sec. 1.954-3 from the purchase and sale transactions. 
Consolidation of Corporations A and B under this section does not result 
in the two transactions being treated as one transaction which is a 
purchase of property from an unrelated person and a sale of property to 
an unrelated person or the nonrecognition of gain on the sale of export 
property by A Corporation to B Corporation.

    (2) Determination of amount by which consolidated subpart F income 
is reduced--(i) In general. In determining the amount by which the 
subpart F income of each export trade corporation includible in a 
consolidation of export trade corporations shall be reduced as provided 
in section 970(a) and paragraph (b)(1) of Sec. 1.970-1 for any taxable 
year of consolidation, the limitations provided by section 970(a) and 
paragraph (b)(2) of Sec. 1.970-1 on such amount for each such export 
trade corporation shall be determined on the basis of such corporation's 
separate share of--
    (a) Amounts included in the total export promotion expense,
    (b) The total gross receipts from the sale, installation, operation, 
maintenance, or use of property in respect of which each such 
corporation derives such export trade income as is properly allocable to 
the export trade income which constitutes foreign base company income, 
and
    (c) The total increase in investments in export trade assets,

of all export trade corporations to which the consolidation applies for 
the taxable year.
    (ii) Limitations not effective. If for any taxable year each of the 
limitations under paragraph (b)(2) of Sec. 1.970-1, determined on a 
consolidated basis, equals or exceeds the total export trade income 
which constitutes foreign base company income of all corporations 
includible in the consolidation of export trade corporations, the 
subpart F income of each includible corporation shall be reduced under 
section 970(a) for such year by its separate export trade income which 
constitutes foreign base company income.
    (iii) Limitation effective. If for any taxable year one of the 
limitations under paragraph (b)(2) of Sec. 1.970-1, determined on a 
consolidated basis, is less than the total export trade income which 
constitutes foreign base company income of all corporations includible 
in the consolidation of export trade corporations, the amount by which 
the subpart F income of each includible corporation shall be reduced 
under section 970(a) for such year shall be an amount which bears the 
same ratio to the amount by which the subpart F income may be reduced on 
a consolidated basis as the export trade income which constitutes 
foreign base company income of each includible corporation bears to the 
total export trade income which constitutes foreign base company income 
of all export trade corporations includible in the consolidation of 
export trade corporations.
    (iv) Illustration. The application of this subparagraph may be 
illustrated by the following example:

    Example. (a) Domestic corporation M owns 100 percent of the only 
class of stock of controlled foreign corporation A, which, in turn, owns 
100 percent of the only class of stock of controlled foreign corporation 
B. All corporations use the calendar year as the taxable year, and 
corporations A and B are export trade corporations throughout the period 
here involved. Corporation M elects under this section to consolidate 
corporations A and B for the entire period here involved. Corporation M 
elects under paragraph (a)(2) of Sec. 1.970-2 for 1963 to determine both 
A Corporation's and B Corporation's investments in export trade assets 
as of the

[[Page 524]]

close of the 75th day after the close of such corporations' taxable 
year.
    (b) The following amounts are applicable to corporations A and B for 
1964:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                Corporation  Corporation
                                                     A            B     
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Subpart F income..............................      $100         $200   
Export trade income which constitutes foreign                           
 base company income..........................        25           75   
Other export trade income.....................        10           15   
Export promotion expenses allocable to export                           
 trade income which constitutes foreign base                            
 company income...............................        10           80   
Gross receipts from the sale of property in                             
 respect of which export trade income which                             
 constitutes foreign base company income is                             
 derived......................................       400          600   
Increase in investments in export trade assets                          
 for period beginning with March 16, 1964, and                          
 ending with March 16, 1965...................        35          120   
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (c) The amount by which subpart F income of corporations A and B is 
reduced for 1964 on a separate-company basis without regard to section 
972 may be determined as set forth in items (i) through (vii) below, and 
the results of the consolidation of corporations A and B for 1964 are 
set forth in items (viii) through (x). Assuming an alternative case in 
which for 1964 the facts are the same as set forth in paragraphs (a) and 
(b) of this example except that B Corporation incurs export promotion 
expenses of $50 (rather than $80) which are allocable to the export 
trade income which constitutes foreign base company income, the results 
of the consolidation of corporations A and B for such year (a case where 
one of the limitations under paragraph (b)(2) of Sec. 1.970-1 is 
effective) are set forth in items (xi) through (xiii):

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                            A            B              
                                       Corporation  Corporation   Total 
                                           (1)          (2)        (3)  
------------------------------------------------------------------------
(i) Subpart F income.................       $100         $200       $300
                                      ==================================
(ii) Export trade income which                                          
 constitutes foreign base company                                       
 income..............................         25           75        100
(iii) Other export trade income......         10           15         25
                                      ----------------------------------
(iv) Total export trade income.......         35           90        125
                                      ==================================
(v) Limitations under Sec.  1.970-                                      
 1(b)(2):                                                               
  (a) Increase in export trade assets                                   
   limitation:                                                          
    ($35 x $25/$35)..................         25    ...........  .......
    ($120 x $75/$90).................  ...........        100    .......
    ([$35+$120] x $100/ $125)........  ...........  ...........      124
  (b) Gross receipts limitation:                                        
    (10% of $400)....................         40    ...........  .......
    (10% of $600)....................  ...........         60    .......
    (10% of $1,000)..................  ...........  ...........      100
  (c) Export promotion expenses                                         
   limitation:                                                          
    (150% of $10)....................         15    ...........  .......
    (150% of $80)....................  ...........        120    .......
    (150% of $90)....................  ...........  ...........      135
  (d) Export promotion expenses                                         
   limitation (alternative case):                                       
    (150% of $10)....................         15    ...........  .......
    (150% of $50)....................  ...........         75    .......
    (150% of $60)....................  ...........  ...........       90
                                      ----------------------------------
(vi) Reduction in subpart F income on                                   
 a separate company basis determined                                    
 without regard to section 972 (item                                    
 (ii), but not to exceed smallest of                                    
 items (v) (a), (b), and (c), in                                        
 columns (1) and (2))................         15           60         75
                                      ----------------------------------
(vii) Subpart F income as reduced on                                    
 a separate company basis (item (i)                                     
 minus item (vi))....................         85          140        225
                                      ==================================
(viii) Reduction in subpart F income                                    
 on a consolidated basis determined                                     
 under section 972 (item (ii), but                                      
 not to exceed smallest of items (v)                                    
 (a), (b), and (c), in column (3))...  ...........  ...........      100
                                      ----------------------------------
(ix) Apportionment of reduction in                                      
 subpart F income (item (ii))........         25           75        100
(x) Subpart F income as reduced on a                                    
 consolidated basis (item (i) minus                                     
 item (ix))..........................         75          125        200
                                      ==================================
                                                                        
                            Alternative Case                            
                                                                        
(xi) Reduction in subpart F income on                                   
 a consolidated basis determined                                        
 under section 972 (item (ii) but not                                   
 to exceed smallest of items (v) (a),                                   
 (b), and (d), in column (3))........  ...........  ...........        9
                                                                --------
(xii) Apportionment of reduction in                                     
 subpart F income (item (xi) times                                      
 [item (ii) of column (1) over item                                     
 (ii) of column (3)] and item (xi)                                      
 times [item (ii) of column (2) over                                    
 item (ii) of column (3)]); ($90  x                                     
 $25/$100)...........................     $22.50                        
  ($90  x  $75/$100).................                  $67.50         90
                                                   ---------------------
(xiii) Subpart F income as reduced on                                   
 a consolidated basis (item (i) minus                                   
 item (xii)).........................      77.50       132.50        210
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (3) Determination of pro rata share of consolidated withdrawal of 
previously excluded export trade income--(i) In general. If, for any 
taxable year, there is a decrease in investments in export trade assets 
under section 970(b) and paragraph (c)(1) of Sec. 1.970-1, determined on 
a consolidated basis, of export trade corporations includible in a 
consolidated chain of such corporations, each United States shareholder 
who has elected

[[Page 525]]

under paragraph (a) of this section to consolidate his interest in such 
chain of corporations shall include in his gross income, under section 
951(a)(1)(A)(ii) and the regulations thereunder as an amount to which 
section 955 (as in effect before the enactment of the Tax Reduction Act 
of 1975) applies, his pro rata share of the amount of such consolidated 
decrease in investments but only to the extent such pro rata share does 
not exceed the lesser of the limitations provided by section 970(b) and 
paragraph (c)(2) of Sec. 1.970-1 with respect to such shareholder 
determined on a consolidated basis. The consolidated decrease in 
investments and the consolidated limitations shall be determined by 
aggregating the applicable amounts determined under paragraph (c) of 
Sec. 1.970-1 with respect to such shareholder's interest in each 
corporation includible in the consolidation.
    (ii) Allocation of pro rata share of consolidated decrease in 
investments in export trade assets. For purposes of determining the 
amount referred to in paragraph (c)(2)(i)(b)(3) of Sec. 1.970-1 for a 
subsequent taxable year, a United States shareholder's pro rata share of 
a consolidated decrease in investments determined under subdivision (i) 
of this subparagraph for the current taxable year shall be allocated to 
such shareholder's interest in each of the export trade corporations 
includible in the consolidation in that ratio which--
    (a) The net amount determined under paragraph (c)(2)(i)(b) of 
Sec. 1.970-1 with respect to such shareholder's interest in such 
corporation for all prior taxable years (whether or not a taxable year 
occurring during the period of consolidation) bears to
    (b) The total of the net amounts determined under paragraph 
(c)(2)(i) (b) of Sec. 1.970-1 with respect to such shareholder's 
interests in all export trade corporations includible in such 
consolidation for all prior taxable years (whether or not a taxable year 
occurring during the period of consolidation).
    (iii) Illustration. The application of this subparagraph may be 
illustrated by the following example:

    Example. (a) Domestic corporation M owns 60 percent of the only 
class of stock of controlled foreign corporation A, which, in turn, owns 
100 percent of the only class of stock of controlled foreign corporation 
B. All corporations use the calendar year as a taxable year, and 
corporations A and B are export trade corporations throughout the period 
here involved. Corporation M elects to consolidate corporations A and B 
for the entire period here involved.
    (b) The following amounts are applicable to corporations A and B for 
1964:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                            Consolidated
                                              A (1)  B (2)       (3)    
------------------------------------------------------------------------
(i) Consolidated decrease in investments in                             
 export trade assets (determined before                                 
 application of Sec.  1.970-1(c)(2))........  .....  .....       $100   
(ii) M Corporation's pro rata share of                                  
 consolidated decrease (60%)................  .....  .....         60   
(iii) M Corporation's pro rata share of                                 
 earnings and profits for 1963 and 1964                                 
 (Sec.  1.970-1(c) (2)(i)(a))...............   $120    $90        210   
(iv) M Corporation's pro rata share of net                              
 amount determined under Sec.  1.970-                                   
 1(c)(2)(i)(b) for 1963.....................    180     60        240   
(v) Amount includible in M Corporation's                                
 gross income for 1964 (smallest of items                               
 (ii), (iii), and (iv) in column (3)).......  .....  .....         60   
------------------------------------------------------------------------

Corporation M must include $60 in its gross income for 1964 under 
section 951(a)(1)(A)(ii) by reason of the application of section 970(b) 
as its pro rata share of the consolidated decrease in investments in 
export trade assets; and, for purposes of determining the amount under 
paragraph (c)(2)(i)(b)(3) of Sec. 1.970-1 with respect to M 
Corporation's interest in each of corporations A and B for a subsequent 
taxable year, such consolidated decrease for 1964 is allocated as 
follows: to M Corporation's interest in A Corporation, $45 ($60 times 
$180/$240); and to its interest in B Corporation, $15 ($60 times $60/
$240).
    (c) The following amounts are applicable to corporations A and B for 
1965:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                            Consolidated
                                         A(1)       B(2)         (3)    
------------------------------------------------------------------------
(i) Consolidated decrease in                                            
 investments in export trade assets                                     
 (determined before application of                                      
 Sec.  1.970-1(c)(2))...............  .........  .........         $150 
(ii) M Corporation's pro rata share                                     
 of consolidated decrease (60%).....  .........  .........           90 
(iii) M Corporation's pro rata share                                    
 of earnings and profits (and                                           
 deficits in earnings and profits)                                      
 for 1963, 1964, and 1965 (Sec.                                         
 1.970-1(c)(2)(i)(a))...............       $100      ($20)           80 

[[Page 526]]

                                                                        
(iv) M Corporation's pro rata share                                     
 of the net amount determined under                                     
 Sec.  1.970-1(c)(2)(i)(b) for 1963                                     
 and 1964  .........................                                    
  ($180-$45)........................        135  .........  ............
  ($60-$15).........................                    45  ............
    Total...........................                                180 
(v) Amount includible in M                                              
 Corporation's gross income for 1965                                    
 (smallest of items (ii), (iii), and                                    
 (iv) in column (3))................                                 80 
------------------------------------------------------------------------

Corporation M must include $80 in its gross income for 1965 under 
section 951(a)(1)(A)(ii) by reason of the application of section 970(b) 
as its pro rata share of the consolidated decrease in investments in 
export trade assets; and, for purposes of determining the amount under 
paragraph (c)(2)(i)(b)(3) of Sec. 1.970-1 with respect to M 
Corporation's interest in each of corporations A and B for a subsequent 
taxable year, such consolidated decrease for 1965 is allocated as 
follows: to M Corporation's interest in A Corporation, $60 ($80 times 
$135/$180); and to its interest in B Corporation, $20 ($80 times $45/
$180).
    (d) The following amounts are applicable to corporations A and B for 
1966:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                            Consolidated
                                               A(1)   B(2)       (3)    
------------------------------------------------------------------------
(i) Consolidated decrease in investments in                             
 export trade assets (determined before                                 
 application of Sec.  1.970-1(c)(2))........  .....  .....       $200   
(ii) M Corporation's pro rata share of                                  
 consolidated decrease (60%)................  .....  .....        120   
(iii) M Corporation's pro rata share of                                 
 earnings and profits (and deficits in                                  
 earnings and profits) for 1963, 1964, 1965,                            
 and 1966 (Sec.  1.970-1(c)(2)(i)(a)).......   $120    $50        170   
(iv) M Corporation's pro rata share of the                              
 net amount determined under Sec.  1.970-                               
 1(c)(2)(i)(b) for 1963, 1964, and 1965  ...                            
  ($180 minus [$45+$60])....................     75  .....  ............
  ($60-[$15+$20])...........................            25  ............
    Total...................................                      100   
(v) Amount includible in M Corporation's                                
 gross income for 1966 (smallest of items                               
 (ii), (iii), and (iv) in column (3)).......  .....  .....        100   
------------------------------------------------------------------------

Corporation M must include $100 in its gross income for 1966 under 
section 951(a)(1)(A)(ii) by reason of the application of section 970(b) 
as its pro rata share of the consolidated decrease in investments in 
export trade assets; and, for purposes of determining the amount under 
paragraph (c)(2)(i)(b)(3) of Sec. 1.970-1 with respect to M 
Corporation's interest in each of corporations A and B for a subsequent 
taxable year, such consolidated decrease for 1966 is allocated as 
follows: to M Corporation's interest in A Corporation, $75 ($100 times 
$75/$100); and to its interest in B Corporation, $25 ($100 times $25/
$100).

[T.D. 6754, 29 FR 12714, Sept. 9, 1964, as amended by T.D. 7893, 48 FR 
22512, May 19, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 1.981-0  Repeal of section 981; effective dates.

    The provisions of section 981 are not effective for taxable years 
beginning after December 31, 1976. For the treatment of the community 
income of aliens and their spouses for taxable years beginning after 
December 31, 1976, see section 879 and the regulations thereunder.

[T.D. 7670, 45 FR 6929, Jan. 31, 1980]


<R05>
Sec. 1.981-1   Foreign law community income for taxable years beginning after December 31, 1966, and before January 1, 1977.

    (a) Election for special treatment--(1) In general. An individual 
citizen of the United States who meets the requirements of section 
981(a)(1) and subparagraph (2) of this paragraph for any open taxable 
year beginning after December 31, 1966, and before January 1, 1977, may 
make a binding election with his nonresident alien spouse to have 
section 981(b) and paragraph (b) of this section apply to their income 
for such year which is treated as community income under the applicable 
community property laws of a foreign country or countries. Generally, 
the community property laws of a foreign country operate upon land 
situated within its jurisdiction and upon personal property owned by 
spouses domiciled therein. If the election is made for any taxable year, 
it shall also apply for all subsequent open taxable years of such 
citizen and his nonresident alien spouse for which all the requirements 
of section 981(a)(1) and subparagraph (2) of this paragraph

[[Page 527]]

are met, unless the Director of International Operations consents, in 
accordance with paragraph (c)(2) of this section, to a termination of 
the election. An election under section 981(a) and this section has no 
effect for any taxable year beginning before January 1, 1967, for which 
a separate election, if made, must be made under section 981(c)(1) and 
Sec. 1.981-2. For the definition of ``open taxable year'' see section 
981(e)(2) and paragraph (a) of Sec. 1.981-3. If the citizen and his 
nonresident alien spouse have different taxable years, see paragraph (c) 
of Sec. 1.981-3. If one of the spouses is deceased, see paragraph (d) of 
Sec. 1.981-3.
    (2) Requirements to be met. In order for a U.S. citizen and his 
nonresident alien spouse to make an election under section 981(a) and 
this section for any taxable year and in order for the election to apply 
for any subsequent taxable year it is required under section 981(a)(1) 
that, for each such taxable year, such citizen be (i) a citizen of the 
United States, (ii) a bona fide resident of a foreign country or 
countries during the entire taxable year, and (iii) married at the close 
of the taxable year to an individual who is (a) a nonresident alien 
during the entire taxable year and (b), in the case of any such 
subsequent taxable year, the same nonresident alien individual to whom 
the citizen was married at the close of the earliest of such taxable 
years. If either spouse dies during a taxable year, the taxable year of 
the surviving spouse shall be treated, solely for purposes of making the 
determination under subdivision (iii) of this subparagraph, as ending on 
the date of such death. A citizen of the United States shall be 
considered as not married at the close of his taxable year if he is 
legally separated from his spouse under a decree of divorce or of 
separate maintenance. However, the mere fact that spouses have not lived 
together during the course of the taxable year shall not cause them to 
be considered as not married at the close of the taxable year. A husband 
and wife who are separated under an interlocutory decree of divorce 
retain the relationship of husband and wife until the decree becomes 
final.
    (3) Determination of residence. The principles of paragraphs (a)(2) 
and (b)(7) of Sec. 1.911-1 (26 CFR 1.911-1 (1978)) shall apply in order 
to determine for purposes of this paragraph whether a U.S. citizen is a 
bona fide resident of a foreign country or countries during the entire 
taxable year. The principles of Secs. 1.871.2 through 1.871-5 shall 
apply in order to determine whether the alien spouse of a U.S. citizen 
is a nonresident during the entire taxable year.
    (4) Manner of electing. The election under section 981(a) and this 
section shall be made in accordance with the applicable rules set forth 
in paragraph (c) of this section.
    (b) Treatment of community income--(1) In general. Community income 
for any taxable year to which an election under section 981(a) and this 
section applies, and the deductions properly allocable to such income, 
shall be divided between the electing U.S. citizen and nonresident alien 
spouses in accordance with the rules set forth in section 981(b) and 
subparagraphs (2) through (6) of this paragraph. Community income for 
this purpose means all gross income, whether derived from sources within 
or without the United States, which is treated as community income of 
the spouses under the community property laws of the foreign country 
having jurisdiction to determine the legal ownership of the income. A 
spouse has ownership of the income for this purpose if under the 
applicable foreign law he has a proprietary vested interest in the 
income.
    (2) Earned income. Wages, salaries, or professional fees, and other 
amounts received as compensation for personal services actually 
performed, which are community income for the taxable year, shall be 
treated as the income of the spouse who actually performed the personal 
services. This subparagraph does not apply, however, to community income 
(i) derived from any trade or business carried on by the husband or the 
wife, (ii) attributable to a spouse's distributive share of the income 
of a partnership to which subparagraph (4) of this paragraph applies, 
(iii) consisting of compensation for personal services rendered to a 
corporation which represents a distribution of the earnings and profits 
of the corporation

[[Page 528]]

rather than a reasonable allowance as compensation for the personal 
services actually performed, or (iv) derived from property which is 
acquired as consideration for personal services performed.
    (3) Trade or business income. If any income derived from a trade or 
business carried on by the husband or wife is community income for the 
taxable year, all of the gross income, and the deductions attributable 
to such income, shall be treated as the gross income and deductions of 
the husband unless the wife exercises substantially all of the 
management and control of the trade or business, in which case all of 
the gross income and deductions shall be treated as the gross income and 
deductions of the wife. This subparagraph does not apply to any income 
derived from a trade or business carried on by a partnership of which 
both or one of the spouses is a member. For purposes of this 
subparagraph, income derived from a trade or business includes any 
income derived from a trade or business in which both personal services 
and capital are material income producing factors. The term ``management 
and control'' means management and control in fact, not the management 
and control imputed to the husband under the community property laws of 
a foreign country. For example, a wife who operates a beauty parlor 
without any appreciable collaboration on the part of a husband is 
considered as having substantially all of the management and control of 
the business despite the provisions of any community property laws of a 
foreign country vesting in the husband the right of management and 
control of community property; and the income and deductions 
attributable to the operation of the beauty parlor are considered the 
income and deductions of the wife.
    (4) Partnership income. If any portion of a spouse's distributive 
share of the income of a partnership of which such spouse is a member is 
community income for the taxable year, all of that distributive share 
shall be treated as the income of that spouse and shall not be taken 
into account in determining the income of the other spouse. If both 
spouses are members of the same partnership, the distributive share of 
the income of each spouse which is community income shall be treated as 
the income of that spouse. A spouse's distributive share of such income 
of a partnership shall be determined as provided in section 704, and the 
regulations thereunder.
    (5) Income from separate property. Any community income for the 
taxable year, other than income described in section 981(b)(1) or (2) 
and subparagraph (2), (3), or (4) of this paragraph, which is derived 
from the separate property of one of the spouses shall be treated as the 
income of that spouse. The determination of what property is separate 
property for this purpose shall be made in accordance with the laws of 
the foreign country which, in accordance with subparagraph (1) of this 
paragraph, has jurisdiction to determine that the income from such 
property is community income.
    (6) Other community income. Any community income for the taxable 
year, other than income described in section 981(b)(1), (2), or (3), and 
subparagraph (2), (3), (4), or (5) of this paragraph, shall be treated 
as the income of that spouse who has a proprietary vested interest in 
that income under the laws of the foreign country which, in accordance 
with subparagraph (1) of this paragraph, has jurisdiction to determine 
that such income is community income. Thus, for example, this 
subparagraph applies to community income not described in subparagraph 
(2), (3), (4), or (5) of this paragraph which consists of dividends, 
interest, rents, royalties, or gains, from community property or of the 
earnings of unemancipated minor children.
    (7) Illustrations. The application of this paragraph may be 
illustrated by the following examples:

    Example 1. H, a nonresident alien individual and W, a U.S. citizen, 
each of whose taxable years is the calendar year, were married 
throughout 1967. H and W were residents of, and domiciled in, foreign 
country Z during the entire taxable year. During 1967, H earned $10,000 
from the performance of personal services as an employee. H also 
received $500 in dividend income from stock which under the community 
property laws of country Z is considered to be the separate property of 
H. W had no separate income for 1967. Under the community property laws 
of

[[Page 529]]

country Z all income earned by either spouse is considered to be 
community income, and one-half of such income is considered to belong to 
the other spouse. In addition, such laws of country Z provide that all 
income derived from property held separately by either spouse is to be 
treated as community income and treated as belonging one-half to each 
spouse. Thus, under the community property laws of country Z, H and W 
are both considered to have realized income of $5,250 during 1967, even 
though such laws recognize the stock as the separate property of H. If 
the election under this section is in effect for 1967, under the rules 
of subparagraphs (2) and (5) of this paragraph all of the income of 
$10,500 derived during 1967 shall be treated, for U.S. income tax 
purposes, as the income of H.
    Example 2. The facts are the same as in example 1 except that H is 
the sole proprietor of a retail merchandising company and such company 
has a $10,000 profit during 1967. W exercises no management and control 
over the business. In addition, H is a partner in a wholesale 
distributing company, and his distributive share of the partnership 
profit is $5,000. Both of these amounts of income are treated as 
community income under the community property laws of country Z, and 
under such laws both H and W are treated as realizing $7,500 of such 
income. If the election under this section is in effect for 1967, under 
the rule of subparagraphs (3) and (4) of this paragraph all $15,000 of 
such income shall be treated as the income of H for U.S. income tax 
purposes.
    Example 3. The facts are the same as in example 1 except that H also 
received $1,000 in dividends on stock held separately in his name. Under 
the community property laws of country Z the stock is considered to be 
community property; and the dividends, to be community income, one-half 
of such income being treated as the income of each spouse. If the 
election under this section is in effect for 1967, under the rule of 
subparagraph (6) of this paragraph, $500 of the dividend income shall be 
treated, for U.S. income tax purposes, as the income of each spouse.

    (c) Time and manner of making or terminating an election--(1) In 
general. A citizen of the United States and his nonresident alien spouse 
shall, for the first taxable year beginning after December 31, 1966, for 
which an election under section 981(a) and this section is to apply, 
make the election by filing a return, an amended return, or a claim for 
refund, whichever is proper, for such taxable year and attaching thereto 
a statement that the election is being made and that the requirements of 
paragraph (a)(2) of this section are met for such taxable year. The 
statement must show the name, address, and account number, if any, of 
each spouse, the name and address of the executor, administrator, or 
other person making the election for a deceased spouse, the taxable year 
to which the election applies, and the name of the foreign country or 
countries having jurisdiction to determine the ownership of any income 
being treated in accordance with section 981(b) and paragraph (b) of 
this section. The statement must be signed by both persons making the 
election. An election under this section may be made only for a taxable 
year which, on the date of the election, as defined in paragraph (b) of 
Sec. 1.981-3, is open within the meaning of section 981(e)(2) and 
paragraph (a) of Sec. 1.981-3.
    (2) Termination only with consent of Director of International 
Operations--(i) In general. An election under this section for any 
taxable year is binding and may not be revoked. The election shall also 
remain in effect for all subsequent taxable years of the spouses for 
which the requirements of paragraph (a)(2) of this section are met and 
which on the date of the election are open, within the meaning of 
paragraph (a) of Sec. 1.981-3, unless the election is terminated for any 
such subsequent taxable year or years in accordance with subdivision 
(ii) of this subparagraph. Any return, amended return, or claim for 
refund in respect of any such subsequent taxable year for which the 
election is in effect shall have attached thereto a copy of the 
statement filed in accordance with subparagraph (1) of this paragraph 
and an additional signed statement that for such subsequent taxable year 
the requirements of paragraph (a)(2) of this section are met.
    (ii) Written request to terminate required. A request to terminate 
an election under this section for a subsequent taxable year or years 
shall be made in writing by the persons who made the election and shall 
be addressed to the Director of International Operations, Internal 
Revenue Service, Washington, DC 20225. The request must include the 
name, address, and account number, if any, of each spouse and must be 
signed by the persons making the request. It must specify

[[Page 530]]

the taxable year or years for which the termination is to be effective 
and the grounds which justify the termination. The request shall be 
filed not later than 90 days before the close of the period for 
assessing a deficiency against the U.S. citizen for the earliest taxable 
year of such citizen for which the termination is to be effective. The 
Director of International Operations may require such other information 
as may be necessary in order to determine whether the termination will 
be permitted. A copy of the consent by the Director of International 
Operations to terminate must be attached to an amended income tax return 
for each taxable year for which the termination is effective and for 
which a return has previously been filed.

(Secs. 913(m) (92 Stat. 3106; 26 U.S.C. 913(m)), and 7805 (68A Stat. 
917; 26 U.S.C. 7805), Internal Revenue Code of 1954)

[T.D. 7330, 39 FR 38372, Oct. 31, 1974, as amended by T.D. 7670, 45 FR 
6929, Jan. 31, 1980; T.D. 7736, 45 FR 76143, Nov. 18, 1980]


<R05>
Sec. 1.981-2   Foreign law community income for taxable years beginning before January 1, 1967.

    (a) Election for special treatment--(1) In general. For all open 
taxable years beginning before January 1, 1967, for which an individual 
citizen of the United States meets the requirements of subparagraphs (A) 
and (C) of section 981(a)(1) and subparagraph (2) of this paragraph, 
such citizen and his nonresident alien spouse may make a joint election 
to have section 981(c)(2) and paragraph (b) of this section apply to 
their income which is treated as community income under the applicable 
community property laws of a foreign country or countries. However, if 
the conditions prescribed by section 981(d)(3) and subparagraph (3) of 
this paragraph are met, the nonresident alien spouse is not required to 
join in the election and such citizen may make a separate election to 
have section 981(c)(2) and paragraph (b) of this section apply to such 
income for such taxable years. An election under section 981(c)(1) and 
this section shall apply to every open taxable year of such citizen and 
his nonresident alien spouse beginning before January 1, 1967, for which 
all the requirements of subparagraphs (A) and (C) of section 981(a)(1) 
and subparagraph (2) of this paragraph are met. It is immaterial whether 
such open taxable year is a taxable year subject to the provisions of 
the 1954 Code, the 1939 Code, or any other internal revenue law in 
effect before the 1939 Code. An election under section 981(c)(1) and 
this section has no effect for any taxable year beginning after December 
31, 1966. For the definition of ``open taxable year'' see section 
981(e)(2) and paragraph (a) of Sec. 1.981-3. If the citizen and his 
nonresident alien spouse have different taxable years, see paragraph (c) 
of Sec. 1.981-3. If one of the spouses is deceased, see paragraph (d) of 
Sec. 1.981-3. An election under section 981(c)(1) and this section is 
binding and may not be revoked.
    (2) Requirements to be met. In order for the citizen of the United 
States to make an election under this section, whether required to be 
made jointly with his nonresident alien spouse or permitted to be made 
separately, it is required under section 981(c)(1) that, for each 
taxable year to which the election applies, the citizen making the 
election be (i) a citizen of the United States and (ii) married at the 
close of the taxable year to an individual who is (a) a nonresident 
alien during the entire taxable year and (b), in the case of any such 
taxable years subsequent to the first, the same nonresident alien 
individual to whom the citizen was married at the close of such first 
taxable year. The provisions of paragraph (a)(2) of Sec. 1.981-1 apply 
to determine whether a U.S. citizen making an election under section 
981(c)(1) and this section is married at the close of a taxable year to 
an individual who is a nonresident alien during the entire taxable year.
    (3) Cases where joint election is not required. A nonresident alien 
spouse is not required to join in an election under section 981(c)(1) 
and this section if the Director of International Operations determines 
in accordance with paragraph (c)(4) of this section--
    (i) That an election under section 981(c)(1) and this section would 
not affect the liability for Federal income tax of the nonresident alien 
spouse for any taxable year, whether beginning on, before, or after 
January 1, 1967, or

[[Page 531]]

    (ii) That the effect of the election on the liability of the 
nonresident alien spouse for Federal income tax for any such taxable 
year cannot be ascertained and that to deny the election to the U.S. 
citizen spouse would be inequitable and cause undue hardship to the U.S. 
citizen.

If in accordance with this subparagraph the nonresident alien spouse is 
not required to join in the election by the U.S. citizen, the provisions 
of section 981(d)(2) and paragraph (e) of Sec. 1.981-3 shall not apply 
so as to extend the period for assessing deficiencies or filing a claim 
for credit or refund for any taxable year of the nonresident alien 
spouse.
    (4) Manner of electing. The election under section 981(c)(1) and 
this section shall be made in accordance with the applicable rules set 
forth in paragraph (c) of this section.
    (b) Treatment of community income--(1) In general. Community income, 
as defined in paragraph (b)(1) of Sec. 1.981-1, for any taxable year 
beginning before January 1, 1967, to which an election under section 
981(c)(1) and this section applies, and the deductions properly 
allocable to such income, shall be divided between the U.S. citizen and 
his nonresident alien spouse in accordance with the rules set forth in 
section 981(c)(2) and subparagraphs (2) and (3) of this paragraph. The 
income shall be divided in such manner even though the nonresident alien 
spouse is not required, in accordance with paragraph (a)(3) of this 
section, to join in the election by the U.S. citizen.
    (2) Earned income, business income, partnership income, and income 
from separate property. All community income for any taxable year to 
which this paragraph applies which is treated as the income of one of 
the spouses in accordance with section 981(b)(1), (2), or (3) and 
paragraph (b)(2), (3), (4), or (5) of Sec. 1.981-1 shall be treated as 
the income of that spouse for purposes of this paragraph.
    (3) Other community income. All community income for any taxable 
year to which this paragraph applies, other than income described in 
subparagraph (2) of this paragraph, shall be treated as the income of 
the spouse who, for such taxable year, has a greater amount of gross 
income than the other spouse, determined by adding to the amount of 
gross income which is treated as the gross income of that spouse in 
accordance with subparagraph (2) of this paragraph the amount of the 
gross income for the taxable year which is treated as the separate 
income of that spouse under the community property laws of the foreign 
country having jurisdiction to determine the legal ownership of the 
income. If either spouse dies during a taxable year, the taxable year of 
the surviving spouse shall be treated as ending on the date of such 
death for the purpose of determining which spouse has the greater amount 
of gross income for such taxable year. Moreover, if the U.S. citizen and 
his nonresident alien spouse do not have the same taxable year, as 
defined in section 441(b) and the regulations thereunder, the periods 
for which the amounts of gross income are to be compared under this 
subparagraph are (i) the taxable year of the citizen and (ii) that 
period falling within the consecutive taxable years of the nonresident 
alien spouse which coincides with the period covered by such taxable 
year of the citizen. See paragraph (c) of Sec. 1.981-3.
    (c) Time and manner of making election--(1) In general. A citizen of 
the United States and his nonresident alien spouse or, if subparagraph 
(4) of this paragraph applies, such citizen alone may make an election 
under section 981(c)(1) and this section at any time on or after 
November 13, 1966, for each and every taxable year beginning before 
January 1, 1967, which on the date of the election, as defined in 
paragraph (b) of Sec. 1.981-3, is open within the meaning of section 
981(e)(2) and paragraph (a) of Sec. 1.981-3. The election shall be made 
by filing a return, an amended return, or a claim for refund, whichever 
is proper, for each taxable year to which the election applies and 
attaching thereto a statement that the election is being made and that 
the requirements of paragraph (a)(2) of this section are met for each 
such taxable year. The statement must also show the information required 
by subparagraph (2) of this paragraph and must, where applicable, be 
signed by both persons making the election.

[[Page 532]]

    (2) Information required. The statement described in subparagraph 
(1) of this paragraph must show--
    (i) The name, address, and account number, if any, of each spouse,
    (ii) The name and address of the executor, administrator, or other 
person making the election for a deceased spouse,
    (iii) The taxable years to which the election applies,
    (iv) The office of the district director, or the service center, 
where the return or returns, if any, for such taxable year or years were 
filed,
    (v) The dates on which such return or returns, if any, were filed 
and on which the tax for such taxable year or years was paid, if the tax 
has been paid, and
    (vi) The name of the foreign country or countries having 
jurisdiction to determine the ownership of any income being treated in 
accordance with section 981(c)(2) and paragraph (b) of this section.
    (3) Place for filing. Any return, amended return, or claim for 
refund filed under subparagraph (1) of this paragraph in respect of any 
taxable year shall be filed with the Director of International 
Operations, Internal Revenue Service, Washington, DC 20225. (See 
Sec. 1.6091-3.)
    (4) Determination that joint election is not required. A U.S. 
citizen spouse entitled to make an election under section 981(c)(1) and 
this section for open taxable years beginning before January 1, 1967, 
may apply to the Director of International Operations for a 
determination under section 981(d)(3) that the nonresident alien spouse 
is not required to join in the election by such citizen. This 
application shall be made by filing with the Director of International 
Operations, Internal Revenue Service, Washington, DC 20225, a statement 
setting forth the same information required by subparagraph (2) of this 
paragraph and such other information as is required by the Director of 
International Operations to justify a claim that the requirements of 
section 981(d)(3) and paragraph (a)(3) of this section are met. The 
Director of International Operations shall notify the U.S. citizen by 
letter of his determination with respect to the application. If the 
determination is that the nonresident alien spouse is not required to 
join in the election, a copy of the letter of determination shall be 
attached to each return, amended return, or claim for refund, to be 
filed pursuant to subparagraph (1) of this paragraph.

[T.D. 7330, 39 FR 38373, Oct. 31, 1974]


<R05>
Sec. 1.981-3   Definitions and other special rules.

    (a) Open taxable years. (1) For purposes of paragraph (a) of 
Sec. 1.981-1, and paragraph (a) of Sec. 1.981-2, a taxable year of the 
U.S. citizen, and the taxable year or years of his nonresident alien 
spouse ending or beginning within such taxable year of such citizen, 
shall be treated as open if the period prescribed by section 6501(a) (or 
section 6501(c)(4) if the period is extended by agreement) for assessing 
a deficiency against the citizen for his taxable year has not expired 
before the date of the election, determined under paragraph (b) of this 
section. Thus, for example, a taxable year of a U.S. citizen beginning 
before January 1, 1967, is open for purposes of this subparagraph if, 
before the election under section 981(c)(1) and Sec. 1.981-2, such 
citizen has never filed a return for such year and a return was required 
under section 6012 without reference to section 981. For example, if a 
U.S. citizen spouse on a calendar year basis who has never filed a 
return for 1960 decides in 1975 that he wishes to make the election 
under section 981(c)(1) and Sec. 1.981-2 in order to avoid being subject 
to tax for 1960 on his share of the community income for that year, he 
may in 1975 elect the benefits of section 981(c)(2) by filing an 
election in accordance with paragraph (c) of Sec. 1.981-2. In such case, 
a taxable year or years of the nonresident alien spouse of such citizen 
ending or beginning within 1960 shall be treated in 1975 as an open 
taxable year.
    (2) Subparagraph (1) of this paragraph shall apply even though the 
period prescribed by section 6501 for assessing a deficiency against the 
nonresident alien spouse for his taxable year or years ending or 
beginning within the taxable year of the U.S. citizen has expired before 
the election is made.
    (3) If either spouse dies during a taxable year to which an election 
under Sec. 1.981-1 or Sec. 1.981-2 applies, the taxable

[[Page 533]]

year of the decedent and the surviving spouse shall be determined under 
this paragraph without regard to section 981(e)(4), relating to death of 
spouse during the taxable year. See paragraph (a)(2) of Sec. 1.443-1.
    (4) For definition of the term ``taxable year'', see section 441(b) 
and the regulations thereunder.
    (b) Date of election. (1) For purposes of Sec. 1.981-1 and this 
section the date of an election made under section 981(a) and 
Sec. 1.981-1 is the date on which the return, amended return, or claim 
for refund required by paragraph (c)(1) of Sec. 1.981-1 is filed.
    (2) For purposes of Sec. 1.981-2 and this section the date of an 
election made under section 981(c)(1) and Sec. 1.981-2 is the date on 
which the returns, amended returns, or claims for refund, required by 
paragraph (c)(1) of Sec. 1.981-2 are filed.
    (3) For provisions treating timely mailing as timely filing, see 
section 7502 and the regulations thereunder.
    (c) Spouses with different taxable years. If the U.S. citizen and 
his nonresident alien spouse do not have the same taxable year, as 
defined in section 441(b) and the regulations thereunder, the election 
under Sec. 1.981-1 or Sec. 1.981-2 shall apply to each taxable year of 
such citizen in respect of which the election is made and to that period 
falling within the consecutive taxable years of the nonresident alien 
spouse which coincides with the period covered by such taxable year of 
the citizen.
    (d) Election on behalf of deceased spouse. Any election, statement, 
or request, required to be made under paragraph (c) of Sec. 1.981-1, or 
paragraph (c) of Sec. 1.981-2, by one of the spouses may, if such spouse 
is deceased, be made by the executor, administrator, or other person 
charged with the property of such deceased spouse.
    (e) Extension of period of limitations on assessment or refund--(1) 
Assessment of deficiency. Except as provided in subparagraph (3) of this 
paragraph, if an election under section 981(a) and Sec. 1.981-1, or 
under section 981(c)(1) and Sec. 1.981-2, is properly made, the period 
within which a deficiency may be assessed for any taxable year to which 
the election applies shall, to the extent the deficiency is attributable 
to the application of such election, not expire before one year after 
the date of the election, determined under paragraph (b) of this 
section.
    (2) Refund of tax. Except as provided in subparagraph (3) of this 
paragraph, if an election under section 981(a) and Sec. 1.981-1, or 
under section 981(c)(1) and Sec. 1.981-2, is properly made, the period 
within which a claim for credit or refund of an overpayment for any 
taxable year to which the election applies may be filed shall, to the 
extent the overpayment is attributable to the application of the 
election, not expire before one year after the date of the election, 
determined under paragraph (b) of this section.
    (3) Exception in case of nonelecting alien. Subparagraphs (1) and 
(2) of this paragraph shall not apply to any taxable year of a 
nonresident alien spouse who, in accordance with paragraph (a)(3) of 
Sec. 1.981-2, is not required to join in the election by the U.S. 
citizen spouse under section 981(c)(1) and Sec. 1.981-2.
    (f) Payment of interest for extension period. To the extent that an 
overpayment or deficiency for any taxable year is attributable to an 
election made under Sec. 1.981-1 or Sec. 1.981-2, no interest shall be 
allowed or paid for any period ending with the day before the date which 
is one year after the date of the election, determined under paragraph 
(b) of this section.

[T.D. 7330, 39 FR 38374, Oct. 31, 1974]


<R05>
Sec. 1.985-0  Outline of regulation.

    This section lists the paragraphs contained in Sec. Sec. 1.985-1 
through 1.985-6.

                    Sec. 1.985-1 Functional currency.

    (a) Applicability and effective date.
    (b) Dollar functional currency.
    (c) Functional currency of a QBU that is not required to use the 
dollar.
    (d) Single functional currency for a foreign corporation.
    (e) Translation of nonfunctional currency transactions.
    (f) Examples.

Sec. 1.985-2 Election to use the United States dollar as the functional 
                           currency of a QBU.

    (a) Background and scope.
    (b) Eligible QBU.
    (c) Time and manner for dollar election.
    (d) Effect of dollar election.

[[Page 534]]

  Sec. 1.985-3 United States dollar approximate separate transactions 
                                 method.

    (a) Scope and effective date.
    (b) Statement of method.
    (c) Translation into United States dollars.
    (d) Computation of DASTM gain or loss.
    (e) Effect of DASTM gain or loss on gross income, taxable income, or 
earnings and profits.

                   Sec. 1.985-4 Method of accounting.

    (a) Adoption or election.
    (b) Condition for changing functional currencies.
    (c) Relationship to certain other sections of the Code.

 Sec. 1.985-5  Adjustments required upon change in functional currency.

    (a) In general.
    (b) Step 1--Taking into account exchange gain or loss on certain 
section 988 transactions.
    (c) Step 2--Determining the new functional currency basis of 
property and the new functional currency amount of liabilities and any 
other relevant items.
    (d) Step 3A--Additional adjustments that are necessary when a branch 
changes functional currency.
    (e) Step 3B--Additional adjustments that are necessary when a 
taxpayer changes functional currency.
    (f) Examples.

    Section 1.985-6  Transition rules for a QBU that uses the dollar 
  approximate separate transactions method for its first taxable year 
                           beginning in 1987.

    (a) In general.
    (b) Certain controlled foreign corporations.
    (c) All other foreign corporations.
    (d) Pre-1987 section 902 amounts.
    (e) Net worth branch.
    (f) Profit and loss branch.

[T.D. 8263, 54 FR 38653, Sept. 20, 1989, as amended by T.D. 8464, 58 FR 
232, Jan. 5, 1993; T.D. 8556, 59 FR 37672, July 25, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 1.985-1  Functional currency.

    (a) Applicability and effective date--(1) Purpose and scope. These 
regulations provide guidance with respect to defining the functional 
currency of a taxpayer and each qualified business unit (QBU), as 
defined in section 989(a). Generally, a taxpayer and each QBU must make 
all determinations under subtitle A of the Code (relating to income 
taxes) in its respective functional currency. This section sets forth 
rules for determining when the functional currency is the United States 
dollar (dollar) or a currency other than the dollar. Section 1.985-2 
provides an election to use the dollar as the functional currency for 
certain QBUs that absent the election would have a functional currency 
that is a hyperinflationary currency, and explains the effect of making 
the election. Section 1.985-3 sets forth the dollar approximate separate 
transactions method that certain QBUs must use to compute their income 
or loss or earnings and profits. Section 1.985-4 provides that the 
adoption of a functional currency is a method of accounting and sets 
forth conditions for a change in functional currency. Section 1.985-5 
provides adjustments that are required to be made upon a change in 
functional currency. Finally, Sec. 1.985-6 provides transition rules for 
a QBU that uses the dollar approximate separate transactions method for 
its first taxable year beginning after December 31, 1986.
    (2) Effective date. These regulations apply to taxable years 
beginning after December 31, 1986. However, any taxpayer desiring to 
apply temporary Income Tax Regulations Sec. 1.985-0T through Sec. 1.985-
4T in lieu of these regulations to all taxable years beginning after 
December 31, 1986, and on or before October 20, 1989 may (on a 
consistent basis) so choose. For the text of the temporary regulations, 
see 53 FR 20308 (1988).
    (b) Dollar functional currency--(1) In general. The dollar shall be 
the functional currency of a taxpayer or QBU described in paragraph 
(b)(1)(i) through (v) of this section regardless of the currency used in 
keeping its books and records (as defined in Sec. 1.989(a)-1(d)). The 
dollar shall be the functional currency of--
    (i) A taxpayer that is not a QBU (e.g., an individual);
    (ii) A QBU that conducts its activities primarily in dollars. A QBU 
conducts its activities primarily in dollars if the currency of the 
economic environment in which the QBU conducts its activities is 
primarily the dollar. The facts and circumstances test set forth in 
paragraph (c)(2) of this section shall apply in making this 
determination;
    (iii) Except as otherwise provided by ruling or administrative 
pronouncement, a QBU that has the United

[[Page 535]]

States, or any possession or territory of the United States where the 
dollar is the standard currency, as its residence (as defined in section 
988(a)(3)(B));
    (iv) A QBU that does not keep books and records in the currency of 
any economic environment in which a significant part of its activities 
is conducted. Whether a QBU keeps such books and records is determined 
in accordance with paragraph (c)(3) of this section; or
    (v) A QBU that produces income or loss that is, or is treated as, 
effectively connected with the conduct of a trade or business within the 
United States.
    (2) QBUs operating in a hyperinflationary environment--(i) Taxable 
years beginning on or before August 24, 1994. For taxable years 
beginning on or before August 24, 1994, see Sec. 1.985-2 with respect to 
a QBU that elects to use, or is otherwise required to use, the dollar as 
its functional currency.
    (ii) Taxable years beginning after August 24, 1994--(A) In general. 
For taxable years beginning after August 24, 1994, except as otherwise 
provided in paragraph (b)(2)(ii)(B) of this section, any QBU that 
otherwise would be required to use a hyperinflationary currency as its 
functional currency must use the dollar as its functional currency and 
compute income or loss or earnings and profits under the rules of 
Sec. 1.985-3.
    (B) Exceptions--(1)--Certain QBU branches. The functional currency 
of a QBU that otherwise would be required to use a hyperinflationary 
currency as its functional currency and that is a branch of a foreign 
corporation having a non-dollar functional currency that is not 
hyperinflationary shall be the functional currency of the foreign 
corporation. Such QBU's income or loss or earnings and profits shall be 
determined under Sec. 1.985-3 by substituting the functional currency of 
the foreign corporation for the dollar.
    (2) Corporation that is not a controlled foreign corporation. A 
foreign corporation (or its QBU branch) operating in a hyperinflationary 
environment is not required to use the dollar as its functional currency 
pursuant to paragraph (b)(2)(ii)(A) of this section if that foreign 
corporation is not a controlled foreign corporation as defined in 
section 957 or 953(c)(1)(B). However, a noncontrolled section 902 
corporation, as defined in section 904(d)(2)(E), may elect to use the 
dollar (or, if appropriate, the currency specified in paragraph 
(b)(2)(ii)(B)(1) of this section) as its (or its QBU branch's) 
functional currency under the procedures set forth in Sec. 1.985-
2(c)(3).
    (C) Change in functional currency. If a QBU is required to change 
its functional currency to the dollar under paragraph (b)(2)(ii)(A) of 
this section, or chooses or is required to change its functional 
currency to the dollar for any open taxable year (and all subsequent 
taxable years) under Sec. 1.985-3(a)(2)(ii), the change is considered to 
be made with the consent of the Commissioner for purposes of Sec. 1.985-
4. A QBU changing functional currency must make the adjustments 
described in Sec. 1.985-5 if the year of change (as defined in 
Sec. 1.481-1(a)(1)) begins after 1987, or the adjustments described in 
Sec. 1.985-6 if the year of change begins in 1987. The adjustments 
described in Sec. 1.985-5 must be included in income in the taxable year 
prior to the year of change unless that prior taxable year is closed. In 
that case, the adjustments must be included in income in the year of 
change. No adjustments under section 481 are required solely because of 
a change in functional currency described in this paragraph 
(b)(2)(ii)(C).
    (D) Hyperinflationary currency. For purposes of sections 985 through 
989, the term hyperinflationary currency means the currency of a country 
in which there is cumulative inflation during the base period of at 
least 100 percent as determined by reference to the consumer price index 
of the country listed in the monthly issues of the ``International 
Financial Statistics'' or a successor publication of the International 
Monetary Fund. If a country's currency is not listed in the monthly 
issues of ``International Financial Statistics,'' a QBU may use any 
other reasonable method consistently applied for determining the 
country's consumer price index. Base period means, with respect to any 
taxable year, the thirty-six calendar months immediately preceding the 
first day of the current calendar year. For this purpose, the cumulative 
inflation rate for the base period is based on compounded inflation 
rates. Thus, if

[[Page 536]]

for 1991, 1992, and 1993, a country's annual inflation rates are 29 
percent, 25 percent, and 30 percent, respectively, the cumulative 
inflation rate for the three-year base period is 110 percent [((1.29  x  
1.25  x  1.3)-1.0  x  1.10)x100=110%] and the currency of the country 
for the QBU's 1994 year is considered hyperinflationary.
    (c) Functional currency of a QBU that is not required to use the 
dollar--(1) General rule. The functional currency of a QBU that is not 
required to use the dollar under paragraph (b) of this section shall be 
the currency of the economic environment in which a significant part of 
the QBU's activities is conducted, if the QBU keeps, or is presumed 
under paragraph (c)(3) of this section to keep, its books and records in 
such currency.
    (2) Economic environment. For purposes of section 985 and the 
regulations thereunder, the economic environment in which a significant 
part of a QBU's activities is conducted shall be determined by taking 
into account all the facts and circumstances.
    (i) Facts and circumstances. The facts and circumstances that are 
considered in determining the economic environment in which a 
significant part of a QBU's activities is conducted include, but are not 
limited to, the following:
    (A) The currency of the country in which the QBU is a resident as 
determined under section 988(a)(3)(B);
    (B) The currencies of the QBU's cash flows;
    (C) The currencies in which the QBU generates revenues and incurs 
expenses;
    (D) The currencies in which the QBU borrows and lends;
    (E) The currencies of the QBU's sales markets;
    (F) The currencies in which pricing and other financial decisions 
are made;
    (G) The duration of the QBU's business operations; and
    (H) The significance and/or volume of the QBU's independent 
activities.
    (ii) Rate of inflation. The rate of inflation (regardless of how it 
is determined) shall not be a factor used to determine a QBU's economic 
environment.
    (iii) Consistency. A taxpayer must consistently apply the facts and 
circumstances test set forth in this paragraph (c)(2) in evaluating the 
economic environment of its QBUs, e.g., its branches, that engage in the 
same or similar trades or businesses.
    (3) Books and records presumption. A QBU shall be presumed to keep 
books and records in the currency of the economic environment in which a 
significant part of its activities are conducted. The presumption may be 
overcome only if the QBU can demonstrate to the satisfaction of the 
district director that a substantial nontax purpose exists for not 
keeping any books and records in such currency. A taxpayer may not use 
this presumption affirmatively in determining a QBU's functional 
currency.
    (4) Multiple currencies. If a QBU has more than one currency that 
satisfies the requirements of paragraph (c)(1) of this section, the QBU 
may choose any such currency as its functional currency.
    (5) Relationship of United States accounting principles. In making 
the functional currency determination under this paragraph (c), the 
currency of the QBU for purposes of United States generally accepted 
accounting principles (GAAP) will ordinarily be accepted as the 
functional currency of the QBU for income tax purposes, provided that 
the GAAP determination is based on facts and circumstances substantially 
similar to those set forth in paragraph (c)(2) of this section.
    (6) Effect of changed circumstances. Regardless of any change in 
circumstances, a QBU may change its functional currency determined under 
this paragraph (c) only if the QBU complies with Sec. 1.985-4 or the 
Commissioner's consent is considered to have been granted under 
Sec. 1.985-2(d)(4) or Sec. 1.985-3(a)(2)(ii).
    (d) Single functional currency for a foreign corporation--(1) 
General rule. This paragraph (d) applies to a foreign corporation that 
has two or more QBUs that do not have the same functional currency. The 
foreign corporation shall be treated as having a single functional 
currency for the corporation as a whole that is different from the 
functional currency of one or more of its QBUs. The determination of a 
foreign corporation's functional currency shall be

[[Page 537]]

made by first applying paragraph (d)(1)(i) and then paragraph (d)(l)(ii) 
of this section.
    (i) Step 1. Each QBU of the foreign corporation determines its 
functional currency in accordance with the rules set forth in paragraphs 
(b) and (c) of this section and Sec. 1.985-2.
    (ii) Step 2. The foreign corporation determines its functional 
currency applying the principles of paragraphs (b) and (c) of this 
section to the corporation's activities as a whole. Thus, if a foreign 
corporation has two branches, the corporation shall determine its 
functional currency by applying the principles of paragraphs (b) and (c) 
of this section to the combined activities of the corporation and the 
branches. For purposes of this paragraph (d)(1), if a QBU of a foreign 
corporation has the dollar as its functional currency under paragraph 
(b)(2) of this section, the QBU's activities shall be considered dollar 
activities of the corporation.
    (2) Translation of income or loss of QBUs having different 
functional currencies than the foreign corporation as a whole. Where the 
functional currency of a foreign corporation as a whole differs from the 
functional currency of one or more of its QBUs, each such QBU shall 
determine the amount of its income or loss or earnings and profits (or 
deficit in earnings and profits) in its functional currency under the 
principles of section 987 (relating to branch transactions). The amount 
of income or loss or earnings and profits (or deficit in earnings and 
profits) of each QBU in its functional currency shall then be translated 
into the foreign corporation's functional currency using the appropriate 
exchange rate as defined in section 989(b)(4) for purposes of 
determining the corporation's income or loss or earnings and profits (or 
deficit in earnings and profits).
    (e) Translation of nonfunctional currency transactions. Except for a 
QBU using the dollar approximate separate transactions method described 
in Sec. 1.985-3, see section 988 and the regulations thereunder for the 
treatment of nonfunctional currency transactions.
    (f) Examples. The provisions of this section are illustrated by the 
following examples:

    Example 1. P, a domestic corporation, operates exclusively through 
foreign branch X in Country A. X is a QBU within the meaning of section 
989(a) and its residence is Country A as determined under section 988 
(a)(3)(B). The currency of Country A is the LC. All of X's purchases, 
sales, and expenses are in the LC. The laws of A require X to keep books 
and records in the LC. It is determined that the LC is the currency of X 
under United States generally accepted accounting principles. This 
determination is based on facts and circumstances substantially similar 
to those set forth in paragraph (c)(2) of this section. Under these 
facts, while the functional currency of P is the dollar since its 
residence is the United States, the functional currency of X is the LC.
    Example 2. P, a publicly-held domestic regulated investment company 
(as defined under section 851), operates exclusively through foreign 
branch B in Country R. B is a QBU within the meaning of section 989(a) 
and its residence is Country R as determined under section 988(a)(3)(B). 
The currency of Country R is the LC. B's principal activities consist of 
purchasing and selling stock and securities of Country R companies and 
securities issued by Country R. It is determined that the dollar is the 
currency of B under United States generally accepted accounting 
principles. This determination is not based on facts and circumstances 
substantially similar to those set forth in paragraph (c)(2) of this 
section. Under these facts, while the functional currency of P is the 
dollar since its residence is the United States, B may choose the LC as 
its functional currency because it has significant activities in the LC 
provided it keeps books and records in the LC. The fact that the dollar 
is the currency of B under generally accepted accounting principles is 
irrelevant for purposes of determining B's functional currency because 
the GAAP determination was not based on factors similar to those set 
forth in paragraph (c)(2) of this section.
    Example 3. P, a domestic bank, operates through foreign branch X in 
Country R. X is a QBU within the meaning of section 989(a) and its 
residence is Country R as determined under section 988(a)(3)(B). The 
currency of Country R is the LC. The laws of R require X to keep books 
and records in the LC. The branch customarily loans dollars and LCs. In 
the case of its LC loans, X ordinarily fixes the terms of the loans by 
reference to a contemporary London Inter-Bank Offered Rate (LIBOR) on 
dollar deposits. For instance, the interest on the amount of the 
outstanding LC loan principal might equal LIBOR plus 2 percent and the 
amount of the outstanding LC loan principal would be adjusted to reflect 
changes in the dollar value of the LC. X is primarily funded with 
dollar-denominated funds borrowed from related and unrelated parties. 
X's only LC activities are paying

[[Page 538]]

local taxes, employee wages, and local expenses such as rent and 
electricity. Under these facts, X's activities are primarily conducted 
in dollars. Thus, although X keeps its books and records in LCs, X's 
functional currency is the dollar.
    Example 4. S, a foreign corporation organized in Country U, is 
wholly-owned by P, a domestic corporation. The currency of Country U is 
the LC. S's sole function is acting as a financing vehicle for P and 
domestic corporations that are affiliated with P. All borrowing and 
lending transactions between S and P and its domestic affiliates are in 
dollars. Furthermore, primarily all of S's other borrowings are dollar-
denominated or based on a dollar index. S's only LC activities are 
paying local taxes, employee wages, and local expenses such as rent and 
electricity. S keeps its books and records in the LC. Under these facts, 
S's activities are primarily conducted in dollars. Thus, although S 
keeps its books and records in LCs, S's functional currency is the 
dollar.
    Example 5. D is a domestic corporation whose primary activity is the 
extraction of natural gas and oil through foreign branch X in Country Y. 
X is a QBU within the meaning of section 989(a) and its residence is 
Country Y as determined under section 988(a)(3)(B). The currency of 
Country Y is the LC. X bills a significant amount of its natural gas and 
oil sales in dollars and a significant amount in LCs. X also incurs 
significant LC and dollar expenses and liabilities. The laws of Country 
Y require X to keep its books and records in the LC. It is determined 
that the LC is the currency of X under United States generally accepted 
accounting principles. This determination is based on facts and 
circumstances substantially similar to those set forth in paragraph 
(c)(2) of this section. Absent other factors indicating that X primarily 
conducts its activities in the dollar, D could choose either the dollar 
or the LC as X's functional currency because X has significant 
activities in both the dollar and the LC, provided the books and records 
requirement is satisfied. If, instead, X's activities were determined to 
be primarily in the dollar, then X would have to use the dollar as its 
functional currency.
    Example 6. S, a foreign corporation organized in Country U, is 
wholly-owned by P, a domestic corporation. The currency of U is the LC. 
S purchases the products it sells from related and unrelated parties, 
including P. These purchases are made in the LC. In addition, most of 
S's gross receipts are generated by transactions denominated in the LC. 
S attempts to determine its LC price for goods sold in such a manner as 
to obtain an LC equivalent of a certain dollar amount after reduction 
for all LC costs. However, local market conditions sometimes result in 
pricing adjustments. Thus, changes in the LC-dollar exchange rate from 
period to period generally result in corresponding changes in the LC 
price of S's products. S pays local taxes, employee wages, and other 
local expenses in the LC. It is determined that the dollar is the 
currency of S under United States generally accepted accounting 
principles. This determination is not based on facts and circumstances 
substantially similar to those set forth in paragraph (c)(2) of this 
section. Under these facts, S could choose either the dollar or the LC 
as its functional currency because S has significant activities in both 
the dollar and the LC, provided that the books and records requirement 
is satisfied.
    Example 7. S, a foreign corporation organized in Country X, is 
wholly-owned by P, a domestic corporation. S conducts all of its 
operations through two branches. Branch A is located in Country F and 
branch B is located in Country G. S, A, and B are QBUs within the 
meaning of section 989(a). Branch A's and branch B's residences are 
Country F and Country G respectively as determined under section 
988(a)(3)(B). The currency of Country F is the FC and the currency of 
Country G is the LC. The functional currencies of S, A, and B are 
determined in a two step procedure.
    Step 1: The functional currency of branches A and B. Branch A and 
branch B both conduct all activities in their respective local 
currencies. The FC is the currency of branch A and the LC is the 
currency of branch B under United States generally accepted accounting 
principles. This determination is based on facts and circumstances 
substantially similar to those set forth in paragraph (c)(2) of this 
section. Under these facts, the functional currency of branch A is the 
FC and the functional currency of branch B is the LC.
    Step 2: The functional currency of S. S's functional currency is 
determined by disregarding the fact that A and B are branches. When A's 
activities and B's activities are viewed as a whole, S determines that 
it only conducts significant activities in the LC. Therefore, S's 
functional currency is the LC. See Examples 9, 10, and 11 for how the 
earnings and profits of a foreign corporation, which has branches with 
different functional currencies, are determined.
    Example 8. Assume the same facts as in Example 7, except that S does 
not exist and P conducts all of its operations through branch A and 
branch B. In this instance P's functional currency in Step 2 is the 
dollar, regardless of the fact that its branches' activities viewed as a 
whole are in the LC, because P is a taxpayer whose residence is the 
United States under section 988(a)(3)(B)(i). Therefore, while the 
functional currency of branch A is the FC and the functional currency of 
branch B is the LC, the functional currency of P is the dollar because 
its residence is the United States.

[[Page 539]]

    Example 9. The facts are the same as in Example 7. ln addition, 
assume that in 1987 branch A has earnings of 100 FC and branch B has 
earnings of 100 LC as determined under section 987. The weighted average 
exchange rate for the year is 1 FC/2 LC. Branch A's earnings are 
translated into 200 LC for purposes of computing S's earnings and 
profits in 1987. Thus, the total earnings and profits of S from branch A 
and branch B for 1987 is 300 LC.
    Example 10. (i) X, a foreign corporation organized in Country W, is 
wholly-owned by P, a domestic corporation. Both X and P are calendar 
year taxpayers that began business during 1987. X operates exclusively 
through two branches, A and B both of which are located outside of 
Country W. The functional currency of X and A is the LC, while the 
functional currency of B is the DC as determined under section 985 and 
Sec. 1.985-1. The earnings of B must be computed under section 987, 
relating to branch transactions. In 1987, A earns 900 LCs of nonsubpart 
F income and B earns 200 DCs of nonsubpart F income. Under section 
904(d)(2), A's income is financial service income and B's income is 
general limitation income. In order to determine X's earnings and 
profits, B's income must be translated into LCs (the functional currency 
of X). The weighted average exchange rate for 1987 is 1 LC/2 DC. Thus, 
in 1987 X's current earnings and profits (and its post-1986 
undistributed earnings) are 1000 LCs consisting of 900 LCs of financial 
services income earned by A and 100 LCs (200 DC/2) of general limitation 
income earned by B. Neither A nor B makes any remittances during 1987.
    (ii) In 1988, neither A nor B earns any income or generates any 
loss. On December 31, 1988, A remits 50 LCs directly to P. The 
remittance to P is considered to be remitted by A to X and then 
immediately distributed by X as a dividend. The 50 LC remittance does 
not result in an exchange gain or loss under section 987 to X because 
the functional currency of X and A is the LC. See section 987(3). Under 
section 904(d)(3)(D), the 50 LC dividend is treated as income in a 
separate category to the extent of the dividend's pro rata share of X's 
earnings and profits in each separate limitation category. Thus, 90 
percent, or 45 LCs, is treated as financial services income, and 10 
percent, or 5 LCs, is treated as general limitation income. After the 
dividend distribution, X has 950 LCs of accumulated earnings and profits 
(and post-1986 undistributed earnings) consisting of 855 LCs of 
financial service limitation income and 95 LCs of general limitation 
income.
    Example 11. The facts are the same as in Example 10, except that A 
makes no remittance during 1988 but B remits 120 DCs to X on December 
31, 1988, which X immediately converts into LCs, and X makes no dividend 
distribution during 1988. Assume that the appropriate exchange rate for 
the remittance is 1 LC/3 DCs. B's remittance triggers exchange loss to 
X. See section 987(3). Under section 987, the exchange loss on the 
remittance is 20 LCs calculated as follows: 40 LCs, which is the LC 
value of the 120 DC remittance (120 DCs/3), less 60 LCs, their LC basis 
(120 DCs/2). This loss is sourced and characterized under section 987 
and regulations thereunder.
    Example 12. F, a foreign corporation, has gain from the disposition 
of a United States real property interest (as defined in section 
897(c)). The gain is taken into account as if F were engaged in a trade 
or business within the United States during the taxable year and as if 
such gain were effectively connected with such trade or business. F's 
disposition activity shall be treated as a separate QBU with a dollar 
functional currency because such activity produced income that is 
treated as effectively connected with a trade or business within the 
United States. Therefore, F must compute its gain from the disposition 
by giving the United States real property interest an historic dollar 
basis.

[T.D. 8263, 54 FR 38653, Sept. 20, 1989, as amended by T.D. 8556, 59 FR 
37672, July 25, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 1.985-2  Election to use the United States dollar as the functional currency of a QBU.

    (a) Background and scope--(1) In general. This section permits an 
eligible QBU to elect to use the dollar as its functional currency for 
taxable years beginning on or before August 24, 1994. An election to use 
a dollar functional currency is not permitted for a QBU other than an 
eligible QBU. Paragraph (b) of this section defines an eligible QBU. 
Paragraph (c) of this section describes the time and manner for making 
the dollar election and paragraph (d) of this section describes the 
effect of making the election. For the definition of a QBU, see section 
989(a). See Sec. 1.985-1(b)(2)(ii) for rules requiring a QBU to use the 
dollar as its functional currency in taxable years beginning after 
August 24, 1994.
    (2) Exception. Pursuant to Sec. 1.985-1(b)(2)(ii)(B)(2), the rules 
of paragraph (c)(3) of this section shall apply with respect to the 
procedure required to be followed by a noncontrolled section 902 
corporation as defined in section 904(d)(2)(E) to elect the dollar as 
its (or its QBU branch's) functional currency and the application of 
Sec. 1.985-3.
    (b) Eligible QBU--(1) In general. The term ``eligible QBU'' means a 
QBU that could have used a hyperinflationary

[[Page 540]]

currency as its functional currency absent the dollar election. See 
Sec. 1.985-1 for how a QBU determines its functional currency absent the 
dollar election.
    (2) Hyperinflationary currency. See Sec. 1.985-1(b)(2)(ii)(D) for 
the definition of hyperinflationary currency.
    (c) Time and manner for dollar election--(1) QBUs that are branches 
of United States persons--(i) Rule. If an eligible QBU is a branch of a 
United States person, the dollar election shall be made by attaching a 
completed Form 8819 to the United States person's timely filed (taking 
extensions into account) tax return for the first taxable year for which 
the election is to be effective.
    (ii) Procedure prior to the issuance of Form 8819. In the absence of 
Form 8819, the election shall be made in accordance with Sec. 1.985-
2T(c)(1). Failure to file an amended return within the time period 
prescribed in Sec. 1.985-2T(c)(1) shall not invalidate the dollar 
election if it is established to the satisfaction of the district 
director that reasonable cause existed for such failure. A subsequent 
election for 1988 will not prejudice the taxpayer with respect to such 
reasonable cause determination. Nevertheless, each United States person 
making an election under the Sec. 1.985-2T(c)(1) must file a Form 8819 
in the time and manner provided in the Form's instructions.
    (2) Eligible QBUs that are controlled foreign corporations or 
branches of controlled foreign corporations--(i) Rule. If an eligible 
QBU is a controlled foreign corporation (as described in section 957), 
or a branch of a controlled foreign corporation, the election may be 
made either by the foreign corporation or by the controlling United 
States shareholders on behalf of the foreign corporation by--
    (A) Filing a completed Form 8819 in the time and manner provided in 
the Form's instructions, and
    (B) Providing the written notice required by paragraph (c)(2)(ii) of 
this section at the time and in the manner prescribed therein.

The term controlling United States shareholders means those United 
States shareholders (as defined in section 951(b)) who, in the 
aggregate, own (within the meaning of section 958(a)) greater than 50 
percent of the total combined voting power of all classes of stock of 
the foreign corporation entitled to vote. If the foreign corporation is 
a controlled foreign corporation (as described in section 957) but the 
United States shareholders do not, in the aggregate, own the requisite 
voting power, the term ``controlling United States shareholders'' means 
all the United States shareholders (as defined in section 951(b)) who 
own (within the meaning of section 958(a)) stock of the controlled 
foreign corporation.
    (ii) Notice. Prior to filing Form 8819, the controlling United 
States shareholders (or the foreign corporation, if the dollar election 
is made by the corporation) shall provide written notice that the dollar 
election will be made to all United States persons known to be 
shareholders who own (within the meaning of section 958(a)) stock of the 
foreign corporation. Such notice shall also include all information 
required in Form 8819.
    (iii) Reasonable cause exception. Failure of the controlling United 
States shareholders (or the foreign corporation, if the dollar election 
is made by the corporation) to timely file Form 8819 or provide written 
notice to a United States person required to be notified by paragraph 
(c)(2)(ii) of this section shall not invalidate the dollar election, if 
it is established to the satisfaction of the district director that 
reasonable cause existed for such failure.
    (iv) Procedure prior to the issuance of Form 8819. In the absence of 
Form 8819, an eligible QBU described in paragraph (c)(2)(i) of this 
section shall make the dollar election in accordance with Sec. 1.985-
2T(c)(2). Nevertheless, the person or persons that made such election 
must file a Form 8819 in the time and manner provided in the Form's 
instructions.
    (3) Eligible QBUs that are noncontrolled foreign corporations or 
branches of noncontrolled foreign corporations--(i) Rule. If an eligible 
QBU is a noncontrolled foreign corporation (a foreign corporation not 
described in section 957), or a branch of a noncontrolled foreign 
corporation, the dollar election must be made by the corporation or the 
majority domestic corporate shareholders on behalf of the corporation by 
applying

[[Page 541]]

the rules provided in paragraph (c)(2)(i)(A) and (B), (ii), (iii), and 
(iv) of this section substituting ``majority domestic corporate 
shareholders'' for ``controlling United States shareholders'' wherever 
it appears therein. The term ``majority domestic corporate 
shareholders'' means those domestic corporate shareholders (as described 
in section 902(a)) who, in the aggregate, own (within the meaning of 
section 958(a)) greater than 50 percent of the total combined voting 
stock of all classes of stock of the noncontrolled foreign corporation 
entitled to vote that is owned (within the meaning of section 958(a)) by 
all the domestic corporate shareholders.
    (ii) Procedure prior to the issuance of Form 8819. In the absence of 
Form 8819, an eligible QBU described in paragraph (c)(3)(i) of this 
section shall make the dollar election in accordance with Sec. 1.985-
2T(c)(3). Nevertheless, the person or persons that made such election 
must file a Form 8819 in the time and manner provided in the Form's 
instructions.
    (4) Others. Any other person making a dollar election under this 
section shall elect by filing Form 8819 and fulfilling any other notice 
requirements that may be required by the Commissioner.
    (d) Effect of dollar election--(1) General rule. If a dollar 
election is made (or considered made under paragraph (d)(3) of this 
section) by or on behalf of an eligible QBU, the QBU shall be deemed to 
have the dollar as its functional currency. Each United States person 
that owns (within the meaning of section 958(a)) stock of a foreign 
corporation which has the dollar as its functional currency under 
Sec. 1.985-2 must make all of its federal income tax calculations with 
respect to the foreign corporation using the dollar as the corporation's 
functional currency (regardless of when ownership was acquired or 
whether the United States person received the written notice required by 
paragraph (c)(2)(i)(B) of this section).
    (2) Computation--(i) In general. Except as provided in paragraph 
(d)(2)(ii) of this section, any eligible QBU that pursuant to this 
Sec. 1.985-2 has a dollar functional currency must compute income or 
loss or earnings and profits (or deficit in earnings and profits) in 
dollars using the dollar approximate separate transactions method 
described in Sec. 1.985-3.
    (ii) Alternative method. An eligible QBU that has a dollar 
functional currency pursuant to this Sec. 1.985-2 may use a method other 
than the dollar approximate separate transactions method described in 
Sec. 1.985-3 only if the QBU demonstrates to the satisfaction of the 
Commissioner that it can properly employ such method. Generally, the QBU 
must show that it could compute foreign currency gain or loss under the 
principles of section 988 with respect to each of its section 988 
transactions. If subsequently the QBU can no longer demonstrate to the 
satisfaction of the district director that it can properly employ such 
an alternative method, then the QBU will be deemed to have changed its 
method of accounting to the dollar approximate separate transactions 
method described in Sec. 1.985-3. This change in accounting will be 
treated as having been made with the consent of the Commissioner. No 
adjustments under either Sec. 1.985-5T (or any succeeding final 
regulation) or section 481(a) shall be required solely because of the 
change. Rather the QBU shall begin accounting for its operations under 
Sec. 1.985-3 based on its dollar books and records as of the time of the 
change.
    (3) Conformity--(i) General rule. If a dollar election is made under 
this Sec. 1.985-2 for an eligible QBU (``electing QBU''), then the 
dollar shall be the functional currency of any related person 
(regardless of when such person became related to the electing QBU) that 
is an eligible QBU, or any branch of any such related person that is an 
eligible QBU. For purposes of the preceding sentence, the term ``related 
person'' means any person with a relationship defined in section 267 (b) 
to the electing QBU (or to the United States or foreign person of which 
the electing QBU is a part). In determining whether two or more 
corporations are members of the same controlled group under section 
267(b)(3), a person is considered to own stock owned directly by such 
person, stock owned with the application of section 1563(e)(1), and 
stock owned with the application of section 267(c).

[[Page 542]]

    (ii) Branches of United States and foreign persons. If a dollar 
election is made for a QBU branch of any person, each eligible QBU 
branch of such person shall have the dollar as its functional currency.
    (4) Required adjustments. If an eligible QBU's functional currency 
changes due to a dollar election, or due to the conformity requirements 
of paragraph (d)(3) of this section, such change shall be deemed for 
purposes of Sec. 1.9B5-4 to be consented to by the Commissioner. No 
adjustments under section 481(a) shall be required solely because of the 
change. However, the QBU must make those adjustments required by 
Sec. 1.985-5T (or any succeeding final regulation).
    (5) Taxable year conformity required. Generally, the adjustments 
required by paragraph (d)(4) of this section shall be made for a related 
person's taxable year--
    (i) That includes the date in which the electing QBU made the dollar 
election if the person was related to such electing QBU at any time 
during the QBU's taxable year that includes such date, or
    (ii) During which the person first becomes related to any electing 
QBU, in all other cases.

For purposes of this paragraph (d)(5), the date in which the electing 
QBU makes the dollar election shall be the last day of the electing 
QBU's taxable year. The district director may permit the related party 
to make such adjustments beginning one taxable year later if, in the 
district director's sole judgment, reasonable cause exists for the 
related party not being able to make the required adjustments for the 
earlier year.
    (6) Availability of election. A dollar election may be made by or on 
behalf of a QBU, or considered made under the conformity rule of 
paragraph (d)(3), in any year in which the QBU is an eligible QBU. If a 
dollar election is not made by or on behalf of a QBU for its first 
taxable year beginning after December 31, 1986 in which it is an 
eligible QBU, then any dollar election made by or on behalf of the QBU, 
or considered made under the conformity rules of paragraph (d)(3) of 
this section, that results in a change in the QBU's functional currency 
shall be treated as having been made with the consent of the 
Commissioner. In such a case, however, the taxpayer must make those 
adjustments required by Sec. 1.985-5T (or any succeeding final 
regulation).
    (7) Effect of changed circumstances. Regardless of any change in 
circumstances (e.g., a currency ceases to qualify as hyperinflationary), 
a QBU whose functional currency is the dollar under this section may 
change its functional currency only if the QBU complies with Sec. 1.985-
4.
    (8) Examples. The provisions of this section are illustrated by the 
following examples.

    Example 1. X is a calendar year domestic corporation that in 1987 
establishes a branch, A, in Country Z. A's functional currency under 
sections 985(b)(1) and (2) and Sec. 1.985-1 is the ``h'', the currency 
of Country Z. The cumulative inflation in Country Z exceeds 100 percent 
for the thirty-six months prior to January 1987, as measured by the 
consumer price index of Country Z listed in the monthly issues of the 
``International Financial Statistics''. Accordingly, A is an eligible 
QBU in 1987 because the h is a hyperinflationary currency. Thus, X may 
elect the dollar as the functional currency of A for 1987.
    Example 2. The facts are the same as in Example (1). X does not 
elect the dollar as the functional currency of A for 1987. Rather, X 
elects the dollar as the functional currency of A for l991, a year A is 
an eligible QBU. The election constitutes a change in A's functional 
currency that is made with the consent of the Commissioner. However, A 
must make the adjustments required under Sec. 1.985-5T (or any 
succeeding final regulation).
    Example 3. X is a domestic corporation that establishes A, an 
eligible QBU branch. X is wholly owned by domestic corporation Y. Y has 
an eligible QBU branch, B. Both X and Y are calendar year taxpayers. X 
makes a dollar election for A in 1987. Thus, A is an electing QBU. X and 
Y are related persons as defined in section 267(b) (i.e., Y has a 
relationship under section 267(b)(3) to X, the corporation of which A is 
a part). Therefore, the dollar election by X for A in 1987 results in B, 
the eligible QBU branch of Y, also having the dollar as its functional 
currency for 1987.
    Example 4. The facts are the same as in Example 3, except that Y 
does not have an eligible QBU branch but owns all the stock of C, a 
calendar year controlled foreign corporation, which is not itself an 
eligible QBU but which has an eligible QBU branch, D. X and C are 
related persons as defined in section 267(b) (i.e., C has a relationship 
under section 267(b)(3) to X, the corporation of

[[Page 543]]

which A is a part). Therefore, the dollar election by X for A in 1987 
results in D, the eligible QBU branch of C, also having the dollar as 
its functional currency for 1987.
    Example 5. X, whose taxable year ends September 30, is an eligible 
QBU that does not use the dollar as its functional currency. X is 
wholly-owned by domestic corporation W. On January 1, 1989, X acquires 
all the stock of Y, an unrelated eligible QBU that made the dollar 
election under Sec. 1.985-2. Y is a calendar year taxpayer. After the 
stock purchase, X and Y are related persons as defined in section 
267(b). Under Secs. 1.985-2(d)(3) and (5), the dollar shall be the 
functional currency of X, any person related to X, and any branch of 
such related person that is an eligible QBU beginning with the taxable 
year that includes December 31, 1989. Thus, X must change to the dollar 
for its taxable year beginning October 1, 1988. However, the district 
director may allow X to change to the dollar for its taxable year 
beginning October 1, 1989, provided reasonable cause exists. Those QBUs 
changing to the dollar as their functional currency as the result of the 
conformity requirements must make the adjustments required under 
Sec. 1.985-5T (or any succeeding final regulation).
    Example 6. The facts are the same as in Example 5, except that 
before X purchased the Y stock, X made the dollar election under 
Sec. 1.985-2 but Y did not use the dollar as its functional currency. 
Under Secs. 1.985-2(d)(3) and (5) the dollar shall be the functional 
currency of Y, any person related to Y, and any branch of such related 
person that is an eligible QBU beginning with the taxable year that 
includes September 30, 1989. Thus, Y must change to the dollar for its 
taxable year beginning January 1, 1989. However the district director 
may allow Y to change to the dollar for its taxable year beginning 
January 1, 1990, provided reasonable cause exists. Those QBUs changing 
to the dollar as their functional currency as the result of the 
conformity requirements must make the adjustments required under 
Sec. 1.985-5T (or any succeeding final regulation).

[T.D. 8263, 54 FR 38656, Sept. 20, 1989, as amended by T.D. 8556, 59 FR 
37673, July 25, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 1.985-3  United States dollar approximate separate transactions method.

    (a) Scope and effective date--(1) Scope. This section describes the 
United States dollar (dollar) approximate separate transactions method 
of accounting (DASTM). For all purposes of subtitle A, this method of 
accounting must be used to compute the gross income, taxable income or 
loss, or earnings and profits (or deficit in earnings and profits) of a 
QBU (as defined in section 989(a)) that has the dollar as its functional 
currency pursuant to Sec. 1.985-1(b)(2).
    (2) Effective date--(i) In general. This section is effective for 
taxable years beginning after August 24, 1994.
    (ii) DASTM prior-year election. A taxpayer may elect to apply this 
section to any open taxable year beginning after December 31, 1986 
(whether or not DASTM has been previously elected for some or all of 
those years). In order to make this election, the taxpayer must apply 
Sec. 1.985-3 to that year and all subsequent years. In addition, each 
person that is related (within the meaning of Sec. 1.985-3(e)(2)(vi)) to 
the taxpayer on the last day of any taxable year for which the election 
is effective and that would have been eligible to elect DASTM must also 
apply these rules to that year and all subsequent years. A taxpayer that 
has not previously elected to apply DASTM to its prior taxable years may 
make the DASTM election for the pertinent years by filing amended 
returns and complying with the applicable election procedures of 
Sec. 1.985-2. Form 8819 shall be attached to the return for the first 
year for which the election is to be effective. A taxpayer that has 
elected DASTM for prior taxable years and applied the rules under 
Sec. 1.985-3 (as contained in the April 1, 1994 edition of 26 CFR part 1 
(1.908 to 1.1000)) may amend its returns to apply the rules of this 
Sec. 1.985-3. In either case, the DASTM election for prior taxable years 
shall be deemed to be made with the consent of the Commissioner.
    (b) Statement of method. Under DASTM, income or loss or earnings and 
profits (or a deficit in earnings and profits) of a QBU for its taxable 
year shall be determined in dollars by--
    (1) Preparing an income or loss statement from the QBU's books and 
records (within the meaning of Sec. 1.989(a)-1(d)) as recorded in the 
QBU's hyperinflationary currency (as defined in Sec. 1.985-
1(b)(2)(ii)(D));
    (2) Making the adjustments necessary to conform such statement to 
United States generally accepted accounting principles and tax 
accounting principles (including reversing monetary correction 
adjustments required by local accounting principles);

[[Page 544]]

    (3) Translating the amounts of hyperinflationary currency as shown 
on such adjusted statement into dollars in accordance with paragraph (c) 
of this section; and
    (4) Adjusting the resulting dollar income or loss or earnings and 
profits (or deficit in earnings and profits) and, where necessary, 
particular items of gross income, deductible expense or other amounts, 
in accordance with paragraph (e) of this section to reflect the amount 
of DASTM gain or loss as determined under paragraph (d) of this section.
    (c) Translation into United States dollars--(1) In general. Except 
as otherwise provided in this paragraph (c), the amounts shown on the 
income or loss statement, as adjusted under paragraph (b)(2) of this 
section, shall be translated into dollars at the exchange rate (as 
defined in paragraph (c)(6) of this section) for the translation period 
(as defined in paragraph (c)(7) of this section) to which they relate. 
However, if the QBU previously changed its functional currency to the 
dollar, and the rules of Sec. 1.985-5 (or, if applicable, Sec. 1.985-5T, 
as contained in the April 1, 1993 edition of 26 CFR part 1 (1.908 to 
1.1000)) applied in translating its balance sheet amounts into dollars, 
then the spot exchange rate applied under those rules shall be used to 
translate any amount that would otherwise be translated at a rate 
determined by reference to a translation period prior to the change in 
functional currency. For example, depreciation with respect to an asset 
acquired while the QBU had a nondollar functional currency shall be 
translated into dollars at the spot rate on the last day of the taxable 
year before the year of change to a dollar functional currency, rather 
than at the rate for the period in which the asset was acquired.
    (2) Cost of goods sold. The dollar value of cost of goods sold shall 
equal the sum of the dollar values of beginning inventory and purchases 
less the dollar value of closing inventory as these amounts are 
determined under paragraph (c)(3) of this section.
    (3) Beginning inventory, purchases, and closing inventory--(i) 
Beginning inventory. Amounts representing beginning inventory shall be 
translated so as to obtain the same amount of dollars which represented 
such items in the closing inventory balance for the preceding taxable 
year.
    (ii) Purchases. Amounts representing items purchased or otherwise 
first included in inventory during the taxable year shall be translated 
at the exchange rate for the translation period in which the cost of 
such items was incurred.
    (iii) Closing inventory--(A) In general. Amounts representing items 
included in the closing inventory balance shall be translated at the 
exchange rate for the translation period in which the cost of such items 
was incurred. However, if amounts representing items included in the 
closing inventory balance are either valued at market or written down to 
market value, they shall be translated at the exchange rate existing on 
the last day of the taxable year. For purposes of determining lower of 
cost or market, items of inventory included in the closing inventory 
balance shall be translated into dollars at the exchange rate for the 
translation period in which the cost of such items was incurred and 
compared with market as determined in the QBU's hyperinflationary 
currency translated into dollars at the exchange rate existing on the 
last day of the taxable year.
    (B) Determination of translation period. The method used to 
determine the translation period of amounts representing items of 
closing inventory for purposes of paragraph (c)(3)(iii)(A) of this 
section may be based upon reasonable approximations and averages, 
including rates of turnover, provided that the method is used 
consistently from year to year.
    (4) Depreciation, depletion, and amortization. Amounts representing 
allowances for depreciation, depletion, or amortization shall be 
translated at the exchange rate for the translation period in which the 
cost of the underlying asset was incurred, except as provided in 
paragraph (c)(1) of this section.
    (5) Prepaid expenses or income. Amounts representing expense or 
income paid or received in a prior taxable year shall be translated at 
the exchange rate for the translation period

[[Page 545]]

during which they were paid or received.
    (6) Exchange rate. The exchange rate for a translation period may be 
determined under any reasonable method, provided that the method is 
consistently applied to all translation periods and conforms to the 
taxpayer's method of financial accounting. Reasonable methods include 
the average of beginning and ending exchange rates for the translation 
period and the spot rate on the last day of the translation period. Once 
chosen, a method for determining an exchange rate can be changed only 
with the consent of the district director.
    (7) Translation period--(i) In general. Except as provided in 
paragraphs (c)(3)(iii)(B) and (c)(7)(ii) of this section, a translation 
period shall be each month within a QBU's taxable year.
    (ii) Exception. A taxpayer may divide its taxable year into 
translation periods of equal length (with not more than one short period 
annually) that are less than one month. Once such a translation period 
is established, it may not be changed without the consent of the 
district director.
    (8) Dollar transactions--(i) In general. Except as provided in 
paragraph (c)(8)(ii) of this section, no DASTM gain or loss is realized 
with respect to dollar transactions since the dollar is the functional 
currency of the QBU. Thus, the amount of any payment or receipt of 
dollars shall be reflected in the income or loss statement by the amount 
of such dollars. Also, the income or loss attributable to any 
transaction in which the amount that a QBU is entitled to receive (or is 
required to pay) by reason of such transaction is denominated in terms 
of the dollar, or is determined by reference to the value of the dollar, 
must be computed transaction by transaction. For example, if a foreign 
corporation lends 20 LC when 20 LC=$20 and is entitled to receive the LC 
equivalent of $20 at maturity plus a market rate of interest in dollars 
(or its LC equivalent), the loan is a dollar transaction. Similarly, 
this paragraph applies to any transaction that is determined to be a 
dollar transaction under section 988.
    (ii) Non-dollar functional currency. If pursuant to Sec. 1.985-
1(b)(2)(ii)(B)(1), a QBU is required to use a functional currency other 
than the dollar, then that currency shall be substituted for the dollar 
in applying paragraph (c)(8)(i) of this section.
    (9) Third currency transactions.--A taxpayer may use any reasonable 
method of accounting for transactions described in sections 988(c)(1)(B) 
and (C) that are denominated in, or determined by reference to, a 
currency other than the QBU's hyperinflationary currency or the dollar 
(third currency transactions) so long as such method is consistent with 
its method of financial accounting.
    (10) Examples. The provisions of this paragraph (c) are illustrated 
by the following examples:

    Example 1. S is an accrual basis QBU that is required to use the 
dollar as its functional currency for its first taxable year beginning 
in 1994. S's hyperinflationary currency is the ``h.'' During 1994, S 
accrues 100 dollars attributable to dollar-denominated sales. Because 
this is a dollar transaction under paragraph (c)(8) of this section, S's 
income or loss for 1994 shall reflect the 100 dollars (not the 
hyperinflationary value of such dollars when accrued).
    Example 2. (i) S is an accrual basis QBU that is required to use the 
dollar as its functional currency for its first taxable year beginning 
in 1994. S's hyperinflationary currency is the ``h.'' During 1994, S's 
sales amounted to 240,000,000h, its currently deductible expenses were 
26,000,000h, and its total inventory purchases amounted to 100,000,000h. 
During January and February of 1994, S purchased depreciable assets for 
80,000,000h and was allowed depreciation of 4,000,000h. At the end of 
1994, S's closing inventory was 23,000,000h. No election to use a 
translation period other than the month is made, S had no transactions 
described in paragraph (c)(8) or (c)(9) of this section, and S's closing 
inventory was computed on the first-in, first-out inventory method. S's 
adjusted income or loss statement for 1994 is translated into dollars as 
follows:

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                  Hyperinflationary   Exchange    United States 
                                                                       currency         rate         dollars    
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                              Sales                                                                             
                                                                                                                
(Jan.-Feb.).....................................................       10,000,000h     \1\ 20:1        $500,000 
(Mar.-Apr.).....................................................       20,000,000          21:1         952,381 

[[Page 546]]

                                                                                                                
(May.-June.)....................................................       50,000,000          22:1       2,272,727 
(July)..........................................................       50,000,000          23:1       2,173,913 
(August)........................................................       20,000,000          26:1         769,231 
(Sept.).........................................................       20,000,000          28:1         714,286 
(Oct.)..........................................................       20,000,000          29:1         689,655 
(Nov.)..........................................................       20,000,000          30:1         666,667 
(Dec.)..........................................................       30,000,000          31:1         967,742 
                                                                 -------------------            ----------------
      Total.....................................................      240,000,000h   ..........       9,706,602 
                       Cost of Goods Sold                                                                       
                                                                                                                
Opening Inventory Purchases:                                                     0   ..........               0 
    (Jan.-Feb.).................................................       15,000,000h         20:1         750,000 
    (Mar.-Apr.).................................................       10,000,000          21:1         476,190 
    (May-June)..................................................       30,000,000          22:1       1,363,636 
    (July)......................................................       20,000,000          23:1         869,565 
    (August)....................................................       10,000,000          26:1         384,615 
    (Sept.).....................................................        5,000,000          28:1         178,571 
    (Oct.)......................................................        5,000,000          29:1         172,414 
    (Nov.)......................................................        2,500,000          30:1          83,333 
    (Dec.)......................................................        2,500,000          31:1          80,645 
Less Closing Inventory..........................................      (23,000,000)        (\2\)        (822,655)
                                                                 -------------------            ----------------
                                                                       77,000,000h   ..........      3,536,314  
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Where multiple months are indicated, the exchange rate applies for all months.                              
\2\ See paragraph (ii) of this Example.                                                                         

    (ii) Since S uses the first-in, first-out inventory method, the 
closing inventory is assumed to consist of purchases made during the 
most recent translation period as follows:

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                               Hyperinflationary                   United States
                                                                    currency       Exchange rate      dollars   
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
December.....................................................        2,500,000h             31:1        $ 80,645
November.....................................................        2,500,000              30:1          83,333
October......................................................        5,000,000              29:1         172,414
September....................................................        5,000,000              28:1         178,571
August.......................................................        8,000,000              26:1         307,692
                                                              -------------------                ---------------
      Total..................................................       23,000,000h   ..............         822,655
                                                              ===================                ===============
                                                                                                                
                   Non-Capitalized Expenses                                                                     
                                                                                                                
(Jan.-Feb.)..................................................        4,000,000h             20:1         200,000
(Mar.-Apr.)..................................................        2,500,000              21:1         119,048
(May-June)...................................................        2,500,000              22:1         113,636
(July).......................................................        2,000,000              23:1          86,957
(August).....................................................        3,000,000              26:1         115,385
(Sept.)......................................................        3,000,000              28:1         107,143
(Oct.).......................................................        2,000,000              29:1          68,966
(Nov.).......................................................        3,000,000              30:1         100,000
(Dec.).......................................................        4,000,000              31:1         129,032
                                                              -------------------                ---------------
      Total..................................................       26,000,000h   ..............       1,040,167
Depreciation.................................................        4,000,000h             20:1         200,000
      Total Cost & Expenses..................................      107,000,000h   ..............       4,776,481
                                                              -------------------                ---------------
Operating Profit.............................................      133,000,000h   ..............       4,930,121
                                                              ===================                ===============
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (d) Computation of DASTM gain or loss--(1) Rule. DASTM gain or loss 
of a QBU equals--
    (i) The net worth of the QBU (as determined under paragraph (d)(2) 
of this section) at the end of the taxable year minus the net worth of 
the QBU at the end of the preceding taxable year; plus
    (ii) The dollar amount of the items described in paragraph (d)(3) of 
this section and minus the dollar amount of

[[Page 547]]

the items described in paragraph (d)(4) of this section; minus
    (iii) The amount of dollar income or earnings and profits (or plus 
the amount of any dollar loss or deficit in earnings and profits) as 
determined for the taxable year pursuant to paragraphs (b)(1) through 
(b)(3) of this section.
    (2) Net worth. Net worth of a QBU at the end of any taxable year 
equals the aggregate dollar amount representing assets on the QBU's 
balance sheet at the end of the taxable year less the aggregate dollar 
amount representing liabilities on the balance sheet. Notwithstanding 
any other provision in this paragraph (d)(2), the district director may 
adjust the amount of any asset or liability if a purpose for acquiring 
(or disposing of) the asset or incurring (or discharging) the liability 
is to manipulate the composition of the balance sheet for any period 
during the taxable year in order to avoid tax. The taxpayer shall 
determine net worth by--
    (i) Preparing a balance sheet as of the end of the taxable year from 
the QBU's books and records (within the meaning of Sec. 1.989(a)-1(d)) 
as recorded in the QBU's hyperinflationary currency;
    (ii) Making adjustments necessary to conform such balance sheet to 
United States generally accepted accounting principles and tax 
accounting principles (including reversing monetary correction 
adjustments required by local accounting principles); and
    (iii) Translating the asset and liability amounts shown on the 
balance sheet into United States dollars in accordance with paragraph 
(d)(5) of this section.
    (3) Positive adjustments. The items described in this paragraph 
(d)(3) are dividend distributions for the taxable year and any items 
that decrease net worth for the taxable year but that generally do not 
affect income or loss or earnings and profits (or a deficit in earnings 
and profits). Such items include a transfer to the home office of a QBU 
branch and a return of capital. Except as otherwise provided by ruling 
or administrative pronouncement, the amount of a transfer to the home 
office of a QBU branch, a dividend, or a distribution that is a return 
of capital shall be translated into dollars at the exchange rate on the 
date the amount is paid.
    (4) Negative adjustments. The items described in this paragraph 
(d)(4) are items that increase net worth for the taxable year but that 
generally do not affect income or loss or earnings and profits (or a 
deficit in earnings and profits). Such items include a capital 
contribution or a transfer from a home office to a QBU branch. Except as 
otherwise provided by ruling or administrative pronouncement, if the 
contribution or transfer is not in dollars, the amount of a capital 
contribution or transfer shall be translated into dollars at the 
exchange rate on the date made.
    (5) Translation of balance sheet. Asset and liability amounts shown 
on the balance sheet in hyperinflationary currency (adjusted pursuant to 
paragraph (d)(2)(ii) of this section) shall be translated into dollars 
as provided in this paragraph (d)(5). However, if the QBU previously 
changed its functional currency to the dollar and the rules of 
Sec. 1.985-5 (or, if applicable, Sec. 1.985-5T, as contained in the 
April 1, 1993 edition of 26 CFR part 1 (1.908 to 1.1000)) applied in 
translating its balance sheet amounts into dollars, then the spot 
exchange rate applied under those rules shall be used to translate any 
amount that would otherwise be translated at a rate determined by 
reference to a translation period prior to the change in functional 
currency. For example, the basis of real property acquired while the QBU 
had a nondollar functional currency shall be translated into dollars at 
the spot rate on the last day of the taxable year before the year of 
change to a dollar functional currency, rather than at the rate for the 
period in which the cost was incurred.
    (i) Closing inventory. Amounts representing items of inventory 
included in the closing inventory balance shall be translated in 
accordance with paragraph (c)(3)(iii) of this section.
    (ii) Bad debt reserves. Amounts representing bad debt reserves shall 
be translated at the exchange rate for the last translation period for 
the taxable year.

[[Page 548]]

    (iii) Prepaid income or expense. Amounts representing expenses or 
income paid or received in a prior taxable year shall be translated in 
accordance with paragraph (c)(5) of this section.
    (iv) Hyperinflationary currency. Amounts of the hyperinflationary 
currency and hyperinflationary demand deposit balances shall be 
translated at the exchange rate for the last translation period of the 
taxable year.
    (v) Certain assets--(A) In general. Amounts representing plant, real 
property, equipment, goodwill, and patents and other intangibles shall 
be translated at the exchange rate for the translation period in which 
the cost of the asset was incurred.
    (B) Adjustment to certain assets. Amounts representing depreciation, 
depletion, and amortization reserves shall be translated in accordance 
with paragraph (c)(4) of this section.
    (vi) Hyperinflationary debt obligations. Except as provided in 
paragraph (d)(5)(vii) of this section, amounts representing a 
hyperinflationary debt obligation (including accounts receivable and 
payable) shall be translated at the exchange rate for the last 
translation period for the taxable year.
    (vii) Accrued foreign income taxes. Amounts representing an accrued 
but unpaid foreign income tax shall be translated at the exchange rate 
on the last day of the last translation period of the taxable year of 
accrual.
    (viii) Certain hyperinflationary financial instruments. Amounts 
representing any item described in section 988(c)(1)(B)(iii) (relating 
to forward contracts, futures contracts, options, or similar financial 
instruments) denominated in or determined by reference to the 
hyperinflationary currency shall be translated at the exchange rate for 
the last translation period for the taxable year.
    (ix) Other assets and liabilities. Amounts representing assets and 
liabilities, other than those described in paragraphs (d)(5)(i) through 
(viii) of this section, shall be translated at the exchange rate for the 
translation period in which the cost of the asset or the amount of the 
liability was incurred.
    (6) Dollar transactions. Notwithstanding any other provisions of 
this paragraph (d), where the amount representing an item shown on the 
balance sheet reflects a dollar transaction (described in paragraph 
(c)(8) of this section), the transaction shall be taken into account in 
accordance with that paragraph.
    (7) Third currency transactions. A taxpayer may use any reasonable 
method of accounting for transactions described in section 988(c)(1)(B) 
and (C) that are denominated in, or determined by reference to, a 
currency other than the QBU's hyperinflationary currency or the dollar 
(third currency transactions), so long as such method is consistent with 
its method of financial accounting.
    (8) Character. The amount of DASTM gain or loss determined under 
paragraph (d)(1) of this section shall be ordinary income or loss.
    (9) Example. The provisions of this paragraph (d) are illustrated by 
the following example:

    Example. (i) S, an accrual method calendar year foreign corporation, 
uses DASTM. S's hyperinflationary currency is the ``h.'' S's net worth 
at December 31, 1993 was $3,246,495. For 1994, S's operating profit is 
81,340,000h, or $2,038,200. S made a 5,000,000h distribution in April 
and again in December of 1994. S's translation period is the month. None 
of S's assets or liabilities reflect a dollar or third currency 
transaction described in paragraph (c)(8) or (c)(9) of this section, 
respectively. The exchange rate for each month in 1994 is as follows:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                  January                     32h:$1                    
                  Feb.-Mar.                   33:1                      
                  April-May                   34:1                      
                  June                        35:1                      
                  July                        36:1                      
                  Aug.-Sept.                  37:1                      
                  Oct.                        38:1                      
                  Nov.                        39:1                      
                  Dec.                        40:1                      
                                                                        

    (ii) At the end of 1994, S's assets and liabilities, as adjusted and 
translated pursuant to paragraphs (d)(2) and (d)(5) of this section, are 
as follows:

[[Page 549]]



----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                     Hyperin-                                   
                                                                    flationary     Exchange rate    U.S. dollar 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hyperinflationary cash on hand..................................         40,000h            40:1         $1,000 
  Checking account..............................................        400,000             40:1         10,000 
Accounts Receivable- 30 Day Accounts............................     20,000,000         \1\ 40:1        500,000 
    60 Day Accounts.............................................     25,000,000             40:1        625,000 
Inventory.......................................................     65,000,000            (\2\)       2,500,000
Fixed assets--Property..........................................     90,000,000             27:1      3,333,333 
    Plant.......................................................    190,000,000            (\3\)      6,785,714 
        Accumulated Depreciation................................      (600,000)            (\3\)        (21,428)
    Equipment...................................................     10,000,000            (\4\)        340,000 
        Accumulated Depreciation................................      (400,000)            (\4\)        (13,333)
Common Stock--Stock A...........................................        500,000             34:1         14,706 
      Stock B...................................................        400,000             26:1         15,385 
Preferred Stock.................................................      1,000,000             32:1         31,250 
C.D.s...........................................................      5,000,000             40:1        125,000 
      Total Assets..............................................    406,340,000                      14,246,627 
Accounts Payable Long-term liabilities:                              35,000,000             40:1        875,000 
    Liability A.................................................    150,000,000             40:1      3,750,000 
    Liability B.................................................     80,000,000             40:1      2,000,000 
    Liability C.................................................     30,000,000             40:1        750,000 
                                                                 ----------------                ---------------
      Total Liabilities.........................................    295,000,000h                    $7,375,000  
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ S ages its accounts receivable and groups them into two categories--those outstanding for 30 days and those 
  outstanding for 60 days.                                                                                      
\2\ Translated the same as closing inventory under paragraph (c)(3)(iii).                                       
\3\ The cost of S's plant was incurred in several translation periods. Therefore, the dollar cost and dollar    
  depreciation reflect several translation rates.                                                               
\4\ S has a variety of equipment. Therefore, S's dollar basis represents the sum of the hyperinflationary cost  
  of each, translated according to the exchange rate for the translation period incurred.                       

    (iii) The DASTM gain of S for 1994 is computed as follows:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                  Net worth--1994         ..............      $6,871,627
                  Less--Net worth--1993   ..............      $3,246,495
                  Plus--1994 Dividends:                                 
                      April                     $149,254                
                      December               \1\ 126,582         275,836
                  Less Operating Profit--                               
                   1994                   ..............       2,038,200
                  DASTM Gain              ..............      $1,862,768
                                                         ===============
                                                                        
                                                                        
\1\ The exchange rates on the date of the April and December dividends  
  were 33.5h:$1 and 39.5h:$1, respectively.                             

    (iv) Thus, total profit = $2,038,200 + $1,862,768 = $3,900,968

    (e) Effect of DASTM gain or loss on gross income, taxable income, or 
earnings and profits--(1) In general. For all purposes of subtitle A, 
the amount of DASTM gain or loss of a QBU determined under paragraph (d) 
of this section is taken into account by the QBU for purposes of 
determining the amount of its gross income, taxable income or loss, 
earnings and profits (or deficit in earnings and profits), and, where 
necessary, particular items of income, expense or other amounts. DASTM 
gain or loss is allocated under one of two methods. Certain small QBUs 
may elect the small QBU DASTM allocation described in paragraph (e)(2) 
of this section. All other QBUs must use the 9-step procedure described 
in paragraph (e)(3) of this section.
    (2) Small QBU DASTM allocation--(i) Election threshold. A taxpayer 
may elect to use the small QBU DASTM allocation described in paragraph 
(e)(2)(iv) of this section with respect to a QBU that has an adjusted 
basis in assets (translated as provided in paragraph (d)(5) of this 
section) of $10 million or less at the end of any taxable year. In 
calculating the $10 million threshold, a QBU shall be treated as owning 
all of the assets of each related QBU (as defined in paragraph 
(e)(2)(vi)

[[Page 550]]

of this section) having its residence (as defined in section 
988(a)(3)(B)) in the QBU's country of residence (related same- country 
QBU). For this purpose, appropriate adjustment shall be made to 
eliminate the double counting of assets created in transactions between 
related QBUs resident in the same country. For example, assume QBU-1, 
resident in country X, sells inventory to related QBU-2, also resident 
in country X, in exchange for an account receivable. For purposes of 
determining the assets of QBU-1 under this paragraph (e)(2)(i), the 
taxpayer shall take into account either the inventory shown on the books 
of QBU-2 or QBU-1's receivable from QBU-2 (but not both).
    (ii) Consent to election. The election of the small QBU DASTM 
allocation or subsequent application of the rules of paragraph (e)(3) of 
this section due to an increase in the adjusted basis of the QBU's 
assets shall be deemed to have been made with the consent of the 
Commissioner. Once the election under paragraph (e)(2)(iii) of this 
section is made, it shall apply for all years in which the adjusted 
basis of the assets of the QBU (and any related same-country QBU) is $10 
million or less, unless revoked with the Commissioner's consent. If the 
adjusted basis of the assets of the QBU (and any related same- country 
QBU) exceeds $10 million at the end of any taxable year, the rules of 
paragraph (e)(3) of this section shall apply to that QBU (and any 
related same-country QBU) for such year and each subsequent year unless 
such QBU again qualifies, and applies for and obtains the Commissioner's 
consent, to use the small QBU DASTM allocation. However, if a QBU 
acquires assets with a principal purpose of avoiding the application of 
paragraph (e)(2)(iv) of this section, the Commissioner may disregard the 
acquisition of such assets.
    (iii) Manner of making election--(A) QBUs that are branches of 
United States persons. For the first year in which this election is 
effective, in the case of a QBU branch of a United States person, a 
statement shall be attached to the United States person's timely filed 
Federal income tax return (taking extensions into account). The 
statement shall identify the QBU (or QBUs) for which the election is 
being made by describing its business and its country of residence, 
state the adjusted basis of the assets of the QBU (and any related same-
country QBUs) to which the election applies, and include a statement 
that the election is being made pursuant to Sec. 1.985-3(e)(2).
    (B) Other QBUs. In the case of a QBU other than one described in 
paragraph (e)(2)(iii)(A) of this section, an election must be made in 
the manner prescribed in Sec. 1.964-1. The statement filed with the 
Internal Revenue Service as required under Sec. 1.964-1 must include the 
information required under paragraph (e)(2)(iii)(A) of this section.
    (iv) Effect of election. If a taxpayer elects under this paragraph 
(e)(2) to use the small QBU DASTM allocation, DASTM gain or loss, as 
determined under paragraph (d) of this section, of a small QBU shall be 
allocated ratably to all items of the QBU's gross income (determined 
prior to adjustment for DASTM gain or loss). Therefore, for purposes of 
the foreign tax credit, DASTM gain or loss shall be allocated on the 
basis of the relative amounts of gross income in each separate category 
as defined in Sec. 1.904-5(a)(1). In the case of a controlled foreign 
corporation (within the meaning of section 957 or 953(c)(1)(B)), for 
purposes of section 952, DASTM gain or loss shall be allocated to 
subpart F income in a separate category in the same ratio that the gross 
subpart F income in that category for the taxable year bears to its 
total gross income in that category for the taxable year.
    (v) Conformity. If a person (or a QBU of such person) makes an 
election under this paragraph (e)(2) to use the small QBU DASTM 
allocation, then each QBU of any related person (as defined in paragraph 
(e)(2)(vi) of this section) that satisfies the threshold requirement of 
paragraph (e)(2)(i) of this section (after application of the 
aggregation rule of paragraph (e)(2)(i) of this section) shall be deemed 
to have made the election.
    (vi) Related person. The term related person means any person with a 
relationship to the QBU (or to the United States or foreign person of 
which the electing QBU is a part) that is defined in section 267(b) or 
section 707(b).

[[Page 551]]

    (3) DASTM 9-step procedure--(i) Step 1--prepare balance sheets. The 
taxpayer shall prepare an opening and a closing balance sheet for the 
QBU for each balance sheet period during the taxable year. The balance 
sheet period is the most frequent period for which balance sheet data 
are reasonably available (but in no event less frequently than 
quarterly). The balance sheet period may not be changed without the 
consent of the district director. The balance sheets must be prepared 
under the principles of paragraph (d)(2) of this section.
    (ii) Step 2--identify certain assets and liabilities. The taxpayer 
shall identify each item on the balance sheet that is described in 
section 988(c)(1)(B) or (C) and that would have been translated under 
paragraph (d)(5) of this section into dollars at the exchange rate for 
the last translation period for the taxable year (or the exchange rate 
on the last day of the last translation period of the taxable year in 
the case of an accrued foreign income tax liability).
    (iii) Step 3--characterize the assets. The taxpayer shall 
characterize and group the assets identified in paragraph (e)(3)(ii) of 
this section (Step 2) according to the source and the type of income 
that they generate, have generated, or may reasonably be expected to 
generate by applying the principles of Sec. 1.861-9T(g)(3) or its 
successor regulation (relating to characterization of assets for 
purposes of interest expense allocation). If a purpose for a taxpayer's 
business practices is to manipulate asset characterization or groupings, 
the district director may allocate or apportion DASTM gain or loss 
attributable to the assets. Thus, if a taxpayer that previously did not 
separately state interest on accounts receivable begins to impose an 
interest charge and a purpose for the change was to manipulate tax 
characterizations or groupings, then the district director may require 
that none of the DASTM gain or loss attributable to those receivables be 
allocated or apportioned to interest income.
    (iv) Step 4--determine DASTM gain or loss attributable to certain 
assets--(A) General rule. The taxpayer shall determine the dollar amount 
of DASTM gain or loss attributable to assets in each group identified in 
paragraph (e)(3)(iii) of this section (Step 3) as follows:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC09OC91.062


where

bb = the hyperinflationary currency adjusted basis of the assets in the 
group at the beginning of the balance sheet period.
eb = the hyperinflationary currency adjusted basis of the assets in the 
group at the end of the balance sheet period.
er = one dollar divided by the number of hyperinflationary currency 
units that equal one dollar at the end of the balance sheet period.
br = one dollar divided by the number of hyperinflationary currency 
units that equal one dollar at the beginning of the balance sheet 
period.
    (B) Weighting to prevent distortion. If averaging the adjusted basis 
of assets in a group at the beginning and end of a balance sheet period 
results in an allocation of DASTM gain or loss that does not clearly 
reflect income, as might be the case in the event of a purchase or 
disposition of an asset that is not in the normal course of business, 
the taxpayer must use a weighting method that reflects the time the 
assets are held by the QBU during the translation period.
    (C) Example. The provisions of this paragraph (e)(3)(iv) are 
illustrated by the following example:

    Example. S is a foreign corporation that operates in the 
hyperinflationary currency ``h'' and computes its income or loss or 
earnings and profits under DASTM. S's adjusted basis in a group of 
assets described in section 988(c)(1)(B) or (C) that generate general 
limitation foreign source income (as characterized under paragraph 
(e)(3)(iii) of this section) at the beginning of the balance sheet 
period is 750,000h. S's basis in such assets at the end of the balance 
sheet period is 1,250,000h. The exchange rate at the beginning of the 
balance sheet period is $1 = 200h. The exchange rate at the end of the 
balance sheet period is $1 = 500h. The DASTM loss attributable to the 
assets described above is $3,000, determined as follows:

[(750,000h+1,250,000h)<divide>2] x  
[($1<divide>500h)-($1<divide>200h)]=($3000)
    (v) Step 5--adjust dollar gross income by DASTM gain or loss from 
assets. The

[[Page 552]]

taxpayer shall adjust the dollar amount of the QBU's gross income 
(computed under paragraphs (b)(1) through (b)(3) of this section) 
generated by each group of assets characterized in paragraph (e)(3)(iii) 
of this section (Step 3) by the amount of DASTM gain or loss 
attributable to those assets computed under paragraph (e)(3)(iv) of this 
section (Step 4). Thus, if a group of assets, such as accounts 
receivable, generates both a category of income described in section 
904(d)(1)(I) (relating to general limitation income) that is not foreign 
base company income as defined in section 954 and a DASTM loss under 
paragraph (e)(3)(iv) of this section (Step 4), the amount of the DASTM 
loss would reduce the amount of the QBU's gross income in that category. 
Similarly, if a group of assets, such as short-term bank deposits, 
generates both foreign personal holding company income that is passive 
income (described in sections 954(c)(1)(A) and 904(d)(1)(A)) and a DASTM 
loss under paragraph (e)(3)(iv) of this section (Step 4), the amount of 
the DASTM loss would reduce the amount of the QBU's foreign personal 
holding company income and passive income. See section 904(f) and the 
regulations thereunder in the case where that section would apply and 
DASTM loss attributable to a group of assets exceeds the income 
generated by such assets.
    (vi) Step 6--determine DASTM gain or loss attributable to 
liabilities--(A) General rule. The taxpayer shall determine the dollar 
amount of DASTM gain or loss attributable to liabilities identified in 
paragraph (e)(3)(ii) of this section (Step 2), and described in 
paragraph (e)(3)(vi)(B) of this section as follows:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC09OC91.063


where

bl = the hyperinflationary currency amount of liabilities at the 
beginning of the balance sheet period.
el = the hyperinflationary currency amount of liabilities at the end of 
the balance sheet translation period.
br = one dollar divided by the number of hyperinflationary currency 
units that equal one dollar at the beginning of the balance sheet 
period.
er = one dollar divided by the number of hyperinflationary currency 
units that equal one dollar at the end of the balance sheet period.
    (B) Separate calculation. The calculation shall be made separately 
for interest-bearing liabilities described in paragraph (e)(3)(vii) of 
this section (Step 7) and for each of the classes of non-interest-
bearing liabilities described in paragraph (e)(3)(viii) of this section 
(Step 8).
    (C) Weighting to prevent distortion. Where a distortion would result 
from averaging the amount of liabilities at the beginning and end of a 
balance sheet period, as might be the case where a taxpayer incurs or 
retires a substantial liability, the taxpayer must use a different 
method that more clearly reflects the average amount of liabilities 
weighted to reflect the time the liability was outstanding during the 
balance sheet period.
    (vii) Step 7--adjust dollar income and expense by DASTM gain or loss 
from interest-bearing liabilities--(A) In general. The taxpayer shall 
apply the amount of DASTM gain on interest-bearing liabilities computed 
under paragraph (e)(3)(vi) of this section (Step 6) to reduce interest 
expense generated by such liabilities (e.g., prior to the application of 
Sec. 1.861-9T or its successor regulation). To the extent DASTM gain on 
such liabilities exceeds interest expense, it shall be sourced or 
otherwise classified in the same manner that interest expense is 
allocated and apportioned under Sec. 1.861-9T or its successor 
regulation. The amount of DASTM loss on interest-bearing liabilities 
computed under paragraph (e)(3)(vi) of this section (Step 6) shall be 
allocated and apportioned in the same manner that interest expense is 
allocated and apportioned under Sec. 1.861-9T or its successor 
regulation (without regard to the exceptions to fungibility in 
Sec. 1.861-10T or its successor regulation). For purposes of this 
section, an interest-bearing liability is a liability that requires 
payment of periodic interest (whether fixed or variable), has original 
issue discount, or would have interest imputed under subtitle A.

[[Page 553]]

    (B) Allocation of DASTM gain or loss from interest-bearing 
liabilities that generate related person interest expense. DASTM gain or 
loss from interest-bearing liabilities that generate related person 
interest expense (as provided in section 954(b)(5)) shall be allocated 
for purposes of subtitle A (including sections 904 and 952) in the same 
manner that the related person interest expense of that debt is required 
to be allocated under the rules of section 954(b)(5) and Sec. 1.904-
5(c)(2).
    (C) Modified gross income method. In applying the modified gross 
income method described in Sec. 1.861-9T(j) or its successor regulation, 
gross income shall be adjusted for any DASTM gain or loss from assets as 
provided in paragraph (e)(3)(v) of this section (Step 5) and any DASTM 
gain or loss with respect to short-term, non-interest-bearing trade 
payables as provided in paragraph (e)(3)(viii)(A) of this section.
    (viii) Step 8--adjust dollar income and expense by DASTM gain or 
loss from non-interest bearing liabilities--(A) Short-term, non-
interest-bearing trade payables. The taxpayer shall allocate DASTM gain 
or loss on short-term non-interest-bearing trade payables for purposes 
of subtitle A (including sections 904 and 952) to the same category or 
type of gross income as the cost or expense to which the trade payable 
relates. For this purpose, a short-term, non-interest-bearing trade 
payable is a non-interest-bearing liability with a term of 183 days or 
less that is incurred to purchase property or services to be used by the 
obligor in an active trade or business.
    (B) Excise tax payables. The taxpayer shall allocate DASTM gain or 
loss on excise tax payables for purposes of subtitle A (including 
sections 904 and 952) to the same category or type of gross income as 
would be derived from the activity to which the excise tax relates.
    (C) Other non-interest-bearing liabilities--(1) In general. Except 
as provided in paragraphs (e)(3)(viii)(A), (e)(3)(viii)(B), and 
(e)(3)(viii)(C)(2) of this section, DASTM gain or loss on non-interest-
bearing liabilities shall be allocated under paragraph (e)(3)(ix) of 
this section (Step 9).
    (2) Tracing if substantial distortion of income. DASTM gains and 
losses on liabilities described in paragraph (e)(3)(viii)(C)(1) of this 
section may be attributed to the same section 904(d) separate category 
or subpart F category as the transaction to which the liability relates 
if the taxpayer demonstrates to the satisfaction of the district 
director, or it is determined by the district director, that application 
of paragraph (e)(3)(viii)(C)(1) of this section results in a substantial 
distortion of income.
    (ix) Step 9--allocate residual DASTM gain or loss. If there is a 
difference between the net DASTM gain or loss determined under 
paragraphs (e)(3)(i) through (viii) of this section (Steps 1 through 8) 
and the DASTM gain or loss determined under paragraph (d) of this 
section, the amount of the difference must be allocated for purposes of 
subtitle A (including sections 904 and 952) to the QBU's gross income 
(computed under paragraphs (b)(1) through (3) of this section, as 
adjusted under paragraphs (e)(3)(i) through (viii) of this section 
(Steps 1 through 8)) on the basis of the relative amounts of each 
category or type of gross income.

[T.D. 8556, 59 FR 37673, July 25, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 1.985-4  Method of accounting.

    (a) Adoption of election. The adoption of, or the election to use, a 
functional currency shall be treated as a method of accounting. The 
functional currency shall be used for the year of adoption (or election) 
and for all subsequent taxable years unless permission to change is 
granted, or considered to be granted under Sec. 1.985-2, by the 
Commissioner.
    (b) Condition for changing functional currencies. Generally, 
permission to change functional currencies shall not be granted unless 
significant changes in the facts and circumstances of the QBU's economic 
environment occur. If the determination of the functional currency of 
the QBU for purposes of United States generally accepted accounting 
principles (GAAP) is based on facts and circumstances substantially 
similar to those set forth in Sec. 1.985-1(c)(2), then ordinarily the 
Commissioner will grant a taxpayer's request to change its functional 
currency (or the functional currency of its branch

[[Page 554]]

that is a QBU) to a new functional currency only if the taxpayer (or its 
QBU) also changes to the new functional currency for purposes of GAAP. 
However, permission to change will not necessarily be granted merely 
because the new functional currency will conform to the taxpayer's GAAP 
functional currency.
    (c) Relationship to certain other sections of the Code. Nothing in 
this section shall be construed to override the provisions of any other 
sections of the Code of regulations that require the use of consistent 
accounting methods. Such provisions must be independently satisfied 
separate and apart from the identification of a functional currency. For 
instance, while separate geographical divisions of a taxpayer's trade or 
business may have different functional currencies, such geographical 
divisions may nevertheless be required to consistently use other methods 
of accounting.

[T.D. 8263, 54 FR 38661, Sept. 20, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 1.985-5  Adjustments required upon change in functional currency.

    (a) In general. This section applies in the case of a QBU that 
changes from one functional currency (old functional currency) to 
another functional currency (new functional currency). A taxpayer or QBU 
subject to the rules of this section shall make the adjustments set 
forth in the 3-step procedure described in paragraphs (b) through (e) of 
this section. The adjustments shall be made on the last day of the 
taxable year ending before the year of change as defined in Sec. 1.481-
1(a)(1). Gain or loss required to be recognized under paragraphs (b), 
(d)(2), and (e)(2) of this section is not subject to section 481 and, 
therefore, the full amount of the gain or loss must be included in 
income or earnings and profits on the last day of the taxable year 
ending before the year of change. Except as provided in Sec. 1.985-6, a 
QBU with a functional currency for its first taxable year beginning in 
1987 that is different from the currency in which it had kept its books 
and records for United States accounting and tax accounting purposes for 
its prior taxable year shall apply the principles of this Sec. 1.985-5 
for purposes of computing the relevant functional currency items, such 
as earnings and profits, basis of an asset, and amount of a liability, 
as of the first day of a taxpayer's first taxable year beginning in 
1987.
    (b) Step 1--Taking into account exchange gain or loss on certain 
section 988 transactions. The QBU shall recognize or otherwise take into 
account for all purposes of the Code the amount of any unrealized 
exchange gain or loss attributable to a section 988 transaction (as 
defined in section 988(c)(1)(A), (B), and (C)) that, after applying 
section 988(d), is denominated in terms of or determined by reference to 
the new functional currency. The amount of such gain or loss shall be 
determined without regard to the limitations of section 988(b) (i.e., 
whether any gain or loss would be realized on the transaction as a 
whole). The character and source of such gain or loss shall be 
determined under section 988.
    (c) Step 2--Determining the new functional currency basis of 
property and the new functional currency amount of liabilities and any 
other relevant items. The new functional currency adjusted basis of 
property and the new functional currency amount of liabilities and any 
other relevant items (e.g., items described in section 
988(c)(1)(B)(iii)) shall equal the product of the amount of the old 
functional currency adjusted basis or amount multiplied by the new 
functional currency/old functional currency spot exchange rate on the 
last day of the taxable year ending before the year of change (spot 
rate).
    (d) Step 3A--Additional adjustments that are necessary when a branch 
changes functional currency--(1) Branch changing to a functional 
currency other than the taxpayer's functional currency--(i) Rule. If a 
QBU that is a branch of a taxpayer changes to a functional currency 
other than the taxpayer's functional currency, the branch shall make the 
adjustments set forth in either paragraph (d)(1)(ii) or (d)(1)(iii) of 
this section for purposes of section 987. See Sec. 1.987-5(d) for rules 
for computing the branch's equity pool and basis pool.
    (ii) Where prior to the change the branch and taxpayer had different 
functional currencies. If the branch and the taxpayer had different 
functional currencies prior to the change, the

[[Page 555]]

branch's new functional currency equity pool shall equal the product of 
the old functional currency amount of the equity pool multiplied by the 
spot rate. No adjustment to the basis pool is necessary.
    (iii) Where prior to the change the branch and taxpayer had the same 
functional currency. If the branch and the taxpayer had the same 
functional currency prior to the change, the branch's basis pool shall 
equal the difference between the branch's total old functional currency 
basis of its assets and its total old functional currency amount of its 
liabilities. The branch's equity pool shall equal the product of the 
basis pool multiplied by the spot rate.
    (2) Branch changing to the taxpayer's functional currency. If a 
branch changes its functional currency to the taxpayer's functional 
currency, the branch shall be treated as if it terminated on the last 
day of the taxable year ending before the year of change. In such a 
case, the taxpayer shall realize gain or loss attributable to the 
branch's equity pool under the principles of section 987.
    (e) Step 3B--Additional adjustments that are necessary when a 
taxpayer changes functional currency--(1) Corporations. The amount of a 
corporation's new functional currency earnings and profits and the 
amount of its new functional currency paid-in capital shall equal the 
product of the old functional currency amounts of such items multiplied 
by the spot rate. The foreign income taxes and accumulated profits or 
deficits in accumulated profits of a foreign corporation that were 
maintained in foreign currency for purposes of section 902 and that are 
attributable to taxable years of the foreign corporation beginning 
before January 1, 1987, also shall be translated into the new functional 
currency at the spot rate.
    (2) Collateral consequences to a United States shareholder of a 
corporation changing to the United States dollar as its functional 
currency. A United States shareholder (within the meaning of section 
951(b) or section 953(c)(1)(A)) of a controlled foreign corporation 
(within the meaning of section 957 or section 953(c)(1)(B)) changing its 
functional currency to the dollar shall recognize foreign currency gain 
or loss computed under section 986(c) as if all previously taxed 
earnings and profits, if any, (including amounts attributable to pre-
1987 taxable years that were translated from dollars into functional 
currency in the foreign corporation's first post-1986 taxable year) were 
distributed immediately prior to the change. Such a shareholder shall 
also recognize gain or loss attributable to the corporation's paid-in 
capital to the same extent, if any, that such gain or loss would be 
recognized under the regulations under section 367(b) if the corporation 
was liquidated completely.
    (3) Taxpayers that are not corporations. [Reserved]
    (4) Adjustments to a branch's accounts when a taxpayer changes 
functional currency--(i) Taxpayer changing to a functional currency 
other than the branch's functional currency. If a taxpayer changes to a 
functional currency that differs from the functional currency of a 
branch of the taxpayer, the branch shall adjust its basis pool in the 
manner prescribed in paragraph (d)(1)(ii) of this section for adjusting 
the equity pool, if the taxpayer's old functional currency was different 
from the branch's functional currency. If the taxpayer's old functional 
currency was the same as the branch's functional currency, the branch 
shall determine its equity pool and basis pool in the manner set forth 
in paragraph (d)(1)(iii) of this section for determining the basis pool 
and equity pool, respectively.
    (ii) Taxpayer changing to the same functional currency as the 
branch. If a taxpayer changes to the same functional currency as a 
branch of the taxpayer, the taxpayer shall realize gain or loss as set 
forth in paragraph (d)(2) of this section.
    (f) Examples. The provisions of this section are illustrated by the 
following examples.

    Example 1. S, a calendar year foreign corporation, is wholly owned 
by domestic corporation P. The Commissioner granted permission to change 
S's functional currency from the LC to the FC beginning January 1, 1993. 
The LC/FC exchange rate on December 31, 1992 is 1 LC/2 FC. The following 
shows how S must convert the items on its balance sheet from the LC to 
the FC.

[[Page 556]]



------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                            1:2         
                                                 -----------------------
                                                      LC          FC    
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Assets:                                                                 
  Cash on hand..................................      40,000      80,000
  Accounts Receivable...........................      10,000      20,000
  Inventory.....................................     100,000     200,000
  100,000 FC Bond (100,000 LC historical basis).   \1\50,000     100,000
  Fixed assets:                                                         
    Property....................................     200,000     400,000
    Plant.......................................     500,000   1,000,000
      Accumulated Depreciation..................   (200,000)   (400,000)
    Equipment...................................   1,000,000   2,000,000
      Accumulated Depreciation..................   (400,000)   (800,000)
                                                 -----------------------
    Total Assets................................   1,300,000   2,600,000
                                                 =======================
Liabilities:                                                            
  Accounts Payable..............................      50,000     100,000
  Long-term Liabilities.........................     400,000     800,000
  Paid-in-Capital...............................     800,000   1,600,000
  Retained Earnings.............................  \2\ 50,000     100,000
                                                 -----------------------
    Total Liabilities and Equity................   1,300,000   2,600,000
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Under Sec.  1.985-5(b), S will recognize a 50,000 LC loss (100,000  
  LC basis-50,000 LC value) on the bond resulting from the change in    
  functional currency. Thus, immediately before the change, S's basis in
  the FC bond (taking into account the loss) is 50,000 LC.              
\2\ The amount of S's LC retained earnings reflects the 50,000 LC loss  
  on the bond.                                                          


    Example 2. P, a domestic corporation, operates a foreign branch, S. 
The Commissioner granted permission to change S's functional currency 
from the LC to the FC beginning January 1, 1993. As of December 31, 
1992, S's equity pool was 2,000 LC and its basis pool was $4,000. The 
LC/FC exchange rate on December 31, 1992 is 1 LC/2 FC. On January 1, 
1993, the new functional currency amount of S's equity pool is 4,000 FC. 
The basis pool is not affected.

[T.D. 8464, 58 FR 233, Jan. 5, 1993; 58 FR 11099, Feb. 23, 1993]


<R05>
Sec. 1.985-6  Transition rules for a QBU that uses the dollar approximate separate transactions method for its first taxable year beginning in 1987.

    (a) In general. This section sets forth transition rules for a QBU 
that used the dollar approximate separate transactions method of 
accounting set forth in Sec. 1.985-3 or Sec. 1.985-3T (as contained in 
the April 1, 1989 edition of 26 CFR part 1 (1.908 to 1.1000)) for its 
first taxable year beginning in 1987 (DASTM QBU). A DASTM QBU must 
determine the dollar and hyperinflationary currency basis of its assets 
and the dollar and hyperinflationary currency amount of its liabilities 
that were acquired or incurred in taxable years beginning before January 
1, 1987. In addition, a DASTM QBU must determine its net worth, 
including its retained earnings, at the end of the QBU's last taxable 
year beginning before January 1, 1987. This section provides rules for 
controlled foreign corporations (as defined in section 957 or section 
953(c)(1)(B)), other foreign corporations, and branches of United States 
persons that must make these determinations.
    (b) Certain controlled foreign corporations. If a DASTM QBU was a 
controlled foreign corporation for its last taxable year beginning 
before January 1, 1987, and it had a significant event as described in 
Sec. 1.964-1(c)(6) in a taxable year beginning before January 1, 1987, 
then the rules of this paragraph (b) shall apply.
    (1) Basis in assets and amount of liabilities. The hyperinflationary 
currency adjusted basis of the QBU's assets and the hyperinflationary 
currency amount of the QBU's liabilities acquired or incurred by the QBU 
in a taxable year beginning before January 1, 1987, shall be the basis 
or the amount as determined under Sec. 1.964-1(e) prior to translation 
under Sec. 1.964-1(e)(4). The dollar adjusted basis of such assets and 
the dollar amount of such liabilities shall be the adjusted basis or the 
amount as determined under the rules of Sec. 1.964-1(e) after 
translation under Sec. 1.964-1(e)(4).
    (2) Retained earnings. The dollar amount of the QBU's retained 
earnings at the end of its last taxable year beginning before January 1, 
1987, shall be the dollar amount determined under Sec. 1.964-1(e)(3).
    (c) All other foreign corporations. If a foreign corporation is a 
DASTM QBU that is not described in paragraph (b) of this section, then 
the hyperinflationary currency and dollar adjusted basis in the QBU's 
assets acquired in taxable years beginning before January 1, 1987, the 
hyperinflationary currency and dollar amount of the QBU's liabilities 
acquired or incurred in taxable years beginning before January 1, 1987, 
and the dollar amount of the QBU's net worth, including its retained 
earnings, at the end of its last taxable year beginning before January 
1, 1987, shall be determined by applying the principles of Sec. 1.985-3T 
or Sec. 1.985-3. Thus, for example, the dollar basis of plant and 
equipment

[[Page 557]]

shall be determined using the appropriate historical exchange rate.
    (d) Pre-1987 section 902 amounts--(1) Translation of pre-1987 
section 902 accumulated profits and taxes into United States dollars. 
The foreign income taxes and accumulated profits or deficits in 
accumulated profits of a foreign corporation that were maintained in 
foreign currency for purposes of section 902 and that are attributable 
to taxable years of the foreign corporation beginning before January 1, 
1987, shall be translated into dollars at the spot exchange rate on the 
first day of its first taxable year beginning after December 31, 1986. 
Once translated into dollars, these accumulated profits and taxes shall 
(absent a change in functional currency) remain in dollars for all 
federal income tax purposes.
    (2) Carryforward of accumulated deficits in accumulated profits from 
pre-1987 taxable years to post-1986 taxable years. For purposes of 
sections 902 and 960, the post-1986 undistributed earnings of a foreign 
corporation that is subject to the rules of this section shall be 
reduced by the dollar amount of the corporation's deficit in accumulated 
profits, if any, determined under section 902 and the regulations 
thereunder, that was accumulated at the end of the corporation's last 
taxable year beginning before January 1, 1987. The dollar amount of the 
accumulated deficit shall be determined by multiplying the foreign 
currency amount of such deficit by the spot exchange rate on the last 
day of the corporation's last taxable year beginning before January 1, 
1987, and shall be taken into account on the first day of the 
corporation's first taxable year beginning after December 31, 1986. 
Post-1986 undistributed earnings may not be reduced by the dollar amount 
of a pre-1987 deficit in retained earnings determined under Sec. 1.964-
1(e).
    (e) Net worth branch. If a DASTM QBU is a branch of a United States 
person and the QBU used a net worth method of accounting for its last 
taxable year beginning before January 1, 1987, then the rules of this 
paragraph (e) shall apply. A net worth method of accounting is any 
method of accounting under which the taxpayer calculates the taxable 
income of a QBU based on the net change in the dollar value of the QBU's 
equity (assets minus liabilities) during the course of a taxable year, 
taking into account any contributions or remittances made during the 
year. See, e.g., Rev. Rul. 75-106, 1975-1 C.B. 31. (See 
Sec. 601.601(d)(2)(ii)(b) of this chapter).
    (1) Basis in assets and amount of liabilities--(i) Hyperinflationary 
amounts. For the first taxable year beginning in 1987, the 
hyperinflationary currency adjusted basis of a QBU's assets or the 
hyperinflationary currency amounts of its liabilities acquired or 
incurred in a taxable year beginning before January 1, 1987 is the 
hyperinflationary currency basis or amount at the date when acquired or 
incurred, as adjusted according to United States generally accepted 
accounting and tax accounting principles. If a hyperinflationary 
currency basis or amount was not determined at such date, the dollar 
basis or amount, as adjusted according to United States generally 
accepted accounting and tax accounting principles, shall be translated 
into hyperinflationary currency at the spot exchange rate on the date 
when the asset or liability was acquired or incurred.
    (ii) Dollar amounts. For the first taxable year beginning in 1987, 
the dollar adjusted basis of the QBU's assets and the amounts of its 
liabilities shall be those amounts reflected on the QBU's dollar books 
and records at the end of the taxpayer's last taxable year beginning 
before January 1, 1987, after adjusting the books and records according 
to United States generally accepted accounting and tax accounting 
principles.
    (2) Ending net worth. The dollar amount of the QBU's net worth at 
the end of its last taxable year beginning before January 1, 1987 shall 
equal the QBU's net worth at that date as determined under paragraph 
(e)(1)(ii) of this section.
    (f) Profit and loss branch. If a DASTM QBU is a branch of a United 
States person and the QBU used a profit and loss method of accounting 
for its last taxable year beginning before January 1, 1987, then the 
United States person shall first apply the transition rules of 
Sec. 1.987-5 in order to determine the beginning amount and dollar basis 
of the branch's EQ pool, the

[[Page 558]]

hyperinflationary currency basis of the branch's assets, and the 
hyperinflationary currency amounts of its liabilities. A profit and loss 
method of accounting is any method of accounting under which the 
taxpayer calculates the profits of a QBU by computing the QBU's profits 
in its functional currency and translating the net result into dollars. 
See e.g., Rev. Rul. 75-107, 1975-1 C.B. 32. (See 
Sec. 601.601(d)(2)(ii)(b) of this chapter). The QBU and the taxpayer 
must then make the adjustments required by Sec. 1.985-5, e.g., the QBU 
must take into account unrealized exchange gain or loss on dollar-
denominated section 988 transactions, the taxpayer must account for the 
deemed termination of the branch, and the taxpayer must translate the 
QBU's balance sheet items from hyperinflationary currency into dollars 
at the spot rate.

[T.D. 8464, 58 FR 234, Jan. 5, 1993]
Sec. 1.987-1  Profit and loss method of accounting for a qualified 
business unit of a taxpayer having a different functional currency from 
the taxpayer. [Reserved]
Sec. 1.987-2  Accounting for gain or loss on certain transfers of 
property. [Reserved]
Sec. 1.987-3  Termination. [Reserved]
Sec. 1.987-4  Special rules relating to QBU branches of foreign 
taxpayers. [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 1.987-5  Transition rules for certain qualified business units using a profit and loss method of accounting for taxable years beginning before January 1, 
          1987.

    (a) Applicability--(1) In general. This section applies to qualified 
business unit (QBU) branches of United States persons, whose functional 
currency (as defined in section 985 of the Code and the regulations 
thereunder) is other than the United States dollar (dollar) and that 
used a profit and loss method of accounting for their last taxable year 
beginning before January 1, 1987. Generally, a profit and loss method of 
accounting is any method of accounting under which the taxpayer 
calculates the profits of a QBU branch in its functional currency and 
translates the net result into dollars. For all taxable years beginning 
after December 31, 1986, such QBU branches must use the profit and loss 
method of accounting as described in section 987, except to the extent 
otherwise provided in regulations under section 985 or any other 
provision of the Code. See Sec. 1.989(c)-1 regarding transition rules 
for QBU branches of United States persons that have a nondollar 
functional currency and that used a net worth method of accounting for 
their last taxable year beginning before January 1, 1987.
    (2) Insolvent QBU branches. A taxpayer may apply the principles of 
this section to a QBU branch that used a profit and loss method of 
accounting for its last taxable year beginning before January 1, 1987, 
whose $E pool (as defined in paragraph (d)(3)(i) of this section) is 
negative. For taxable years beginning on or after October 25, 1991, the 
principles of this section shall apply to insolvent QBU branches.
    (b) General rules. Generally, section 987 gain or loss occurs when a 
QBU branch makes a remittance. A remittance is considered to be made 
from one or more functional currency pools under rules provided in 
paragraph (c) of this section. In general, the amount of section 987 
gain or loss from a remittance equals the difference between the dollar 
value of the functional currency adjusted basis of the property remitted 
and the portion of the dollar basis in the applicable pool. Section 987 
gain or loss is calculated under a 4-step procedure described in 
paragraph (d) of this section. Section 987 gain or loss attributable to 
a remittance is realized and must be recognized in the taxable year of 
the remittance except to the extent otherwise provided in regulations.
    (c) Determining the pool(s) from which a remittance is made--(1) 
Remittances made during taxable years beginning after December 31, 1986, 
and before October 25, 1991. A remittance made during taxable years 
beginning after December 31, 1986 and before October 25, 1991, first 
represents an amount of the QBU branch's post-86 profits pool (including 
functional currency profits for the current taxable year determined 
without regard to remittances made during the

[[Page 559]]

current year). To the extent the functional currency amount of the 
remittance exceeds the post-86 profits pool, it is considered to come 
out of the EQ pool. Paragraph (d)(2) of this section describes the EQ 
pool and the post-86 profits pool.
    (2) Remittances made in taxable years beginning on or after October 
25, 1991. For remittances made in taxable years beginning on or after 
October 25, 1991, the post-86 profits and EQ pools are combined into one 
pool called the equity pool. Therefore, remittances made during those 
taxable years will only come from the equity pool. The dollar basis of, 
and section 987 gain or loss on, such remittances shall be calculated 
utilizing the principles set forth in paragraphs (d)(4) and (5) of this 
section.
    (d) Calculation of section 987 gain or loss--(1) In general. This 
paragraph (d) describes the 4-step procedure for calculating section 987 
gain or loss.
    (2) Step 1--Calculate the amount of the functional currency pools--
(i) EQ pool-- (A) Beginning pool. The beginning amount of the EQ pool is 
equal to the functional currency adjusted bases of a QBU branch's assets 
less the functional currency amount of the QBU branch's liabilities at 
the end of the taxpayer's last taxable year beginning before January 1, 
1987, as these amounts are determined under the rules of paragraphs (e) 
and (f) of the section. The district director may allow for additional 
adjustments to the beginning amount of the EQ pool to prevent the 
recognition of section 987 gain or loss due to factors unrelated to the 
movement of exchange rates.
    (B) Adjusting the EQ pool. The EQ pool is increased by the 
functional currency amount of any transfer (as determined under section 
987) to the QBU branch made during the current taxable year or any prior 
taxable year beginning after December 31, 1986. If the transfer is made 
in a nonfunctional currency, this amount is translated into the QBU 
branch's functional currency at the spot rate (determined under the 
principles of section 988 and the regulations thereunder) on the date of 
the transfer. The method for determining the rate must be applied 
consistently each quarter. The EQ pool is decreased by the functional 
currency amount of any remittance (as determined under section 987) made 
during a prior taxable year beginning after December 31, 1986, that is 
considered remitted from the EQ pool under paragraph (c) of this 
section. The EQ pool must also be decreased by any transfer from the QBU 
branch that is not a remittance.
    (ii) Post-86 profits pool. The amount of a QBU branch's post-86 
profits pool is calculated at the end of each taxable year beginning 
after December 31, 1986. The opening balance of the post-86 profits pool 
at the beginning of the first taxable year beginning after December 31, 
1986, is zero. The post-86 profits pool is increased by the functional 
currency amount of the QBU branch's profits (determined under section 
987) for the taxable year. The post-86 profits pool is decreased by the 
functional currency amount of the QBU branch's losses (determined under 
section 987) for the taxable year and the amount of any remittances by 
the QBU branch during the taxable year from the post-86 profits pool as 
provided under paragraph (c) of this section.
    (iii) Adjustments to the equity pool. For remittances made in 
taxable years beginning on or after October 25, 1991 under paragraph 
(c)(2) of this section, the post-86 profits and EQ pools are combined 
into one pool called the equity pool. Additions to and subtractions from 
the equity pool shall be made utilizing the principles of paragraphs 
(d)(2)(i)(B) and (ii) of this section. For example, remittances shall 
reduce the equity pool.
    (3) Step 2--Calculate the dollar basis of the pools--(i) Dollar 
basis of the EQ pool--(A) Beginning dollar basis. The beginning dollar 
basis of the EQ pool (hereinafter referred to as the $E pool) equals:
    (1) The dollar amount of all the QBU branch's profits reported on 
the taxpayer's income tax returns for taxable years beginning before 
January 1, 1987, plus the total dollar amount of all transfers to the 
QBU branch during that period (properly reflected on the taxpayer's 
books), less
    (2) The dollar amount of all the QBU branch's losses reported on the 
taxpayer's income tax returns for such years, and the total dollar basis 
of all

[[Page 560]]

remittances and all transfers made by the QBU branch during that period 
(properly reflected on the taxpayer's books).
A QBU branch's profits and losses shall be properly adjusted for foreign 
taxes of the QBU branch.
    (B) Adjusting the $E pool. The $E pool is increased by the dollar 
amount of any transfers to the QBU branch made during the current 
taxable year or any prior taxable year beginning after December 31, 
1986. If a transfer is made in a currency other than the dollar, the 
amount of the currency is translated into dollars at the spot rate 
(determined under the principles of section 988 and the regulations 
thereunder) on the date of the transfer. The $E pool is decreased by the 
dollar basis of any remittance made during a prior taxable year 
beginning after December 31, 1986, that is considered remitted from the 
$E pool under paragraphs (c) and (d)(4) of these section. The $E pool is 
also reduced by the amount of a transfer (other than a remittance) from 
the QBU branch translated into dollars at the spot rate (determined 
under the principles of section 988 and the regulations thereunder) on 
the date of the transfer. The method for determining the spot rate must 
be applied consistently to all transfers to and from a QBU branch.
    (ii) Dollar basis of the post-86 profits pool. The amount of a QBU 
branch's dollar basis in the post-86 profits pool (the $P pool) is 
calculated at the end of each taxable year beginning after December 31, 
1986. The opening balance of the $P pool at the beginning of the first 
taxable year beginning after December 31, 1986, is zero. The $P pool is 
increased by the functional currency amount of the QBU branch's profits 
(determined under section 987) for the taxable year translated into 
dollars at the weighted average exchange rate (as defined in Sec. 1.989 
(b)-1) for the year. The $P pool is decreased by the functional currency 
amount of the QBU branch's losses (determined under section 987) for the 
taxable year translated into dollars at the weighted average exchange 
rate for the year and by the dollar basis of any remittances made by the 
QBU branch during the taxable year from the post-86 profits pool under 
paragraph (c)(1) of this section.
    (iii) Combination of the $E and the $P pools. For taxable years 
beginning on or after October 25, 1991 the $P and the $E pools are 
combined into one pool called the basis pool. Additions to and 
subtractions from the basis pool shall be made utilizing the principles 
set forth in paragraphs (d)(3)(i) and (ii) of this section.
    (4) Step 3--Calculation of the dollar basis of a remittance. For all 
taxable years beginning after December 31, 1986, the dollar basis of a 
remittance is calculated using the following formula:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC09OC91.064

    (5) Step 4--Calculation of the section 987 gain or loss on a 
remittance. Section 987 gains or loss equals the difference between--
    (i) The dollar amount of the remittance, and
    (ii) The dollar basis of the remittance as calculated under 
paragraph (d)(4) of this section.
    (e) Functional currency adjusted basis of QBU branch assets acquired 
in taxable years beginning before January 1, 1987--(1) Basis of asset. 
For taxable years beginning after December 31, 1986, the functional 
currency adjusted basis of a QBU branch asset acquired in a taxable year 
beginning before January 1, 1987, is the functional currency basis of 
the asset at the date of acquisition, as adjusted according to United 
States tax principles. The functional currency adjusted basis of an 
asset for which a

[[Page 561]]

functional currency basis was not determined at the date of acquisition 
is the nonfunctional currency basis of the asset at the date of 
acquisition multiplied by the spot exchange rate on the date of 
acquisition, as adjusted according to United States tax principles.
    (2) Adjustment to basis of asset. Any future adjustments to the 
functional currency adjusted basis of such an asset are determined with 
respect to the appropriate functional currency adjusted basis of the 
asset as determined under this paragraph (e).
    (f) Functional currency amount of QBU branch liabilities acquired in 
taxable years beginning before January 1, 1987. For the first taxable 
year beginning after December 31, 1986, the amount of a QBU branch 
liability incurred in a taxable year beginning before January 1, 1987, 
is the functional currency amount of the liability at the date incurred, 
as adjusted according to United States tax principles. The functional 
currency amount of a liability for which a functional currency amount 
was not determined at the date incurred is the nonfunctional currency 
amount of the liability at the date incurred multiplied by the spot 
exchange rate on the date incurred, as adjusted according to the United 
States tax principles.
    (g) Examples. The provisions of this section are illustrated by the 
following examples.

    Example 1--(i) Facts. U.S. is a domestic corporation. B, a QBU 
branch of U.S., operates in country X and was established in 1985. B's 
functional currency is the FC. U.S. is on a calendar taxable year and, 
prior to January 1, 1987, accounted for the operations of B by the 
profit and loss method of accounting as set forth in Rev. Rul. 75-107, 
1975-1 C.B. 32. B's books and records were kept according to United 
States tax principles. B received a transfer of $2,000 in 1985, and had 
profits of $3,000 in 1985 and $5,000 in 1986. B made a remittance in 
1986, the dollar basis of which was $1,000. As of December 31, 1986, the 
adjusted basis of B's functional currency assets exceeded the functional 
currency amount of its liabilities by 15,000 FC (the beginning pool of 
EQ). Under section 987, B has profits of 8,000 FC in 1987, which are 
worth $1,000 when translated at the weighted average exchange rate for 
1987 as required by sections 987(2) and 989(b)(4). B has no profits or 
loss in 1988. There are no transfers to B in 1987 and 1988. B remits 
18,000 FC in 1988. Under section 987, the appropriate exchange rate for 
the 1988 remittance is 10 FC/$1.
    (ii) Calculation of section 987 loss on remittance--(A) Post-86 
profits. Under paragraph (c)(i) of this section, the 18,000 FC 
remittance comes first out of the post-86 profits pool (8,000 FC) and 
second out of EQ (10,000 FC). The loss on the 1988 remittance out of the 
post-86 profits pool equals:

Dollar value of post-86 profits remitted - Dollar basis of post-86 
          profits remitted=
(8,000 FC  x  10 FC/$1) - $1,000 = $800 - $1,000 = <ls-thn-eq>$200> 
          loss.

    (B) EQ. Under paragraph (d) of this section, U.S. calculates 987 
gain or loss on the 10,000 FC remittance of EQ from B as follows:
    Step 1. The total EQ pool equals 15,000 FC (the functional currency 
adjusted bases of its assets less the functional currency amount of its 
liabilities as of December 31, 1986). There are no adjustments necessary 
under paragraph (d)(2)(i)(B) of this section.
    Step 2. The $E pool is $9,000 (the $2,000 transfer in 1985 plus 
profits of $3,000 in 1985 and $5,000 in 1986 and less than $1,000 basis 
of the 1986 remittance). There are no adjustments necessary under 
paragraph (d)(3)(i)(B) of this section.
    Step 3. The entire 10,000 FC remittance is deemed to come out of EQ.
    Step 4. The dollar basis of the EQ remitted equals: N x $E 
determined under paragraph (d)(3)(i)=
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC09OC91.065

Where:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC09OC91.066

    Step 5. Section 987 loss of U.S. on remittance equals:

Dollar value of the EQ remitted - Dollar basis of the EQ remitted = 
          (10,000 FC  x  10 FC/$1) - $6,000 = $1,000 - $6,000 = 
          <ls-thn-eq>$5,000> loss.


[[Page 562]]


    (C) Total loss on remittance. The total combined loss on the 
remittance is '$5,200>. The total of amounts determined in paragraphs 
(ii)(A) and (B) of this Example 1.

    Example 2--(i) Facts. D is a domestic corporation. B, a QBU branch 
of D, operates in country X. B's functional currency is the FC. At the 
end of B's last taxable year beginning before October 25, 1991, B's EQ 
pool equals 15,000 FC and B's post-86 profits pool equals 8,000 FC. B's 
$E amount equals $9,000, and the $P pool equals $1,000. In B's first 
taxable year beginning on or after October 25, 1991, B remits 18,000 FC. 
Under section 987, the appropriate exchange rate for this remittance is 
10FC:$1.
    (ii) Computation of the equity pool.
15,000 FC (EQ pool) + 8,000 FC (post-86 profits pool) = 23,000 FC 
          (equity pool)
    (iii) Computation of the basis pool.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC09OC91.067
    
    (iv) Dollar basis in remittance.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC09OC91.068
    
    (v) Computation of section 987 loss by U.S. on remittance.
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC09OC91.069
    
    (h) Character and source of section 987 gain or loss. Section 987 
gain or loss is sourced and characterized as provided by section 987 and 
regulations issued under that section.

[T.D. 8367, 56 FR 48434, Sept. 25, 1991; 56 FR 65684, Dec. 18, 1991]


<R05>
Sec. 1.988-0  Taxation of gain or loss from a section 988 transaction; Table of Contents.

    This section lists captioned paragraphs contained in Secs. 1.988-1 
through 1.988-5.

          Sec. 1.988-1  Certain definitions and special rules.

    (a) Section 988 transaction.
    (1) In general.
    (2) Description of transactions.
    (3)-(5) [Reserved]
    (6) Examples.
    (7) Special rules for regulated futures contracts and non-equity 
options.
    (8) Special rules for qualified funds.
    (9) Exception for certain transactions entered into by an 
individual.
    (10) Intra-taxpayer transactions.
    (11) Authority of Commissioner to include or exclude transactions 
from section 988.
    (b) Spot contract.
    (c) Nonfunctional currency.
    (d) Spot rate.
    (1) In general.
    (2) Consistency required in valuing transactions subject to section 
988.
    (3) Use of certain spot rate conventions for payables and 
receivables denominated in nonfunctional currency.
    (4) Currency where an official government established rate differs 
from a free market rate.
    (e) Exchange gain or loss.
    (f) Hyperinflationary currency.
    (g) Fair market value.
    (h) Interaction with sections 1092 and 1256 in examples.
    (i) Effective date.

   Sec. 1.988-2  Recognition and computation of exchange gain or loss.

    (a) Disposition of nonfunctional currency.
    (1) Recognition of exchange gain or loss.
    (2) Computation of exchange gain or loss.
    (b) Translation of interest income or expense and determination of 
exchange gain or loss with respect to debt instruments.
    (1) Translation of interest income received with respect to a 
nonfunctional currency demand account.
    (2) Translation of nonfunctional currency interest income or expense 
received or paid with respect to a debt instrument described in 
Sec. 1.988-1(a)(1)(ii) and (2)(i).
    (3) Exchange gain or loss recognized by the holder with respect to 
accrued interest income.
    (4) Exchange gain or loss recognized by the obligor with respect to 
accrued interest expense.
    (5) Exchange gain or loss recognized by the holder of a debt 
instrument with respect to principal.
    (6) Exchange gain or loss recognized by the obligor of a debt 
instrument with respect to principal.
    (7) Payment ordering rules.
    (8) Limitation of exchange gain or loss on payment or disposition of 
a debt instrument.

[[Page 563]]

    (9) Examples.
    (10) Treatment of bond premium.
    (11) Market discount.
    (12) Tax exempt bonds.
    (13) Nonfunctional currency debt exchanged for stock of obligor.
    (14)-(15) [Reserved]
    (16) Coordination with section 267 regarding debt instruments.
    (17) Coordination with installment method under section 453.
    (c) Item of expense or gross income or receipts which is to be paid 
or received after the date accrued.
    (1) In general.
    (2) Determination of exchange gain or loss with respect to an item 
of gross income or receipts.
    (3) Determination of exchange gain or loss with respect to an item 
of expense.
    (4) Examples.
    (d) Exchange gain or loss with respect to forward contracts, futures 
contracts and option contracts.
    (1) Scope.
    (2) Realization of exchange gain or loss.
    (3) Recognition of exchange gain or loss.
    (4) Determination of exchange gain or loss.
    (5) [Reserved]
    (e) Currency swaps and notional principal contracts.
    (1) Notional principal contract denominated in a single 
nonfunctional currency.
    (2) Special rules for currency swaps.
    (3) Amortization of swap premium or discount in the case of off 
market swaps.
    (4) Treatment of taxpayer disposing of a currency swap.
    (5) Examples.
    (6) Special effective date for rules regarding currency swaps.
    (7) [Reserved]
    (f) Substance over form.
    (1) In general.
    (2) Example.
    (g) Effective date.

            Sec. 1.988-3  Character of exchange gain or loss.

    (a) In general.
    (b) Election to characterize exchange gain or loss on certain 
identified forward contracts, futures contracts and option contracts as 
capital gain or loss.
    (1) In general.
    (2) Special rule for contracts that become part of a straddle after 
the election is made.
    (3) Requirements for making the election.
    (4) Verification.
    (5) Independent verification.
    (6) Effective date.
    (c) Exchange gain or loss treated as interest.
    (1) In general.
    (2) Exchange loss realized by the holder on nonfunctional currency 
tax exempt bonds.
    (d) Effective date.

     Sec. 1.988-4  Source of gain or loss realized on a section 988 
                              transaction.

    (a) In general.
    (b) Qualified business unit.
    (1) In general.
    (2) Proper reflection on the books of the taxpayer or qualified 
business unit.
    (c) Effectively connected exchange gain or loss.
    (d) Residence.
    (1) In general.
    (2) Exception.
    (3) Partner in a partnership not engaged in a U.S. trade or business 
under section 864(b)(2).
    (e) Special rule for certain related party loans.
    (1) In general.
    (2) United States person.
    (3) Loans by related person.
    (4) 10 percent owned foreign corporation.
    (f) Exchange gain or loss treated as interest under Sec. 1.988-3.
    (g) Exchange gain or loss allocated in the same manner as interest 
under Sec. 1.861-9T.
    (h) Effective date.

           Sec. 1.988-5  Section 988(d) hedging transactions.

    (a) Integration of a nonfunctional currency debt instrument and a 
Sec. 1.988-5(a) hedge.
    (1) In general.
    (2) Exception.
    (3) Qualifying debt instrument.
    (4) Section 1.988-5(a) hedge.
    (5) Definition of integrated economic transaction.
    (6) Special rules for legging in and legging out of integrated 
treatment.
    (7) Transactions part of a straddle.
    (8) Identification requirements.
    (9) Taxation of qualified hedging transactions.
    (10) Transition rules and effective dates.
    (b) Hedged executory contracts.
    (1) In general.
    (2) Definitions.
    (3) Identification rules.
    (4) Effect of hedged executory contract.
    (5) References to this paragraph (b).
    (c) Hedges of period between trade date and settlement date on 
purchase or sale of publicly traded stock or security.
    (d) [Reserved]
    (e) Advance rulings regarding net hedging and anticipatory hedging 
systems.
    (f) [Reserved]
    (g) General effective date.

[T.D. 8400, 57 FR 9177, Mar. 17, 1992]


<R05>
Sec. 1.988-1  Certain definitions and special rules.

    (a) Section 988 transaction--(1) In general. The term ``section 988 
transaction'' means any of the following transactions--

[[Page 564]]

    (i) A disposition of nonfunctional currency as defined in paragraph 
(c) of this section;
    (ii) Any transaction described in paragraph (a)(2) of this section 
if any amount which the taxpayer is entitled to receive or is required 
to pay by reason of such transaction is denominated in terms of a 
nonfunctional currency or is determined by reference to the value of one 
or more nonfunctional currencies.
A transaction described in this paragraph (a) need not require or permit 
payment with a nonfunctional currency as long as any amount paid or 
received is determined by reference to the value of one or more 
nonfunctional currencies. The acquisition of nonfunctional currency is 
treated as a section 988 transaction for purposes of establishing the 
taxpayer's basis in such currency and determining exchange gain or loss 
thereon.
    (2) Description of transactions. The following transactions are 
described in this paragraph (a)(2).
    (i) Debt instruments. Acquiring a debt instrument or becoming an 
obligor under a debt instrument. The term ``debt instrument'' means a 
bond, debenture, note, certificate or other evidence of indebtedness.
    (ii) Payables, receivables, etc. Accruing, or otherwise taking into 
account, for purposes of subtitle A of the Internal Revenue Code, any 
item of expense or gross income or receipts which is to be paid or 
received after the date on which so accrued or taken into account. A 
payable relating to cost of goods sold, or a payable or receivable 
relating to a capital expenditure or receipt, is within the meaning of 
this paragraph (a)(2)(ii). Generally, a payable relating to foreign 
taxes (whether or not claimed as a credit under section 901) is within 
the meaning of this paragraph (a)(2)(ii). However, a payable of a 
domestic person relating to accrued foreign taxes of its qualified 
business unit (QBU branch) is not within the meaning of this paragraph 
(a)(2)(ii) if the QBU branch's functional currency is the U.S. dollar 
and the foreign taxes are claimed as a credit under section 901.
    (iii) Forward contract, futures contract, option contract, or 
similar financial instrument. Except as otherwise provided in this 
paragraph (a)(2)(iii) and paragraph (a)(4)(i) of this section, entering 
into or acquiring any forward contract, futures contract, option, 
warrant, or similar financial instrument.
    (A) Limitation for certain derivative instruments. A forward 
contract, futures contract, option, warrant, or similar financial 
instrument is within this paragraph (a)(2)(iii) only if the underlying 
property to which the instrument ultimately relates is a nonfunctional 
currency or is otherwise described in paragraph (a)(1)(ii) of this 
section. Thus, if the underlying property of an instrument is another 
financial instrument (e.g., an option on a futures contract), then the 
underlying property to which such other instrument (e.g., the futures 
contract) ultimately relates must be a nonfunctional currency. For 
example, a forward contract to purchase wheat denominated in a 
nonfunctional currency, an option to enter into a forward contract to 
purchase wheat denominated in a nonfunctional currency, or a warrant to 
purchase stock denominated in a nonfunctional currency is not described 
in this paragraph (a)(2)(iii). On the other hand, a forward contract to 
purchase a nonfunctional currency, an option to enter into a forward 
contract to purchase a nonfunctional currency, an option to purchase a 
bond denominated in or the payments of which are determined by reference 
to the value of a nonfunctional currency, or a warrant to purchase 
nonfunctional currency is described in this paragraph (a)(2)(iii).
    (B) Nonfunctional currency notional principal contracts--(1) In 
general. The term ``similar financial instrument'' includes a notional 
principal contract only if the payments required to be made or received 
under the contract are determined with reference to a nonfunctional 
currency.
    (2) Definition of notional principal contract. The term ``notional 
principal contract'' means a contract (e.g., a swap, cap, floor or 
collar) that provides for the payment of amounts by one party to another 
at specified intervals calculated by reference to a specified index upon 
a notional principal amount in exchange for specified consideration or a 
promise to pay similar amounts.

[[Page 565]]

For this purpose, a ``notional principal contract'' shall only include 
an instrument where the underlying property to which the instrument 
ultimately relates is money (e.g., functional currency), nonfunctional 
currency, or property the value of which is determined by reference to 
an interest rate. Thus, the term ``notional principal contract'' 
includes a currency swap as defined in Sec. 1.988-2(e)(2)(ii), but does 
not include a swap referenced to a commodity or equity index.
    (C) Effective date with respect to certain contracts. This paragraph 
(a)(2)(iii) does not apply to any forward contract, futures contract, 
option, warrant, or similar financial instrument entered into or 
acquired on or before October 21, 1988, if such instrument would have 
been marked to market under section 1256 if held on the last day of the 
taxable year.
    (3)-(5) [Reserved]
    (6) Examples. The following examples illustrate the application of 
paragraph (a) of this section. The examples assume that X is a U.S. 
corporation on an accrual method with the calendar year as its taxable 
year. Because X is a U.S. corporation the U.S. dollar is its functional 
currency under section 985. The examples also assume that section 988(d) 
does not apply.

    Example 1. On January 1, 1989, X acquires 10,000 Canadian dollars. 
On January 15, 1989, X uses the 10,000 Canadian dollars to purchase 
inventory. The acquisition of the 10,000 Canadian dollars is a section 
988 transaction for purposes of establishing X's basis in such Canadian 
dollars. The disposition of the 10,000 Canadian dollars is a section 988 
transaction pursuant to paragraph (a)(1) of this section.
    Example 2. On January 1, 1989, X acquires 10,000 Canadian dollars. 
On January 15, 1989, X converts the 10,000 Canadian dollars to U.S. 
dollars. The acquisition of the 10,000 Canadian dollars is a section 988 
transaction for purposes of establishing X's basis in such Canadian 
dollars. The conversion of the 10,000 Canadian dollars to U.S. dollars 
is a section 988 transaction pursuant to paragraph (a)(1) of this 
section.
    Example 3. On January 1, 1989, X borrows 100,000 British pounds 
(<brit-pound>) for a period of 10 years and issues a note to the lender 
with a face amount of <brit-pound>100,000. The note provides for 
payments of interest at an annual rate of 10% paid quarterly in pounds 
and has a stated redemption price at maturity of <brit-pound>100,000. 
X's becoming the obligor under the note is a section 988 transaction 
pursuant to paragraphs (a)(1)(ii) and (2)(i) of this section. Because X 
is an accrual basis taxpayer, the accrual of interest expense under X's 
note is a section 988 transaction pursuant to paragraphs (a)(1)(ii) and 
(2)(ii) of this section. In addition, the acquisition of the British 
pounds to make payments under the note is a section 988 transaction for 
purposes of establishing X's basis in such pounds, and the disposition 
of such pounds is a section 988 transaction under paragraph (a)(1)(i) of 
this section. See Sec. 1.988-2(b) with respect to the translation of 
accrued interest expense and the determination of exchange gain or loss 
upon payment of accrued interest expense.
    Example 4. On January 1, 1989, X purchases an original issue for 
74,621.54 British pounds (<brit-pound>) a 3-year bond maturing on 
December 31, 1991, at a stated redemption price of <brit-pound>100,000. 
The bond provides for no stated interest. The bond has a yield to 
maturity of 10% compounded semiannually and has <brit-pound>25,378.46 of 
original issue discount. The acquisition of the bond is a section 988 
transaction as provided in paragraphs (a)(1)(ii) and (2)(i) of this 
section. The accrual of original issue discount with respect to the bond 
is a section 988 transaction under paragraphs (a)(1)(ii) and (2)(ii) of 
this section. See Sec. 1.988-2(b) with respect to the translation of 
original issue discount and the determination of exchange gain or loss 
upon receipt of such amounts.
    Example 5. On January 1, 1989, X sells and delivers inventory to Y 
for 10,000,000 Italian lira for payment on April 1, 1989. Under X's 
method of accounting, January 1, 1989 is the accrual date. Because X is 
an accrual basis taxpayer, the accrual of a nonfunctional currency 
denominated item of gross receipts on January 1, 1989, for payment after 
the date of accrual is a section 988 transaction under paragraphs 
(a)(1)(ii) and (2)(ii) of this section.
    Example 6. On January 1, 1989, X agrees to purchase a machine from Y 
for delivery on March 1, 1990 for 1,000,000 yen. The agreement calls for 
X to pay Y for the machine on June 1, 1990. Under X's method of 
accounting, the expenditure for the machine does not accrue until 
delivery on March 1, 1990. The agreement to purchase the machine is not 
a section 988 transaction. In particular, the agreement to purchase the 
machine is not described in paragraph (a)(2)(ii) of this section because 
the agreement is not an item of expense taken into account under 
subtitle A (but rather is an agreement to purchase a capital asset in 
the future). However, the payable that will arise on the delivery date 
is a section 988 transaction under paragraphs (a)(1)(ii) and (2)(ii) of 
this section even though the payable relates to a capital expenditure. 
In addition, the disposition of yen to satisfy the payable on June 1, 
1990, is a section 988 transaction under paragraph (a)(1)(i) of this 
section.

[[Page 566]]

    Example 7. On January 1, 1989, X purchases and takes delivery of 
inventory for 10,000 French francs with payment to be made on April 1, 
1989. Under X's method of accounting, the expense accrues on January 1, 
1989. On January 1, 1989, X also enters into a forward contract with a 
bank to purchase 10,000 French francs for $2,000 on April 1, 1989. 
Because X is an accrual basis taxpayer, the accrual of a nonfunctional 
currency denominated item of expense on January 1, 1989, for payment 
after the date of accrual is a section 988 transaction under paragraphs 
(a)(1)(ii) and (2)(ii) of this section. Entering into the forward 
contract to purchase the 10,000 French francs is a section 988 
transaction under paragraphs (a)(1)(ii) and (2)(iii) of this section.
    Example 8. On January 1, 1989, X acquires 100,000 Norwegian krone. 
On January 15, 1989, X purchases and takes delivery of 1,000 shares of 
common stock with the 100,000 krone acquired on January 1, 1989. On 
August 1, 1989, X sells the 1,000 shares of common stock and receives 
120,000 krone in payment. On August 30, 1989, X converts the 120,000 
krone to U.S. dollars. The acquisition of the 100,000 krone on January 
1, 1989, and the acquisition of the 120,000 krone on August 1, 1989, are 
section 988 transactions for purposes of establishing the basis of such 
krone. The disposition of the 100,000 krone on January 15, 1989, and the 
120,000 krone on August 30, 1989, are section 988 transactions as 
provided in paragraph (a)(1)(i) of this section. Neither the acquisition 
on January 15, 1989, nor the disposition on August 1, 1989, of the stock 
is a section 988 transaction.
    Example 9. On May 11, 1989, X purchases a one year note at original 
issue for its issue price of $1,000. The note pays interest in dollars 
at the rate of 4 percent compounded semiannually. The amount of 
principal received by X upon maturity is equal to $1,000 plus the 
equivalent of the excess, if any, of (a) the Financial Times One Hundred 
Stock Index (an index of stocks traded on the London Stock Exchange 
hereafter referred to as the FT100) determined and translated into 
dollars on the last business day prior to the maturity date, over (b) 
<brit-pound>2,150, the ``stated value'' of the FT100, which is equal to 
110% of the average value of the index for the six months prior to the 
issue date, translated at the exchange rate of <brit-pound>1=$1.50. The 
purchase by X of the instrument described above is not a section 988 
transaction because the index used to compute the principal amount 
received upon maturity is determined with reference to the value of 
stock and not nonfunctional currency.
    Example 10. On April 9, 1989, X enters into an interest rate swap 
that provides for the payment of amounts by X to its counterparty based 
on 4% of a 10,000 yen principal amount in exchange for amounts based on 
yen LIBOR rates. Pursuant to paragraphs (a)(1)(ii) and (2)(iii) of this 
section, this yen for yen interest rate swap is a section 988 
transaction.
    Example 11. On August 11, 1989, X enters into an option contract for 
sale of a group of stocks traded on the Japanese Nikkei exchange. The 
contract is not a section 988 transaction within the meaning of 
Sec. 1.988-1(a)(2)(iii) because the underlying property to which the 
option relates is a group of stocks and not nonfunctional currency.

    (7) Special rules for regulated futures contracts and non-equity 
options--(i) In general. Except as provided in paragraph (a)(7)(ii) of 
this section, paragraph (a)(2)(iii) of this section shall not apply to 
any regulated futures contract or non-equity option which would be 
marked to market under section 1256 if held on the last day of the 
taxable year.
    (ii) Election to have paragraph (a)(2)(iii) of this section apply. 
Notwithstanding paragraph (a)(7)(i) of this section, a taxpayer may 
elect to have paragraph (a)(2)(iii) of this section apply to regulated 
futures contracts and non-equity options as provided in paragraphs 
(a)(7)(iii) and (iv) of this section.
    (iii) Procedure for making the election. A taxpayer shall make the 
election provided in paragraph (a)(7)(ii) of this section by sending to 
the Internal Revenue Service Center, Examination Branch, Stop Number 92, 
Kansas City, MO 64999 a statement titled ``Election to Treat Regulated 
Futures Contracts and Non-Equity Options as Section 988 Transactions 
Under Section 988 (c)(1)(D)(ii)'' that contains the following:
    (A) The taxpayer's name, address, and taxpayer identification 
number;
    (B) The date the notice is mailed or otherwise delivered to the 
Internal Revenue Service Center;
    (C) A statement that the taxpayer (including all members of such 
person's affiliated group as defined in section 1504 or in the case of 
an individual all persons filing a joint return with such individual) 
elects to have section 988(c)(1)(D)(i) and Sec. 1.988-1(a)(7)(i) not 
apply;
    (D) The date of the beginning of the taxable year for which the 
election is being made;

[[Page 567]]

    (E) If the election is filed after the first day of the taxable 
year, a statement regarding whether the taxpayer has previously held a 
contract described in section 988(c)(1)(D)(i) or Sec. 1.988-1(a)(7)(i) 
during such taxable year, and if so, the first date during the taxable 
year on which such contract was held; and
    (F) The signature of the person making the election (in the case of 
individuals filing a joint return, the signature of all persons filing 
such return).

The election shall be made by the following persons: in the case of an 
individual, by such individual; in the case of a partnership, by each 
partner separately; effective for taxable years beginning after March 
17, 1992, in the case of tiered partnerships, each ultimate partner; in 
the case of an S corporation, by each shareholder separately; in the 
case of a trust (other than a grantor trust) or estate, by the fiduciary 
of such trust or estate; in the case of any corporation other than an S 
corporation, by such corporation (in the case of a corporation that is a 
member of an affiliated group that files a consolidated return, such 
election shall be valid and binding only if made by the common parent, 
as that term is used in Sec. 1.1502-77(a)); in the case of a controlled 
foreign corporation, by its controlling United States shareholders under 
Sec. 1.964-1(c)(3). With respect to a corporation (other than an S 
corporation), the election, when made by the common parent, shall be 
binding on all members of such corporation's affiliated group as defined 
in section 1504 that file a consolidated return. The election shall be 
binding on any income or loss derived from the partner's share 
(determined under the principles of section 702(a)) of all contracts 
described in section 988(c)(1)(D)(i) or paragraph (a)(7)(i) of this 
section in which the taxpayer holds a direct interest or indirect 
interest through a partnership or S corporation; however, the election 
shall not apply to any income or loss of a partnership for any taxable 
year if such partnership made an election under section 
988(c)(1)(E)(iii)(V) for such year or any preceding year. Generally, a 
copy of the election must be attached to the taxpayer's income tax 
return for the first year it is effective. It is not required to be 
attached to subsequent returns. However, in the case of a partner, a 
copy of the election must be attached to the taxpayer's income tax 
return for every year during which the taxpayer is a partner in a 
partnership that engages in a transaction that is subject to the 
election.
    (iv) Time for making the election--(A) In general. Unless the 
requirements for making a late election described in paragraph 
(a)(7)(iv)(B) of this section are satisfied, an election under section 
988 (c)(1)(D)(ii) and paragraph (a)(7)(ii) of this section for any 
taxable year shall be made on or before the first day of the taxable 
year or, if later, on or before the first day during such taxable year 
on which the taxpayer holds a contract described in section 
988(c)(1)(D)(ii) and paragraph (a)(7)(ii) of this section. The election 
under section 988(c)(1)(D)(ii) and paragraph (a)(7)(ii) of this section 
shall apply to contracts entered into or acquired after October 21, 
1988, and held on or after the effective date of the election. The 
election shall be effective as of the beginning of the taxable year and 
shall be binding with respect to all succeeding taxable years unless 
revoked with the prior consent of the Commissioner. In determining 
whether to grant revocation of the election, recapture of the tax 
benefit derived from the election in previous taxable years will be 
considered.
    (B) Late elections. A taxpayer may make an election under section 
988(c)(1)(D)(ii) and paragraph (a)(7)(ii) of this section within 30 days 
after the time prescribed in the first sentence of paragraph 
(a)(7)(iv)(A) of this section. Such a late election shall be effective 
as of the beginning of the taxable year; however, any losses recognized 
during the taxable year with respect to contracts described in section 
988(c)(1)(D)(ii) or paragraph (a)(7)(ii) of this section which were 
entered into or acquired after October 21, 1988, and held on or before 
the date on which the late election is mailed or otherwise delivered to 
the Internal Revenue Service Center shall not be treated as derived from 
a section 988 transaction. A late

[[Page 568]]

election must comply with the procedures set forth in paragraph 
(a)(7)(iii) of this section.
    (v) Transition rule. An election made prior to September 21, 1989 
which satisfied the requirements of Notice 88-124, 1988-51 I.R.B. 6, 
shall be deemed to satisfy the requirements of paragraphs (a)(7)(iii) 
and (iv) of this section.
    (vi) General effective date provision. This paragraph (a)(7) shall 
apply with respect to futures contracts and options entered into or 
acquired after October 21, 1988.
    (8) Special rules for qualified funds--(i) Definition of qualified 
fund. The term ``qualified fund'' means any partnership if--
    (A) At all times during the taxable year (and during each preceding 
taxable year to which an election under section 988(c)(1)(E)(iii)(V) 
applied) such partnership has at least 20 partners and no single partner 
owns more than 20 percent of the interests in the capital or profits of 
the partnership;
    (B) The principa1 activity of such partnership for such taxable year 
(and each such preceding taxable year) consists of buying and selling 
options, futures, or forwards with respect to commodities;
    (C) At least 90 percent of the gross income of the partnership for 
the taxable year (and each such preceding year) consists of income or 
gains described in subparagraph (A), (B), or (G) of section 7704(d)(1) 
or gain from the sale or disposition of capital assets held for the 
production of interest or dividends;
    (D) No more than a de minimis amount of the gross income of the 
partnership for the taxable year (and each such preceding taxable year) 
was derived from buying and selling commodities; and
    (E) An election under section 988 (c)(1)(E)(iii)(V) as provided in 
paragraph (a)(8)(iv) of this section applies to the taxable year.
    (ii) Special rules relating to paragraph (a)(8)(i)(A) of this 
section--(A) Certain general partners. The interest of a general partner 
in the partnership shall not be treated as failing to meet the 20 
percent ownership requirement of paragraph (a)(8)(i)(A) of this section 
for any taxable year of the partnership if, for the taxable year of the 
partner in which such partnership's taxable year ends, such partner (and 
each corporation filing a consolidated return with such partner) had no 
ordinary income or loss from a section 988 transaction (other than 
income from the partnership) which is exchange gain or loss (as the case 
may be).
    (B) Treatment of incentive compensation. For purposes of paragraph 
(a)(8)(i)(A) of this section, any income allocable to a general partner 
as incentive compensation based on profits rather than capital shall not 
be taken into account in determining such partner's interest in the 
profits of the partnership.
    (C) Treatment of tax exempt partners. The interest of a partner in 
the partnership shall not be treated as failing to meet the 20 percent 
ownership requirements of paragraph (a)(5)(8)(A) of this section if none 
of the income of such partner from such partnership is subject to tax 
under chapter 1 of subtitle A of the Internal Revenue Code (whether 
directly or through one or more pass-through entities).
    (D) Look-through rule. In determining whether the 20 percent 
ownership requirement of paragraph (a)(8)(i)(A) of this section is met 
with respect to any partnership, any interest in such partnership held 
by another partnership shall be treated as held proportionately by the 
partners in such other partnership.
    (iii) Other special rules--(A) Related persons. Interests in the 
partnership held by persons related to each other (within the meaning of 
section 267(b) or 707(b)) shall be treated as held by one person.
    (B) Predecessors. Reference to any partnership shall include a 
reference to any predecessor thereof.
    (C) Treatment of certain debt instruments. Solely for purposes of 
paragraph (a)(8)(i)(D) of this section, any debt instrument which is 
described in both paragraphs (a)(1)(ii) and (2)(i) of this section shall 
be treated as a commodity.
    (iv) Procedure for making the election provided in section 
988(c)(1)(E)(iii)(V). A partnership shall make the election provided in 
section 988(c)(1)(E)(iii)(V) by sending to the Internal Revenue Service 
Center, Examination Branch,

[[Page 569]]

Stop Number 92, Kansas City, MO 64999 a statement titled ``QUALIFIED 
FUND ELECTION UNDER SECTION 988(c)(1)(E)(iii)(V)'' that contains the 
following:
    (A) The partnership's name, address, and taxpayer identification 
number;
    (B) The name, address and taxpayer identification number of the 
general partner making the election on behalf of the partnership;
    (C) The date the notice is mailed or otherwise delivered to the 
Internal Revenue Service Center;
    (D) A brief description of the activity of the partnership;
    (E) A statement that the partnership is making the election provided 
in section 988(c)(1)(E)(iii)(V);
    (F) The date of the beginning of the taxable year for which the 
election is being made;
    (G) If the election is filed after the first day of the taxable 
year, then a statement regarding whether the partnership previously held 
an instrument referred to in section 988(c)(1)(E)(i) during such taxable 
year and, if so, the first date during the taxable year on which such 
contract was held; and
    (H) The signature of the general partner making the election.

The election shall be made by a general partner with management 
responsibility of the partnership's activities and a copy of such 
election shall be attached to the partnership's income tax return (Form 
1065) for the first taxable year it is effective. It is not required to 
be attached to subsequent returns.
    (v) Time for making the election. The election under section 
988(c)(1)(E)(iii)(V) for any taxable year shall be made on or before the 
first day of the taxable year or, if later, on or before the first day 
during such year on which the partnership holds an instrument described 
in section 988(c)(1)(E)(i). The election under section 
988(c)(1)(E)(iii)(V) shall apply to the taxable year for which made and 
all succeeding taxable years. Such election may only be revoked with the 
consent of the Commissioner. In determining whether to grant revocation 
of the election, recapture by the partners of the tax benefit derived 
from the election in previous taxable years will be considered.
    (vi) Operative rules applicable to qualified funds--(A) In general. 
In the case of a qualified fund, any bank forward contract or any 
foreign currency futures contract traded on a foreign exchange which is 
not otherwise a section 1256 contract shall be treated as a section 1256 
contract for purposes of section 1256.
    (B) Gains and losses treated as short-term. In the case of any 
instrument treated as a section 1256 contract under paragraph 
(a)(8)(vi)(A) of this section, subparagraph (A) of section 1256(a)(3) 
shall be applied by substituting ``100 percent'' for ``40 percent'' (and 
subparagraph (B) of such section shall not apply).
    (vii) Transition rule. An election made prior to September 21, 1989, 
which satisfied the requirements of Notice 88-124, 1988-51 I.R.B. 6, 
shall be deemed to satisfy the requirements of Sec. 1.988-1(a)(8)(iv) 
and (v).
    (viii) General effective date rules--(A) The requirements of 
subclause (IV) of section 988(c)(1)(E)(iii) shall not apply to contracts 
entered into or acquired on or before October 21, 1988.
    (B) In the case of any partner in an existing partnership, the 20 
percent ownership requirements of subclause (I) of section 
988(c)(1)(E)(iii) shall be treated as met during any period during which 
such partner does not own a percentage interest in the capital or 
profits of such partnership greater than 33\1/3\ percent (or, if lower, 
the lowest such percentage interest of such partner during any period 
after October 21, 1988, during which such partnership is in existence). 
For purposes of the preceding sentence, the term ``existing 
partnership'' means any partnership if--
    (1) Such partnership was in existence on October 21, 1988, and 
principally engaged on such date in buying and selling options, futures, 
or forwards with respect to commodities; or
    (2) A registration statement was filed with respect to such 
partnership with the Securities and Exchange Commission on or before 
such date and such registration statement indicated that the principal 
activity of such partnership will consist of buying and selling 
instruments referred to in paragraph (a)(8)(viii)(B)(1) of this section.

[[Page 570]]

    (9) Exception for certain transactions entered into by an 
individual--(i) In general. A transaction entered into by an individual 
which otherwise qualifies as a section 988 transaction shall be 
considered a section 988 transaction only to the extent expenses 
properly allocable to such transaction meet the requirements of section 
162 or 212 (other than the part of section 212 dealing with expenses 
incurred in connection with taxes).
    (ii) Examples. The following examples illustrate the application of 
paragraph (a)(9) of this section.

    Example 1. X is a U.S. citizen who therefore has the U.S. dollar as 
his functional currency. On January 1, 1990, X enters into a spot 
contract to purchase 10,000 British pounds (<brit-pound>) for $15,000 
for delivery on January 3, 1990. Immediately upon delivery, X acquires 
at original issue a pound denominated bond with an issue price of 
<brit-pound>10,000. The bond matures on January 3, 1993, pays interest 
in pounds at a rate of 10% compounded semiannually, and has no original 
issue discount. Assume that all expenses properly allocable to these 
transactions would meet the requirements of section 212. Under 
Sec. 1.988-2(d)(1)(ii), entering into the spot contract on January 1, 
1990, is not a section 988 transaction. The acquisition of the pounds on 
January 3, 1990, under the spot contract is a section 988 transaction 
for purposes of establishing X's basis in the pounds. The disposition of 
the pounds and the acquisition of the bond by X are section 988 
transactions. These transactions are not excluded from the definition of 
a section 988 transaction under paragraph (a)(9) of this section because 
expenses properly allocable to such transactions meet the requirements 
of section 212.
    Example 2. X is a U.S. citizen who therefore has the dollar as his 
functional currency. In preparation for X's vacation, X purchases 1,000 
British pounds (<brit-pound>) from a bank on June 1, 1989. During the 
period of X's vacation in the United Kingdom beginning June 10, 1989, 
and ending June 20, 1989, X spends <brit-pound>500 for hotel rooms, 
<brit-pound>300 for food and <brit-pound>200 for miscellaneous vacation 
expenses. The expenses properly allocable to such dispositions do not 
meet the requirements of section 162 or 212. Thus, the disposition of 
the pounds by X on his vacation are not section 988 transactions.

    (10) Intra-taxpayer transactions--(i) In general. Except as provided 
in paragraph (a)(10)(ii) of this section, transactions between or among 
the taxpayer and/or qualified business units of that taxpayer (``intra-
taxpayer transactions'') are not section 988 transactions. See section 
987 and the regulations thereunder.
    (ii) Certain transfers. Exchange gain or loss with respect to 
nonfunctional currency or any item described in paragraph (a)(2) of this 
section entered into with another taxpayer shall be realized upon an 
intra-taxpayer transfer of such currency or item where as the result of 
the transfer the currency or other such item--
    (A) Loses its character as nonfunctional currency or an item 
described in paragraph (a)(2) of this section; or
    (B) Where the source of the exchange gain or loss could be altered 
absent the application of this paragraph (a)(10)(ii).

Such exchange gain or loss shall be computed in accordance with 
Sec. 1.988-2 (without regard to Sec. 1.988-2(b)(8)) as if the 
nonfunctional currency or item described in paragraph (a)(2) of this 
section had been sold or otherwise transferred at fair market value 
between unrelated taxpayers. For purposes of the preceding sentence, a 
taxpayer must use the translation rate that it uses for purposes of 
computing section 987 gain or loss with respect to the QBU branch that 
makes the transfer. In the case of a gain or loss incurred in a 
transaction described in this paragraph (a)(10)(ii) that does not have a 
significant business purpose, the Commissioner, may defer such gain or 
loss.
    (iii) Example. The following example illustrates the provisions of 
this paragraph (a)(10).

    Example. (A) X, a corporation with the U.S. dollar as its functional 
currency, operates through foreign branches Y and Z. Y and Z are 
qualified business units as defined in section 989(a) with the LC as 
their functional currency. X computes Y's and Z's income under section 
987 (relating to branch transactions). On November 12, 1988, Y transfers 
$25 to the home office of X when the fair market value of such amount 
equals LC120. Y has a basis of LC100 in the $25. Under paragraph 
(a)(10)(ii) of this section, Y realizes foreign source exchange gain of 
LC20 (LC120--LC100) as the result of the $25 transfer. For purposes of 
determining whether the transfer is a remittance resulting in additional 
gain or loss, see section 987 and the regulations thereunder.
    (B) If instead Y transfers the $25 to Z, exchange gain is not 
realized because the $25 is nonfunctional currency with respect to Z and 
if Z were to immediately convert the $25 into LCs, the gain would be 
foreign source.

[[Page 571]]

For purposes of determining whether the transfer is a remittance 
resulting in additional gain or loss, see section 987 and the 
regulations thereunder.

    (11) Authority to include or exclude transactions from section 988--
(i) In general. The Commissioner may recharacterize a transaction (or 
series of transactions) in whole or in part as a section 988 transaction 
if the effect of such transaction (or series of transactions) is to 
avoid section 988. In addition, the Commissioner may exclude a 
transaction (or series of transactions) which in form is a section 988 
transaction from the provisions of section 988 if the substance of the 
transaction (or series of transactions) indicates that it is not 
properly considered a section 988 transaction.
    (ii) Example. The following example illustrates the provisions of 
this paragraph (a)(11).

    Example. B is an individual with the U.S. dollar as its functional 
currency. B holds 500,000 Swiss francs which have a basis of $100,000 
and a fair market value of $400,000 as of October 15, 1989. On October 
16, 1989, B transfers the 500,000 Swiss francs to a newly formed U.S. 
corporation, X, with the dollar as its functional currency. On October 
16, 1989, B sells the stock of X for $400,000. Assume the transfer to X 
qualified for nonrecognition under section 351. Because the sale of the 
stock of X is a substitute for the disposition of an asset subject to 
section 988, the Commissioner may recharacterize the sale of the stock 
as a section 988 transaction. The same result would obtain if B 
transferred the Swiss francs to a partnership and then sold the 
partnership interest.

    (b) Spot contract. A spot contract is a contract to buy or sell 
nonfunctional currency on or before two business days following the date 
of the execution of the contract. See Sec. 1.988-2 (d)(1)(ii) for 
operative rules regarding spot contracts.
    (c) Nonfunctional currency. The term ``nonfunctional currency'' 
means with respect to a taxpayer or a qualified business unit (as 
defined in section 989 (a)) a currency (including the European Currency 
Unit) other than the taxpayer's or the qualified business unit's 
functional currency as defined in section 985 and the regulations 
thereunder. For rules relating to nonrecognition of exchange gain or 
loss with respect to certain dispositions of nonfunctional currency, see 
Sec. 1.988-2 (a)(1)(iii).
    (d) Spot rate--(1) In general. Except as otherwise provided in this 
paragraph, the term ``spot rate'' means a rate demonstrated to the 
satisfaction of the District Director or the Assistant Commissioner 
(International) to reflect a fair market rate of exchange available to 
the public for currency under a spot contract in a free market and 
involving representative amounts. In the absence of such a 
demonstration, the District Director or the Assistant Commissioner 
(International), in his or her sole discretion, shall determine the spot 
rate from a source of exchange rate information reflecting actual 
transactions conducted in a free market. For example, the taxpayer or 
the District Director or the Assistant Commissioner (International) may 
determine the spot rate by reference to exchange rates published in the 
pertinent monthly issue of ``International Financial Statistics'' or a 
successor publication of the International Monetary Fund; exchange rates 
published by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 
pursuant to 31 U.S.C. section 5151; exchange rates published in 
newspapers, financial journals or other daily financial news sources; or 
exchange rates quoted by electronic financial news services.
    (2) Consistency required in valuing transactions subject to section 
988. If the use of inconsistent sources of spot rate quotations results 
in the distortion of income, the District Director or the Assistant 
Commissioner (International) may determine the appropriate spot rate.
    (3) Use of certain spot rate conventions for payables and 
receivables denominated in nonfunctional currency. If consistent with 
the taxpayer's financial accounting, a taxpayer may utilize a spot rate 
convention determined at intervals of one quarter year or less for 
purposes of computing exchange gain or loss with respect to payables and 
receivables denominated in a nonfunctional currency that are incurred in 
the ordinary course of business with respect to the acquisition or sale 
of goods or the obtaining or performance of services. For

[[Page 572]]

example, if consistent with the taxpayer's financial accounting, a 
taxpayer may accrue all payables and receivables incurred during the 
month of January at the spot rate on December 31 or January 31 (or at an 
average of any spot rates occurring between these two dates) and record 
the payment or receipt of amounts in satisfaction of such payables and 
receivables consistent with such convention. The use of a spot rate 
convention cannot be changed without the consent of the Commissioner.
    (4) Currency where an official government established rate differs 
from a free market rate--(i) In general. If a currency has an official 
government established rate that differs from a free market rate, the 
spot rate shall be the rate which most clearly reflects the taxpayer's 
income. Generally, this shall be the free market rate.
    (ii) Examples. The following examples illustrate the application of 
this paragraph (d)(4).

    Example 1. X is an accrual method U.S. corporation with the dollar 
as its functional currency. X owns all the stock of a Country L 
subsidiary, CFC. CFC has the currency of Country L, the LC, as its 
functional currency. Country L imposes restrictions on the remittance of 
dividends. On April 1, 1990, CFC pays a dividend to X in the amount of 
LC100. Assume that the official governnent established rate is $1=LC1 
and the free market rate, which takes into account the remittance 
restrictions and which is the rate that most clearly reflects income, is 
$1=LC4. On April 1, 1990, X donates the LC100 in a transaction that 
otherwise qualifies as a charitable contribution under section 170 (c). 
Both the amount of the dividend income and the deduction under section 
170 is $25 (LC100 x the free market rate, $.25).
    Example 2. X, a corporation with the U.S. dollar as its functional 
currency, operates in foreign country L through branch Y. Y is a 
qualified business unit as defined in section 989 (a). X computes Y's 
income under the dollar approximate separate transactions method as 
described in Sec. 1.985-3. The currency of L is the LC. X can purchase 
legally United States dollars ($) in L only from the L government. In 
order to take advantage of an arbitrage between the official and 
secondary dollar to LC exchange rates in L:
    (i) X purchases LC100 for $60 in L on the secondary market when the 
official exchange rate is S1=LC1;
    (ii) X transfers the LC100 to Y;
    (iii) Y purchases $100 for LC100; and
    (iv) Y transfers $65 ($100 less an L tax withheld of $35 on the 
transfer) to the home office of X.

Under paragraph (a)(7) of this section, the transfer of the LC100 by X 
to Y is a realization event. X has a basis of $60 in the LC100. Under 
these facts, the appropriate dollar to LC exchange rate for computing 
the amount realized by X is the official exchange rate. Therefore, X 
realizes $40 ($100-$60) of U.S. source gain from the transfer to Y. The 
same result would obtain if Y rather than X purchased the LC100 on the 
secondary market in L with $60 supplied by X, because the substance of 
this transaction is that X is performing the arbitrage.

    (e) Exchange gain or loss. The term ``exchange gain or loss'' means 
the amount of gain or loss realized as determined in Sec. 1.988-2 with 
respect to a section 988 transaction. Except as otherwise provided in 
these regulations (e.g., Sec. 1.98B-5), the amount of exchange gain or 
loss from a section 988 transaction shall be separately computed for 
each section 988 transaction, and such amount shall not be integrated 
with gain or loss recognized on another transaction (whether or not such 
transaction is economically related to the section 988 transaction). See 
Sec. 1.988-2 (b)(8) for a special rule with respect to debt instruments.
    (f) Hyperinflationary currency. For the definition of 
hyperinflationary currency see Sec. 1.985-2 (b)(2). Unless otherwise 
provided, the currency in any example used in Secs. 1.988-1 through 
1.988-5 is not a hyperinflationary currency.
    (g) Fair market value. The fair market value of an item shall, where 
relevant, reflect an appropriate premium or discount for the time value 
of money (e.g., the fair market value of a forward contract to buy or 
sell nonfunctional currency shall reflect the present value of the 
difference between the units of nonfunctional currency times the market 
forward rate at the time of valuation and the units of nonfunctional 
currency times the forward rate set forth in the contract). However, if 
consistent with the taxpayer's method of financial accounting (and 
consistently applied from year to year), the preceding sentence shall 
not apply to a financial instrument that matures within one year from 
the date of issuance or acquisition. Unless otherwise provided,

[[Page 573]]

the fair market value given in any example used in Secs. 1.988-1 through 
1.988-5 is deemed to reflect appropriately the time value of money. If 
the use of inconsistent sources of forward or other market rate 
quotations results in the distortion of income, the District Director or 
the Assistant Commissioner (International) may determine the appropriate 
rate.
    (h) Interaction with sections 1092 and 1256. Unless otherwise 
provided, it is assumed for purposes of Secs. 1.988-1 through 1.988-5 
that any contract used in any example is not a section 1256 contract and 
is not part of a straddle as defined in section 1092. No inference is 
intended regarding the application of section 1092 or 1256 unless 
expressly stated.
    (i) Effective date. Except as otherwise provided in this section, 
this section shall be effective for taxable years beginning after 
December 31, 1986. Thus, except as otherwise provided in this section, 
any payments made or received with respect to a section 988 transaction 
in taxable years beginning after December 31, 1986, are subject to this 
section.

[T.D. 8400, 57 FR 9178, Mar. 17, 1992]


<R05>
Sec. 1.988-2  Recognition and computation of exchange gain or loss.

    (a) Disposition of nonfunctional currency--(1) Recognition of 
exchange gain or loss--(i) In general. Except as otherwise provided in 
this section, Sec. 1.988-1(a)(7)(ii), and Sec. 1.988-5, the recognition 
of exchange gain or loss upon the sale or other disposition of 
nonfunctional currency shall be governed by the recognition provisions 
of the Internal Revenue Code which apply to the sale or disposition of 
property (e.g., section 1001 or, to the extent provided in regulations, 
section 1092). The disposition of nonfunctional currency in settlement 
of a forward contract, futures contract, option contract, or similar 
financial instrument is considered to be a sale or disposition of the 
nonfunctional currency for purposes of the preceding sentence.
    (ii) Clarification of section 1031. An amount of one nonfunctional 
currency is not ``property of like kind'' with respect to an amount of a 
different nonfunctional currency.
    (iii) Coordination with section 988(c)(1)(C)(ii). No exchange gain 
or loss is recognized with respect to the following transactions--
    (A) An exchange of units of nonfunctional currency for different 
units of the same nonfunctional currency;
    (B) The deposit of nonfunctional currency in a demand or time 
deposit or similar instrument (including a certificate of deposit) 
issued by a bank or other financial institution if such instrument is 
denominated in such currency;
    (C) The withdrawal of nonfunctional currency from a demand or time 
deposit or similar instrument issued by a bank or other financial 
institution if such instrument is denominated in such currency;
    (D) The receipt of nonfunctional currency from a bank or other 
financial institution from which the taxpayer purchased a certificate of 
deposit or similar instrument denominated in such currency by reason of 
the maturing or other termination of such instrument; and
    (E) The transfer of nonfunctional currency from a demand or time 
deposit or similar instrument issued by a bank or other financial 
institution to another demand or time deposit or similar instrument 
denominated in the same nonfunctional currency issued by a bank or other 
financial institution.

The taxpayer's basis in the units of nonfunctional currency or other 
property received in the transaction shall be the adjusted basis of the 
units of nonfunctional currency or other property transferred. See 
paragraph (b) of this section with respect to the timing of interest 
income or expense and the determination of exchange gain or loss 
thereon.
    (iv) Example. The following example illustrates the provisions of 
paragraph (a)(1)(iii) of this section.

    Example. X is a corporation on the accrual method of accounting with 
the U.S. dollar as its functional currency. On January 1, 1989, X 
acquires 1,500 British pounds (<brit-pound>) for $2,250 (<brit-pound>1 = 
$1.50). On January 3, 1989, when the spot rate is <brit-pound>1 = $1.49, 
X deposits the <brit-pound>1,500 with a British financial institution in 
a non-interest bearing demand account. On February 1, 1989, when the 
spot rate is <brit-pound>1 = $1.45, X withdraws the <brit-pound>1,500. 
On February 5, 1989, when

[[Page 574]]

the spot rate is <brit-pound>1 = $1.42, X purchases inventory in the 
amount of <brit-pound>1,500. Pursuant to paragraph (a)(1)(iii) of this 
section, no exchange loss is realized until February 5, 1989, when X 
disposes of the <brit-pound>1,500 for inventory. At that time, X 
realizes exchange loss in the amount of $120 computed under paragraph 
(a)(2) of this section. The loss is not an adjustment to the cost of the 
inventory.

    (2) Computation of gain or loss--(i) In general. Exchange gain 
realized from the sale or other disposition of nonfunctional currency 
shall be the excess of the amount realized over the adjusted basis of 
such currency, and exchange loss realized shall be the excess of the 
adjusted basis of such currency over the amount realized.
    (ii) Amount realized--(A) In general. The amount realized from the 
disposition of nonfunctional currency shall be determined under section 
1001(b). A taxpayer that uses a spot rate convention under Sec. 1.988-
1(d)(3) to determine exchange gain or loss with respect to a payable 
shall determine the amount realized upon the disposition of 
nonfunctional currency paid in satisfaction of the payable in a manner 
consistent with such convention.
    (B) Exchange of nonfunctional currency for property. For purpose of 
paragraph (a)(2) of this section, the exchange of nonfunctional currency 
for property (other than nonfunctional currency) shall be treated as--
    (1) An exchange of the units of nonfunctional currency for units of 
functional currency at the spot rate on the date of the exchange, and
    (2) The purchase or sale of the property for such units of 
functional currency.
    (C) Example. The following example illustrates the provisions of 
paragraph (a)(2)(ii)(B) of this section.

    Example. G is a U.S. corporation with the U.S. dollar as its 
functional currency. On January 1, 1989, G enters into a contract to 
purchase a paper manufacturing machine for 10,000,000 British pounds 
(<brit-pound>) for delivery on January 1, 1991. On January 1, 1991, when 
G exchanges <brit-pound>10,000,000 (which G purchased for $12,000,000) 
for the machine, the fair market value of the machine is 
<brit-pound>17,000,000. On January 1, 1991, the spot exchange rate is 
<brit-pound>1 = $1.50. Under paragraph (a)(2)(ii)(B) of this section, 
the transaction is treated as an exchange of <brit-pound>10,000,000 for 
$15,000,000 and the purchase of the machine for $15,000,000. 
Accordingly, in computing G's exchange gain of $3,000,000 on the 
disposition of the <brit-pound>10,000,000, the amount realized is 
$15,000,000. G's basis in the machine is $15,000,000. No gain is 
recognized on the bargain purchase of the machine.

    (iii) Adjusted basis--(A) In general. Except as provided in 
paragraph (a)(2)(iii)(B) of this section, the adjusted basis of 
nonfunctional currency is determined under the applicable provisions of 
the Internal Revenue Code (e.g., sections 1011 through 1023). A taxpayer 
that uses a spot rate convention under Sec. 1.988-1 (d)(3) to determine 
exchange gain or loss with respect to a receivable shall determine the 
basis of nonfunctional currency received in satisfaction of such 
receivable in a manner consistent with such convention.
    (B) Determination of the basis of nonfunctional currency withdrawn 
from an account with a bank or other financial institution--(1) In 
general. The basis of nonfunctional currency withdrawn from an account 
with a bank or other financial institution shall be determined under any 
reasonable method that is consistently applied from year to year by the 
taxpayer to all accounts denominated in a nonfunctional currency. For 
example, a taxpayer may use a first in first out method, a last in first 
out method, a pro rata method (as illustrated in the example below), or 
any other reasonable method that is consistently applied. However, a 
method that consistently results in units of nonfunctional currency with 
the highest basis being withdrawn first shall not be considered 
reasonable.
    (2) Example. The following example illustrates the provisions of 
this paragraph (a)(2)(iii)(B).

    Example. (i) X, a cash basis individual with the dollar as his 
functional currency, opens a demand account with a Swiss bank. Assume 
expenses associated with the demand account are deductible under section 
212. The following chart indicates Swiss franc deposits to the account, 
Swiss franc interest credited to the account, the dollar basis of each 
deposit, and the determination of the aggregate dollar basis of all 
Swiss francs in the account. Assume that the taxpayer has properly 
translated all the amounts specified in the chart and that all 
transactions are subject to section 988.

[[Page 575]]



----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                                                      Aggregate 
               Date                  Swiss francs deposited       Interest received     U.S. dollar  U.S. dollar
                                                                                           basis        basis   
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1/01/89..........................  1000 Sf                    ........................         $500         $500
3/31/89..........................  .........................  50 Sf                              25          525
6/30/89..........................  .........................  50 Sf                              24          549
9/30/89..........................  .........................  50 Sf                              25          574
12/31/89.........................  .........................  50 Sf                              26          600
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (ii) On January 1, 1990, X withdraws 500 Swiss francs from the 
account. X may determine his basis in the Swiss francs by multiplying 
the aggregate U.S. dollar basis of Swiss francs in the account by a 
fraction the numerator of which is the number of Swiss francs withdrawn 
from the account and the denominator is the total number of Swiss francs 
in the account. Under this method, X's basis in the 500 Swiss francs is 
$250 computed as follows:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC09OC91.070

    (iii) X's basis in the Swiss francs remaining in the account is $350 
($600-$250). X must use this method consistently from year to year with 
respect to withdrawals of nonfunctional currency from all of X's 
accounts.
    (iv) Purchase and sale of stock or securities traded on an 
established securities market by cash basis taxpayer--

    (A) Amount realized. If stock or securities traded on an established 
securities market are sold by a cash basis taxpayer for nonfunctional 
currency, the amount realized with respect to the stock or securities 
(as determined on the trade date) shall be computed by translating the 
units of nonfunctional currency received into functional currency at the 
spot rate on the settlement date of the sale. This rule applies 
notwithstanding that the stock or securities are treated as disposed of 
on a date other than the settlement date under another section of the 
Code. See section 453(k).
    (B) Basis. If stock or securities traded on an established 
securities market are purchased by a cash basis taxpayer for 
nonfunctional currency, the basis of the stock or securities shall be 
determined by translating the units of nonfunctional currency paid into 
functional currency at the spot rate on the settlement date of the 
purchase.
    (C) Example. The following example illustrates the provisions of 
this paragraph (a)(2)(iv).

    Example. On November 1, 1989 (the trade date), X, a calendar year 
cash basis U.S. individual, purchases stock for <brit-pound>100 for 
settlement on November 5, 1989. On November 1, 1989, the spot value of 
the <brit-pound>100 is $140. On November 5, 1989, X purchases 
<brit-pound>100 for $141 which X uses to pay for the stock. X's basis in 
the stock is $141. On December 30, 1990 (the trade date), X sells the 
stock for <brit-pound>110 for settlement on January 5, 1991. On December 
30, 1990, the spot value of <brit-pound>110 is $165. On January 5, 1991, 
X transfers the stock and receives <brit-pound>110 which, translated at 
the spot rate, equal $166. Under section 453(k), the stock is considered 
disposed of on December 30, 1990. The amount realized with respect to 
such disposition is the value of the <brit-pound>110 on January 5, 1991 
($166). Accordingly, X's gain realized on December 30, 1990, from the 
disposition of the stock is $25 ($166 amount realized less $141 basis). 
X's basis in the <brit-pound>110 received from the sale of the stock is 
$166.

    (v) Purchase and sale of stock or securities traded on an 
established securities market by accrual basis taxpayer. For taxable 
years beginning after March 17, 1992, an accrual basis taxpayer may 
elect to apply the rules of paragraph (a)(2)(iv) of this section. The 
election shall be made by filing a statement with the taxpayer's first 
return in which the election is effective clearly indicating that the 
election has been made. A method so elected must be applied consistently 
from year to year and cannot be changed without the consent of the 
Commissioner.
    (b) Translation of interest income or expense and determination of 
exchange gain or loss with respect to debt instruments--(1) Translation 
of interest income received with respect to a nonfunctional currency 
demand account. Interest income received with respect to a demand 
account with a bank or other financial institution which is denominated 
in (or the payments of which are determined by reference to) a 
nonfunctional currency shall be translated into functional currency at 
the spot rate on the date received or accrued or pursuant to any 
reasonable spot rate convention

[[Page 576]]

consistently applied by the taxpayer to all taxable years and to all 
accounts denominated in nonfunctional currency in the same financial 
institution. For example, a taxpayer may translate interest income 
received with respect to a demand account on the last day of each month 
of the taxable year, on the last day of each quarter of the taxable 
year, on the last day of each half of the taxable year, or on the last 
day of the taxable year. No exchange gain or loss is realized upon the 
receipt or accrual of interest income with respect to a demand account 
subject to this paragraph (b)(1).
    (2) Translation of nonfunctional currency interest income or expense 
received or paid with respect to a debt instrument described in 
Sec. 1.988-1(a)(1)(ii) and (2)(i)--(i) Scope--(A) In general. Paragraph 
(b) of this section only applies to debt instruments described in 
Sec. 1.988-1(a)(1)(ii) and (2)(i) where all payments are denominated in, 
or determined with reference to, a single nonfunctional currency. Except 
as provided in paragraph (b)(2)(i)(B) of this section, this paragraph 
(b) shall not apply to contingent payment debt instruments.
    (B) Nonfunctional currency contingent payment debt instruments--(1) 
Operative rules. [Reserved]
    (2) Certain instruments are not contingent payment debt instruments. 
For purposes of section 1275(d), a debt instrument denominated in, or 
all payments of which are determined with reference to, a single 
nonfunctional currency (with no contingencies) is not a contingent 
payment debt instrument. See Sec. 1.988-1(a)(4) and (5) for the 
treatment of dual currency and multi-currency debt instruments.
    (ii) Determination and translation of interest income or expense--
(A) In general. Interest income or expense on a debt instrument 
described in paragraph (b)(2)(i) of this section (including original 
issue discount determined in accordance with sections 1271 through 1275 
and 163(e) as adjusted for acquisition premium under section 1272(a)(7), 
and acquisition discount determined in accordance with sections 1281 
through 1283) shall be determined in units of nonfunctional currency and 
translated into functional currency as provided in paragraphs 
(b)(2)(ii)(B) and (C) of this section. For purposes of sections 483, 
1273(b)(5) and 1274, the nonfunctional currency in which an instrument 
is denominated (or by reference to which payments are determined) shall 
be considered money.
    (B) Translation of interest income or expense that is not required 
to be accrued prior to receipt or payment. With respect to an instrument 
described in paragraph (b)(2)(i) of this section, interest income or 
expense received or paid that is not required to be accrued by the 
taxpayer prior to receipt or payment shall be translated at the spot 
rate on the date of receipt or payment. No exchange gain or loss is 
realized with respect to the receipt or payment of such interest income 
or expense (other than the exchange gain or loss that might be realized 
under paragraph (a) of this section upon the disposition of the 
nonfunctional currency so received or paid).
    (C) Translation of interest income or expense that is required to be 
accrued prior to receipt or payment. With respect to an instrument 
described in paragraph (b)(2)(i) of this section, interest income or 
expense that is required to be accrued prior to receipt or payment 
(e.g., under section 1272, 1281 or 163(e) or because the taxpayer uses 
an accrual method of accounting) shall be translated at the average rate 
(or other rate specified in paragraph (b)(2)(iii)(B) of this section) 
for the interest accrual period or, with respect to an interest accrual 
period that spans two taxable years, at the average rate (or other rate 
specified in paragraph (b)(2)(iii)(B) of this section) for the partial 
period within the taxable year. See paragraphs (b)(3) and (4) of this 
section for the determination of exchange gain or loss on the receipt or 
payment of accrued interest income or expense.
    (iii) Determination of average rate or other accrual convention--(A) 
In general. For purposes of this paragraph (b), the average rate for an 
accrual period (or partial period) shall be a simple average of the spot 
exchange rates for each business day of such period or other average 
exchange rate for the period reasonably derived and consistently applied 
by the taxpayer.
    (B) Election to use spot accrual convention. For taxable years 
beginning after

[[Page 577]]

March 17, 1992, a taxpayer may elect to translate interest income and 
expense at the spot rate on the last day of the interest accrual period 
(and in the case of a partial accrual period, the spot rate on the last 
day of the taxable year). If the last day of the interest accrual period 
is within five business days of the date of receipt or payment, the 
taxpayer may translate interest income or expense at the spot rate on 
the date of receipt or payment. The election shall be made by filing a 
statement with the taxpayer's first return in which the election is 
effective clearly indicating that the election has been made. A method 
so elected must be applied consistently to all debt instruments from 
year to year and cannot be changed without the consent of the 
Commissioner.
    (3) Exchange gain or loss recognized by the holder with respect to 
accrued interest income. The holder of a debt instrument described in 
paragraph (b)(2)(i) of this section shall realize exchange gain or loss 
with respect to accrued interest income on the date such accrued 
interest income is received or the instrument is disposed of (including 
a deemed disposition under section 1001 that results from a material 
change in terms of the instrument). Except as otherwise provided in this 
paragraph (b) (e.g., paragraph (b)(8) of this section), exchange gain or 
loss realized with respect to accrued interest income shall be 
recognized in accordance with the applicable recognition provisions of 
the Internal Revenue Code. The amount of exchange gain or loss so 
realized with respect to accrued interest income is determined for each 
accrual period by--
    (i) Translating the units of nonfunctional currency interest income 
received with respect to such accrual period (as determined under the 
ordering rules of paragraph (b)(7) of this section) into functional 
currency at the spot rate on the date the interest income is received or 
the instrument is disposed of (or deemed disposed of), and
    (ii) Subtracting from such amount the amount computed by translating 
the units of nonfunctional currency interest income accrued with respect 
to such income received at the average rate (or other rate specified in 
paragraph (b)(2)(iii)(B) of this section) for the accrual period.
    (4) Exchange gain or loss recognized by the obligor with respect to 
accrued interest expense. The obligor under a debt instrument described 
in paragraph (b)(2)(i) of this section shall realize exchange gain or 
loss with respect to accrued interest expense on the date such accrued 
interest expense is paid or the obligation to make payments is 
transferred or extinguished (including a deemed disposition under 
section 1001 that results from a material change in terms of the 
instrument). Except as otherwise provided in this paragraph (b) (e.g., 
paragraph (b)(8) of this section), exchange gain or loss realized with 
respect to accrued interest expense shall be recognized in accordance 
with the applicable recognition provisions of the Internal Revenue Code. 
The amount of exchange gain or loss so realized with respect to accrued 
interest expense is determined for each accrual period by--
    (i) Translating the units of nonfunctional currency interest expense 
accrued with respect to the amount of interest paid into functional 
currency at the average rate (or other rate specified in paragraph 
(b)(2)(iii)(B) of this section) for such accrual period; and
    (ii) Subtracting from such amount the amount computed by translating 
the units of nonfunctional currency interest paid (or, if the obligation 
to make payments is extinguished or transferred, the units accrued) with 
respect to such accrual period (as determined under the ordering rules 
in paragraph (b)(7) of this section) into functional currency at the 
spot rate on the date payment is made or the obligation is transferred 
or extinguished (or deemed extinguished).
    (5) Exchange gain or loss recognized by the holder of a debt 
instrument with respect to principal. The holder of a debt instrument 
described in paragraph (b)(2)(i) of this section shall realize exchange 
gain or loss with respect to the principal amount of such instrument on 
the date principal (determined under the ordering rules of paragraph 
(b)(7) of this section) is received from the obligor or the instrument 
is disposed of (including a deemed disposition under section 1001 that 
results

[[Page 578]]

from a material change in terms of the instrument). For purposes of 
computing exchange gain or loss, the principal amount of a debt 
instrument is the holder's purchase price in units of nonfunctional 
currency. See paragraph (b)(10) of this section for rules regarding the 
amortization of that part of the principal amount that represents bond 
premium and the computation of exchange gain or loss thereon. If, 
however, the holder acquired the instrument in a transaction in which 
exchange gain or loss was realized but not recognized by the transferor, 
the nonfunctional currency principal amount of the instrument with 
respect to the holder shall be the same as that of the transferor. 
Except as otherwise provided in this paragraph (b) (e.g., paragraph 
(b)(8) of this section), exchange gain or loss realized with respect to 
such principal amount shall be recognized in accordance with the 
applicable recognition provisions of the Internal Revenue Code. The 
amount of exchange gain or loss so realized by the holder with respect 
to principal is determined by--
    (i) Translating the units of nonfunctional currency principal at the 
spot rate on the date payment is received or the instrument is disposed 
of (or deemed disposed of); and
    (ii) Subtracting from such amount the amount computed by translating 
the units of nonfunctional currency principal at the spot rate on the 
date the holder (or a transferor from whom the nonfunctional principal 
amount is carried over) acquired the instrument (is deemed to acquire 
the instrument).
    (6) Exchange gain or loss recognized by the obligor of a debt 
instrument with respect to principal. The obligor under a debt 
instrument described in paragraph (b)(2)(i) of this section shall 
realize exchange gain or loss with respect to the principal amount of 
such instrument on the date principal (determined under the ordering 
rules of paragraph (b)(7) of this section) is paid or the obligation to 
make payments is transferred or extinguished (including a deemed 
disposition under section 1001 that results from a material change in 
terms of the instrument). For purposes of computing exchange gain or 
loss, the principal amount of a debt instrument is the amount received 
by the obligor for the debt instrument in units of nonfunctional 
currency. See paragraph (b)(10) of this section for rules regarding the 
amortization of that part of the principal amount that represents bond 
premium and the computation of exchange gain or loss thereon. If, 
however, the obligor became the obligor in a transaction in which 
exchange gain or loss was realized but not recognized by the transferor, 
the nonfunctional currency principal amount of the instrument with 
respect to such obligor shall be the same as that of the transferor. 
Except as otherwise provided in this paragraph (b) (e.g., paragraph 
(b)(8) of this section), exchange gain or loss realized with respect to 
such principal shall be recognized in accordance with the applicable 
recognition provisions of the Internal Revenue Code. The amount of 
exchange gain or loss so realized by the obligor is determined by--
    (i) Translating the units of nonfunctional currency principal at the 
spot rate on the date the obligor (or a transferor from whom the 
principal amount is carried over) became the obligor (or is deemed to 
have become the obligor); and
    (ii) Subtracting from such amount the amount computed by translating 
the units of nonfunctional currency principal at the spot rate on the 
date payment is made or the obligation is transferred or extinguished 
(or deemed extinguished).
    (7) Payment ordering rules--(i) Debt instruments subject to the 
rules of sections 163(e), or 1271 through 1288. In the case of a debt 
instrument described in paragraph (b)(2)(i) of this section that is 
subject to the rules of sections 163(e), or 1272 through 1288, units of 
nonfunctional currency (or an amount determined with reference to 
nonfunctional currency) received or paid with respect to such debt 
instrument shall be treated first as a receipt or payment of periodic 
interest under the principles of section 1273 and the regulations 
thereunder, second as a receipt or payment of original issue discount to 
the extent accrued as of the date of the receipt or payment, and finally 
as a receipt or payment of principal. Units of nonfunctional currency 
(or an amount determined with reference to nonfunctional

[[Page 579]]

currency) treated as a receipt or payment of original issue discount 
under the preceding sentence are attributed to the earliest accrual 
period in which original issue discount has accrued and to which prior 
receipts or payments have not been attributed. No portion thereof shall 
be treated as prepaid interest. These rules are illustrated by Example 
10 of paragraph (b)(9) of this section.
    (ii) Other debt instruments. In the case of a debt instrument 
described in paragraph (b)(2)(i) of this section that is not subject to 
the rules of section 163(e) or 1272 through 1288, whether units of 
nonfunctional currency (or an amount determined with reference to 
nonfunctional currency) received or paid with respect to such debt 
instrument are treated as interest or principal shall be determined 
under section 163 or other applicable section of the Code.
    (8) Limitation of exchange gain or loss on payment or disposition of 
a debt instrument. When a debt instrument described in paragraph 
(b)(2)(i) of this section is paid or disposed of, or when the obligation 
to make payments thereunder is satisfied by another person, or 
extinguished or assumed by another person, exchange gain or loss is 
computed with respect to both principal and any accrued interest 
(including original issue discount), as provided in paragraph (b)(3) 
through (7) of this section. However, pursuant to section 988(b)(1) and 
(2), the sum of any exchange gain or loss with respect to the principal 
and interest of any such debt instrument shall be realized only to the 
extent of the total gain or loss realized on the transaction. The gain 
or loss realized shall be recognized in accordance with the general 
principles of the Code. See Examples 3, 4 and 6 of paragraph (b)(9) of 
this section.
    (9) Examples. The preceding provisions are illustrated in the 
following examples. The examples assume that any transaction involving 
an individual is a section 988 transaction.

    Example 1. (i) X is an individual on the cash method of accounting 
with the dollar as his functional currency. On January 1, 1992, X 
converts $13,000 to 10,000 British pounds (<brit-pound>) at the spot 
rate of <brit-pound>1 = $1.30 and loans the <brit-pound>10,000 to Y for 
3 years. The terms of the loan provide that Y will make interest 
payments of <brit-pound>1,000 on December 31 of 1992, 1993, and 1994, 
and will repay X's <brit-pound>10,000 principal on December 31, 1994. 
Assume the spot rates for the pertinent dates are as follows:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                              Spot rate 
                            Date                              (pounds to
                                                               dollars) 
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Jan. 1, 1992...............................................  <brit-pound
                                                                >1=$1.30
Dec. 31, 1992..............................................  <brit-pound
                                                                >1=$1.35
Dec. 31, 1993..............................................  <brit-pound
                                                                >1=$1.40
Dec. 31, 1994..............................................  <brit-pound
                                                                >1=$1.45
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (ii) Under paragraph (b)(2)(ii)(B) of this section, X will trans1ate 
the <brit-pound>1,000 interest payments at the spot rate on the date 
received. Accordingly, X will have interest income of $1,350 in 1992, 
$1,400 in 1993, and $1,450 in 1994. Because X is a cash basis taxpayer, 
X does not realize exchange gain or loss on the receipt of interest 
income.
    (iii) Under paragraph (b)(5) of this section, X will realize 
exchange gain upon repayment of the <brit-pound>10,000 principal amount 
determined by translating the <brit-pound>10,000 at the spot rate on the 
date it is received (<brit-pound>10,000 x $1.45 = $14,500) and 
subtracting from such amount, the amount determined by translating the 
<brit-pound>10,000 at the spot rate on the date the loan was made 
(<brit-pound>10,000 x $1.30 = $13,000). Accordingly, X will realize an 
exchange gain of $1,500 on the repayment of the loan on December 31, 
1994.
    Example 2. (i) Assume the same facts as in Example 1 except that X 
is an accrual method taxpayer and that average rates are as follows:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                               Average rate (pounds to  
              Accrual period                          dollars)          
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1992......................................  <brit-pound>1=$1.32         
1993......................................  <brit-pound>1=$1.37         
1994......................................  <brit-pound>1=$1.42         
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (ii) Under paragraph (b)(2)(ii)(C) of this section, X will accrue 
the <brit-pound>1,000 interest payments at the average rate for the 
accrual period. Accordingly, X will have interest income of $1,320 in 
1992, $1,370 in 1993, and $1,420 in 1994. Because X is an accrual basis 
taxpayer, X determines exchange gain or loss for each interest accrual 
period by translating the units of nonfunctional currency interest 
income received with respect to such accrual period at the spot rate on 
the date received and subtracting the amounts of interest income accrued 
for such period. Thus, X will realize $90 of exchange gain with respect 
to interest received under the loan, computed as follows:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                            Spot     Accrued            
                                           value     interest    Exch.  
                  Year                    interest  @ average     gain  
                                          received     rate             
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1992...................................     $1,350     $1,320        $30
1993...................................      1,400      1,370         30

[[Page 580]]

                                                                        
1994...................................      1,450      1,420         30
                                                              ----------
  Total................................  .........  .........        $90
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (iii) Under paragraph (b)(5) of this section, X will realize 
exchange gain upon repayment of the <brit-pound>10,000 loan principal 
determined in the same manner as in Example 1. Accordingly, X will 
realize an exchange gain of $1,500 on the repayment of the loan 
principal on December 31, 1994.
    Example 3. Assume the same facts as in Example 1 except that X is a 
calendar year taxpayer on the accrual method of accounting that elects 
to use a spot rate convention to translate interest income as provided 
in Sec. 1.988-2(b)(2)(iii)(B). Interest income is received by X on the 
last day of each accrual period. Under paragraph (b)(2)(ii)(C), X will 
translate the interest income at the spot rate on the last day of each 
interest accrual period. Accordingly, X will have interest income of 
$1,350 in 1992, and $1,400 in 1993, $1,450 in 1994. Because the rate at 
which the interest income is translated is the same as the rate on the 
day of receipt, X will not realize any exchange gain or loss with 
respect to the interest income. Under paragraph (b)(5) of this section, 
X will realize exchange gain upon repayment of the <brit-pound>10,000 
loan principal determined in the same manner as in Example 1. 
Accordingly, X will realize an exchange gain of $1,500 on the repayment 
of the loan principal on December 31, 1994.
    Example 4. Assume the same facts as in Example 1 except that on 
December 31, 1993, X sells Y's note for 9,821.13 British pounds 
(<brit-pound>) after the interest payment. Under paragraph (b)(8) of 
this section, X will compute exchange gain on the <brit-pound>10,000 
principal. The exchange gain is $1,000 
[(<brit-pound>10,000 x $1.40)-(<brit-pound>10,000 x $1.30)]. This 
exchange gain, however, is only realized to the extent of the total gain 
on the disposition. X's total gain is $749.58 
[(<brit-pound>9,821.13 x $1.40)-(<brit-pound>10,000 x $1.30)]. Thus, X 
will realize $749.58 of exchange gain (and will realize no market loss).
    Example 5. (i) The facts are the same as in Example 1 except that Y 
becomes insolvent and fails to repay the full <brit-pound>10,000 
principal when due. Instead, X and Y agree to compromise the debt for a 
payment of <brit-pound>8,000 on December 31, 1994. Under paragraph 
(b)(8) of this section, X will compute exchange gain on the 
<brit-pound>10,000 originally booked. The exchange gain is $1,500 
[(<brit-pound>10,000 x $1.45)-(<brit-pound>10,000 x $1.30) = $1,500]. 
This exchange gain, however, is only realized to the extent of the total 
gain on the disposition. X realizes an overall loss on the disposition 
of $1,400 [(<brit-pound>8,000 x $1.45)-(<brit-pound>10,000 x $1.30) = 
($1,400)]. Thus, X will realize no exchange gain (and a $1400 market 
loss).
    (ii) If the exchange rate on December 31, 1994, were <brit-pound>1 = 
$1.25, rather than <brit-pound>1 = $1.45, X would compute exchange loss 
under paragraph (b)(8) of this section, on the <brit-pound>10,000 
originally booked. The exchange loss would be $500 
[(<brit-pound>10,000 x $1.25)-(<brit-pound>10,000 x $1.30) = ($500)]. 
X's total loss on the disposition would be $3,000 
[(<brit-pound>8,000 x $1.25)-(<brit-pound>10,000 x $1.30) = ($3,000)]. 
Thus, X would realize $500 of exchange loss and a $2,500 market loss on 
the disposition.
    Example 6. (i) X is an individual with the dollar as his functional 
currency. X is on the cash method of accounting. On January 1, 1989, X 
borrows 10,000 British pounds (<brit-pound>) from Y, an unrelated 
person. The terms of the loan provide that X will make interest payments 
of <brit-pound>1,200 on December 31 of 1989 and 1990 and will repay Y's 
<brit-pound>10,000 principal on December 31, 1990. The spot rates for 
the pertinent dates are as follows:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                              Spot rate 
                            Date                                 \1\    
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Jan. 1, 1989...............................................      1=$1.50
Dec. 31, 1989..............................................       1=1.60
Dec. 31, 1990..............................................      1=1.70 
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Pounds to dollars.                                                  

Assume that the basis of the <brit-pound>1,200 paid as interest by X on 
December 31, 1989, is $2,000, the basis of the <brit-pound>1,200 paid as 
interest by X on December 31, 1990, is $2,020 and the basis of the 
<brit-pound>10,000 principal paid by X on December 31, 1990, is $16,000.
    (ii) Under paragraph (b)(2)(ii)(B) of this section, X translates the 
<brit-pound>1,200 interest payments at the spot rate on the day paid. 
Thus, X paid $1,920 (<brit-pound>1,200 x $1.60) of interest on December 
31, 1989, and $2,040 (<brit-pound>1,200 x $1.70) of interest on December 
31, 1990. In addition, X will realize exchange gain or loss on the 
disposition of the <brit-pound>1,200 on December 31, 1989 and 1990, 
under paragraph (a) of this section. Pursuant to paragraph (a)(2) of 
this section, X will realize an exchange loss of $80 
[(<brit-pound>1,200 x $1.60)-$2,000] on December 31, 1989, and exchange 
gain of $20 [(<brit-pound>1,200 x $1.70)-$2,020] on December 31, 1990.
    (iii) Under paragraph (b)(6) of this section, X will realize 
exchange loss on December 31, 1990, upon repayment of the 
<brit-pound>10,000 principal amount determined by translating the 
<brit-pound>10,000 received at the spot rate on January 1, 1989 
(<brit-pound>10,000 x $1.50 = $15,000) and subtracting from such amount, 
the amount determined by translating the <brit-pound>10,000 paid at the 
spot rate on December 31, 1990 (<brit-pound>10,000 x $1.70 = $17,000). 
Thus, under paragraph (b)(6) of this section, X has an exchange loss 
with respect to the <brit-pound>10,000 principal of $2,000. Further, 
under paragraph (a)(2) of this section, X will realize an exchange gain 
upon disposition of the <brit-pound>10,000 on December 31, 1990. Under 
paragraph (a)(2) of this section, X will subtract his adjusted basis in 
the <brit-pound>10,000 ($16,000) from

[[Page 581]]

the amount realized upon the disposition of the <brit-pound>10,000 
(<brit-pound>10,000 x $1.70 = $17,000) resulting in a gain of $1,000. 
Accordingly, X's combined exchange gain and loss realized on December 
31, 1990, with respect to the repayment of the <brit-pound>10,000 is a 
$1,000 exchange loss.
    Example 7. (i) X is a calendar year corporation on the accrual 
method of accounting and with the dollar as its functional currency. On 
January 1, 1989, X purchases at original issue for 82.64 Canadian 
dollars (C$) M corporation's 2 year note maturing on December 31, 1990, 
at a stated redemption price of C$100. The yield to maturity in Canadian 
dollars is 10 percent and the accrual period is the one year period 
beginning January 1 and ending December 31. The note has C$17.36 of 
original issue discount. Assume that the spot rates are as follows: C$1 
= U.S.$.72 on January 1, 1989; C$1 = U.S.$.80 on January 1, 1990; C$1 = 
U.S.$ .82 on December 31, 1990. Assume further that the average rate for 
1989 is C$1 = U.S.$ .76 and for 1990 is C$1 = U.S. $.81.
    (ii) Under paragraph (b)(2)(ii)(A) of this section, X will determine 
its interest income in Canadian dollars. Accordingly, under section 
1272, X must take into account original issue discount in the amount of 
C$8.26 on December 31, 1989, and C$9.10 on December 31, 1990. Pursuant 
to paragraph (b)(2)(ii)(C) of this section, X will translate these 
amounts into U.S. dollars at the average exchange rate for the relevant 
accrual period. Thus, the amount of interest income taken into account 
in 1989 is U.S.$6.28 (C$8.26 x U.S.$.76) and in 1990 is U.S.$7.37 
(C$9.10 x U.S.$.81). Pursuant to paragraph (b)(3)(ii) of this section, X 
will realize exchange gain or loss with respect to the accrued interest 
determined for each accrual period by translating the Canadian dollars 
received with respect to such accrual period into U.S. dollars at the 
spot rate on the date the interest is received and subtracting from that 
amount the amount accrued in U.S. dollars. Thus, the amount of exchange 
gain realized on December 31, 1990, is U.S.$.58 (U.S.$.49 from 
1989+U.S.$.09 from 1990). Pursuant to paragraph (b)(5) of this section, 
X shall realize exchange gain or loss with respect to the principal 
(C$82.64) on December 31, 1990, computed by translating the C$82.64 at 
the spot rate on December 31, 1990 (U.S.$67.76) and subtracting the 
C$82.64 translated at the spot rate on January 1, 1989 (U.S.$59.50) for 
an exchange gain of U.S.$8.26. Thus, X's combined exchange gain is 
U.S.$8.84 (U.S.$.49+U.S.$.09+U.S.$8.26).
    (iii) Assume instead that on January 1, 1990, X sells the note for 
C$86.95, which it immediately converts to U.S. dollars. X's exchange 
gain is computed under paragraph (b)(8) of this section with reference 
to the nonfunctional currency denominated principal amount (C$82.64) and 
the nonfunctional currency denominated accrued original issue discount 
(C$8.26). X will compute an exchange gain of U.S.$6.61 with respect to 
the issue price [(C$82.64 x U.S.$ .80)-(C$82.64 x U.S.$.72)] and an 
exchange gain of U.S.$.33 with respect to the accrued original issue 
discount [(C$8.26 x U.S.$.80)- (C$8.26 x U.S.$ .76)]. Accordingly, prior 
to the application of paragraph (b)(8) of this section, X's total 
exchange gain is U.S.$6.94 (U.S.$6.61+U.S.$.33), and X's market loss is 
U.S.$3.16 [(C$90.90-C$86.95) x U.S.$.80]. Pursuant to paragraph (b)(8) 
of this section, however, X's market loss on the note of U.S.$3.16 is 
netted against X's exchange gain of U.S.$6.94, resulting in a realized 
exchange gain of U.S.$3.78 and no market loss.
    Example 8. (i) The facts are the same as in Example 7 (i) except 
that on January 1, 1990, X contributes the M corporation note to Y, a 
wholly-owned U.S. subsidiary of X with the dollar as its functional 
currency, and Y collects C$100 from M corporation at maturity on 
December 31, 1990, when the spot rate is C$1 = U.S.$.82. The transfer of 
the note from X to Y qualifies for nonrecognition of gain under section 
351(a). On December 31, 1990, Y includes C$9.10 of accrued interest in 
income which translated at the average exchange rate of C$1 = U.S.$.81 
for the year results in U.S.$7.37 of interest income.
    (ii) Y's exchange gain is computed under paragraph (b)(3) of this 
section with respect to accrued interest income and paragraph (b)(5) of 
this section with respect to the nonfunctional currency principal 
amount. Under paragraph (b)(3) of this section, Y will realize exchange 
gain or loss for each accrual period computed by translating the units 
of nonfunctional currency interest income received with respect to such 
accrual period at the spot rate on the day received and subtracting the 
amounts of interest income accrued for such period. Thus, Y will realize 
$.49 of exchange gain with respect to original issue discount accrued in 
1989 [(C$8.26 x U.S.$.82)-(C$8.26 x U.S.$.76) = U.S. $.49] and $.09 of 
exchange gain with respect to original issue discount accrued in 1990 
[(C$9.10 x U.S.$.82)-(C$9.10 x U.S.$.81) = $.09].
    (iii) Pursuant to paragraph (b)(5) of this section, the 
nonfunctional currency principal amount of the M bond in the hands of Y 
is C$82.64, the amount carried over from X, the transferor. Y's exchange 
gain with respect to the nonfunctional currency principal amount is 
$8.26 [(C$82.64 x U.S.$.82)- (C$82.64 x U.S.$.72) = U.S. $8.26]. 
Accordingly, Y's combined exchange gain is U.S. $8.84 ($.49+$.09+$8.26). 
Because the amount realized in Canadian dollars equals the adjusted 
issue price (C$100) on retirement of the M note, there is no market 
loss, and the netting rule of paragraph (b)(8) of this section does not 
limit realization of the exchange gain.
    Example 9. (i) X is a calendar year corporation on the accrual 
method of accounting and with the dollar as its functional currency. X 
elects to use the spot rate convention to translate interest income as 
provided

[[Page 582]]

in paragraph (b)(2)(iii)(B) of this section. On January 31, 1992, X 
loans <brit-pound>1000 to Y, an unrelated person. Under the terms of the 
loan, Y will pay X interest of <brit-pound>50 on July 31, 1992, and 
January 31, 1993, and will repay the <brit-pound>1000 principal on 
January 31, 1993. Assume the following spot exchange rates:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                              Spot rate 
                            Date                                 \1\    
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Jan. 31, 1992..............................................  <brit-pound
                                                                >1=$1.50
July 31, 1992..............................................  <brit-pound
                                                                 >1=1.55
Dec. 31, 1992..............................................  <brit-pound
                                                                 >1=1.60
Jan. 31, 1993..............................................  <brit-pound
                                                                >1=1.61 
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Pounds to dollars.                                                  

    (ii) Under paragraph (b)(2)(ii)(C) of this section, X will translate 
the interest income at the spot rate on the last day of each interest 
accrual period (and in the case of a partial accrual period, at the spot 
rate on the last day of the taxable year). Accordingly, X will have 
interest income of $77.50 (<brit-pound>50 x $1.55) on July 31, 1992. 
Assuming under X's method of accounting that interest is accrued daily, 
X will accrue $66.50 (153/184 x <brit-pound>50) x $1.60) of interest 
income on December 31, 1992. On January 31, 1993, X will have interest 
income of $13.60 ((31/184 x <brit-pound>50) x $1.61). Because the rate 
at which the interest income is translated is the same as the rate on 
the day of receipt, X will not realize any exchange gain or loss with 
respect to the interest income received on July 31, 1992. However, X 
will realize exchange gain on the <brit-pound>41.50 (153/
184 x <brit-pound>50) of accrued interest income of $.41 
[(<brit-pound>41.50 x $1.61)-(<brit-pound>41.50 x $1.60) = $.41].
    (iii) Under paragraph (b)(5) of this section, X will realize 
exchange gain upon repayment of the <brit-pound>100 principal amount 
determined by translating the <brit-pound>100 at the spot rate on the 
date it is received (<brit-pound>100 x $1.61 = $161.00) and subtracting 
from such amount, the amount determined by translating the 
<brit-pound>100 at the spot rate on the date the loan was made 
(<brit-pound>100 x $1.50 = $150.00). Accordingly, X will realize an 
exchange gain of $11 on the repayment of the loan on January 31, 1993.
    Example 10. (i) X, a cash basis taxpayer with the dollar as its 
functional currency, has the calendar year as its taxable year. On 
January 1, 1992, X purchases at original issue for 65.88 British pounds 
(<brit-pound>) M corporation's 5-year bond maturing on December 31, 
1996, having a stated redemption price at maturity of <brit-pound>100. 
The bond provides for annual payments of interest in pounds of 1 pound 
per year on December 31 of each year. The bond has 34.12 British pounds 
of original issue discount. The yield to maturity is 10 percent in 
British pounds and the accrual period is the one year period beginning 
January 1 and ending December 31 of each calendar year. The amount of 
original issue discount is determined in pounds for each accrual period 
by multiplying the adjusted issue price expressed in pounds by the yield 
and subtracting from such amount the periodic interest payments 
expressed in pounds for such period. The periodic interest payments are 
translated at the spot rate on the payment date (December 31 of each 
year). The original issue discount is translated at the average rate for 
the accrual period (January 1 through December 31). The following chart 
describes the determination of interest income with respect to the facts 
presented and provides other pertinent information.

[[Page 583]]



                                                                         Table 1                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                     Original                           
                                                                                                        Periodic      issue                             
                                                                                                        interest   discount in                          
                                                                                           Assumed    payments in     pounds       Total                
                                       Periodic     Original                  Assumed      average       pounds     multiplied    interest              
                                       interest      issue     Issue price   spot rate     rate for    multiplied     by the     income in     Adjusted 
           Year (Dec. 31)            payments in  discount in  or adjusted   on Dec. 31    accrual      by spot      average      dollars    issue price
                                      pounds for   pounds for  issue price   (pounds to     period    rate on the    rate for    (column 7    in dollars
                                     the accrual  the accrual   in pounds     dollars)    (pounds to    date of    the accrual  plus column             
                                        period       period                                dollars)     payment       period         8)                 
                                                                                                       (column 2    (column 3                           
                                                                                                         times        times                             
                                                                                                       column 5)    column 6)                           
1                                              2            3            4            5            6            7            8            9           10
                                                                                                                                                        
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Issue Date:                                                                                                                                             
                                                                     65.88      1=$1.20  ...........  ...........  ...........  ...........       $79.06
1992                                           1         5.59        71.47       1=1.30      1=$1.25        $1.30        $6.99        $8.29        86.05
1993                                           1         6.15        77.62       1=1.40       1=1.35         1.40         8.30         9.70        94.35
1994                                           1         6.76        84.38       1=1.50       1=1.45         1.50         9.80        11.30       104.15
1995                                           1         7.44        91.82       1=1.60       1=1.55         1.60        11.53        13.13       115.68
1996                                           1         8.18       100.00       1=1.70       1=1.65         1.70        13.50        15.20       129.18


[[Page 584]]

    (ii) Because X is a cash basis taxpayer, X does not realize exchange 
gain or loss on the receipt of the <brit-pound>1 periodic interest 
payments. However, X will realize exchange gain on December 31, 1996 
totaling $7.88 with respect to the original issue discount. Exchange 
gain is determined for each interest accrual period by translating the 
units of nonfunctional currency interest income received with respect to 
such accrual period at the spot rate on the date received and 
subtracting from such amount, the amount computed by translating the 
units of nonfunctional currency interest income accrued for such period 
at the average rate for the period. The following chart illustrates this 
computation:

                                                     Table 2                                                    
                                                                                                                
                                                                                           IOD in               
                                                                Interest                   pounds               
                                                   Assumed      received     Assumed     times the              
                                    OID accrued   spot rate    times spot    average      average      Exchange 
                                     in pounds     on date    rate on the    rate for     rate for     gain or  
               Year                   for each     payment        date       accrual    the accrual   loss (col.
                                      accrual      received     received      period       period    4 less col.
                                       period     (pounds to    (col. 2     (pounds to    (col. 2         6)    
                                                   dollars)    times col.    dollars)    times col.             
                                                                   3)                        5)                 
1                                             2            3            4            5            6            7
                                                                                                                
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1992..............................         5.59      1=$1.70        $9.50      1=$1.25        $6.99        $2.51
1993..............................         6.15       1=1.70        10.46       1=1.35         8.30         2.16
1994..............................         6.76       1=1.70        11.49       1=1.45         9.80         1.69
1995..............................         7.44       1=1.70        12.65       1=1.55        11.53         1.12
1996..............................         8.18       1=1.70        13.90       1=1.65        13.50          .40
                                                                                                    ------------
  Total...........................  ...........  ...........  ...........  ...........  ...........        $7.88

    (iii) X will also realize exchange gain with respect to the 
principal of the loan (i.e., the issue price of 65.88 British pounds) on 
December 31, 1996 computed by translating the units of nonfunctional 
currency principal received at the spot rate on the date principal is 
received (65.88 British pounds  x  $1.70 = $112.00) and subtracting from 
such amount, the units of nonfunctional currency principal received 
translated at the spot rate on the date the instrument was acquired 
(65.88 British pounds  x  $1.20 = $79.06). Accordingly, X's exchange 
gain on the principal is $32.94 and X's total exchange gain with respect 
to the accrued interest and principal is $40.82. It should be noted 
that, under this fact pattern, the total exchange gain may be determined 
in an alternative fashion. Exchange gain may be computed by subtracting 
the adjusted issue price in dollars at maturity ($129.18--see column 10 
of Table 1) from the amount computed by multiplying the stated 
redemption price at maturity in pounds times the spot rate on the 
maturity date (<brit-pound>100 x $1.70 = $170), which equals $40.82.
    Example 11. (i) The facts are the same as in Example 10 except that 
X makes an election under paragraph (b)(2)(iii) of this section to 
translate accrued interest on the last day of the accrual period. 
Accordingly, columns 8, 9 and 10 in Table 1 would change as follows:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                     Original                           
                                      issue                             
                                   discount in     Total                
                                      pounds      interest              
                                    multiplied   income in     Adjusted 
          Year (Dec. 31)           by the spot    dollars    issue price
                                     rate on     (column 7    in dollars
                                   last day of  plus column             
                                     accrual         8)                 
                                      period                            
                                    (Dec. 31)                           
1                                            8            9           10
                                                                        
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                  $79.06
1992.............................        $7.27        $8.57        87.63
1993.............................         8.61        10.01        97.64
1994.............................        10.14        11.64       109.28
1995.............................        11.90        13.50       122.78
1996.............................        13.91        15.61       138.39

    (ii) Because X is a cash basis taxpayer, X does not realize exchange 
gain or loss on the receipt of the <brit-pound>1 periodic interest 
payments. However, X will realize exchange gain on December 31, 1993 
totaling $6.18 with respect to the original issue discount. Exchange 
gain is determined for each interest accrual period by translating the 
units of nonfunctional currency interest income received with respect to 
such accrual period at the spot rate on the date received and 
subtracting from such amount, the amount computed by translating the 
units of nonfunctional currency interest income accrued for such period 
at the spot rate on the last day of the

[[Page 585]]

accrual period. Accordingly, columns 5, 6 and 7 of Table 2 would change 
as follows:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                   OID in               
                                                   pounds               
                                                 times the              
                                    Spot rate    spot rate     Exchange 
                                   on last day  on the last    gain or  
               Year                 of accrual   day of the   loss (col.
                                      period      accrual    4 less col.
                                                period (col       6)    
                                                  2 times               
                                                  col. 3)               
1                                            5            6            7
                                                                        
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1992.............................        $1.30        $7.27        $2.23
1993.............................         1.40         8.61         1.85
1994.............................         1.50        10.14         1.35
1995.............................         1.60        11.90         0.75
1996.............................         1.70        13.90         0.00
                                                            ------------
                                                                    6.18

    (iii) X will realize exchange gain with respect to the principal 
amount of the loan as provided in the preceding example.
    Example 12. (i) C is a corporation that is a calendar year accrual 
method taxpayer with the dollar as its functional currency. On January 
1, 1989, C lends 100 British pounds (<brit-pound>) in exchange for a 
note under the terms of which C will receive two equal payments of 
<brit-pound>57.62 on December 31, 1989, and December 31, 1990. Each 
payment of <brit-pound>57.62 represents the annual payment necessary to 
amortize the <brit-pound>100 principal amount at a rate of 10% 
compounded annually over a two year period. The following tables reflect 
the amounts of principal and interest that compose each payment and 
assumptions as to the relevant exchange rates:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                     Date                        Principal     Interest 
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Dec. 31, 1989.................................  <brit-pound             
                                                     >47.62  <brit-pound
                                                                  >10.00
Dec. 12, 1990.................................  <brit-pound             
                                                     >52.38  <brit-pound
                                                                   >5.24
------------------------------------------------------------------------


------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                               Average  
                    Date                        Spot rate      rate for 
                                             <brit-pound>1=  year ending
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Jan. 1, 1989...............................          $1.30              
Dec. 31, 1989..............................           1.40          1.35
Dec. 31, 1990..............................           1.50          1.45
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (ii) Because each interest payment is equal to the product of the 
outstanding principal balance of the obligation and a single fixed rate 
of interest, each stated interest payment constitutes periodic interest 
under the principles of section 1273. Accordingly, there is no original 
issue discount.
    (iii) Because C is an accrual basis taxpayer, C will translate the 
interest income at the average rate for the annual accrual period 
pursuant to paragraph (b)(2)(ii)(C) of this section. Thus, C's interest 
income is $13.50 (<brit-pound>10.00 x $1.35) in 1989, and $7.60 
(<brit-pound>5.24 x $1.45) in 1990. C will realize exchange gain or loss 
upon receipt of accrued interest computed in accordance with paragraph 
(b)(3) of this section. Thus, C will realize exchange gain in the amount 
of $.50 [(<brit-pound>10.00 x $1.40)-$13.50] in 1989, and $.26 
[(<brit-pound>5.24 x $1.50)-$7.60] in 1990.
    (iv) In addition, C will realize exchange gain or loss upon the 
receipt of principal each year computed under paragraph (b)(5) of this 
section. Thus, C will realize exchange gain in the amount of $4.76 
[(<brit-pound>47.62 x $1.40)-(<brit-pound>47.62 x $1.30)] in 1989, and 
$10.48 [(<brit-pound>52.38 x $1.50)-(<brit-pound>52.38 x $1.30)] in 
1990.

    (10) Treatment of bond premium--(i) In general. Amortizable bond 
premium on a bond described in paragraph (b)(2)(i) of this section shall 
be computed in the units of nonfunctional currency in which the bond is 
denominated (or in which the payments are determined). Amortizable bond 
premium properly taken into account under section 171 or Sec. 1.61-12 
(or the successor provision thereof) shall reduce interest income or 
expense in units of nonfunctional currency. Exchange gain or loss is 
realized with respect to bond premium described in the preceding 
sentence by treating the portion of premium amortized with respect to 
any period as a return of principal. With respect to a holder that does 
not elect to amortize bond premium under section 171, the amount of bond 
premium will constitute a market loss when the bond matures. See 
paragraph (b)(8) of this section. The principles set forth in this 
paragraph (b)(10) shall apply to determine the treatment of acquisition 
premium described in section 1272(a)(7).
    (ii) Example. The following example illustrates the provisions of 
this paragraph (b)(10).

    Example. (A) X is an individual on the cash method of accounting 
with the dollar as his functional currency. On January 1, 1989, X 
purchases Y corporation's note for 107.99 British pounds (<brit-pound>) 
from Z, an unrelated party. The note has an issue price of 
<brit-pound>100, a stated redemption price at maturity of 
<brit-pound>100, pays interest in pounds at the rate of 10% compounded 
annually, and matures on December 31, 1993. X elects to amortize the 
bond premium of <brit-pound>7.99 under the rules of section 171. 
Pursuant to paragraph (b)(10)(i) of this section, bond premium is 
determined and amortized in British pounds. Assume the amortization 
schedule is as follows:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                Unamortized             
                                       Bond       premium               
        Year ending 12/31            premium        plus       Interest 
                                    amortized    principal              
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                <brit-pound             
                                                    >107.99             
1989.............................  <brit-pound                          
                                         >1.36  <brit-pound             
                                                    >106.63  <brit-pound
                                                                   >8.64

[[Page 586]]

                                                                        
1990.............................  <brit-pound                          
                                         >1.47  <brit-pound             
                                                    >105.16  <brit-pound
                                                                   >8.53
1991.............................  <brit-pound                          
                                         >1.59  <brit-pound             
                                                    >103.57  <brit-pound
                                                                   >8.41
1992.............................  <brit-pound                          
                                         >1.71  <brit-pound             
                                                    >101.86  <brit-pound
                                                                   >8.29
1993.............................  <brit-pound                          
                                         >1.85  <brit-pound             
                                                    >100.00  <brit-pound
                                                                   >8.15
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (B) The bond premium reduces X's pound interest income under the 
note. For example, the <brit-pound>10 stated interest payment made in 
1989 is reduced by <brit-pound>1.36 of bond premium, and the resulting 
<brit-pound>8.64 interest income is translated into dollars at the spot 
rate on December 31, 1989. Exchange gain or loss is realized on the 
<brit-pound>1.36 bond premium based on the difference between the spot 
rates on January 1, 1989, the date the premium is paid to acquire the 
bond, and December 31, 1989, the date the bond premium is returned as 
part of the stated interest. The <brit-pound>1.36 bond premium reduces 
the unamortized premium plus principal to <brit-pound>106.63 
(<brit-pound>107.99-<brit-pound>1.36). On December 31, 1993, when the 
bond matures and the <brit-pound>7.99 of bond premium has been fully 
amortized, X will realize exchange gain or loss with respect to the 
remaining purchase price of <brit-pound>100.

    (11) Market discount--(i) In general. Market discount as defined in 
section 1278(a)(2) shall be determined in units of nonfunctional 
currency in which the market discount bond is denominated (or in which 
the payments are determined). Accrued market discount (other than market 
discount currently included in income pursuant to section 1278(b)) shall 
be translated into functional currency at the spot rate on the date the 
market discount bond is disposed of. No part of such accrued market 
discount is treated as exchange gain or loss. Accrued market discount 
currently includible in income pursuant to section 1278(b) shall be 
translated into functional currency at the average exchange rate for the 
accrual period. Exchange gain or loss with respect to accrued market 
discount currently includible in income under section 1278(b) shall be 
determined in accordance with paragraph (b)(3) of this section relating 
to accrued interest income.
    (ii) Example. The following example illustrates the provisions of 
this paragraph (b)(11).

    Example. (A) X is a calendar year corporation with the U.S. dollar 
as its functional currency. On January 1, 1990, X purchases a bond of M 
corporation for 96,530 British pounds (<brit-pound>). The bond, which 
was issued on January 1, 1989, has an issue price of 
<brit-pound>100,000, a stated redemption price at maturity of 
<brit-pound>100,000, and provides for annual pound payments of interest 
at 8 percent. The bond matures on December 31, 1991. X purchased the 
bond at a market discount of 3,470 pounds and did not elect to include 
the market discount currently in income under section 1278(b). X holds 
the bond to maturity and on December 31, 1991, receives payment of 
<brit-pound>100,000 (plus <brit-pound>8,000 interest) when the exchange 
rate is <brit-pound>1 = $1.50.
    (B) Pursuant to paragraph (b)(11) of this section, X computes market 
discount in units of nonfunctional currency. Thus, the market discount 
as defined under section 1278(a)(2) is <brit-pound>3,470. Accrued market 
discount (other than market discount currently included in income 
pursuant to section 1278(b)) is translated at the spot rate on the date 
the market discount bond is disposed of. Accordingly, X will translate 
the accrued market discount of <brit-pound>3,470 at the spot rate on 
December 31, 1991 (<brit-pound>3,470 x $1.50 = $5,205). No exchange gain 
or loss is realized with respect to the <brit-pound>3,470 of accrued 
market discount. See paragraphs (b)(3) and (5) of this section for the 
realization and recognition of exchange gain or loss with respect to 
accrued interest and principal.

    (12) Tax exempt bonds. See Sec. 1.988-3(c)(2), which characterizes 
exchange loss realized with respect to a nonfunctional currency tax 
exempt bond as a reduction of interest income.
    (13) Nonfunctional currency debt exchanged for stock of obligor--(i) 
In general. Notwithstanding any other section of the Code other than 
section 267, 1091 or 1092, exchange gain or loss shall be realized and 
recognized by the holder and the obligor in accordance with the rules of 
paragraphs (b)(3) through (7) of this section with respect to the 
principal and accrued interest of a debt instrument described in 
paragraph (b)(2)(i) of this section that is acquired by the obligor in 
exchange for its stock, provided however, that such gain or loss shall 
be recognized only to the extent of the total gain or loss on the 
exchange (regardless of whether such gain or loss would otherwise be 
recognized). This rule shall apply whether the debt instrument is 
converted into stock according to its terms or exchanged pursuant to a 
separate agreement between the obligor and the holder. A debt instrument 
that is acquired by the obligor from a shareholder as a contribution to 
capital shall be treated for purposes of this

[[Page 587]]

section as exchanged for stock, whether or not additional stock is 
issued.
    (ii) Coordination with section 108. Section 988 and this section 
shall apply before section 108. Exchange gain realized by the obligor on 
an exchange described in paragraph (b)(13)(i) of this section shall not 
be treated as discharge of indebtedness income, but shall be considered 
to reduce the amount of the liability for purposes of computing the 
obligor's income on the exchange under section 108(e)(4), section 
108(e)(6) or section 108(e)(10).
    (iii) Effective date. This paragraph (b)(13) shall be effective for 
exchanges of debt for stock effected after September 21, 1989.
    (iv) Examples. The following examples illustrate the operation of 
this paragraph (b)(13). In each such example, assume that sections 267, 
1091 and 1092 do not apply.

    Example 1. (i) X is a calendar year U.S. corporation with the U.S. 
dollar as its functional currency. On January 1, 1990 (the issue date), 
X acquired a convertible bond maturing on December 31, 1998, issued by Y 
corporation, a U.K. corporation with the British pound (<brit-pound>) as 
its functional currency. The issue price of the bond is 
<brit-pound>100,000, the stated redemption price at maturity is 
<brit-pound>100,000, and the bond provides for annual pound interest 
payments at the rate of 10%. The terms of the bond also provide that at 
any time prior to December 31, 1998, the holder may surrender all of his 
interest in the bond in exchange for 20 shares of Y common stock. On 
January 1, 1994, X surrenders his interest in the bond for 20 shares of 
Y common stock. Assume the following: (a) The spot rate on January 1, 
1990, is <brit-pound>1 = $1.30, (b) The spot rate on January 1, 1994, is 
<brit-pound>1 = $1.50, and (c) The 20 shares of Y common stock have a 
market value of <brit-pound>200,000 on January 1, 1994.
    (ii) Pursuant to paragraph (b)(13) of this section, X will realize 
and recognize exchange gain with respect to the issue price 
(<brit-pound>100,000) of the bond on January 1, 1994, when the bond is 
converted to stock. X will compute exchange gain pursuant to paragraph 
(b)(5) of this section by translating the issue price at the spot rate 
on the conversion date (<brit-pound>100.000 x $1.50 = $150,000) and 
subtracting from such amount the issue price translated at the spot rate 
on the date X acquired the bond (<brit-pound>100,000 x $1.30 = 
$130,000). Thus, X will realize and recognize $20,000 of exchange gain. 
X's basis in the 20 shares of Y common stock is $150,000 ($130,000 
substituted basis + $20,000 recognized gain).
    Example 2. (i) X, a foreign corporation with the British pound 
(<brit-pound>) as its functional currency, lends <brit-pound>100 at a 
market rate of interest to Y, its wholly-owned U.S. subsidiary, on 
January 1, 1990, on which date the spot exchange rate is <brit-pound>1 = 
$1. Y's functional currency is the U.S. dollar. On January 1, 1992, when 
the spot exchange rate is <brit-pound>1 = $.50, X cancels the debt as a 
contribution to capital. Pursuant to paragraph (b)(13) of this section, 
Y will realize and recognize exchange gain with respect to the 
<brit-pound>100 issue price of the debt instrument on January 1, 1992. Y 
will compute exchange gain pursuant to paragraph (b)(6) of this section 
by translating the issue price at the spot rate on the date Y became the 
obligor (<brit-pound>100 x $1 = $100) and subtracting from such amount 
the issue price translated at the spot rate on the date of 
extinguishment (<brit-pound>100 x $.50 = $50). Thus, Y will realize and 
recognize $50 of exchange gain.
    (ii) Under section 108(e)(6), on the acquisition of its indebtedness 
from X as a contribution to capital Y is treated as having satisfied the 
debt with an amount of money equal to X's adjusted basis in the debt 
(<brit-pound>100). For purposes of section 108(e)(6), X's adjusted basis 
is translated into United States dollars at the spot rate on the date Y 
acquires the debt (<brit-pound>1 = $.50). Therefore, Y is treated as 
having satisfied the debt for $50. Pursuant to paragraph (b)(13) of this 
section, for purposes of section 108 the amount of the indebtedness is 
considered to be reduced by the exchange gain from $100 to $50. 
Accordingly, Y recognizes $50 of exchange gain and no discharge of 
indebtedness income on the extinguishment of its debt to X.
    (iii) If X were a United States taxpayer with a dollar functional 
currency and a $100 basis in Y's obligation. X would realize and 
recognize an exchange loss of $50 under paragraph (b)(5) of this section 
on the contribution of the debt to Y. The recognized loss would reduce 
X's adjusted basis in the debt from $100 to $50, so that for purposes of 
applying section 108(e)(6) Y is treated as having satisfied the debt for 
$50. Accordingly, under these facts as well Y would recognize $50 of 
exchange gain and no discharge of indebtedness income.
    Example 3. (i) X and Y are unrelated calendar year U.S. corporations 
with the U.S. dollar as their functional currency. On January 1, 1990 
(the issue date), X acquires Y's bond maturing on December 31, 1999. The 
issue price of the bond is <brit-pound>100,000, the stated redemption 
price at maturity is <brit-pound>100,000, and the bond provides for 
annual pound interest payments at the rate of 10%. On January 1, 1994, X 
and Y agree that Y will redeem its bond from X in exchange for 20 shares 
of Y common stock. Assume the following:
    (a) The spot rate on January 1, 1990, is <brit-pound>1 = $1.00,
    (b) The spot rate on January 1, 1994, is <brit-pound>1 = $.50,

[[Page 588]]

    (c) Interest rates on equivalent bonds have increased so that as of 
January 1, 1994, the value of Y's bond has declined to 
<brit-pound>90,000, and
    (d) The 20 shares of Y common stock have a market value of 
<brit-pound>90,000 as of January 1, 1994.
    (ii) Pursuant to paragraph (b)(13) of this section, X will realize 
and recognize exchange loss with respect to the issue price 
(<brit-pound>100,000) of the bond on January 1, 1994, when the bond is 
exchanged for stock. X will compute exchange loss pursuant to paragraph 
(b)(5) of this section by translating the issue price at the spot rate 
on the exchange date (<brit-pound>100,000 x $.50 = $50,000) and 
subtracting from such amount the issue price translated at the spot rate 
on the date X acquired the bond (<brit-pound>100,000 x $1.00 = 
$100,000). Thus, X will compute $50,000 of exchange loss, all of which 
will be realized and recognized because it does not exceed the total 
$55,000 realized loss on the exchange ($45,000 worth of stock received 
less $100,000 basis in the exchanged bond).
    (iii) Pursuant to paragraph (b)(13) of this section, Y will realize 
and recognize exchange gain with respect to the issue price, computed 
under paragraph (b)(6) of this section by translating the issue price at 
the spot rate on the date Y became the obligor 
(<brit-pound>100,000 x $1.00 = $100,000) and subtracting from such 
amount the issue price translated at the spot rate on the exchange date 
(<brit-pound>100,000 x $.50 = $50,000). Thus, Y will realize and 
recognize $50,000 of exchange gain. Under section 108(e)(10), on the 
transfer of stock to X in satisfaction of its indebtedness Y is treated 
as having satisfied the indebtedness with an amount of money equal to 
the fair market value of the stock (<brit-pound>90,000 x $.50 = 
$45,000). Pursuant to paragraph (b)(13) of this section, for purposes of 
section 108 the amount of the indebtedness is considered to be reduced 
by the recognized exchange gain from $100,000 to $50,000. Accordingly, Y 
recognizes an additional $5,000 of discharge of indebtedness income on 
the exchange.
    Example 4. (i) The facts are the same as in Example 3 except that 
interest rates on equivalent bonds have declined, rather than increased, 
so that the value of Y's bond on January 1, 1994, has risen to 
<brit-pound>112,500; and X and Y agree that Y will redeem its bond from 
X on that date in exchange for 25 shares of Y common stock worth 
<brit-pound>112,500. Pursuant to paragraphs (b)(13) and (b)(5) of this 
section, X will compute $50,000 of exchange loss on the exchange with 
respect to the <brit-pound>100,000 issue price of the bond. See Example 
3. However, because X's total loss on the exchange is only $43,750 
($56,250 worth of stock received less $100,000 basis in the exchanged 
bond), under the netting rule of paragraph (b)(13) of this section the 
realized exchange loss is limited to $43,750.
    (ii) Pursuant to paragraphs (b)(13) and (b)(6) of this section, Y 
will compute $50,000 of exchange gain with respect to the issue price. 
See Example 3. Under section 108(e)(10), Y is treated as having 
satisfied the $100,000 indebtedness with an amount of money equal to the 
fair market value of the stock (<brit-pound>112,500 x $.50 = $56,250), 
resulting in a total gain on the exchange of $43,750. Accordingly, under 
paragraph (b)(13) of this section Y's realized (and recognized) exchange 
gain on the exchange is limited to $43,750. Also pursuant to paragraph 
(b)(13) of this section, for purposes of section 108 the amount of the 
indebtedness is considered to be reduced by the recognized exchange gain 
from $100,000 to $56,250. Accordingly, Y recognizes no discharge of 
indebtedness income on the exchange.

    (14)-(15) [Reserved]
    (16) Coordination with section 267 regarding debt instruments--(i) 
Treatment of a creditor. For rules applicable to a corporation included 
in a controlled group that is a creditor under a debt instrument see 
Sec. 1.267(f)--1(h).
    (ii) Treatment of a debtor. [Reserved]
    (17) Coordination with installment method under section 453. 
[Reserved]
    (c) Item of expense or gross income or receipts which is to be paid 
or received after the date accrued--(1) In general. Except as provided 
in Sec. 1.988-5, exchange gain or loss with respect to an item described 
in Sec. 1.988-1(a)(1)(ii) and (2)(ii) (other than accrued interest 
income or expense subject to paragraph (b) of this section) shall be 
realized on the date payment is made or received. Except as provided in 
the succeeding sentence, such exchange gain or loss shall be recognized 
in accordance with the applicable recognition provisions of the Internal 
Revenue Code. If the taxpayer's right to receive income, or obligation 
to pay an expense, is transferred or modified in a transaction in which 
gain or loss would otherwise be recognized, exchange gain or loss shall 
be realized and recognized only to the extent of the total gain or loss 
on the transaction.
    (2) Determination of exchange gain or loss with respect to an item 
of gross income or receipts. Exchange gain or loss realized on an item 
of gross income or receipts described in paragraph (c)(1) of this 
section shall be determined by multiplying the units of nonfunctional 
currency received by the spot rate on the payment date, and subtracting

[[Page 589]]

from such amount the amount determined by multiplying the units of 
nonfunctional currency received by the spot rate on the booking date. 
The term ``spot rate on the payment date'' means the spot rate 
determined under Sec. 1.988-1(d) on the date payment is received or 
otherwise taken into account. Pursuant to Sec. 1.988-1(d)(3), a taxpayer 
may use a spot rate convention for purposes of determining the spot rate 
on the payment date. The term ``spot rate on the booking date'' means 
the spot rate determined under Sec. 1.988-1(d) on the date the item of 
gross income or receipts is accrued or otherwise taken into account. 
Pursuant to Sec. 1.988-1(d)(3), a taxpayer may use a spot rate 
convention for purposes of determining the spot rate on the booking 
date.
    (3) Determination of exchange gain or loss with respect to an item 
of expense. Exchange gain or loss realized on an item of expense 
described in paragraph (c)(1) of this section shall be determined by 
multiplying the units of nonfunctional currency paid by the spot rate on 
the booking date and subtracting from such amount the amount determined 
by multiplying the units of nonfunctional currency paid by the spot rate 
on the payment date. The term ``spot rate on the booking date'' means 
the spot rate determined under Sec. 1.988-1(d) on the date the item of 
expense is accrued or otherwise taken into account. Pursuant to 
Sec. 1.988-1(d)(3), a taxpayer may use a spot rate convention for 
purposes of determining the spot rate on the booking date. The term 
``spot rate on the payment date'' means the spot rate determined under 
Sec. 1.988-1(d) on the date payment is made or otherwise taken into 
account. Pursuant to Sec. 1.988-1(d)(3), a taxpayer may use a spot rate 
convention for purposes of determining the spot rate on the date.
    (4) Examples. The following examples illustrate the application of 
paragraph (c) of this section.

    Example 1. X is a calendar year corporation with the dollar as its 
functional currency. X is on the accrual method of accounting. On 
January 15, 1989, X sells inventory for 10,000 Canadian dollars (C$). 
The spot rate on January 15, 1989, is C$1 = U.S. $.55. On February 23, 
1989, when X receives payment of the C$10,000, the spot rate is C$1 = 
U.S. $.50. On February 23, 1989, X will realize exchange loss. X's loss 
is computed by multiplying the C$10,000 by the spot rate on the date the 
C$10,000 are received (C$10,000 x .50 = U.S. $5,000) and subtracting 
from such amount, the amount computed by multiplying the C$10,000 by the 
spot rate on the booking date (C$10,000 x .55 = U.S. $5,500). Thus, X's 
exchange loss on the transaction is U.S. $500 (U.S. $5,000-U.S. $5,500).
    Example 2. The facts are the same as in Example 1 except that X uses 
a spot rate convention to determine the spot rate as provided in 
Sec. 1.988-1(d)(3). Pursuant to X's spot rate convention, the spot rate 
at which a payable or receivable is booked is determined monthly for 
each nonfunctional currency payable or receivable by adding the spot 
rate at the beginning of the month and the spot rate at the end of the 
month and dividing by two. All payables and receivables in a 
nonfunctional currency booked during the month are translated into 
functional currency at the rate described in the preceding sentence. 
Further, the translation of nonfunctional currency paid with respect to 
a payable, and nonfunctional currency received with respect to a 
receivable, is also performed pursuant to the spot rate convention. 
Assume the spot rate determined under the spot rate convention for the 
month of January is C$1 = U.S. $.54 and for the month of February is C$1 
= U.S. $.51. On the last date in February, X will realize exchange loss. 
X's loss is computed by multiplying the C$10,000 by the spot rate 
convention for the month of February (C$10,000 x U.S. $.51 = U.S. 
$5,100) and subtracting from such amount, the amount computed by 
multiplying the C$10,000 by the spot rate convention for the month of 
January (C$10,000 x U.S. $.54 = $5,400). Thus, X's exchange loss on the 
transaction is U.S. $300 (U.S. $5,100-U.S. $5,400). X's basis in the 
C$10,000 is U.S. $5,400.
    Example 3. The facts are the same as in Example 2 except that X has 
a standing order with X's bank for the bank to convert any nonfunctional 
currency received in satisfaction of a receivable into U.S. dollars on 
the day received and to deposit those U.S. dollars in X's U.S. dollar 
bank account. X may use its convention to translate the amount booked 
into U.S. dollars, but must use the U.S. dollar amounts received from 
the bank with respect to such receivables to determine X's exchange gain 
or loss. Thus, if X receives payment of the C$10,000 on February 23, 
1989, when the spot rate is C$1 = U.S.$ .50, X determines exchange gain 
or loss by subtracting the amount booked under X's convention 
(U.S.$5,400) from the amount of U.S. dollars received from the bank 
under the standing conversion order (assume $5,000). X's exchange loss 
is U.S.$400.

    (d) Exchange gain or loss with respect to forward contracts, futures 
contracts and option contracts--(1) Scope--(i) In

[[Page 590]]

general. This paragraph (d) applies to forward contracts, futures 
contracts and option contracts described in Sec. 1.988-1(a)(1)(ii) and 
(2)(iii). For rules applicable to currency swaps and notional principal 
contracts described in Sec. 1.988-1(a) (1)(ii) and (2)(iii), see 
paragraph (e) of this section.
    (ii) Treatment of spot contracts. Solely for purposes of this 
paragraph (d), a spot contract as defined in Sec. 1.988-1(b) to buy or 
sell nonfunctional currency is not considered a forward contract or 
similar transaction described in Sec. 1.988-1(a)(2)(iii) unless such 
spot contract is disposed of (or otherwise terminated) prior to making 
or taking delivery of the currency. For example, if a taxpayer with the 
dollar as its functional currency enters into a spot contract to 
purchase British pounds, and takes delivery of such pounds under the 
contract, the delivery of the pounds is not a realization event under 
section 988(c)(5) and paragraph (e)(4)(ii) of this section because the 
contract is not considered a forward contract or similar transaction 
described in Sec. 1.988-1(a)(2)(iii). However, if the taxpayer sells or 
otherwise terminates the contract before taking delivery of the pounds, 
exchange gain or loss shall be realized and recognized in accordance 
with paragraphs (d)(2) and (3) of this section.
    (2) Realization of exchange gain or loss--(i) In general. Except as 
provided in Sec. 1.988-5, exchange gain or loss on a contract described 
in Sec. 1.988-2(d)(1) shall be realized in accordance with the 
applicable realization section of the Internal Revenue Code (e.g., 
sections 1001, 1092, and 1256). See also section 988(c)(5). For purposes 
of determining the timing of the realization of exchange gain or loss, 
sections 1092 and 1256 shall take precedence over section 988(c)(5).
    (ii) Realization by offset--(A) In general. Except as provided in 
paragraphs (d)(2)(ii)(B) and (C) of this section, exchange gain or loss 
with respect to a transaction described in Sec. 1.988-1(a)(1)(ii) and 
(2)(iii) shall not be realized solely because such transaction is offset 
by another transaction (or transactions).
    (B) Exception where economic benefit is derived. If a transaction 
described in Sec. 1.988-1(a)(1)(ii) and (2)(iii) is offset by another 
transaction or transactions, exchange gain shall be realized to the 
extent the taxpayer derives, by pledge or otherwise, an economic benefit 
(e.g., cash, property or the proceeds from a borrowing) from any gain 
inherent in such offsetting positions. Proper adjustment shall be made 
in the amount of any gain or loss subsequently realized for gain taken 
into account by reason of the preceding sentence. This paragraph 
(d)(2)(ii)(B) shall apply to transactions creating an offset after 
September 21, 1989.
    (C) Certain contracts traded on an exchange. If a transaction 
described in Sec. 1.988-1(a)(1)(ii) and (2)(iii) is traded on an 
exchange and it is the general practice of the exchange to terminate 
offsetting contracts, entering into an offsetting contract shall be 
considered a termination of the contract being offset.
    (iii) Clarification of section 988(c)(5). If the delivery date of a 
contract subject to section 988(c)(5) and paragraph (d)(4)(ii) of this 
section is different than the date the contract expires, then for 
purposes of determining the date exchange gain or loss is realized, the 
term delivery date shall mean expiration date.
    (iv) Examples. The following examples illustrate the rules of this 
paragraph (d)(1) and (2).

    Example 1. On August 1, 1989, X, a calendar year corporation with 
the dollar as its functional currency, enters into a forward contract 
with Bank A to buy 100 New Zealand dollars for $80 for delivery on 
January 31, 1990. (The forward purchase contract is not a section 1256 
contract.) On November 1, 1989, the market price for the purchase of 100 
New Zealand dollars for delivery on January 31, 1990, is $76. On 
November 1, 1989, X cancels its obligation under the forward purchase 
contract and pays Bank A $3.95 (the present value of $4 discounted at 
12% for the period) in cancellation of such contract. Under section 1001 
(a), X realizes an exchange loss of $3.95 on November 1, 1989, because 
cancellation of the forward purchase contract for cash results in the 
termination of X's contract.
    Example 2. X is a corporation with the dollar as its functional 
currency. On January 1, 1989, X enters into a currency swap contract 
with Bank A under which X is obligated to make a series of Japanese yen 
payments in exchange for a series of dollar payments. On

[[Page 591]]

February 21, 1992, X has a gain of $100,000 inherent in such contract as 
a result of interest rate and exchange rate movements. Also on February 
21, 1992, X enters into an offsetting swap with Bank A to lock in such 
gain. If on February 21, 1992, X pledges the gain inherent in such 
offsetting positions as collateral for a loan, X's initial swap contract 
is treated as being terminated on February 21, 1992, under paragraph 
(d)(2)(ii)(B) of this section. Proper adjustment is made in the amount 
of any gain or loss subsequently realized for the gain taken into 
account by reason of paragraph (d)(2)(ii)(B) of this section.
    Example 3. X is a calendar year corporation with the dollar as its 
functional currency. On October 1, 1989, X enters into a forward 
contract to buy 100,000 Swiss francs (Sf) for delivery on March l, 1990, 
for $51,220. Assume that the contract is a section 1256 contract under 
section 1256(g)(2) and that section 1256(e) does not apply. Pursuant to 
section 1256(a)(1), the forward contract is treated as sold for its fair 
market value on December 31, 1989. Assume that the fair market value of 
the contract is $1,000 determined under Sec. 1.988-1(g). Thus X will 
realize an exchange gain of $1,000 on December 31, 1989. Such gain is 
subject to the character rules of Sec. 1.988-3 and the source rules of 
Sec. 1.988-4.

    (v) Extension of the maturity date of certain contracts. An 
extension of time for making or taking delivery under a contract 
described in paragraph (d)(1) of this section (e.g., a historical rate 
rollover as defined in Sec. 1.988-5(b)(2)(iii)(C)) shall be considered a 
sale or exchange of the contract for its fair market value on the date 
of the extension and the establishment of a new contract on such date. 
If, under the terms of the extension, the time value of any gain or loss 
recognized pursuant to the preceding sentence adjusts the price of the 
currency to be bought or sold under the new contract, the amount 
attributable to such time value shall be treated as interest income or 
expense for all purposes of the Code. However, the preceding sentence 
shall not apply and the amount attributable to the time value of any 
gain or loss recognized shall be treated as exchange gain or loss if the 
period beginning on the first date the contract is rolled over and 
ending on the date payment is ultimately made or received with respect 
to such contract does not exceed 183 days.
    (3) Recognition of exchange gain or loss. Except as provided in 
Sec. 1.988-5 (relating to section 988 hedging transactions), exchange 
gain or loss realized with respect to a contract described in paragraph 
(d)(1) of this section shall be recognized in accordance with the 
applicable recognition provisions of the Internal Revenue Code. For 
example, a loss realized with respect to a contract described in 
paragraph (d)(1) of this section which is part of a straddle shall be 
recognized in accordance with the provisions of section 1092 to the 
extent such section is applicable.
    (4) Determination of exchange gain or loss--(i) In general. Exchange 
gain or loss with respect to a contract described in Sec. 1.988-2(d)(1) 
shall be determined by subtracting the amount paid (or deemed paid), if 
any, for or with respect to the contract (including any amount paid upon 
termination of the contract) from the amount received (or deemed 
received), if any, for or with respect to the contract (including any 
amount received upon termination of the contract). Any gain or loss 
determined according to the preceding sentence shall be treated as 
exchange gain or loss.
    (ii) Special rules where taxpayer makes or takes delivery. If the 
taxpayer makes or takes delivery in connection with a contract described 
in paragraph (d)(1) of this section, any gain or loss shall be realized 
and recognized in the same manner as if the taxpayer sold the contract 
(or paid another person to assume the contract) on the date on which he 
took or made delivery for its fair market value on such date. See 
paragraph (d)(2)(iii) of this section regarding the definition of the 
term ``delivery date.'' This paragraph (d)(4)(ii) shall not apply in any 
case in which the taxpayer makes or takes delivery before June 11, 1987.
    (iii) Examples. The following examples illustrate the application of 
paragraph (d)(4) of this section.

    Example 1. X is a calendar year corporation with the dollar as its 
functional currency. On October 1, 1989, when the six month forward rate 
is $.4907, X enters into a forward contract to buy 100,000 New Zealand 
dollars (NZD) for delivery on March 1, 1990. On March 1, 1990, when X 
takes delivery of the 100,000 NZD, the spot rate is 1NZD equals $.48. 
Pursuant to section 988(c)(5) and paragraph (d)(4)(ii) of this section, 
a taxpayer

[[Page 592]]

that takes delivery of nonfunctional currency under a forward contract 
that is subject to section 988 is treated as if the taxpayer sold the 
contract for its fair market value on the date delivery is taken. If X 
sold the contract on March 1, 1990, the transferee would require a 
payment of $1,070 [($.48 x 100,000NZD)-($.4907 x 100,000NZD)] to 
compensate him for the loss in value of the 100,000NZD. Therefore, X 
realizes an exchange loss of $1,070. X has a basis in the 100,000NZD of 
$48,000.
    Example 2. Assume the same facts as in Example 1 except that the 
contract is for Swiss francs and is a section 1256 contract. Assume 
further that on December 31, 1989, the value to X of the contract as 
marked to market is $1,000. Pursuant to section 1256(a), X realizes an 
exchange gain of $1,000. Such gain, however, is characterized as 
ordinary income under Sec. 1.988-3 and will be sourced under Sec. 1.988-
4.
    Example 3. X is a calendar year corporation with the dollar as its 
functional currency. On May 2, 1989, X enters into an option contract 
with Bank A to purchase 50,000 Canadian dollars (C$) for U.S. $42,500 
(C$1 = U.S. $.85) for delivery on or before September 18, 1989. X pays a 
$285 premium to Bank A to obtain the option contract. On September 18, 
1989, when X exercises the option and takes delivery of the C$50,000, 
the spot rate is C$1 equals U.S. $.90. Pursuant to section 988(c)(5) and 
paragraph (d)(4)(ii) of this section, a taxpayer that takes delivery 
under an option contract that is subject to section 988 is treated as if 
the taxpayer sold the contract for its fair market value on the date 
delivery is taken. If X sold the contract for its fair market value on 
September 18, 1989, X would receive U.S. $2,500 [(C$50,000 x U.S. 
$.90)-(C$50,000 x U.S. $.85)]. Accordingly, X is deemed to have received 
U.S. $2,500 on the sale of the contract at its fair market value. X will 
realize U.S. $2,215 ($2,500 deemed received less $285 paid) of exchange 
gain with respect to the delivery of Canadian dollars under the option 
contract. X's basis in the 50,000 Canadian dollars is U.S. $45,000.

    (5) [Reserved]
    (e) Currency swaps and other notional principal contracts--(1) In 
general. Except as provided in paragraph (e)(2) of this section or in 
Sec. 1.988-5, the timing of income, deduction and loss with respect to a 
notional principal contract that is a section 988 transaction shall be 
governed by section 446 and the regulations thereunder. Such income, 
deduction and loss is characterized as exchange gain or loss (except as 
provided in another section of the Internal Revenue Code (or regulations 
thereunder), Sec. 1.988-5, or in paragraph (f) of this section).
    (2) Special rules for currency swaps--(i) In general. Except as 
provided in paragraph (e)(2)(iii)(B) of this section, the provisions of 
this paragraph (e)(2) shall apply solely for purposes of determining the 
realization, recognition and amount of exchange gain or loss with 
respect to a currency swap contract, and not for purposes of determining 
the source of such gain or loss, or characterizing such gain or loss as 
interest. Except as provided in Sec. 1.988-3(c), any income or loss 
realized with respect to a currency swap contract shall be characterized 
as exchange gain or loss (and not as interest income or expense). Any 
exchange gain or loss realized in accordance with this paragraph (e)(2) 
shall be recognized unless otherwise provided in an applicable section 
of the Code. For purposes of this paragraph (e)(2), a currency swap 
contract is a contract defined in paragraph (e)(2)(ii) of this section. 
With respect to a contract which requires the payment of swap principal 
prior to maturity of such contract, see paragraph (f) of this section. 
For purposes of this paragraph (e), the rules of paragraph (d)(2)(ii) of 
this section (regarding realization by offset) apply. See Example 2 of 
paragraph (d)(2)(iv) of this section.
    (ii) Definition of currency swap contract--(A) In general. A 
currency swap contract is a contract involving different currencies 
between two or more parties to--
    (1) Exchange periodic interim payments, as defined in paragraph 
(e)(2)(ii)(C) of this section, on or prior to maturity of the contract; 
and
    (2) Exchange the swap principal amount upon maturity of the 
contract.

A currency swap contract may also require an exchange of the swap 
principal amount upon commencement of the agreement.
    (B) Swap principal amount. The swap principal amount is an amount of 
two different currencies which, under the terms of the currency swap 
contract, is used to determine the periodic interim payments in each 
currency and which is exchanged upon maturity of the contract. If such 
amount is not clearly set

[[Page 593]]

forth in the contract, the Commissioner may determine the swap principal 
amount.
    (C) Exchange of periodic interim payments. An exchange of periodic 
interim payments is an exchange of one or more payments in one currency 
specified by the contract for one or more payments in a different 
currency specified by the contract where the payments in each currency 
are computed by reference to an interest index applied to the swap 
principal amount. A currency swap contract must clearly indicate the 
periodic interim payments, or the interest index used to compute the 
periodic interim payments, in each currency.
    (iii) Timing and computation of periodic interim payments--(A) In 
general. Except as provided in paragraph (e)(2)(iii)(B) of this section 
and Sec. 1.988-5, the timing and computation of the periodic interim 
payments provided in a currency swap agreement shall be determined by 
treating--
    (1) Payments made under the swap as payments made pursuant to a 
hypothetical borrowing that is denominated in the currency in which 
payments are required to be made (or are determined with reference to) 
under the swap, and
    (2) Payments received under the swap as payments received pursuant 
to a hypothetical loan that is denominated in the currency in which 
payments are received (or are determined with reference to) under the 
swap.

Except as provided in paragraph (e)(2)(v) of this section, the 
hypothetical issue price of such hypothetical borrowing and loan shall 
be the swap principal amount. The hypothetical stated redemption price 
at maturity is the total of all payments (excluding any exchange of the 
swap principal amount at the inception of the contract) provided under 
the hypothetical borrowing or loan other than periodic interest payments 
under the principles of section 1273. For purposes of determining 
economic accrual under the currency swap, the number of hypothetical 
interest compounding periods of such hypothetical borrowing and loan 
shall be determined pursuant to a semiannual compounding convention 
unless the currency swap contract indicates otherwise. For purposes of 
determining the timing and amount of the periodic interim payments, the 
principles regarding the amortization of interest (see generally, 
sections 1272 through 1275 and 163(e)) shall apply to the hypothetical 
interest expense and income of such hypothetical borrowing and loan. 
However, such principles shall not apply to determine the time when 
principal is deemed to be paid on the hypothetical borrowing and loan. 
See paragraph (d)(2)(iii) of this section and Example 2 of paragraph 
(d)(5) of this section with respect to the time when principal is deemed 
to be paid. With respect to the translation and computation of exchange 
gain or loss on any hypothetical interest income or expense, see 
Sec. 1.988-2(b). The amount treated as exchange gain or loss by the 
taxpayer with respect to the periodic interim payments for the taxable 
year shall be the amount of hypothetical interest income and exchange 
gain or loss attributable to such interest income from the hypothetical 
borrowing and loan for such year less the amount of hypothetical 
interest expense and exchange gain or loss attributable to the interest 
expense from such hypothetical borrowing and loan for such year.
    (B) Effect of prepayment for purposes of section 956. For purposes 
of section 956, the Commissioner may treat any prepayment of a currency 
swap as a loan.
    (iv) Timing and determination of exchange gain or loss with respect 
to the swap principal amount. Exchange gain or loss with respect to the 
swap principal amount shall be realized on the day the units of swap 
principal in each currency are exchanged. (See paragraph 
(e)(2)(ii)(A)(2) of this section which requires that the entire swap 
principal amount be exchanged upon maturity of the contract.) Such gain 
or loss shall be determined on the date of the exchange by subtracting 
the value (on such date) of the units of swap principal paid from the 
value of the units of swap principal received. This paragraph (e)(2)(iv) 
does not apply to an equal exchange of the swap principal amount at the 
commencement of the agreement at a market exchange rate.
    (v) Anti-abuse rules--(A) Method of accounting does not clearly 
reflect income.

[[Page 594]]

If the taxpayer's method of accounting for income, expense, gain or loss 
attributable to a currency swap does not clearly reflect income, or if 
the present value of the payments to be made is not equivalent to that 
of the payments to be received (including the swap premium or discount, 
as defined in paragraph (e)(3)(ii) of this section) on the day the 
taxpayer enters into or acquires the contract, the Commissioner may 
apply principles analogous to those of section 1274 or such other rules 
as the Commissioner deems appropriate to clearly reflect income. For 
example, in order to clearly reflect income the Commissioner may 
determine the hypothetical issue price, the hypothetical stated 
redemption price at maturity, and the amounts required to be taken into 
account within a taxable year. Further, if the present value of the 
payments to be made is not equivalent to that of the payments to be 
received (including the swap premium or discount, as defined in 
paragraph (e)(3)(ii) of this section) on the day the taxpayer enters 
into or acquires the contract, the Commissioner may integrate the swap 
with another transaction (or transactions) in order to clearly reflect 
income.
    (B) Terms must be clearly stated. If the currency swap contract does 
not clearly set forth the swap principal amount in each currency, and 
the periodic interim payments in each currency (or the interest index 
used to compute the periodic interim payments in each currency), the 
Commissioner may defer any income, deduction, gain or loss with respect 
to such contract until termination of the contract.
    (3) Amortization of swap premium or discount in the case of off-
market currency swaps--(i) In general. An ``off-market currency swap'' 
is a currency swap contract under which the present value of the 
payments to be made is not equal to that of the payments to be received 
on the day the taxpayer enters into or acquires the contract (absent the 
swap premium or discount, as defined in paragraph (e)(3)(ii) of this 
section). Generally, such present values may not be equal if the swap 
exchange rate (as defined in paragraph (e)(3)(iii) of this section) is 
not the spot rate, or the interest indices used to compute the periodic 
interim payments do not reflect current values, on the day the taxpayer 
enters into or acquires the currency swap.
    (ii) Treatment of taxpayer entering into or acquiring an off-market 
currency swap. If a taxpayer that enters into or acquires a currency 
swap makes a payment (that is, the taxpayer pays a premium, ``swap 
premium,'' to enter into or acquire the currency swap) or receives a 
payment (that is, the taxpayer enters into or acquires the currency swap 
at a discount, ``swap discount'') in order to make the present value of 
the amounts to be paid equal the amounts to be received, such payment 
shall be amortized in a manner which places the taxpayer in the same 
position it would have been in had the taxpayer entered into a currency 
swap contract under which the present value of the amounts to be paid 
equal the amounts to be received (absent any swap premium or discount). 
Thus, swap premium or discount shall be amortized as follows--
    (A) The amount of swap premium or discount that is attributable to 
the difference between the swap exchange rate (as defined in paragraph 
(e)(3)(iii) of this section) and the spot rate on the date the contract 
is entered into or acquired shall be taken into account as income or 
expense on the date the swap principal amounts are taken into account; 
and
    (B) The amount of swap premium or discount attributable to the 
difference in values of the periodic interim payments shall be amortized 
in a manner consistent with the principles of economic accrual. Cf., 
section 171.

Any amount taken into account pursuant to this paragraph (e)(3)(ii) 
shall be treated as exchange gain or loss.
    (iii) Definition of swap exchange rate. The swap exchange rate is 
the single exchange rate set forth in the contract at which the swap 
principal amounts are determined. If the swap exchange rate is not 
clearly set forth in the contract, the Commissioner may determine such 
rate.
    (iv) [Reserved]
    (4) Treatment of taxpayer disposing of a currency swap. Any gain or 
loss realized on the disposition or the termination

[[Page 595]]

of a currency swap is exchange gain or loss.
    (5) Examples. The following examples illustrate the application of 
this paragraph (e).

    Example 1. (i) C is an accrual method calendar year corporation with 
the dollar as its functional currency. On January 1, 1989, C enters into 
a currency swap with J with the following terms:
    (1) the principal amount is $150 and 100 British pounds 
(<brit-pound>) (the equivalent of $150 on the effective date of the 
contract assuming a spot rate of <brit-pound>1 = $1.50 on January 1, 
1989);
    (2) C will make payments equal to 10% of the dollar principal amount 
on December 31, 1989, and December 31, 1990;
    (3) J will make payments equal to 12% of the pound principal amount 
on December 31, 1989, and December 31, 1990; and
    (4) on December 31, 1990, C will pay to J the $150 principal amount 
and J will pay to C the <brit-pound>100 principal amount.

Assume that the spot rate is <brit-pound>1 = $1.50 on January 1, 1989, 
<brit-pound>1 = $1.40 on December 31, 1989, and <brit-pound>1 = $1.30 on 
December 31, 1990. Assume further that the average rate for 1989 is 
<brit-pound>1 = $1.45 and for 1990 is <brit-pound>1 = $1.35.
    (ii) Solely for determining the realization of gain or loss in 
accordance with paragraph (e)(2) of this section (and not for purposes 
of determining whether any payments are treated as interest), C will 
treat the dollar payments made by C as payments made pursuant to a 
dollar borrowing with an issue price of $150, a stated redemption price 
at maturity of $150, and yield to maturity of 10%. C will treat the 
pound payments received as payments received pursuant to a pound loan 
with an issue price of <brit-pound>100, a stated redemption price at 
maturity of <brit-pound>100, and a yield of 12% to maturity. Pursuant to 
Sec. 1.988-2(b), C is required to compute hypothetical accrued pound 
interest income at the average rate for the accrual period and then 
determine exchange gain or loss on the day payment is received with 
respect to such accrued amount. Accordingly, C will accrue $17.40 
(<brit-pound>12 x $1.45) in 1989 and $16.20 (<brit-pound>12 x $1.35) in 
1990. C also will compute hypothetical exchange loss of $.60 on December 
31, 1989 [(<brit-pound>12 x $1.40)-(<brit-pound>12 x $1.45)] and 
hypothetical exchange loss of $.60 on December 31, 1990 
[(<brit-pound>12 x $1.30)-(<brit-pound>12 x $1.35)]. All such 
hypothetical interest income and exchange loss are characterized and 
sourced as exchange gain and loss. Further, C is treated as having paid 
$15 ($150 x 10%) of hypothetical interest on December 31, 1989, and 
again on December 31, 1990. Such hypothetical interest expense is 
characterized and sourced as exchange loss. Thus, C will have a net 
exchange gain of $1.80 ($17.40-$.60-$15.00) with respect to the periodic 
interim payments in 1989 and a net exchange gain of $.60 
($16.20-$.60-$15.00) with respect to the periodic interim payments in 
1990. Finally, C will realize an exchange loss on December 31, 1990, 
with respect to the exchange of the swap principal amount. This loss is 
determined by subtracting the value of the units of swap principal paid 
($150) from the value of the units of swap principal received 
(<brit-pound>100 x $1.30 = $130) resulting in a $20 exchange loss.
    Example 2. (i) C is an accrual method calendar year corporation with 
the dollar as its functional currency. On January 1, 1989, when the spot 
rate is <brit-pound>1 = $1.50, C enters into a currency swap contract 
with J under which C agrees to make and receive the following payments:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                     Date                          C pays       J pays  
------------------------------------------------------------------------
December 31, 1989.............................       $15.00  <brit-pound
                                                                  >12.00
December 31, 1990.............................        41.04        12.00
December 31, 1991.............................         0.00        12.00
December 31, 1992.............................       150.00       112.00
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (ii) Under paragraph (e)(2)(iii) of this section, C must treat the 
dollar periodic interim payments under the swap as made pursuant to a 
hypothetical dollar borrowing. The hypothetical issue price is $150 and 
the stated redemption price at maturity is $206.04. The amount of 
hypothetical interest expense must be amortized in accordance with 
economic accrual. Thus J must include and C must deduct periodic interim 
payment amounts as follows:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                   Amount               
                                                 taken into    Adjusted 
                                                  account    issue price
------------------------------------------------------------------------
December 31, 1989.............................       $15.00       150.00
December 31, 1990.............................       $15.00       123.96
December 31, 1991.............................       $12.40       136.36
December 31, 1992.............................       $13.64             
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (iii) Gain or loss with respect to the periodic interim payments of 
the currency swap is determined under paragraph (e)(2)(iii)(A) of this 
section with respect to the dollar cash flow amortized as set forth 
above and the corresponding pound cash flow as stated in the currency 
swap contract. Gain or loss with respect to the principal payments 
(i.e., $150 and <brit-pound>100) exchanged on December 31, 1992, is 
determined under paragraph (e)(2)(iv) of this section on December 31, 
1992, notwithstanding that under the principles regarding amortization 
of interest $26.04 would have been regarded as a payment of principal on 
December 31, 1990.
    Example 3. (i) X is a corporation on the accrual method of 
accounting with the dollar as its functional currency and the calendar 
year as its taxable year. On January 1, 1989, X enters into a three year 
currency swap

[[Page 596]]

contract with Y with the following terms. The swap principal amount is 
$100 and the Swiss franc (Sf) equivalent of such amount which equals 
Sf200 translated at the swap exchange rate of $1 = Sf2. There is no 
initial exchange of the swap principal amount. The interest rates used 
to compute the periodic interim payments are 10% compounded annually for 
U.S. dollar payments and 5% compounded annually for Swiss franc 
payments. Thus, under the currency swap, X agrees to pay Y $10 
(10% x $100) on December 31st of 1989, 1990 and 1991 and to pay Y the 
swap principal amount of $100 on December 31, 1991. Y agrees to pay X 
Sf10 (5% x Sf200) on December 31st of 1989, 1990 and 1991 and to pay X 
the swap principal amount of Sf200 on December 31, 1991. Assume that the 
average rate for 1989 and the spot rate on December 31, 1989, is $1 = 
Sf2.5.
    (ii) Under paragraph (e)(2)(iii) of this section, on December 31, 
1989, X will realize an exchange loss of $6 (the sum of $10 of loss by 
reason of the $10 periodic interim payment paid to Y and $4.00 of gain, 
the value of Sf10 on December 31, 1989, from the receipt of Sf10 on such 
date).
    (iii) On January 1, 1990, X transfers its rights and obligations 
under the swap contract to Z, an unrelated corporation. Z has the dollar 
as its functional currency, is on the accrual method of accounting, and 
has the calendar year as its taxable year. On January 1, 1990, the 
exchange rate is $1 = Sf2.50. The relevant dollar interest rate is 8% 
compounded annually and the relevant Swiss franc interest rate is 5% 
compounded annually. Because of the movement in exchange and interest 
rates, the agreement between X and Z to transfer the currency swap 
requires X to pay Z $23.56 (the swap discount as determined under 
paragraph (e)(3) of this section).
    (iv) Pursuant to paragraph (e)(4) of this section, X may deduct the 
loss of $23.56 in 1990. The loss is characterized under Sec. 1.988-3 and 
sourced under Sec. 1.988-4.
    (v) Pursuant to paragraph (e)(3)(ii) of this section, Z is required 
to amortize the $23.56 received as follows. The amount of the $23.56 
payment that is attributable to movements in exchange rates ($20) is 
taken into account on December 31, 1991, the date the swap principal 
amounts are exchanged, under paragraph (e)(3)(ii)(A) of this section. 
This amount is the present value (discounted at 10%, the rate under the 
currency swap contract used to compute the dollar periodic interim 
payments) of the financial asset required to compensate Z for the loss 
in value of the hypothetical Swiss franc loan resulting from movements 
in exchange rates between January 1, 1989, and January 1, 1990. This 
amount is determined by assuming that interest rates did not change from 
the date the swap originally was entered into (January 1, 1989), but 
that the exchange rate is $1 = Sf2.50. Under this assumption, a taxpayer 
undertaking the obligation to pay dollars under the currency swap on 
January 1, 1990, would only agree to pay $8 for Sf10 on December 31, 
1990, and $88 for Sf210 on December 31, 1991, because the exchange rates 
have moved from $1 = Sf2 to $1 = Sf2.50. Thus, Z requires $2 on December 
31, 1990, and $22 on December 31, 1991, to compensate for the amount of 
dollar payments Z is required to make in exchange for the Swiss francs 
received on December 31, 1990 and 1991. The present value of $2 on 
December 31, 1990, and $22 on December 31, 1991, discounted at the rate 
for U.S. dollar payments of 10% is $20 ($1.82+$18.18). This amount is 
discounted at the rate for U.S. dollar payments (i.e., at the historic 
rate) because the amount of the $23.56 payment received by Z that is 
attributable to movements in interest rates is computed and amortized 
separately as provided in the following paragraph.
    (vi) Pursuant to paragraph (e)(3)(ii)(B) of this section, Z is 
required to amortize the portion of the $23.56 payment attributable to 
movements in interest rates under principles of economic accrual over 
the term of the currency swap agreement. The amount of the $23.56 
payment that is attributable to movements in interest rates (assuming 
that exchange rates have not changed) is the present value ($3.56) of 
the excess ($2.00 in 1990 and $2.00 in 1991) of the periodic interim 
payments Z is required to pay under the currency swap agreement ($10 in 
1990 and $10 in 1991) over the amount Z would be required to pay if the 
currency swap agreement reflected current interest rates on the day Z 
acquired the swap contract ($8 in 1990 and $8 in 1991) discounted at the 
appropriate dollar interest rate on January 1, 1990. Thus, under 
principles of economic accrual (e.g., see section 171 of the Code), Z 
will include in income $1.72 on December 31, 1990, the amount that, when 
added to the interest ($.28) on the $3.56 computed at the 8% rate on the 
date Z acquired the currency swap contract, will equal the $2.00 needed 
to compensate Z for the movement in interest rates between January 1, 
1989, and January 1, 1990. Z also will include in income $1.85 on 
December 31, 1991, the amount that, when added to the interest ($.15) on 
the $1.85 (the remaining balance of the $3.56 payment) computed at the 
8% rate on the date Z acquired the currency swap contract, will equal 
the $2.00 needed to compensate Z for the movement in interest rates 
between January 1, 1990, and January 1, 1991. This amount is computed 
assuming exchange rates have not changed because the amount attributable 
to movements in exchange rates is computed and amortized separately 
under the preceding paragraph.

    (6) Special effective date for rules regarding currency swaps. 
Paragraph (e)(3) of this section regarding amortization of swap premium 
or discount in the

[[Page 597]]

case of off-market currency swaps shall be effective for transactions 
entered into after September 21, 1989, unless such swap premium or 
discount was paid or received pursuant to a binding contract with an 
unrelated party that was entered into prior to such date. For 
transactions entered into prior to this date, see Notice 89-21, 1989-8 
I.R.B. 23.
    (7) [Reserved]
    (f) Substance over form--(1) In general. If the substance of a 
transaction described in Sec. 1.988-1(a)(1) differs from its form, the 
timing, source, and character of gains or losses with respect to such 
transaction may be recharacterized by the Commissioner in accordance 
with its substance. For example, if a taxpayer enters into a transaction 
that it designates a ``currency swap contract'' that requires the 
prepayment of all payments to be made or to be received (but not both), 
the Commissioner may recharacterize the contract as a loan. In applying 
the substance over form principle, separate transactions may be 
integrated where appropriate. See also Sec. 1.861-9T(b)(1).
    (2) Example. The following example illustrates the provisions of 
this paragraph (f).

    Example. (i) On January 1, 1990, X, a U.S. corporation with the 
dollar as its functional currency, enters into a contract with Y under 
which X will pay Y $100 and Y will pay X LC100 on January 1, 1990, and X 
will pay Y LC109.3 and Y will pay X $133 on December 31, 1992. On 
January 1, 1990, the spot exchange rate is LC1 = $1 and the 3 year 
forward rate is LC1 = $.8218. X's cash flows are summarized below:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                         Date                            Dollar     LC  
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1/1/90................................................    (100)      100
12/31/90..............................................        0        0
12/31/91..............................................        0        0
12/31/92..............................................      133  (109.3)
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (ii) X and Y designate this contract as a ``currency swap.'' 
Notwithstanding this designation, for purposes of determining the 
timing, source, and character with respect to the transaction, the 
transaction is characterized by the Commissioner in accordance with its 
substance. Thus, the January 1, 1990, exchange by X of $100 for LC 100 
is treated as a spot purchase of LCs by X and the December 31, 1992, 
exchange by X at 109.3LC for $133 is treated as a forward sale of LCs by 
X. Under such treatment there would be no tax consequences to X under 
paragraph (e)(2) of this section in 1990, 1991, and 1992 with respect to 
this transaction other than the realization of exchange gain or loss on 
the sale of the LC109.3 on December 31, 1992. Calculation of such gain 
or loss would be governed by the rules of paragraph (d) of this section.

    (g) Effective date. Except as otherwise provided in this section, 
this section shall be effective for taxable years beginning after 
December 31, 1986. Thus, except as otherwise provided in this section, 
any payments made or received with respect to a section 988 transaction 
in taxable years beginning after December 31, 1986, are subject to this 
section.
    (h) Timing of income and deductions from notional principal 
contracts. Except as otherwise provided (e.g., in Sec. 1.988-5 or 1.446-
3(g)), income or loss from a notional principal contract described in 
Sec. 1.988-1(a)(2)(iii)(B) (other than a currency swap) is exchange gain 
or loss. For the rules governing the timing of income and deductions 
with respect to notional principal contracts, see Sec. 1.446-3. See 
paragraph (e)(2) of this section with respect to currency swaps.

[T.D. 8400, 57 FR 9183, Mar. 17, 1992, as amended by T.D. 8491, 58 FR 
53135, Oct. 14, 1993]


<R05>
Sec. 1.988-3  Character of exchange gain or loss.

    (a) In general. The character of exchange gain or loss recognized on 
a section 988 transaction is governed by section 988 and this section. 
Except as otherwise provided in section 988(c)(1)(E), section 1092, 
Sec. 1.988-5 and this section, exchange gain or loss realized with 
respect to a section 988 transaction (including a section 1256 contract 
that is also a section 988 transaction) shall be characterized as 
ordinary gain or loss. Accordingly, unless a valid election is made 
under paragraph (b) of this section, any section providing special rules 
for capital gain or loss treatment, such as sections 1233, 1234, 1234A, 
1236 and 1256(f)(3), shall not apply.
    (b) Election to characterize exchange gain or loss on certain 
identified forward contracts, futures contracts and option contracts as 
capital gain or loss--(1) In general. Except as provided in paragraph 
(b)(2) of this section, a taxpayer may elect, subject to the 
requirements

[[Page 598]]

of paragraph (b)(3) of this section, to treat any gain or loss 
recognized on a contract described in Sec. 1.988-2(d)(1) as capital gain 
or loss, but only if the contract--
    (i) Is a capital asset in the hands of the taxpayer;
    (ii) Is not part of a straddle within the meaning of section 1092(c) 
(without regard to subsections (c)(4) or (e)); and
    (iii) Is not a regulated futures contract or nonequity option with 
respect to which an election under section 988(c)(1)(D)(ii) is in 
effect.

If a valid election under this paragraph (b) is made with respect to a 
section 1256 contract, section 1256 shall govern the character of any 
gain or loss recognized on such contract.
    (2) Special rule for contracts that become part of a straddle after 
an election is made. If a contract which is the subject of an election 
under paragraph (b)(1) of this section becomes part of a straddle within 
the meaning of section 1092(c) (without regard to subsections (c)(4) or 
(e)) after the date of the election, the election shall be invalid with 
respect to gains from such contract and the Commissioner, in his sole 
discretion, may invalidate the election with respect to losses.
    (3) Requirements for making the election. A taxpayer elects to treat 
gain or loss on a transaction described in paragraph (b)(1) of this 
section as capital gain or loss by clearly identifying such transaction 
on its books and records on the date the transaction is entered into. No 
specific language or account is necessary for identifying a transaction 
referred to in the preceding sentence. However, the method of 
identification must be consistently applied and must clearly identify 
the pertinent transaction as subject to the section 988(a)(1)(B) 
election. The Commissioner, in his sole discretion, may invalidate any 
purported election that does not comply with the preceding sentence.
    (4) Verification. A taxpayer that has made an election under 
Sec. 1.988-3(b)(3) must attach to his income tax return a statement 
which sets forth the following:
    (i) A description and the date of each election made by the taxpayer 
during the taxpayer's taxable year;
    (ii) A statement that each election made during the taxable year was 
made before the close of the date the transaction was entered into;
    (iii) A description of any contract for which an election was in 
effect and the date such contract expired or was otherwise sold or 
exchanged during the taxable year;
    (iv) A statement that the contract was never part of a straddle as 
defined in section 1092; and
    (v) A statement that all transactions subject to the election are 
included on the statement attached to the taxpayer's income tax return.

In addition to any penalty that may otherwise apply, the Commissioner, 
in his sole discretion, may invalidate any or all elections made during 
the taxable year under Sec. 1.988-3(b)(1) if the taxpayer fails to 
verify each election as provided in this Sec. 1.988-3(b)(4). The 
preceding sentence shall not apply if the taxpayer's failure to verify 
each election was due to reasonable cause or bona fide mistake. The 
burden of proof to show reasonable cause or bona fide mistake made in 
good faith is on the taxpayer.
    (5) Independent verification--(i) Effect of independent 
verification. If the taxpayer receives independent verification of the 
election in paragraph (b)(3) of this section, the taxpayer shall be 
presumed to have satisfied the requirements of paragraphs (b)(3) and (4) 
of this section. A contract that is a part of a straddle as defined in 
section 1092 may not be independently verified and shall be subject to 
the rules of paragraph (b)(2) of this section.
    (ii) Requirements for independent verification. A taxpayer receives 
independent verification of the election in paragraph (b)(3) of this 
section if--
    (A) The taxpayer establishes a separate account(s) with an unrelated 
broker(s) or dealer(s) through which all transactions to be 
independently verified pursuant to this paragraph (b)(5) are conducted 
and reported.
    (B) Only transactions entered into on or after the date the taxpayer 
establishes such account may be recorded in the account.
    (C) Transactions subject to the election of paragraph (b)(3) of this 
section are entered into such account on the

[[Page 599]]

date such transactions are entered into.
    (D) The broker or dealer provides the taxpayer a statement detailing 
the transactions conducted through such account and includes on such 
statement the following: ``Each transaction identified in this account 
is subject to the election set forth in section 988(a)(1)(B).''
    (iii) Special effective date for independent verification. The rules 
of this paragraph (b)(5) shall be effective for transactions entered 
into after March 17, 1992.
    (6) Effective date. Except as otherwise provided, this paragraph (b) 
is effective for taxable years beginning on or after September 21, 1989. 
For prior taxable years, any reasonable contemporaneous election meeting 
the requirements of section 988(a)(1)(B) shall satisfy this paragraph 
(b).
    (c) Exchange gain or loss treated as interest--(1) In general. 
Except as provided in this paragraph (c)(1), exchange gain or loss 
realized on a section 988 transaction shall not be treated as interest 
income or expense. Exchange gain or loss realized on a section 988 
transaction shall be treated as interest income or expense as provided 
in paragraph (c)(2) of this section with regard to tax exempt bonds, 
Sec. 1.988-2(e)(2)(ii)(B), Sec. 1.988-5, and in administrative 
pronouncements. See Sec. 1.861-9T(b), providing rules for the allocation 
of certain items of exchange gain or loss in the same manner as interest 
expense.
    (2) Exchange loss realized by the holder on nonfunctional currency 
tax exempt bonds. Exchange loss realized by the holder of a debt 
instrument the interest on which is excluded from gross income under 
section 103(a) or any similar provision of law shall be treated as an 
offset to and reduce total interest income received or accrued with 
respect to such instrument. Therefore, to the extent of total interest 
income, no exchange loss shall be recognized. This paragraph (c)(2) 
shall be effective with respect to debt instruments acquired on or after 
June 24, 1987.
    (d) Effective date. Except as otherwise provided in this section, 
this section shall be effective for taxable years beginning after 
December 31, 1986. Thus, except as otherwise provided in this section, 
any payments made or received with respect to a section 988 transaction 
in taxable years beginning after December 31, 1986, are subject to this 
section. Thus, for example, a payment made prior to January 1, 1987, 
under a forward contract that results in the deferral of a loss under 
section 1092 to a taxable year beginning after December 31, 1986, is not 
characterized as an ordinary loss by virtue of paragraph (a) of this 
section because payment was made prior to January 1, 1987.

[T.D. 8400, 57 FR 9197, Mar. 17, 1992]


<R05>
Sec. 1.988-4  Source of gain or loss realized on a section 988 transaction.

    (a) In general. Except as otherwise provided in Sec. 1.988-5 and 
this section, the source of exchange gain or loss shall be determined by 
reference to the residence of the taxpayer. This rule applies even if 
the taxpayer has made an election under Sec. 1.988-3(b) to characterize 
exchange gain or loss as capital gain or loss. This section takes 
precedence over section 865.
    (b) Qualified business unit--(1) In general. The source of exchange 
gain or loss shall be determined by reference to the residence of the 
qualified business unit of the taxpayer on whose books the asset, 
liability, or item of income or expense giving rise to such gain or loss 
is properly reflected.
    (2) Proper reflection on the books of the taxpayer or qualified 
business unit--(i) In general. Whether an asset, liability, or item of 
income or expense is properly reflected on the books of a qualified 
business unit is a question of fact.
    (ii) Presumption if booking practices are inconsistent. It shall be 
presumed that an asset, liability, or item of income or expense is not 
properly reflected on the books of the qualified business unit if the 
taxpayer and its qualified business units employ inconsistent booking 
practices with respect to the same or similar assets, liabilities, or 
items of income or expense. If not properly reflected on the books, the 
Commissioner may allocate any asset, liability, or item of income or 
expense between or among the taxpayer and its qualified business units 
to properly reflect the

[[Page 600]]

source (or realization) of exchange gain or loss.
    (c) Effectively connected exchange gain or loss. Notwithstanding 
paragraphs (a) and (b) of this section, exchange gain or loss that under 
principles similar to those set forth in Sec. 1.864-4(c) arises from the 
conduct of a United States trade or business shall be sourced in the 
United States and such gain or loss shall be treated as effectively 
connected to the conduct of a United States trade or business for 
purposes of sections 871(b) and 882 (a)(1).
    (d) Residence--(1) In general. Except as otherwise provided in this 
paragraph (d), for purposes of sections 985 through 989, the residence 
of any person shall be--
    (i) In the case of an individual, the country in which such 
individual's tax home (as defined in section 911(d)(3)) is located;
    (ii) In the case of a corporation, partnership, trust or estate 
which is a United States person (as defined in section 7701(a)(30)), the 
United States; and
    (iii) In the case of a corporation, partnership, trust or estate 
which is not a United States person, a country other than the United 
States.

If an individual does not have a tax home (as defined in section 
911(d)(3)), the residence of such individual shall be the United States 
if such individual is a United States citizen or a resident alien and 
shall be a country other than the United States if such individual is 
not a United States citizen or resident alien. If the taxpayer is a U.S. 
person and has no principal place of business outside the United States, 
the residence of the taxpayer is the United States. Notwithstanding 
paragraph (d)(1)(ii) of this section, if a partnership is formed or 
availed of to avoid tax by altering the source of exchange gain or loss, 
the source of such gain or loss shall be determined by reference to the 
residence of the partners rather than the partnership.
    (2) Exception. In the case of a qualified business unit of any 
taxpayer (including an individual), the residence of such unit shall be 
the country in which the principal place of business of such qualified 
business unit is located.
    (3) Partner in a partnership not engaged in a U.S. trade or business 
under section 864(b)(2). The determination of residence shall be made at 
the partner level (without regard to whether the partnership is a 
qualified business unit of the partners) in the case of partners in a 
partnership that are not engaged in a U.S. trade or business by reason 
of section 864(b)(2).
    (e) Special rule for certain related party loans--(1) In general. In 
the case of a loan by a United States person or a related person to a 10 
percent owned foreign corporation, or a corporation that meets the 80 
percent foreign business requirements test of section 861(c)(1), other 
than a corporation subject to Sec. 1.861-11T(e)(2)(i), which is 
denominated in, or determined by reference to, a currency other than the 
U.S. dollar and bears interest at a rate at least 10 percentage points 
higher than the Federal mid-term rate (as determined under section 
1274(d)) at the time such loan is entered into, the following rules 
shall apply--
    (i) For purposes of section 904 only, such loan shall be marked to 
market annually on the earlier of the last business day of the United 
States person's (or related person's) taxable year or the date the loan 
matures; and
    (ii) Any interest income earned with respect to such loan for the 
taxable year shall be treated as income from sources within the United 
States to the extent of any notional loss attributable to such loan 
under paragraph (d)(1)(i) of this section.
    (2) United States person. For purposes of this paragraph (e), the 
term ``United States person'' means a person described in section 
7701(a)(30).
    (3) Loans by related foreign persons--(i) In general. [Reserved]
    (ii) Definition of related person. For purposes of this paragraph 
(e), the term ``related person'' has the meaning given such term by 
section 954(d)(3) except that such section shall be applied by 
substituting ``United States person'' for ``controlled foreign 
corporation'' each place such term appears.
    (4) 10 percent owned foreign corporation. For purposes of this 
paragraph (e), the term ``10 percent owned foreign corporation'' means 
any foreign corporation in which the United States person owns directly 
or indirectly

[[Page 601]]

(within the meaning of section 318(a)) at least 10 percent of the voting 
stock.
    (f) Exchange gain or loss treated as interest under Sec. 1.988-3. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, any gain or loss 
realized on a section 988 transaction that is treated as interest income 
or expense under Sec. 1.988-3(c)(1) shall be sourced or allocated and 
apportioned pursuant to section 861(a)(1), 862(a)(1), or 864(e) as the 
case may be.
    (g) Exchange gain or loss allocated in the same manner as interest 
under Sec. 1.861-9T. The allocation and apportionment of exchange gain 
or loss under Sec. 1.861-9T shall not affect the source of exchange gain 
or loss for purposes of sections 871(a), 881, 1441, 1442 and 6049.
    (h) Effective date. This section shall be effective for taxable 
years beginning after December 31, 1986. Thus, any payments made or 
received with respect to a section 988 transaction in taxable years 
beginning after December 31, 1986, are subject to this section.

[T.D. 8400, 57 FR 9199, Mar. 17, 1992]


<R05>
Sec. 1.988-5  Section 988(d) hedging transactions.

    (a) Integration of a nonfunctional currency debt instrument and a 
Sec. 1.988-5(a) hedge--(1) In general. This paragraph (a) applies to a 
qualified hedging transaction as defined in this paragraph (a)(1). A 
qualified hedging transaction is an integrated economic transaction, as 
provided in paragraph (a)(5) of this section, consisting of a qualifying 
debt instrument as defined in paragraph (a)(3) of this section and a 
Sec. 1.988-5(a) hedge as defined in paragraph (a)(4) of this section. If 
a taxpayer enters into a transaction that is a qualified hedging 
transaction, no exchange gain or loss is recognized by the taxpayer on 
the qualifying debt instrument or on the Sec. 1.988-5(a) hedge for the 
period that either is part of a qualified hedging transaction, and the 
transactions shall be integrated as provided in paragraph (a)(9) of this 
section. However, if the qualified hedging transaction results in a 
synthetic nonfunctional currency denominated debt instrument, such 
instrument shall be subject to the rules of Sec. 1.988-2(b).
    (2) Exception. This paragraph (a) does not apply with respect to a 
qualified hedging transaction that creates a synthetic asset or 
liability denominated in, or determined by reference to, a currency 
other than the U.S. dollar if the rate that approximates the Federal 
short-term rate in such currency is at least 20 percentage points higher 
than the Federal short term rate (determined under section 1274(d)) on 
the date the taxpayer identifies the transaction as a qualified hedging 
transaction.
    (3) Qualifying debt instrument--(i) In general. A qualifying debt 
instrument is a debt instrument described in Sec. 1.988-1(a)(2)(i), 
regardless of whether denominated in, or determined by reference to, 
nonfunctional currency (including dual currency debt instruments, multi-
currency debt instruments and contingent payment debt instruments). A 
qualifying debt instrument does not include accounts payable, accounts 
receivable or similar items of expense or income.
    (ii) Special rule for debt instrument of which all payments are 
proportionately hedged. If a debt instrument satisfies the requirements 
of paragraph (a)(3)(i) of this section, and all principal and interest 
payments under the instrument are hedged in the same proportion, then 
for purposes of this paragraph (a), that portion of the instrument that 
is hedged is eligible to be treated as a qualifying debt instrument, and 
the rules of this paragraph (a) shall apply separately to such 
qualifying debt instrument. See Example 8 in paragraph (a)(9)(iv) of 
this section.
    (4) Section 1.988-5(a) hedge--(i) In general. A Sec. 1.988-5(a) 
hedge (hereinafter referred to in this paragraph (a) as a ``hedge'') is 
a spot contract, futures contract, forward contract, option contract, 
notional principal contract, currency swap contract, similar financial 
instrument, or series or combination thereof, that when integrated with 
a qualifying debt instrument permits the calculation of a yield to 
maturity (under principles of section 1272) in the currency in which the 
synthetic debt instrument is denominated (as determined under paragraph 
(a)(9)(ii)(A) of this section).
    (ii) Retroactive application of definition of currency swap 
contract. A taxpayer may apply the definition of currency swap contract 
set forth in Sec. 1.988-

[[Page 602]]

2(e)(2)(ii) in lieu of the definition of swap agreement in section 
2(e)(5) of Notice 87-11, 1987-1 C.B. 423 to transactions entered into 
after December 31, 1986 and before September 21, 1989.
    (5) Definition of integrated economic transaction. A qualifying debt 
instrument and a hedge are an integrated economic transaction if all of 
the following requirements are satisfied--
    (i) All payments to be made or received under the qualifying debt 
instrument (or amounts determined by reference to a nonfunctional 
currency) are fully hedged on the date the taxpayer identifies the 
transaction under paragraph (a) of this section as a qualified hedging 
transaction such that a yield to maturity (under principles of section 
1272) in the currency in which the synthetic debt instrument is 
denominated (as determined under paragraph (a)(9)(ii)(A) of this 
section) can be calculated. Any contingent payment features of the 
qualifying debt instrument must be fully offset by the hedge such that 
the synthetic debt instrument is not classified as a contingent payment 
debt instrument. See Examples 6 and 7 of paragraph (a)(9)(iv) of this 
section.
    (ii) The hedge is identified in accordance with paragraph (a)(8) of 
this section on or before the date the acquisition of the financial 
instrument (or instruments) constituting the hedge is settled or closed.
    (iii) None of the parties to the hedge are related. The term 
``related'' means the relationships defined in section 267(b) or section 
707(b).
    (iv) In the case of a qualified business unit with a residence, as 
defined in section 988(a)(3)(B), outside of the United States, both the 
qualifying debt instrument and the hedge are properly reflected on the 
books of such qualified business unit throughout the term of the 
qualified hedging transaction.
    (v) Subject to the limitations of paragraph (a)(5) of this section, 
both the qualifying debt instrument and the hedge are entered into by 
the same individual, partnership, trust, estate, or corporation. With 
respect to a corporation, the same corporation must enter into both the 
qualifying debt instrument and the hedge whether or not such corporation 
is a member of an affiliated group of corporations that files a 
consolidated return.
    (vi) With respect to a foreign person engaged in a U.S. trade or 
business that enters into a qualifying debt instrument or hedge through 
such trade or business, all items of income and expense associated with 
the qualifying debt instrument and the hedge (other than interest 
expense that is subject to Sec. 1.882-5), would have been effectively 
connected with such U.S. trade or business throughout the term of the 
qualified hedging transaction had this paragraph (a) not applied.
    (6) Special rules for legging in and legging out of integrated 
treatment--(i) Legging in. ``Legging in'' to integrated treatment under 
this paragraph (a) means that a hedge is entered into after the date the 
qualifying debt instrument is entered into or acquired, and the 
requirements of this paragraph (a) are satisfied on the date the hedge 
is entered into (``leg in date''). If a taxpayer legs into integrated 
treatment, the following rules shall apply--
    (A) Exchange gain or loss shall be realized with respect to the 
qualifying debt instrument determined solely by reference to changes in 
exchange rates between--
    (1) The date the instrument was acquired by the holder, or the date 
the obligor assumed the obligation to make payments under the 
instrument; and
    (2) The leg in date.
    (B) The recognition of such gain or loss will be deferred until the 
date the qualifying debt instrument matures or is otherwise disposed of.
    (C) The source and character of such gain or loss shall be 
determined on the leg in date as if the qualifying debt instrument was 
actually sold or otherwise terminated by the taxpayer.
    (ii) Legging out. With respect to a qualifying debt instrument and 
hedge that are properly identified as a qualified hedging transaction, 
``legging out'' of integrated treatment under this paragraph (a) means 
that the taxpayer disposes of or otherwise terminates all or a part of 
the qualifying debt instrument or hedge prior to maturity of the 
qualified hedging transaction, or the taxpayer changes a material term 
of the qualifying debt instrument (e.g.,

[[Page 603]]

exercises an option to change the interest rate or index, or the 
maturity date) or hedge (e.g., changes the interest or exchange rates 
underlying the hedge, or the expiration date) prior to maturity of the 
qualified hedging transaction. A taxpayer that disposes of or terminates 
a qualified hedging transaction (i.e., disposes of or terminates both 
the qualifying transaction and the hedge on the same day) shall be 
considered to have disposed of or otherwise terminated the synthetic 
debt instrument rather than as legging out. If a taxpayer legs out of 
integrated treatment, the following rules shall apply--
    (A) The transaction will be treated as a qualified hedging 
transaction during the time the requirements of this paragraph (a) were 
satisfied.
    (B) If the hedge is disposed of or otherwise terminated, the 
qualifying debt instrument shall be treated as sold for its fair market 
value on the date the hedge is disposed of or otherwise terminated (the 
``leg-out date''), and any gain or loss (including gain or loss 
resulting from factors other than movements in exchange rates) from the 
identification date to the leg-out date is realized and recognized on 
the leg-out date. The spot rate on the leg-out date shall be used to 
determine exchange gain or loss on the debt instrument for the period 
beginning on the leg-out date and ending on the date such instrument 
matures or is disposed of or otherwise terminated. Proper adjustment to 
the principal amount of the debt instrument must be made to reflect any 
gain or loss taken into account. The netting rule of Sec. 1.988-2(b)(8) 
shall apply.
    (C) If the qualifying debt instrument is disposed of or otherwise 
terminated, the hedge shall be treated as sold for its fair market value 
on the date the qualifying debt instrument is disposed of or otherwise 
terminated (the ``leg-out date''), and any gain or loss from the 
identification date to the leg-out date is realized and recognized on 
the leg-out date. The spot rate on the leg-out date shall be used to 
determine exchange gain or loss on the hedge for the period beginning on 
the leg-out date and ending on the date such hedge is disposed of or 
otherwise terminated.
    (D) Except as provided in paragraph (a)(8)(iii) of this section 
(regarding identification by the Commissioner), that part of the 
qualified hedging transaction that has not been terminated (i.e., the 
remaining debt instrument in its entirety even if partially hedged, or 
hedge) cannot be part of a qualified hedging transaction for any period 
subsequent to the leg out date.
    (E) If a taxpayer legs out of a qualified hedging transaction and 
realizes a gain with respect to the terminated instrument, then 
paragraph (a)(6)(ii)(B) or (C) of this section, as appropriate, shall 
not apply if during the period beginning 30 days before the leg-out date 
and ending 30 days after that date the taxpayer enters into another 
transaction that hedges at least 50% of the remaining currency flow with 
respect to the qualifying debt instrument which was part of the 
qualified hedging transaction (or, if appropriate, an equivalent amount 
under the Sec. 1.988-5 hedge which was part of the qualified hedging 
transaction).
    (7) Transactions part of a straddle. At the discretion of the 
Commissioner, a transaction shall not satisfy the requirements of 
paragraph (a)(5) of this section if the debt instrument making up the 
qualified hedging transaction is part of a straddle as defined in 
section 1092(c) prior to the time the qualified hedging transaction is 
identified.
    (8) Identification requirements--(i) Identification by the taxpayer. 
A taxpayer must establish a record and before the close of the date the 
hedge is entered into, the taxpayer must enter into the record for each 
qualified hedging transaction the following information--
    (A) The date the qualifying debt instrument and hedge were entered 
into;
    (B) The date the qualifying debt instrument and the hedge are 
identified as constituting a qualified hedging transaction;
    (C) The amount that must be deferred, if any, under paragraph (a)(6) 
of this section and the source and character of such deferred amount;
    (D) A description of the qualifying debt instrument and the hedge; 
and
    (E) A summary of the cash flow resulting from treating the 
qualifying

[[Page 604]]

debt instrument and the hedge as a qualified hedging transaction.
    (ii) Identification by trustee on behalf of beneficiary. A trustee 
of a trust that enters into a qualified hedging transaction may satisfy 
the identification requirements described in paragraph (a)(8)(i) of this 
section on behalf of a beneficiary of such trust.
    (iii) Identification by the Commissioner. If--
    (A) A taxpayer enters into a qualifying debt instrument and a hedge 
but fails to comply with one or more of the requirements of this 
paragraph (a), and
    (B) On the basis of all the facts and circumstances, the 
Commissioner concludes that the qualifying debt instrument and the hedge 
are, in substance, a qualified hedging transaction,

then the Commissioner may treat the qualifying debt instrument and the 
hedge as a qualified hedging transaction. The Commissioner may identify 
a qualifying debt instrument and a hedge as a qualified hedging 
transaction regardless of whether the qualifying debt instrument and the 
hedge are held by the same taxpayer.
    (9) Taxation of qualified hedging transactions--(i) In general--(A) 
General rule. If a transaction constitutes a qualified hedging 
transaction, the qualifying debt instrument and the hedge are integrated 
and treated as a single transaction with respect to the taxpayer that 
has entered into the qualified hedging transaction during the period 
that the transaction qualifies as a qualified hedging transaction. 
Neither the qualifying debt instrument nor the hedge that makes up the 
qualified hedging transaction shall be subject to section 263(g), 1092 
or 1256 for the period such transactions are integrated. However, the 
qualified hedging transaction may be subject to section 263(g) or 1092 
if such transaction is part of a straddle.
    (B) Special rule for income or expense of foreign persons 
effectively connected with a U.S. trade or business. Interest income of 
a foreign person resulting from a qualified hedging transaction entered 
into by such foreign person that satisfies the requirements of paragraph 
(a)(5)(vii) of this section shall be treated as effectively connected 
with a U.S. trade or business. Interest expense of a foreign person 
resulting from a qualified hedging transaction entered into by such 
foreign person that satisfies the requirements of paragraph (a)(5)(vii) 
of this section shall be allocated and apportioned under Sec. 1.882-5 of 
the regulations.
    (C) Special rule for foreign persons that enter into qualified 
hedging transactions giving rise to U.S. source income not effectively 
connected with a U.S. trade or business. If a foreign person enters into 
a qualified hedging transaction that gives rise to U.S. source interest 
income (determined under the source rules for synthetic asset 
transactions as provided in this section) not effectively connected with 
a U.S. trade or business of such foreign person, for purposes of 
sections 871(a), 881, 1441, 1442 and 6049, the provisions of this 
paragraph (a) shall not apply and such sections of the Internal Revenue 
Code shall be applied separately to the qualifying debt instrument and 
the hedge. To the extent relevant to any foreign person, if the 
requirements of this paragraph (a) are otherwise met, the provisions of 
this paragraph (a) shall apply for all other purposes of the Internal 
Revenue Code (e.g., for purposes of calculating the earnings and profits 
of a controlled foreign corporation that enters into a qualified hedging 
transaction through a qualified business unit resident outside the 
United States, income or expense with respect to such qualified hedging 
transaction shall be calculated under the provisions of this paragraph 
(a)).
    (ii) Income tax effects of integration. The effect of integrating 
and treating a transaction as a single transaction is to create a 
synthetic debt instrument for income tax purposes, which is subject to 
the original issue discount provisions of sections 1272 through 1288 and 
163(e), the terms of which are determined as follows:
    (A) Denomination of synthetic debt instrument. In the case where the 
qualifying debt instrument is a borrowing, the denomination of the 
synthetic debt instrument is the same as the currency paid under the 
terms of the hedge to acquire the currency used to make payments under 
the qualifying debt instrument. In the case where the qualifying

[[Page 605]]

debt instrument is a lending, the denomination of the synthetic debt 
instrument is the same as the currency received under the terms of the 
hedge in exchange for amounts received under the qualifying debt 
instrument. For example, if the hedge is a forward contract to acquire 
British pounds for dollars, and the qualifying debt instrument is a 
borrowing denominated in British pounds, the synthetic debt instrument 
is considered a borrowing in dollars.
    (B) Term and accrual periods. The term of the synthetic debt 
instrument shall be the period beginning on the identification date and 
ending on the date the qualifying debt instrument matures or such 
earlier date that the qualifying debt instrument or hedge is disposed of 
or otherwise terminated. Unless otherwise clearly indicated by the 
payment interval under the hedge, the accrual period shall be a six 
month period which ends on the dates determined under section 
1272(a)(5).
    (C) Issue price. The issue price of the synthetic debt instrument is 
the adjusted issue price of the qualifying debt instrument translated 
into the currency in which the synthetic debt instrument is denominated 
at the spot rate on the identification date.
    (D) Stated redemption price at maturity. In the case where the 
qualifying debt instrument is a borrowing, the stated redemption price 
at maturity shall be determined under section 1273(a)(2) on the 
identification date by reference to the amounts to be paid under the 
hedge to acquire the currency necessary to make interest and principal 
payments on the qualifying debt instrument. In the case where the 
qualifying debt instrument is a lending, the stated redemption price at 
maturity shall be determined under section 1273(a)(2) on the 
identification date by reference to the amounts to be received under the 
hedge in exchange for the interest and principal payments received 
pursuant to the terms of the qualifying debt instrument.
    (iii) Source of interest income and allocation of expense. Interest 
income from a synthetic debt instrument described in paragraph 
(a)(9)(ii) of this section shall be sourced by reference to the source 
of income under sections 861 (a)(1) and 862(a)(1) of the qualifying debt 
instrument. The character for purposes of section 904 of interest income 
from a synthetic debt instrument shall be determined by reference to the 
character of the interest income from qualifying debt instrument. 
Interest expense from a synthetic debt instrument described in paragraph 
(a)(9)(ii) of this section shall be allocated and apportioned under 
Secs. 1.861-8T through 1.861-12T or the successor sections thereof or 
under Sec. 1.882-5.
    (iv) Examples. The following examples illustrate the application of 
this paragraph (a)(9).

    Example 1. (i) K is a U.S. corporation with the U.S. dollar as its 
functional currency. On December 24, 1989, K agrees to close the 
following transaction on December 31, 1989. K will borrow from an 
unrelated party on December 31, 1989, 100 British pounds (<brit-pound>) 
for 3 years at a 10 percent rate of interest, payable annually, with no 
principal payment due until the final installment. K will also enter 
into a currency swap contract with an unrelated counterparty under the 
terms of which--
    (a) K will swap, on December 31, 1989, the <brit-pound>100 obtained 
from the borrowing for $100; and
    (b) K will exchange dollars for pounds pursuant to the following 
table in order to obtain the pounds necessary to make payments on the 
pound borrowing:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                    U.S.                
                     Date                         dollars       Pounds  
------------------------------------------------------------------------
December 31, 1990.............................            8           10
December 31, 1991.............................            8           10
December 31, 1992.............................          108          110
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (ii) The interest rate on the borrowing is set and the exchange 
rates on the swap are fixed on December 24, 1989. On December 31, 1989, 
K borrows the <brit-pound>100 and swaps such pounds for $100. Assume x 
has satisfied the identification requirements of paragraph (a)(8) of 
this section.
    (iii) The pound borrowing (which constitutes a qualifying debt 
instrument under paragraph (a)(3) of this section) and the currency swap 
contract (which constitutes a hedge under paragraph (a)(4) of this 
section) are a qualified hedging transaction as defined in paragraph 
(a)(1) of this section. Accordingly, the pound borrowing and the swap 
are integrated and treated as one transaction with the following 
consequences:
    (A) The integration of the pound borrowing and the swap results in a 
synthetic dollar borrowing with an issue price of $100 under section 
1273(b)(2).
    (B) The total amount of interest and principal of the synthetic 
dollar borrowing is

[[Page 606]]

equal to the dollar payments made by K under the currency swap contract 
(i.e., $8 in 1990, $8 in 1991, and $108 in 1992).
    (C) The stated redemption price at maturity (defined in section 
1273(a)(2)) is $100. Because the stated redemption price equals the 
issue price, there is no OID on the synthetic dollar borrowing.
    (D) K may deduct the annual interest payments of $8 under section 
163(a) (subject to any limitations on deductibility imposed by other 
provisions of the Code) according to its regular method of accounting. K 
has also paid $100 as a return of principal in 1992.
    (E) K must allocate and apportion its interest expense with respect 
to the synthetic dollar borrowing under the rules of Secs. 1.861-8T 
through 1.861-12T.
    Example 2. (i) K, a U.S. corporation, has the U.S. dollar as its 
functional currency. On December 24, 1989, when the spot rate for Swiss 
francs (Sf) is Sf1 = $1, K enters into a forward contract to purchase 
Sf100 in exchange for $100.04 for delivery on December 31, 1989. The 
Sf100 are to be used for the purchase of a franc denominated debt 
instrument on December 31, 1989. The instrument will have a term of 3 
years, an issue price of Sf100, and will bear interest at 6 percent, 
payable annually, with no repayment of principal until the final 
installment. On December 24, 1989, K also enters into a series of 
forward contracts to sell the franc interest and principal payments that 
will be received under the terms of the franc denominated debt 
instrument for dollars according to the following schedule:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                    U.S.                
                     Date                         dollars       Francs  
------------------------------------------------------------------------
December 31, 1990.............................         6.12            6
December 31, 1991.............................         6.23            6
December 31, 1992.............................       112.16          106
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (ii) On December 31, 1989, K takes delivery of the Sf100 and 
purchases the franc denominated debt instrument. Assume K satisfies the 
identification requirements of paragraph (a)(8) of this section. The 
purchase of the franc debt instrument (which constitutes a qualifying 
debt instrument under paragraph (a)(3) of this section) and the series 
of forward contracts (which constitute a hedge under paragraph (a)(4) of 
this section) are a qualified hedging transaction under paragraph (a)(1) 
of this section. Accordingly, the franc debt instrument and all the 
forward contracts are integrated and treated as one transaction with the 
following consequences:
    (A) The integration of the franc debt instrument and the forward 
contracts results in a synthetic dollar debt instrument in an amount 
equal to the dollars exchanged under the forward contract to purchase 
the francs necessary to acquire the franc debt instrument. Accordingly, 
the issue price is $100.04 (section 1273(b)(2) of the Code).
    (B) The total amount of interest and principal received by K with 
respect to the synthetic dollar debt instrument is equal to the dollars 
received under the forward sales contracts (i.e., $6.12 in 1990, $6.23 
in 1991, and $112.16 in 1992).
    (C) The synthetic dollar debt instrument is an installment 
obligation and its stated redemption price at maturity is $106.15 (i.e., 
$6.12 of the payments in 1990, 1991, and 1992 are treated as periodic 
interest payments under the principles of section 1273). Because the 
stated redemption price at maturity exceeds the issue price, under 
section 1273(a)(1) the synthetic dollar debt instrument has OID of 
$6.11.
    (D) The yield to maturity of the synthetic dollar debt instrument is 
8.00 percent, compounded annually. Assuming K is a calendar year 
taxpayer, it must include interest income of $8.00 in 1990 (of which 
$1.88 constitutes OID), $8.15 in 1991 (of which $2.03 constitutes OID), 
and $8.32 in 1992 (of which $2.20 constitutes OID). The amount of the 
final payment received by K in excess of the interest income includible 
is a return of principal and a payment of previously accrued OID.
    (E) The source of the interest income shall be determined by 
applying sections 861(a)(1) and 862(a)(1) with reference to the franc 
interest income that would have been received had the transaction not 
been integrated.
    Example 3. (i) K is an accrual method U.S. corporation with the U.S. 
dollar as its functional currency. On January 1, 1992, K borrows 100 
British pounds (<brit-pound>) for 3 years at a 10% rate of interest 
payable on December 31 of each year with no principal payment due until 
the final installment. The spot rate on January 1, 1992, is 
<brit-pound>1 = $1.50. On January 1, 1993, when the spot rate is 
<brit-pound>1 = $1.60, K enters into a currency swap contract with an 
unrelated counterparty under the terms of which K will exchange dollars 
for pounds pursuant to the following table in order to obtain the pounds 
necessary to make the remaining payments on the pound borrowing:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                    U.S.                
                     Date                         dollars       Pounds  
------------------------------------------------------------------------
December 31, 1993.............................        12.80           10
December 31, 1994.............................        12.80           10
December 31, 1994.............................       160.00          100
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (ii) Assume that British pound interest rates are still 10% and that 
K properly identifies the pound borrowing and the currency swap contract 
as a qualified hedging transaction as provided in paragraph (a)(8) of 
this section. Under paragraph (a)(6)(i) of this section, K must realize 
exchange gain or loss with respect to the pound borrowing determined 
solely by reference to changes in exchange rates between January 1, 1992 
and January 1, 1993. (Thus, gain or loss from other factors such as 
movements in interest rates or changes in credit quality of K are

[[Page 607]]

not taken into account). Recognition of such gain or loss is deferred 
until K terminates its pound borrowing. Accordingly, K must defer 
exchange loss in the amount of $10 
[(<brit-pound>100 x 1.50)-(<brit-pound>100 x 1.60)].
    (iii) Additionally, the qualified hedging transaction is treated as 
a synthetic U.S. dollar debt instrument with an issue date of January 1, 
1993, and a maturity date of December 31, 1994. The issue price of the 
synthetic debt instrument is $160 (<brit-pound>100 x 1.60, the spot rate 
on January 1, 1993) and the total amount of interest and principal is 
$185.60. The accrual period is the one year period beginning on January 
1 and ending December 31 of each year. The stated redemption price at 
maturity is $160. Thus, K is treated as paying $12.80 of interest in 
1993, $12.80 of interest in 1994, and $160 of principal in 1994. The 
interest expense from the synthetic instrument is allocated and 
apportioned in accordance with the rules of Secs. 1.861-8T through 
1.861-12T. Sections 263(g), 1092, and 1256 do not apply to the positions 
comprising the synthetic dollar borrowing.
    Example 4. (i) K is an accrual method U.S. corporation with the U.S. 
dollar as its functional currency. On January 1, 1990, K borrows 100 
British pounds (<brit-pound>) for 3 years at a 10% rate of interest 
payable on December 31 of each year with no principal payment due until 
the final installment. The spot rate on January 1, 1990, is 
<brit-pound>1 = $1.50. Also on January 1, 1990, K enters into a currency 
swap contract with an unrelated counterparty under the terms of which K 
will exchange dollars for pounds pursuant to the following table in 
order to obtain the pounds necessary to make the remaining payments on 
the pound borrowing:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                    U.S.                
                     Date                         dollars       Pounds  
------------------------------------------------------------------------
December 31, 1990.............................        12.00           10
December 31, 1991.............................        12.00           10
December 31, 1992.............................       162.00          110
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (ii) Assume that K properly identifies the pound borrowing and the 
currency swap contract as a qualified hedging transaction as provided in 
paragraph (a)(1) of this section.
    (iii) The pound borrowing (which constitutes a qualifying debt 
instrument under paragraph (a)(3) of this section) and the currency swap 
contract (which constitutes a hedge under paragraph (a)(4) of this 
section) are a qualified hedging transaction as defined in paragraph 
(a)(1) of this section. Accordingly, the pound borrowing and the swap 
are integrated and treated as one transaction with the following 
consequences:
    (A) The integration of the pound borrowing and the swap results in a 
synthetic dollar borrowing with an issue price of $150 under section 
1273(b)(2).
    (B) The total amount of interest and principal of the synthetic 
dollar borrowing is equal to the dollar payments made by K under the 
currency swap contract (i.e., $12 in 1990, $12 in 1991, and $162 in 
1992).
    (C) The stated redemption price at maturity (defined in section 
1273(a)(2)) is $150. Because the stated redemption price equals the 
issue price, there is no OID on the synthetic dollar borrowing.
    (D) K may deduct the annual interest payments of $12 under section 
163(a) (subject to any limitations on deductibility imposed by other 
provisions of the Code) according to its regular method of accounting. K 
has also paid $150 as a return of principal in 1992.
    (E) K must allocate and apportion its interest expense from the 
synthetic instrument under the rules of Secs. 1.861-8T through 1.861-
12T.
    (iv) Assume that on January 1, 1991, the spot exchange rate is 
<brit-pound>1 = $1.60, interest rates have not changed since January 1, 
1990, (accordingly, assume that the market value of K's bond in pounds 
has not changed) and that K transfers its rights and obligations under 
the currency swap contract in exchange for $10. Under Sec. 1.988-
2(e)(3)(iii), K will include in income as exchange gain $10 on January 
1, 1991. Pursuant to paragraph (a)(6)(ii) of this section, the pound 
borrowing and the currency swap contract are treated as a qualified 
hedging transaction for 1990. The loss inherent in the pound borrowing 
from January 1, 1990, to January 1, 1991, is realized and recognized on 
January 1, 1991. Such loss is exchange loss in the amount of $10.00 
[(<brit-pound>100 x $1.50, the spot rate on January 1, 1990)--
(<brit-pound>100 x $1.60, the spot rate on January 1, 1991)]. For 
purposes of determining exchange gain or loss on the <brit-pound>100 
principal amount of the debt instrument for the period January 1, 1991, 
to December 31, 1992, the spot rate on January 1, 1991 is used rather 
than the spot rate on the issue date. Thus, assuming that the spot rate 
on December 31, 1992, the maturity date, is <brit-pound>1 = $1.80, K 
realizes exchange loss in the amount of $20 
[(<brit-pound>100 x $1.60)-(<brit-pound>100 x $1.80)]. Except as 
provided in paragraph (a)(8)(iii) (regarding identification by the 
Commissioner), the pound borrowing cannot be part of a qualified hedging 
transaction for any period subsequent to the leg out date.
    Example 5. (i) K, a U.S. corporation, has the U.S. dollar as its 
functional currency. On January 1, 1990, when the spot rate for Swiss 
francs (Sf) is Sf1 = $.50, K converts $100 to Sf200 and purchases a 
franc denominated debt instrument. The instrument has a term of 3 years, 
an adjusted issue price of Sf200, and will bear interest at 5 percent, 
payable annually, with no repayment of principal until the final 
installment. The U.S. dollar interest rate on an equivalent instrument 
is 8% on January 1, 1990, compounded annually. On January 1, 1990, K 
also enters into a series of forward contracts to sell the franc 
interest and principal payments that will be

[[Page 608]]

received under the terms of the franc denominated debt instrument for 
dollars according to the following schedule:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                    U.S.                
                     Date                         dollars       Francs  
------------------------------------------------------------------------
December 31, 1990.............................         5.14           10
December 31, 1991.............................         5.29           10
December 31, 1992.............................       114.26          210
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (ii) Assume K satisfies the identification requirements of paragraph 
(a)(8) of this section. Assume further that on January 1, 1991, the spot 
exchange rate is Sf1 = U.S.$.5143, the U.S. dollar interest rate is 10%, 
compounded annually, and the Swiss franc interest rate is the same as on 
January 1, 1990 (5%, compounded annually). On January 1, 1991, K 
disposes of the forward contracts that were to mature on December 31, 
1991, and December 31, 1992 and incurs a loss of $3.62 (the present 
value of $.10 with respect to the 1991 contract and $4.27 with respect 
to the 1992 contract).
    (iii) The purchase of the franc debt instrument (which constitutes a 
qualifying debt instrument under paragraph (a)(3) of this section) and 
the series of forward contracts (which constitute a hedge under 
paragraph (a)(4) of this section) are a qualified hedging transaction 
under paragraph (a)(1) of this section. Accordingly, the franc debt 
instrument and all the forward contracts are integrated for the period 
beginning January 1, 1990, and ending January 1, 1991.
    (A) The integration of the franc debt instrument and the forward 
contracts results in a synthetic dollar debt instrument with an issue 
price of $100.
    (B) The total amount of interest and principal to be received by K 
with respect to the synthetic dollar debt instrument is equal to the 
dollars to be received under the forward sales contracts (i.e., $5.14 in 
1990, $5.29 in 1991, and $114.26 in 1992).
    (C) The synthetic dollar debt instrument is an installment 
obligation and its stated redemption price at maturity is $109.27 (i.e., 
$5.14 of the payments in 1990, 1991, and 1992 is treated as periodic 
interest payments under the principles of section 1273). Because the 
stated redemption price at maturity exceeds the issue price, under 
section 1273(a)(1) the synthetic dollar debt instrument has OID of 
$9.27.
    (D) The yield to maturity of the synthetic dollar debt instrument is 
8.00 percent, compounded annually. Assuming K is a calendar year 
taxpayer, it must include interest income of $8.00 in 1990 (of which 
$2.86 constitutes OID).
    (E) The source of the interest income is determined by applying 
sections 861(a)(1) and 862(a)(1) with reference to the franc interest 
income that would have been received had the transaction not been 
integrated.
    (iv) Because K disposed of the forward contracts on January 1, 1991, 
the rules of paragraph (a)(6)(ii) of this section shall apply. 
Accordingly, the $3.62 loss from the disposition of the forward 
contracts is realized and recognized on January 1, 1991. Additionally, K 
is deemed to have sold the franc debt instrument for $102.86, its fair 
market value in dollars on January 1, 1991. K will compute gain or loss 
with respect to the deemed sale of the franc debt instrument by 
subtracting its adjusted basis in the instrument ($102.86--the value of 
the Sf200 issue price at the spot rate on the identification date plus 
$2.86 of original issue discount accrued on the synthetic dollar debt 
instrument for 1990) from the amount realized on the deemed sale of 
$102.86. Thus K realizes and recognizes no gain or loss from the deemed 
sale of the debt instrument. The dollar amount used to determine 
exchange gain or loss with respect to the franc debt instrument is the 
Sf200 issue price on January 1, 1991, translated into dollars at the 
spot rate on January 1, 1991, of Sf1 = U.S.$.5143. Except as provided in 
paragraph (a)(8)(iii) of this section (regarding identification by the 
Commissioner), the franc borrowing cannot be part of a qualified hedging 
transaction for any period subsequent to the leg out date.
    Example 6. (i) K is a U.S. corporation with the dollar as its 
functional currency. On January 1, 1992, K issues a debt instrument with 
the following terms: the issue price is $1,000, the instrument pays 
interest annually at a rate of 8% on the $1,000 principal amount, the 
instrument matures on December 31, 1996, and the amount paid at maturity 
is the greater of zero or $2,000 less the U.S. dollar value (determined 
on December 31, 1996) of 150,000 Japanese yen.
    (ii) Also on January 1, 1992, K enters into the following hedges 
with respect to the instrument described in the preceding paragraph: a 
forward contract under which K will sell 150,000 yen for $1,000 on 
December 31, 1996 (note that this forward rate assumes that interest 
rates in yen and dollars are equal); and an option contract that expires 
on December 31, 1996, under which K has the right (but not the 
obligation) to acquire 150,000 yen for $2,000. K will pay for the option 
by making payments to the writer of the option equal to $5 each December 
31 from 1992 through 1996.
    (iii) The net economic effect of these transactions is that K has 
created a liability with a principal amount and amount paid at maturity 
of $1,000, with an interest cost of 8.5% (8% on debt instrument, 0.5% 
option price) compounded annually. For example, if on December 31, 1996, 
the spot exchange rate is $1 = 100 yen, K pays $500 on the bond 
[$2,000-(150,000 yen/$100)], and $500 in satisfaction of the forward 
contract [$1,000-(150,000 yen/$100)]. If instead the spot exchange rate 
on December 31, 1996 is $1 = 200 yen, K pays $1,250 on the bond 
[$2,000-(150,000 yen/$200)] and K receives $250

[[Page 609]]

in satisfaction of the forward contract [$1,000-(150,000 yen/$200)]. 
Finally, if the spot exchange rate on December 31, 1996 is $1 = 50 yen, 
K pays $0 on the bond [$2,000-(150,000 yen/$50), but the bond holder is 
not required under the terms of the instrument to pay additional 
principal]; K exercises the option to buy 150,000 yen for $2,000; and K 
then delivers the 150,000 yen as required by the forward contract in 
exchange for $1,000.
    (iv) Assume K satisfies the identification requirements of paragraph 
(a)(8) of this section. The debt instrument described in paragraph (i) 
of this Example 6 (which constitutes a qualifying debt instrument under 
paragraph (a)(3) of this section) and the forward contract and option 
contract described in paragraph (ii) of this example (which constitute a 
hedge under paragraph (a)(4) of this section and are collectively 
referred to hereafter as ``the contracts'') together are a qualified 
hedging transaction under paragraph (a)(1) of this section. Accordingly, 
with respect to K, the debt instrument and the contracts are integrated, 
resulting in a synthetic dollar debt instrument with an issue price of 
$1000, a stated redemption price at maturity of $1000 and a yield to 
maturity of 8.5% compounded annually (with no original issue discount). 
K must allocate and apportion its annual interest expense of $85 under 
the rules of Secs. 1.861-8T through 1.861-12T.
    Example 7. (i) R is a U.S. corporation with the dollar as its 
functional currency. On January 1, 1995, R issues a debt instrument with 
the following terms: the issue price is 504 British pounds 
(<brit-pound>), the instrument pays interest at a rate of 3.7% 
(compounded semi-annually) on the <brit-pound>504 principal amount, the 
instrument matures on December 31, 1999, with a repayment at maturity of 
the <brit-pound>504 principal plus the proportional gain, if any, in the 
``Financial Times'' 100 Stock Exchange (FTSE) index (determined by the 
excess of the value of the FTSE index on the maturity date over the 
value of the FTSE on the issue date, divided by the value of the FTSE 
index on the issue date, multiplied by the number of FTSE index 
contracts that could be purchased on the issue date for 
<brit-pound>504).
    (ii) Also on January 1, 1995, R enters into a contract with a bank 
under which on January 1, 1995, R will swap the <brit-pound>504 for 
$1,000 (at the current spot rate). R will make U.S. dollar payments to 
the bank equal to 8.15% on the notional principal amount of $1,000 
(compounded semi-annually) for the period beginning January 1, 1995 and 
ending December 31, 1999. R will receive pound payments from the bank 
equal to 3.7% on the notional principal amount of <brit-pound>504 
(compounded semi-annually) for the period beginning January 1, 1995 and 
ending December 31, 1999. On December 31, 1999, R will swap with the 
bank $1,000 for <brit-pound>504 plus the proportional gain, if any, in 
the FTSE index (computed as provided above).
    (iii) Economically, both the indexed debt instrument and the hedging 
contract are hybrid instruments with the following components. The 
indexed debt instrument is composed of a par pound debt instrument that 
is assumed to have a 10.85% coupon (compounded semi-annually) plus an 
embedded FTSE equity index option for which the investor pays a premium 
of 7.15% (amortized semi-annually) on the pound principal amount. The 
combined effect is that the premium paid by the investor partially 
offsets the coupon payments resulting in a return of 3.7% 
(10.85%-7.15%). Similarly, the dollar payments under the hedging 
contract to be made by R are computed by multiplying the dollar notional 
principal amount by an 8.00% rate (compounded semi-annually) which the 
facts assume would be the rate paid on a conventional currency swap plus 
a premium of 0.15% (amortized semi-annually) on the dollar notional 
principal amount for an embedded FTSE equity index option.
    (iv) Assume R satisfies the identification requirements of paragraph 
(a)(8) of this section. The indexed debt instrument described in 
paragraph (i) of this Example 7 constitutes a qualifying debt instrument 
under paragraph (a)(3) of this section. The hedging contract described 
in paragraph (ii) of this Example 7 constitutes a hedge under paragraph 
(a)(4) of this section. Since both the pound exposure of the indexed 
debt instrument and the exposure to movements of the FTSE embedded in 
the indexed debt instrument are hedged such that a yield to maturity can 
be determined in dollars, the transaction satisfies the requirement of 
paragraph (a)(5)(i) of this section. Assuming the transactions satisfy 
the other requirements of paragraph (a)(5) of this section, the indexed 
debt instrument and hedge are a qualified hedging transaction under 
paragraph (a)(1) of this section. Accordingly, with respect to R, the 
debt instrument and the contracts are integrated, resulting in a 
synthetic dollar debt instrument with an issue price of $1000, a stated 
redemption price at maturity of $1000 and a yield to maturity of 8.15% 
compounded semi-annually (with no original issue discount). K must 
allocate and apportion its interest expense from the synthetic 
instrument under the rules Secs. 1.861-8T through 1.861-12T.
    Example 8. (i) K is a U.S. corporation with the U.S. dollar as its 
functional currency. On December 24, 1992, K agrees to close the 
following transaction on December 31, 1992. K will borrow from an 
unrelated party on December 31, 1992, 200 British pounds (<brit-pound>) 
for 3 years at a 10 percent rate of interest, payable annually, with no 
principal payment due until the final installment. K will also enter

[[Page 610]]

into a currency swap contract with an unrelated counterparty under the 
terms of which--
    (A) K will swap, on December 31, 1992, <brit-pound>100 obtained from 
the borrowing for $100; and
    (B) K will exchange dollars for pounds pursuant to the following 
table:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                    U.S.                
                     Date                         dollars       Pounds  
------------------------------------------------------------------------
December 31, 1993.............................            8           10
December 31, 1994.............................            8           10
December 31, 1995.............................          108          110
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (ii) The interest rate on the borrowing is set and the exchange 
rates on the swap are fixed on December 24, 1992. On December 31, 1992, 
K borrows the <brit-pound>200 and swaps <brit-pound>100 for $100. Assume 
K has satisfied the identification requirements of paragraph (a)(8) of 
this section.
    (iii) The <brit-pound>200 debt instrument satisfies the requirements 
of paragraph (a)(3)(i) of this section. Because all principal and 
interest payments under the instrument are hedged in the same proportion 
(50% of all interest and principal payments are hedged), 50% of the 
payments under the <brit-pound>200 instrument (principal amount of 
<brit-pound>100 and annual interest of <brit-pound>10) are treated as a 
qualifying debt instrument for purposes of paragraph (a) of this 
section. Thus, the distinct <brit-pound>100 borrowing and the currency 
swap contract (which constitutes a hedge under paragraph (a)(4) of this 
section) are a qualified hedging transaction as defined in paragraph 
(a)(1) of this section. Accordingly, <brit-pound>100 of the pound 
borrowing and the swap are integrated and treated as one synthetic 
dollar transaction with the following consequences:
    (A) The integration of <brit-pound>100 of the pound borrowing and 
the swap results in a synthetic dollar borrowing with an issue price of 
$100 under section 1273(b)(2).
    (B) The total amount of interest and principal of the synthetic 
dollar borrowing is equal to the dollar payments made by K under the 
currency swap contract (i.e., $8 in 1993, $8 in 1994, and $108 in 1995).
    (C) The stated redemption price at maturity (defined in section 
1273(a)(2)) is $100. Because the stated redemption price equals the 
issue price, there is no OID on the synthetic dollar borrowing.
    (D) K may deduct the annual interest payments of $8 under section 
163(a) (subject to any limitations on deductibility imposed by other 
provisions of the Code) according to its regular method of accounting. K 
has also paid $100 as a return of principal in 1995.
    (E) K must allocate and apportion its interest expense from the 
synthetic instrument under the rules of Secs. l.861-8T through 1.861-
12T.

That portion of the <brit-pound>200 pound debt instrument that is not 
hedged (i.e., <brit-pound>100) is treated as a separate debt instrument 
subject to the rules of Sec. 1.988-2 (b) and Secs. l.861-8T through 
1.861-12T.
    Example 9. (i) K is an accrual method U.S. corporation with the U.S. 
dollar as its functional currency. On January 1, 1992, K borrows 100 
British pounds (<brit-pound>) for 3 years at a 10% rate of interest 
payable on December 31 of each year with no principal payment due until 
the final installment. On the same day, K enters into a currency swap 
agreement with an unrelated bank under which K agrees to the following:
    (A) On January 1, 1992, K will exchange the <brit-pound>100 borrowed 
for $150.
    (B) For the period beginning January 1, 1992 and ending December 31, 
1994, K will pay at the end of each month an amount determined by 
multiplying $150 by one month LIBOR less 65 basis points and receive 
from the bank on December 31st of 1992, 1993, and 1994, <brit-pound>10.
    (C) On December 31, 1994, K will exchange $150 for <brit-pound>100.

Assume K satisfies the identification requirements of paragraph (a)(8) 
of this section.
    (ii) The pound borrowing (which constitutes a qualifying debt 
instrument under paragraph (a)(3) of this section) and the currency swap 
contract (which constitutes a hedge under paragraph (a)(4) of this 
section) are a qualified hedging transaction as defined in paragraph 
(a)(1) of this section. Accordingly, the pound borrowing and the swap 
are integrated and treated as one transaction with the following 
consequences:
    (A) The integration of the pound borrowing and the swap results in a 
synthetic dollar borrowing with an issue price of $150 under section 
1273(b)(2).
    (B) The total amount of interest and principal of the synthetic 
dollar borrowing is equal to the dollar payments made by K under the 
currency swap contract.
    (C) The stated redemption price at maturity (defined in section 
1273(a)(2)) is $150. Because the stated redemption price equals the 
issue price, there is no OID on the synthetic dollar borrowing.
    (D) K may deduct the monthly variable interest payments under 
section 163(a) (subject to any limitations on deductibility imposed by 
other provisions of the Code) according to its regular method of 
accounting. K has also paid $150 as a return of principal in 1994.
    (E) K must allocate and apportion its interest expense from the 
synthetic instrument under the rules of Secs. 1.861-8T through 1.861-
12T.

[[Page 611]]

    Example 10. (i) K is an accrual method U.S. corporation with the 
U.S. dollar as its functional currency. On January 1, 1992, K loans 100 
British pounds (<brit-pound>) for 3 years at a 10% rate of interest 
payable on December 31 of each year with no principal payment due until 
the final installment. The spot rate on January 1, 1992, is 
<brit-pound>1 = $1.50. Also on January 1, 1992, K enters into a currency 
swap contract with an unrelated counterparty under the terms of which K 
will exchange pounds for dollars pursuant to the following table:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                     Date                          Pounds      Dollars  
------------------------------------------------------------------------
December 31, 1992.............................           10           12
December 31, 1993.............................           10           12
December 31, 1994.............................          110          162
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (ii) Assume that K properly identifies the pound borrowing and the 
currency swap contract as a qualified hedging transaction as provided in 
paragraph (a)(1) of this section.
    (iii) The pound loan (which constitutes a qualifying debt instrument 
under paragraph (a)(3) of this section) and the currency swap contract 
(which constitutes a hedge under paragraph (a)(4) of this section) are a 
qualified hedging transaction as defined in paragraph (a)(1) of this 
section. Accordingly, the pound loan and the swap are integrated and 
treated as one transaction with the following consequences:
    (A) The integration of the pound loan and the swap results in a 
synthetic dollar loan with an issue price of $150 under section 
1273(b)(2).
    (B) The total amount of interest and principal of the synthetic 
dollar loan is equal to the dollar payments received by K under the 
currency swap contract (i.e., $12 in 1992, $12 in 1993, and $162 in 
1994).
    (C) The stated redemption price at maturity (defined in section 
1273(a)(2)) is $150. Because the stated redemption price equals the 
issue price, there is no OID on the synthetic dollar loan.
    (D) K must include in income as interest $12 in 1992, 1993, and 
1994.
    (E) The source of the interest income shall be determined by 
applying sections 861(a)(1) and 862(a)(1) with reference to the pound 
interest income that would have been received had the transaction not 
been integrated.
    (iv) On January 1, 1993, K transfers both the pound loan and the 
currency swap to B, its wholly owned U.S. subsidiary, in exchange for B 
stock in a transfer that satisfies the requirements of section 351. 
Under paragraph (a)(6) of this section, the transfer of both instruments 
is not ``legging out.'' Rather, K is considered to have transferred the 
synthetic dollar loan to B in a transaction in which gain or loss is not 
recognized. B's basis in the loan under section 362 is $100.

    (10) Transition rules and effective dates for certain provisions--
(i) Coordination with Notice 87-11. Any transaction entered into prior 
to September 21, 1989, which satisfied the requirements of Notice 87-11, 
1987-1 C.B. 423, shall be deemed to satisfy the requirements of 
paragraph (a) of this section.
    (ii) Prospective application to contingent payment debt instruments. 
In the case of a contingent payment debt instrument, the definition of 
qualifying debt instrument set forth in paragraph (a)(3)(i) of this 
section applies to transactions entered into after March 17, 1992.
    (iii) Prospective application of partial hedging rule. Paragraph 
(a)(3)(ii) of this section is effective for transactions entered into 
after March 17, 1992.
    (iv) Effective date for paragraph (a)(6)(i) of this section. The 
rules of paragraph (a)(6)(i) of this section are effective for qualified 
hedging transactions that are legged into after March 17, 1992.
    (b) Hedged executory contracts--(1) In general. If the taxpayer 
enters into a hedged executory contract as defined in paragraph (b)(2) 
of this section, the executory contract and the hedge shall be 
integrated as provided in paragraph (b)(4) of this section.
    (2) Definitions--(i) Hedged executory contract. A hedged executory 
contract is an executory contract as defined in paragraph (b)(2)(ii) of 
this section that is the subject of a hedge as defined in paragraph 
(b)(2)(iii) of this section, provided that the following requirements 
are satisfied--
    (A) The executory contract and the hedge are identified as a hedged 
executory contract as provided in paragraph (b)(3) of this section.
    (B) The hedge is entered into (i.e., settled or closed, or in the 
case of nonfunctional currency deposited in an account with a bank or 
other financial institution, such currency is acquired and deposited) on 
or after the date the executory contract is entered into and before the 
accrual date as defined in paragraph (b)(2)(iv) of this section.
    (C) The executory contract is hedged in whole or in part throughout 
the period beginning with the date the hedge

[[Page 612]]

is identified in accordance with paragraph (b)(3) of this section and 
ending on or after the accrual date.
    (D) None of the parties to the hedge are related. The term related 
means the relationships defined in section 267(b) and section 707(c)(1).
    (E) In the case of a qualified business unit with a residence, as 
defined in section 988(a)(3)(B), outside of the United States, both the 
executory contract and the hedge are properly reflected on the books of 
the same qualified business unit.
    (F) Subject to the limitations of paragraph (b)(2)(i)(E) of this 
section, both the executory contract and the hedge are entered into by 
the same individual, partnership, trust, estate, or corporation. With 
respect to a corporation, the same corporation must enter into both the 
executory contract and the hedge whether or not such corporation is a 
member of an affiliated group of corporations that files a consolidated 
return.
    (G) With respect to a foreign person engaged in a U.S. trade or 
business that enters into an executory contract or hedge through such 
trade or business, all items of income and expense associated with the 
executory contract and the hedge would have been effectively connected 
with such U.S. trade or business throughout the term of the hedged 
executory contract had this paragraph (b) not applied.
    (ii) Executory contract--(A) In general. Except as provided in 
paragraph (b)(2)(ii)(B) of this section, an executory contract is an 
agreement entered into before the accrual date to pay nonfunctional 
currency (or an amount determined with reference thereto) in the future 
with respect to the purchase of property used in the ordinary course of 
the taxpayer's business, or the acquisition of a service (or services), 
in the future, or to receive nonfunctional currency (or an amount 
determined with reference thereto) in the future with respect to the 
sale of property used or held for sale in the ordinary course of the 
taxpayer's business, or the performance of a service (or services), in 
the future. Notwithstanding the preceding sentence, a contract to buy or 
sell stock shall be considered an executory contract. (Thus, for 
example, a contract to sell stock of an affiliate is an executory 
contract for this purpose.) On the accrual date, such agreement ceases 
to be considered an executory contract and is treated as an account 
payable or receivable.
    (B) Exceptions. An executory contract does not include a section 988 
transaction. For example, a forward contract to purchase nonfunctional 
currency is not an executory contract. An executory contract also does 
not include a transaction described in paragraph (c) of this section.
    (C) Effective date for contracts to buy or sell stock. That part of 
paragraph (b)(2)(ii)(A) of this section which provides that a contract 
to buy or sell stock shall be considered an executory contract applies 
to contracts to buy or sell stock entered into on or after March 17, 
1992.
    (iii) Hedge--(A) In general. For purposes of this paragraph (b), the 
term hedge means a deposit of nonfunctional currency in a hedging 
account (as defined paragraph (b)(3)(iii)(D) of this section), a forward 
or futures contract described in Sec. 1.988-1(a)(1)(ii) and (2)(iii), or 
combination thereof, which reduces the risk of exchange rate 
fluctuations by reference to the taxpayer's functional currency with 
respect to nonfunctional currency payments made or received under an 
executory contract. The term hedge also includes an option contract 
described in Sec. 1.988-1(a)(1)(ii) and (2)(iii), but only if the 
option's expiration date is on or before the accrual date. The premium 
paid for an option that lapses shall be integrated with the executory 
contract.
    (B) Special rule for series of hedges. A series of hedges as defined 
in paragraph (b)(3)(iii)(A) of this section shall be considered a hedge 
if the executory contract is hedged in whole or in part throughout the 
period beginning with the date the hedge is identified in accordance 
with paragraph (b)(3)(i) of this section and ending on or after the 
accrual date. A taxpayer that enters into a series of hedges will be 
deemed to have satisfied the preceding sentence if the hedge that 
succeeds a hedge that has been terminated is entered into no later than 
the business day following such termination.

[[Page 613]]

    (C) Special rules for historical rate rollovers--(1) Definition. A 
historical rate rollover is an extension of the maturity date of a 
forward contract where the new forward rate is adjusted on the rollover 
date to reflect the taxpayer's gain or loss on the contract as of the 
rollover date plus the time value of such gain or loss through the new 
maturity date.
    (2) Certain historical rate rollovers considered a hedge. A 
historical rate rollover is considered a hedge if the rollover date is 
before the accrual date.
    (3) Treatment of time value component of certain historical rate 
rollovers that are hedges. Interest income or expense determined under 
Sec. 1.988-2(d)(2)(v) with respect to a historical rate rollover shall 
be considered part of a hedge if the period beginning on the first date 
a hedging contract is rolled over and ending on the date payment is made 
or received under the executory contract does not exceed 183 days. Such 
interest income or expense shall not be recognized and shall be an 
adjustment to the income from, or expense of, the services performed or 
received under the executory contract, or to the amount realized or 
basis of the property sold or purchased under the executory contract. 
For the treatment of such interest income or expense that is not 
considered part of a hedge, see Sec. 1.988-2(d)(2)(v).
    (D) Special rules regarding deposits of nonfunctional currency in a 
hedging account. A hedging account is an account with a bank or other 
financial institution used exclusively for deposits of nonfunctional 
currency used to hedge executory contracts. For purposes of determining 
the basis of units in such account that comprise the hedge, only those 
units in the account as of the accrual date shall be taken into 
consideration. A taxpayer may adopt any reasonable convention 
(consistently applied to all hedging accounts) to determine which units 
comprise the hedge as of the accrual date and the basis of the units as 
of such date.
    (E) Interest income on deposit of nonfunctional currency in a 
hedging account. Interest income on a deposit of nonfunctional currency 
in a hedging account may be taken into account for purposes of 
determining the amount of a hedge if such interest is accrued on or 
before the accrual date. However, such interest income shall be included 
in income as provided in section 61. For example, if a taxpayer with the 
dollar as its functional currency enters into an executory contract for 
the purchase and delivery of a machine in one year for 100 British 
pounds (<brit-pound>), and on such date deposits <brit-pound>90.91 in a 
properly identified bank account that bears interest at the rate of 10%, 
the interest that accrues prior to the accrual date shall be included in 
income and may be considered a hedge.
    (iv) Accrual date. The accrual date is the date when the item of 
income or expense (including a capital expenditure) that relates to an 
executory contract is required to be accrued under the taxpayer's method 
of accounting.
    (v) Payment date. The payment date is the date when payment is made 
or received with respect to an executory contract or the subsequent 
corresponding account payable or receivable.
    (3) Identification rules--(i) Identification by the taxpayer. A 
taxpayer must establish a record and before the close of the date the 
hedge is entered into, the taxpayer must enter into the record a clear 
description of the executory contract and the hedge and indicate that 
the transaction is being identified in accordance with paragraph (b)(3) 
of this section.
    (ii) Identification by the Commissioner. If a taxpayer enters into 
an executory contract and a hedge but fails to satisfy one or more of 
the requirements of paragraph (b) of this section and, based on the 
facts and circumstances, the Commissioner concludes that the executory 
contract in substance is hedged, then the Commissioner may apply the 
provisions of paragraph (b) of this section as if the taxpayer had 
satisfied all of the requirements therein, and may make appropriate 
adjustments. The Commissioner may apply the provisions of paragraph (b) 
of this section regardless of whether the executory contract and the 
hedge are held by the same taxpayer.
    (4) Effect of hedged executory contract--(i) In general. If a 
taxpayer enters into a hedged executory contract, amounts paid or 
received under the hedge by the taxpayer are treated as

[[Page 614]]

paid or received by the taxpayer under the executory contract, or any 
subsequent account payable or receivable, or that portion to which the 
hedge relates. Also, the taxpayer recognizes no exchange gain or loss on 
the hedge. If an executory contract, on the accrual date, becomes an 
account payable or receivable, the taxpayer recognizes no exchange gain 
or loss on such payable or receivable for the period covered by the 
hedge.
    (ii) Partially hedged executory contracts. The effect of integrating 
an executory contract and a hedge that partially hedges such contract is 
to treat the amounts paid or received under the hedge as paid or 
received under the portion of the executory contract being hedged, or 
any subsequent account payable or receivable. The income or expense of 
services performed or received under the executory contract, or the 
amount realized or basis of property sold or purchased under the 
executory contract, that is attributable to that portion of the 
executory contract that is not hedged shall be translated into 
functional currency on the accrual date. Exchange gain or loss shall be 
realized when payment is made or received with respect to any payable or 
receivable arising on the accrual date with respect to such unhedged 
amount.
    (iii) Disposition of a hedge or executory contract prior to the 
accrual date--(A) In general. If a taxpayer identifies an executory 
contract as part of a hedged executory contract as defined in paragraph 
(b)(2) of this section, and disposes of (or otherwise terminates) the 
executory contract prior to the accrual date, the hedge shall be treated 
as sold for its fair market value on the date the executory contract is 
disposed of and any gain or loss shall be realized and recognized on 
such date. Such gain or loss shall be an adjustment to the amount 
received or expended with respect to the disposition or termination, if 
any. The spot rate on the date the hedge is treated as sold shall be 
used to determine subsequent exchange gain or loss on the hedge. If a 
taxpayer identifies a hedge as part of a hedged executory contract as 
defined in paragraph (b)(2) of this section, and disposes of the hedge 
prior to the accrual date, any gain or loss realized on such disposition 
shall not be recognized and shall be an adjustment to the income from, 
or expense of, the services performed or received under the executory 
contract, or to the amount realized or basis of the property sold or 
purchased under the executory contract.
    (B) Certain events in a series of hedges treated as a termination of 
the hedged executory contract. If the rules of paragraph (b)(2)(iii)(B) 
of this section are not satisfied, the hedged executory contract shall 
be terminated and the provisions of paragraph (b)(4)(iii)(A) of this 
section shall apply to any gain or loss previously realized with respect 
to such hedge. Any subsequent hedging contracts entered into to reduce 
the risk of exchange rate movements with respect to such executory 
contract shall not be considered a hedge as defined in paragraph 
(b)(2)(iii) of this section.
    (C) Executory contracts between related persons. If an executory 
contract is between related persons as defined in sections 267(b) and 
707(b), and the taxpayer disposes of the hedge or terminates the 
executory contract prior to the accrual date, the Commissioner may 
redetermine the timing, source, and character of gain or loss from the 
hedge or the executory contract if he determines that a significant 
purpose for disposing of the hedge or terminating the executory contract 
prior to the accrual date was to affect the timing, source, or character 
of income, gain, expense, or loss for Federal income tax purposes.
    (iv) Disposition of a hedge on or after the accrual date. If a 
taxpayer identifies a hedge as part of a hedged executory contract as 
defined in paragraph (b)(2) of this section, and disposes of the hedge 
on or after the accrual date, no gain or loss is recognized on the hedge 
and the booking date as defined in Sec. 1.988-2(c)(2) of the payable or 
receivable for purposes of computing exchange gain or loss shall be the 
date such hedge is disposed of. See Example 3 of paragraph (b)(4)(iv) of 
this section.
    (v) Sections 263(g), 1092, and 1256 do not apply. Sections 263(g), 
1092, and 1256 do not apply with respect to an executory contract or 
hedge which comprise a hedged executory contract as defined

[[Page 615]]

in paragraph (b)(2) of this section. However, sections 263(g), 1092 and 
1256 may apply to the hedged executory contract if such transaction is 
part of a straddle.
    (vi) Examples. The principles set forth in paragraph (b) of this 
section are illustrated in the following examples. The examples assume 
that K is an accrual method, calendar year U.S. corporation with the 
dollar as its functional currency.

    Example 1. (i) On January 1, 1992, K enters into a contract with 
JPF, a Swiss machine manufacturer, to pay 500,000 Swiss francs for 
delivery of a machine on June 1, 1993. Also on January 1, 1992, K enters 
into a foreign currency forward agreement to purchase 500,000 Swiss 
francs for $250,000 for delivery on June 1, 1993. K properly identifies 
the executory contract and the hedge in accordance with paragraph 
(b)(3)(i) of this section. On June 1, 1993, K takes delivery of the 
500,000 Swiss francs (in exchange for $250,000) under the forward 
contract and makes payment of 500,000 Swiss francs to JPF in exchange 
for the machine. Assume that the accrual date is June 1, 1993.
    (ii) Under paragraph (b)(1) of this section, the hedge is integrated 
with the executory contract. Therefore, K is deemed to have paid 
$250,000 for the machine and there is no exchange gain or loss on the 
foreign currency forward contract. K's basis in the machine is $250,000. 
Section 1256 does not apply to the forward contract.
    Example 2. (i) On January 1, 1992, K enters into a contract with S, 
a Swiss machine manufacturer, to pay 500,000 Swiss francs for delivery 
of a machine on June 1, 1993. Under the contract, K is not obligated to 
pay for the machine until September 1, 1993. On February 1, 1992, K 
enters into a foreign currency forward agreement to purchase 500,000 
Swiss francs for $250,000 for delivery on September 1, 1993. K properly 
identifies the executory contract and the hedge in accordance with 
paragraph (b)(3) of this section. On June 1, 1993, K takes delivery of 
machine. Assume that under K's method of accounting the delivery date is 
the accrual date. On September 1, 1993, K takes delivery of the 500,000 
Swiss francs (in exchange for $250,000) under the forward contract and 
makes payment of 500,000 Swiss francs to S.
    (ii) Under paragraph (b)(1) of this section, the hedge is integrated 
with the executory contract. Therefore K is deemed to have paid $250,000 
for the machine and there is no exchange gain or loss on the foreign 
currency forward contract. Thus K's basis in the machine is $250,000. In 
addition, no exchange gain or loss is recognized on the payable in 
existence from June 1, 1993, to September 1, 1993. Section 1256 does not 
apply to the forward contract.
    Example 3. The facts are the same as in Example 2 except that K 
disposed of the forward contract on August 1, 1993 for $10,000. Pursuant 
to paragraph (b)(4)(iv) of this section, K does not recognize the 
$10,000 gain. K's basis in the machine is $250,000 (the amount fixed by 
the forward contract), regardless of the amount in dollars that K 
actually pays to acquire the Sf500,000 when K pays for the machine. K 
has a payable with a booking date of August 1, 1993, payable on 
September 1, 1993 for 500,000 Swiss francs. Thus, K will realize 
exchange gain or loss on the difference between the amount booked on 
August 1, 1993 and the amount paid on September 1, 1993 under 
Sec. 1.988-2(c).
    Example 4. (i) On January 1, 1992, K enters into a contract with S, 
a Swiss machine repair firm, to pay 500,000 Swiss francs for repairs to 
be performed on June 1, 1992. Under the contract, K is not obligated to 
pay for the repairs until September 1, 1992. On February 1, 1992, K 
enters into a foreign currency forward agreement to purchase 500,000 
Swiss francs for $250,000 for delivery on August 1, 1992. K properly 
identifies the executory contract and the hedge in accordance with 
paragraph (b)(3) of this section. On June 1, 1992, S performs the repair 
services. Assume that under K's method of accounting this date is the 
accrual date. On August 1, 1992, K takes delivery of the 500,000 Swiss 
francs (in exchange for $250,000) under the forward contract. On the 
same day, K deposits the Sf500,000 in a separate account with a bank and 
properly identifies the transaction as a continuation of the hedged 
executory contract. On September 1, 1992, K makes payment of the 
Sf500,000 in the account to S.
    (ii) Under paragraph (b)(1) of this section, the hedge is integrated 
with the executory contract. Therefore K is deemed to have paid $250,000 
for the services and there is no exchange gain or loss on the foreign 
currency forward contract or on the disposition of Sf500,000 in the 
account. Any interest on the Swiss francs in the account is included in 
income but is not considered part of the hedge (because the amount paid 
for the services must be set on or before the accrual date). In 
addition, no exchange gain or loss is recognized on the payable in 
existence from June 1, 1992, to September 1, 1992. Section 1256 does not 
apply to the forward contract.
    Example 5. (i) On January 1, 1992, K enters into a contract with S, 
a Swiss machine manufacturer, to pay 500,000 Swiss francs for delivery 
of a machine on June 1, 1993. Under the contract, K is not obligated to 
pay for the machine until September 1, 1993. On February 1, 1992, K 
enters into a foreign currency forward agreement to purchase 250,000 
Swiss francs for $125,000 for delivery on September 1, 1993. K properly 
identifies the executory contract and the hedge in accordance

[[Page 616]]

with paragraph (b)(3) of this section. On June 1, 1993, K takes delivery 
of the machine. Assume that under K's method of accounting the delivery 
date is the accrual date. Assume further that the exchange rate is Sf1 = 
$.50 on June 1, 1993. On August 30, 1993, K purchases Sf250,000 for 
$135,000. On September 1, 1993, K takes delivery of the 250,000 Swiss 
francs (in exchange for $125,000) under the forward contract and makes 
payment of 500,000 Swiss francs (the Sf250,000 received under the 
contract plus the Sf250,000 purchased on August 30, 1993) to S. Assume 
the spot rate on September 1, 1993, is 1 Sf = $.5420 (Sf250,000 equal 
$135,500).
    (ii) Under paragraph (b)(1) of this section, the partial hedge is 
integrated with the executory contract. K is deemed to have paid 
$250,000 for the machine [$125,000 on the hedged portion of the 
Sf500,000 and $125,000 ($.50, the spot rate on June 1, 1993, times 
Sf250,000) on the unhedged portion of the Sf500,000]. K's basis in the 
machine therefore is $250,000. K recognizes no exchange gain or loss on 
the foreign currency forward contract but K will realize exchange gain 
of $500 on the disposition of the Sf250,000 purchased on August 30, 1993 
under Sec. 1.988-2(a). In addition, exchange loss is realized on the 
unhedged portion of the payable in existence from June 1, 1993, to 
September 1, 1993. Thus, K will realize exchange loss of $10,500 
($125,000 booked less $135,500 paid) under Sec. 1.988-2(c) on the 
payable. Section 1256 does not apply to the forward contract.
    Example 6. (i) On January 1, 1990, K enters into a contract with S, 
a Swiss steel manufacturer, to buy steel for 1,000,000 Swiss francs (Sf) 
for delivery and payment on December 31, 1990. On January 1, 1990, the 
spot rate is Sf1 = $.50, the U.S. dollar interest rate is 10% compounded 
annually, and the Swiss franc rate is 5% compounded annually. Under K's 
method of accounting, the delivery date is the accrual date.
    (ii) Assume that on January 1, 1990, K enters into a foreign 
currency forward contract to buy Sf1,000,000 for $523,800 for delivery 
on December 31, 1990. K properly identifies the executory contract and 
the hedge in accordance with paragraph (b)(3) of this section. Pursuant 
to paragraph (b)(2)(iii) of this section, the forward contract 
constitutes a hedge. Assuming that the requirements of paragraph 
(b)(2)(i) of this section are satisfied, the executory contract to buy 
steel and the forward contract are integrated under paragraph (b)(1) of 
this section. Thus, K is deemed to have paid $523,800 for the steel and 
will have a basis in the steel of $523,800. No gain or loss is realized 
with respect to the forward contract and section 1256 does not apply to 
such contract.
    (iii) Assume instead that on January 1, 1990, K enters into a 
foreign currency forward contract to buy Sf1,000,000 for $512,200 for 
delivery on July 1, 1990. K properly identifies the executory contract 
and the hedge in accordance with paragraph (b)(3) of this section. On 
July 1, 1990, when the spot rate is Sf1 = $.53, K cancels the forward 
contract in exchange for $17,800 ($530,000-$512,200). On July 1, 1990, K 
enters into a second forward agreement to buy Sf1,000,000 for $542,900 
for delivery on December 31, 1990. K properly identifies the second 
forward agreement as a hedge in accordance with paragraph (b)(3) of this 
section. Pursuant to paragraph (b)(2)(iii) of this section, the forward 
contract entered into on January 1, 1990, and the forward contract 
entered into on July 1, 1990, constitute a hedge. Assuming that the 
requirements of paragraph (b)(2)(i) of this section are satisfied, the 
executory contract to buy steel and the forward agreements are 
integrated under paragraph (b)(1) of this section. Thus, K is deemed to 
have paid $525,100 for the steel (the forward price in the second 
forward agreement of $542,900 less the gain on the first forward 
agreement of $17,800) and will have a basis in the steel of $525,100. No 
gain is realized with respect to the forward contracts and section 1256 
does not apply to such contracts.
    (iv) Assume instead that on January 1, 1990, K enters into a foreign 
currency forward contract to buy Sf1,000,000 for $512,200 for delivery 
on July 1, 1990. K properly identifies the executory contract and the 
hedge in accordance with paragraph (b)(3) of this section. On July 1, 
1990, when the spot rate is Sf1 = $.53, K enters into a historical rate 
rollover of its $17,800 gain ($530,000-$512,200) on the forward 
agreement. Thus, K enters into a second foreign currency forward 
agreement to buy Sf1,000,000 for $524,210 for delivery on December 31, 
1990. (The forward price of $524,210 is the market forward price on July 
1, 1990, for the purchase of Sf1,000,000 for delivery on December 31, 
1990, of $542,900 less the $17,800 gain on January 1, 1990, contract and 
less the time value of such gain of $890.) K properly identifies the 
second forward agreement as a hedge in accordance with paragraph (b)(3) 
of this section. On December 31, 1990, when the spot rate is Sf1 = $.54, 
K takes delivery of the Sf1,000,000 (in exchange for $524,210) and 
purchases the steel for Sf1,000,000. Pursuant to paragraph (b)(2)(iii) 
of this section, the forward contract entered into on January 1, 1990, 
and the forward contract entered into on July 1, 1990, which 
incorporates the rollover of K's gain on the January 1, 1990, contract, 
constitute a hedge. Assuming that the requirements of paragraph 
(b)(2)(i) of this section are satisfied, the executory contract to buy 
steel and the forward agreements are integrated under paragraph (b)(1) 
of this section. Because the period from the rollover date to the date 
payment is made under the executory contract does not exceed 183 days, 
the $890 of interest income is considered part of the hedge and is not 
recognized. Thus, K is deemed to

[[Page 617]]

have paid $524,210 for the steel and will have a basis in the steel of 
$524,210. No gain is realized with respect to the forward contracts and 
section 1256 does not apply to such contracts.
    (v) Assume instead that on January 1, 1990, K purchases Sf952,380.95 
(the present value of Sf1,000,000 to be paid on December 31, 1990) for 
$476,190.48 and on the same day deposits the Swiss francs in a separate 
bank account that bears interest at a rate of 5%, compounded annually. K 
properly identifies the transaction as a hedged executory contract. Over 
the period beginning January 1, 1990, and ending December 31, 1990, K 
receives Sf47,619.05 in interest on the account that is included in 
income and that has a basis of $25,714.29. (Assume that under 
Sec. 1.988-2(b)(1), K uses the spot rate of Sf1 = $.54 to translate the 
interest income). On December 31, 1990, K makes payment of the 
Sf1,000,000 principal and accrued interest in the account to S. Pursuant 
to paragraph (b)(2)(iii) of this section, the principal in the bank 
account and the interest constitute a hedge. Under paragraph (b)(1) of 
this section, the hedge is integrated with the executory contract. 
Therefore K is deemed to have paid $501,904.77 (the basis of the 
principal deposited plus the basis of the interest) for the steel and 
there is no exchange gain or loss on the disposition of the Sf1,000,000. 
K's basis in the steel therefore is $501,904.77.

    (5) References to this paragraph (b). If the rules of this paragraph 
(b) are referred to in another paragraph of this section (e.g., 
paragraph (c) of this section), then the rules of this paragraph (b) 
shall be applied for purposes of such other paragraph by substituting 
terms appropriate for such other paragraph. For example, paragraph 
(c)(2) of this section refers to the identification rules of paragraph 
(b)(3) of this section. Accordingly, for purposes of paragraph (c)(2), 
the rules of paragraph (b)(3) will be applied by substituting the term 
``stock or security'' for ``executory contract''.
    (c) Hedges of period between trade date and settlement date on 
purchase or sale of publicly traded stock or security. If a taxpayer 
purchases or sells stocks or securities which are traded on an 
established securities market and--
    (1) Hedges all or part of such purchase or sale for any part of the 
period beginning on the trade date and ending on the settlement date; 
and
    (2) Identifies the hedge and the underlying stock or securities as 
an integrated transaction under the rules of paragraph (b)(3) of this 
section;

then any gain or loss on the hedge shall be an adjustment to the amount 
realized or the adjusted basis of the stock or securities sold or 
purchased (and shall not be taken into account as exchange gain or 
loss). The term hedge means a deposit of nonfunctional currency in a 
hedging account (within the meaning of paragraph (b)(2)(iii)(D) of this 
section), or a forward or futures contract described in Sec. 1.988-
1(a)(1)(ii) and (2)(iii), or combination thereof, which reduces the risk 
of exchange rate fluctuations for any portion of the period beginning on 
the trade date and ending on the settlement date. The provisions of 
paragraphs (b)(2)(i)(D) through (G), and (b)(2)(iii)(D) and (E) of this 
section shall apply. Sections 263(g), 1092, and 1256 do not apply with 
respect to stock or securities and a hedge which are subject to this 
paragraph (c).
    (d) [Reserved]
    (e) Advance rulings regarding net hedging and anticipatory hedging 
systems. In his sole discretion, the Commissioner may issue an advance 
ruling addressing the income tax consequences of a taxpayer's system of 
hedging either its net nonfunctional currency exposure or anticipated 
nonfunctional currency exposure. The ruling may address the character, 
source, and timing of both the section 988 transaction(s) making up the 
hedge and the underlying transactions being hedged. The procedures for 
obtaining a ruling shall be governed by such pertinent revenue 
procedures and revenue rulings as the Commissioner may provide. The 
Commissioner will not issue a ruling regarding hedges of a taxpayer's 
investment in a foreign subsidiary.
    (f) [Reserved]
    (g) General effective date. Except as otherwise provided in this 
section, the rules of this section shall apply to qualified hedging 
transactions, hedged executory contracts and transactions described in 
paragraph (c) of this section entered into on or after September 21, 
1989. This section shall apply even if the transaction being hedged 
(e.g., the debt instrument) was entered into or acquired prior to such 
date. The effective date regarding advance rulings for

[[Page 618]]

net and anticipatory hedging shall be governed by such revenue 
procedures that the Commissioner may publish.

[T.D. 8400, 57 FR 9199, Mar. 17, 1992]


<R05>
Sec. 1.989(a)-1  Definition of a qualified business unit.

    (a) Applicability--(1) In general. This section provides rules 
relating to the definition of the term ``qualified business unit'' (QBU) 
within the meaning of section 989.
    (2) Effective date. These rules shall apply to taxable years 
beginning after December 31, 1986. However, any person may apply on a 
consistent basis Sec. 1.989(a)-1T (c) of the Temporary Income Tax 
Regulations in lieu of Sec. 1.989(a)-1 (c) to all taxable years 
beginning after December 31, 1986, and on or before February 5, 1990. 
For the text of the temporary regulation, see 53 FR 20612 (June 8, 
1988).
    (b) Definition of a qualified business unit--(1) In general. A QBU 
is any separate and clearly identified unit of a trade or business of a 
taxpayer provided that separate books and records are maintained.
    (2) Application of the QBU definition--(i) Persons. A corporation is 
QBU. An individual is not a QBU. A partnership, trust, or estate is a 
QBU of a partner or beneficiary.
    (ii) Activities. Activities of a corporation, partnership, trust, 
estate, or individual qualify as a QBU if--
    (A) The activities constitute a trade or business; and
    (B) A separate set of books and records is maintained with respect 
to the activities.
    (3) Special rule. Any activity (wherever conducted and regardless of 
its frequency) that produces income or loss that is, or is treated as, 
effectively connected with the conduct of a trade or business within the 
United States shall be treated as a separate QBU, provided the books and 
records requirement of paragraph (d)(2) of this section is satisfied.
    (c) Trade or business. The determination as to whether activities 
constitute a trade or business is ultimately dependent upon an 
examination of all the facts and circumstances. Generally, a trade or 
business for purposes of section 989(a) is a specific unified group of 
activities that constitutes (or could constitute) an independent 
economic enterprise carried on for profit, the expenses related to which 
are deductible under section 162 or 212 (other than that part of section 
212 dealing with expenses incurred in connection with taxes). To 
constitute a trade or business, a group of activities must ordinarily 
include every operation which forms a part of, or a step in, a process 
by which an enterprise may earn income or profit. Such group of 
activities must ordinarily include the collection of income and the 
payment of expenses. It is not necessary that the activities carried out 
by a QBU constitute a different trade or business from those carried out 
by other QBUs of the taxpayer. A vertical, functional, or geographic 
division of the same trade or business may be a trade or business for 
this purpose provided that the activities otherwise qualify as trade or 
business under this paragraph (c). However, activities that are merely 
ancillary to a trade or business will not constitute a trade or business 
under this paragraph (c). Activities of an individual as an employee are 
not considered by themselves to constitute a trade or business under 
this paragraph (c).
    (d) Separate books and records--(1) General rule. Except as provided 
in paragraph (d)(2) of this section, a separate set of books and records 
shall include books of original entry and ledger accounts, both general 
and subsidiary, or similar records. For example, in the case of a 
taxpayer using the cash receipts and disbursements method of accounting, 
the books of original entry include a cash receipts and disbursements 
journal where each receipt and each disbursement is recorded. Similarly, 
in the case of a taxpayer using an accrual method of accounting, the 
books of original entry include a journal to record sales (accounts 
receivable) and a journal to record expenses incurred (accounts 
payable). In general, a journal represents a chronological account of 
all transactions entered into by an entity for an accounting period. A 
ledger account, on the other hand, chronicles the impact during an 
accounting period of the specific transactions recorded in the journal 
for that period upon the various items

[[Page 619]]

shown on the entity's balance sheet (i.e., assets, liabilities, and 
capital accounts) and income statement (i.e., revenues and expenses).
    (2) Special rule. For purposes of paragraph (b)(3) of this section, 
books and records include books and records used to determine income or 
loss that is, or is treated as, effectively connected with the conduct 
of a trade or business within the United States.
    (e) Examples. The provisions of this section may be illustrated by 
the following examples:

    Example 1. Corporation X is a domestic corporation. Corporation X 
manufactures widgets in the U.S. for export. Corporation X sells widgets 
in the United Kingdom through a branch office in London. The London 
office has its own employees and solicits and processes orders. 
Corporation X maintains in the U.S. a separate set of books and records 
for all transactions conducted by the London office. Corporation X is a 
QBU under paragraph (b)(2)(i) of this section because of its corporate 
status. The London branch office is a QBU under paragraph (b)(2)(ii) of 
this section because (1) the sale of widgets is a trade or business as 
defined in paragraph (c) of this section; and (2) a complete and 
separate set of books and records (as described in paragraph (d) of this 
section) is maintained with respect to its sales operations.
    Example 2. A domestic corporation incorporates a wholly-owned 
subsidiary in Switzerland. The domestic corporation is a manufacturer 
that markets its product abroad primarily through the Swiss subsidiary. 
To facilitate sales of the parent's product in Europe, the Swiss 
subsidiary has branch offices in France and West Germany that are 
responsible for all marketing operations in those countries. Each branch 
has its own employees, solicits and processes orders, and maintains a 
separate set of books and records. The domestic corporation and the 
Swiss subsidiary are both QBUs under paragraph (b)(2)(i) of this section 
because of their corporate status. The French and West German branches 
are QBUs of the Swiss subsidiary. They satisfy paragraph (b)(2)(ii) 
because each constitutes a trade or business (as defined in paragraph 
(c) of this section) and because separate sets of books and records (as 
described in paragraph (d) of this section) of their respective 
operations is maintained. Each branch is considered to have a trade or 
business although each is a geographical division of the same trade or 
business.
    Example 3. W is a domestic corporation that manufactures product X 
in the United States for sale worldwide. All of W's sales functions are 
conducted exclusively in the United States. W employs individual Q to 
work in France. Q's sole function is to act as a courier to deliver 
sales documents to customers in France. With respect to Q's activities 
in France, a separate set of books and records as described in paragraph 
(d) is maintained. Under paragraph (c) of this section, Q's activities 
in France do not constitute a QBU since they are merely ancillary to W's 
manufacturing and selling business. Q is not considered to have a QBU 
because an individual's activities as an employee are not considered to 
constitute a trade or business of the individual under paragraph (c).
    Example 4. The facts are the same as in example (3) except that the 
courier function is the sole activity of a wholly-owned French 
subsidiary of W. Under paragraph (b)(2)(i) of this section, the French 
subsidiary is considered to be a QBU.
    Example 5. A corporation incorporated in the Netherlands is a 
subsidiary of a domestic corporation and a holding company for the stock 
of one or more subsidiaries incorporated in other countries. The Dutch 
corporation's activities are limited to paying its directors and its 
administrative expenses, receiving capital contributions from its United 
States parent corporation, contributing capital to its subsidiaries, 
receiving dividend distributions from its subsidiaries, and distributing 
dividends to its domestic parent corporation. Under paragraph (b)(2)(i) 
of this section, the Netherlands corporation is considered to be a QBU.
    Example 6. Taxpayer A, an individual resident of the United States, 
is engaged in a trade or business wholly unrelated to any type of 
investment activity. A also maintains a portfolio of foreign currency-
denominated investments through a foreign broker. The broker is 
responsible for all activities necessary to the management of A's 
investments and maintains books and records as described in paragraph 
(d) of this section, with respect to all investment activities of A. A's 
investment activities qualify as a QBU under paragraph (b)(2)(ii) of 
this section to the extent the activities engaged in by A generate 
expenses that are deductible under section 212 (other than that part of 
section 212 dealing with expenses incurred in connection with taxes).
    Example 7. Taxpayer A, an individual resident of the United States, 
is the sole shareholder of foreign corporation (FC) whose activities are 
limited to trading in stocks and securities. FC is a QBU under paragraph 
(b)(2)(i) of this section.
    Example 8. Taxpayer A, an individual resident of the United States, 
markets and sells in Spain and in the United States various products 
produced by other United States manufacturers. A has an office and 
employs a salesman to manage A's activities in Spain, maintains a 
separate set of books and records with respect to his activities in 
Spain, and is engaged in a trade or business

[[Page 620]]

as defined in paragraph (c) of this section. Therefore, under paragraph 
(b)(2)(ii) of this section, the activities of A in Spain are considered 
to be a QBU.
    Example 9. Foreign corporation FX is incorporated in Mexico and is 
wholly owned by a domestic corporation. The domestic corporation elects 
to treat FX as a domestic corporation under section 1504(d). FX operates 
entirely in Mexico and maintains a separate set of books and records 
with respect to its activities in Mexico. FX is a QBU under paragraph 
(b)(2)(i) of this section. The activities of FX in Mexico also 
constitute a QBU under paragraph (b)(2)(ii) of this section.
    Example 10. F, a foreign corporation, computes a gain of $100 from 
the disposition of a United States real property interest (as defined in 
section 897(c)). The gain is taken into account as if F were engaged in 
a trade or business in the United States and as if such gain were 
effectively connected with such trade or business. F is a QBU under 
paragraph (b)(2)(i) of this section because of its corporate status. F's 
disposition activity constitutes a separate QBU under paragraph (b)(3) 
of this section.

[T.D. 8279, 55 FR 284, Jan. 4, 1990]


<R05>
Sec. 1.989(b)-1  Definition of weighted average exchange rate.

    For purposes of section 989(b)(3) and (4), the term ``weighted 
average exchange rate'' means the simple average of the daily exchange 
rates (determined by reference to a qualified source of exchange rates 
within the meaning of Sec. 1.964-1(d)(5)), excluding weekends, holidays 
and any other nonbusiness days for the taxable year.

[T.D. 8263, 54 FR 38664, Sept. 20, 1989. Redesignated by T.D. 8367, 56 
FR 48437, Sept. 25, 1991; 57 FR 6060, Feb. 18, 1992]


<R05>
Sec. 1.989(c)-1  Transition rules for certain branches of United States persons using a net worth method of accounting for taxable years beginning before 
          January 1, 1987.

    (a) Applicability--(1) In general. This section applies to qualified 
business units (QBU) branches of United States persons, whose functional 
currency (as defined in section 985 of the Code and regulations issued 
thereunder) is other than the United States dollar (dollar) and that 
used a net worth method of accounting for their last taxable year 
beginning before January 1, 1987. Generally, a net worth method of 
accounting is any method of accounting under which the taxpayer 
calculates the taxable income of a QBU branch based on the net change in 
the dollar value of the QBU branch's equity over the course of a taxable 
year, taking into account any remittance made during the year. QBU 
branch equity is the excess of QBU branch assets over QBU branch 
liabilities. For all taxable years beginning after December 31, 1986, 
such QBU branches must use the profit and loss method of accounting as 
described in section 987, except to the extent otherwise provided in 
regulations under section 985 or any other provision of the Code.
    (2) Insolvent QBU branches. A taxpayer may apply the principles of 
this section to a QBU branch that used a net worth method of accounting 
for its last taxable year beginning before January 1, 1987, whose $E 
pool (as defined in paragraph (d)(3)(i) of this section) is negative. 
For taxable years beginning on or after October 25, 1991, the principles 
of this section shall apply to insolvent QBU branches.
    (b) General rules. For the general rules, see Sec. 1.987-5(b).
    (c) Determining the pool(s) from which a remittance is made. To 
determine from which pool(s) a remittance is made, see Sec. 1.987-5(c).
    (d) Calculation of section 987 gain or loss--(1) In general. See 
Sec. 1.987-5(d)(1) for rules to make this calculation.
    (2) Step 1--Calculate the amount of the functional currency pools. 
For calculation of the amount of the functional currency pools, see 
Sec. 1.987-5(d)(2).
    (3) Step 2--Calculate the dollar basis pools--(i) Dollar basis of 
the EQ pool--(A) Beginning dollar basis. The beginning dollar basis of 
the EQ pool (hereinafter referred to as the $E pool) equals the final 
net worth of the QBU branch. Final net worth of the QBU branch equals 
the QBU branch's equity value (assets less liabilities) measured in 
dollars at the end of the taxpayer's last taxable year beginning before 
January 1, 1987, determined on the basis of the QBU branch's books and 
records as adjusted according to United States tax principles.
    (B) Adjusting the $E pool. For adjustments to be made to the $E 
pool, see Sec. 1.987-5(d)(3)(i)(B).
    (ii) Dollar basis of the post-86 profits pool. To calculate the 
dollar basis of

[[Page 621]]

the post-86 profits pool, see Sec. 1.987-5(d)(3)(ii).
    (iii) Dollar basis of the equity pool. To calculate the dollar basis 
of the equity pool, see Sec. 1.987-5(d)(3)(iii).
    (4) Step 3--Calculation of the dollar basis of a remittance. To 
calculate the dollar basis of the EQ remitted, see Sec. 1.987-5(d)(4).
    (5) Step 4--Calculation of the section 987 gain or loss on a 
remittance. To calculate 987 gain or loss determined on a remittance, 
see Sec. 1.987-5(d)(5).
    (e) Functional currency adjusted basis of QBU branch assets acquired 
in taxable years beginning before January 1, 1987. To determine the 
functional currency adjusted basis of QBU branch assets acquired in 
taxable years beginning before January 1, 1987, see Sec. 1.987-5(e).
    (f) Functional currency amount of QBU branch liabilities acquired in 
taxable years beginning before January 1, 1987. To determine the 
functional currency amount of QBU branch liabilities acquired in taxable 
years beginning before January 1, 1987, see Sec. 1.987-5(f).

[T.D. 8367, 56 FR 48437, Sept. 25, 1991]

                Domestic International Sales Corporations


<R05>
Sec. 1.991-1   Taxation of a domestic international sales corporation.

    (a) In general. A corporation which is a DISC for a taxable year is 
not subject to any tax imposed by subtitle A of the Code (sections 1 
through 1564) for such taxable year, except for the tax imposed by 
chapter 5 thereof (sections 1491 through 1494) on certain transfers to 
avoid tax. Thus, for example, a corporation which is a DISC for a 
taxable year is not subject for such year to the corporate income tax 
(section 11), the minimum tax on tax preferences (sections 56 through 
58), or the accumulated earnings tax (sections 531 through 537). A DISC 
is liable for the payment of all taxes payable by corporations under 
other subtitles of the Code, such as, for example, income taxes withheld 
at the source and other employment taxes under subtitle C and the 
interest equalization tax and other miscellaneous excise taxes imposed 
by subtitle D. In addition, a DISC is subject to the provisions of 
chapter 3 of subtitle A (including section 1461), relating to 
withholding of tax on nonresident aliens and foreign corporations and 
tax-free covenant bonds. See Sec. 1.992-1 for the definition of the term 
``DISC.''
    (b) Determination of taxable income--(1) In general. Although a DISC 
is not subject to tax under subtitle A of the Code (other than chapter 5 
thereof), a DISC's taxable income shall be determined for each taxable 
year in order to determine, for example, the amount deemed distributed 
for that taxable year to its shareholders pursuant to Sec. 1.995-2. 
Except as otherwise provided in the Code and the regulations thereunder, 
the taxable income of a DISC shall be determined in the same manner as 
if the DISC were a domestic corporation which had not elected to be 
treated as a DISC. Thus, for example, a DISC chooses its method of 
depreciation, inventory method, and annual accounting period in the same 
manner as if it were a corporation which had not elected to be treated 
as a DISC. Any elections affecting the determination of taxable income 
shall be made by the DISC. Thus, as a further example, a DISC which 
makes an installment sale described in section 453 is able to avail 
itself of the benefits of section 453: Provided, The DISC complies with 
the election requirements of such section. See Sec. 1.995-2(e) and 
Sec. 1.996-8 and the regulations thereunder for rules relating to the 
application for a taxable year of a DISC of a deduction under section 
172 for a net operating loss carryback or carryover or of a capital loss 
carryback or carryover under section 1212.
    (2) Choice of method of accounting. A DISC may, generally, choose 
any method of accounting permissible under section 446(c) and the 
regulations thereunder. However, if a DISC is a member of a controlled 
group (as defined in Sec. 1.993-1(k)), the DISC may not choose a method 
of accounting which, when applied to transactions between the DISC and 
other members of the controlled group, will result in a material 
distortion of the income of the DISC or any other member of the 
controlled group. Such a material distortion of income would occur, for 
example, if a DISC chooses to use the cash method of accounting where 
the DISC acts as commission agent in a substantial volume

[[Page 622]]

of sales of property by a related corporation which uses the accrual 
method of accounting and which customarily pays commissions to the DISC 
more than 2 months after such sales. As a further example, a material 
distortion of income would occur if a DISC chooses to use the accrual 
method of accounting where the DISC leases a substantial amount of 
property from a related corporation which uses the cash method of 
accounting, if the DISC customarily accrues any portion of the rent on 
such property more than 2 months before the rent is paid. Changes in the 
method of accounting of a DISC are subject to the requirements of 
section 446(e) and the regulations thereunder.
    (3) Choice of annual accounting period--(i) In general. A DISC may 
choose its annual accounting period without regard to the annual 
accounting period of any of its stockholders. In general, changes in the 
annual accounting period of a DISC are subject to the requirements of 
section 442 and the regulations thereunder.
    (ii) Transition rule for change in taxable year in order to become a 
DISC. A corporation may, without the consent of the Commissioner, change 
its annual accounting period and adopt a new taxable year beginning on 
the first day of any month in 1972: Provided, That--
    (a) Such change has the effect of accelerating the time as of which 
such corporation can become a DISC,
    (b) The Commissioner is notified of such change by means of a 
statement filed (with the regional service center with which such 
corporation files its election to be treated as a DISC) not later than 
the end of the period during which such corporation may file an election 
to be treated as a DISC for such new taxable year, and
    (c) The short period required to effect such change is not a taxable 
year in which such corporation has a net operating loss as defined in 
section 172.

Thus, for example, if a corporation which uses the calendar year for its 
taxable year does not complete arrangements to become a DISC until May 
15, 1972, such corporation can, pursuant to this subdivision, change its 
annual accounting period and adopt a taxable year beginning on the first 
day of any month in 1972 after May. A change to a new annual accounting 
period made pursuant to this subdivision is effective only if the 
corporation which makes such change qualifies as a DISC for such new 
period. A corporation may change its annual accounting period and adopt 
a new taxable year pursuant to this subdivision without regard to the 
provisions of Sec. 1.1502-76 (relating to the taxable year of members of 
a group). A copy of the statement described in (b) of this subdivision 
shall be attached to the return of a corporation for the new taxable 
year to which such corporation changes pursuant to this subdivision. A 
corporation which changes its annual accounting period pursuant to this 
subparagraph will not be permitted under section 442 to change its 
annual accounting period at any time before 1982, except with the 
consent of the Commissioner as provided in Sec. 1.442-1(b)(1) or 
pursuant to subparagraph (4) of this paragraph.
    (4) Transition rule for change of taxable year of certain DISC's. In 
the case of a DISC all of the shares of which are held by a single 
shareholder or by members of a group who file a consolidated return, 
such DISC may (without the consent of the Commissioner) change its 
annual accounting period and adopt a taxable year beginning in 1972 
which is the same as the taxable year of such shareholder or the members 
of such group. A change to a new annual accounting period may be made by 
a DISC pursuant to this subparagraph even if such DISC has changed its 
annual accounting period pursuant to subparagraph (3)(ii) of this 
paragraph.
    (5) Transition rule for beginning of first taxable year of certain 
corporations. If a corporation organized before January 1, 1972, neither 
acquires assets (other than cash or other property acquired as 
consideration for the issuance of stock) nor begins doing business prior 
to January 1, 1972, the first taxable year of such corporation is deemed 
to begin at the time such corporation acquires any asset (other than 
cash or other property acquired as consideration for the issuance of 
stock) or begins doing business, whichever is earlier: Provided, That 
such corporation is a DISC for such first taxable year. For purposes of

[[Page 623]]

Sec. 1.6012-2(a), such corporation is treated as not coming into 
existence until the beginning of such first taxable year.
    (c) Effective date. The provisions of this section and the 
regulations under sections 992 through 997 apply with respect to taxable 
years ending after December 31, 1971, except that a corporation may not 
be a DISC for any taxable year beginning before January 1, 1972.
    (d) Related statutes. For rules relating to the transfer, during a 
taxable year beginning before January 1, 1976, to a DISC of assets of an 
export trade corporation (as defined in section 971), where a parent 
owns all the outstanding stock of both such DISC and such export trade 
corporation, see section 505(b) of the Revenue Act of 1971 (85 Stat. 
551). For rules regarding limitations on the qualification of a 
corporation as an export trade corporation for any taxable year 
beginning after October 31, 1971, see section 971(a)(3).

[T.D. 7323, 39 FR 34402, Sept. 25, 1974, as amended by T.D. 7854, 47 FR 
51738, Nov. 17, 1982]


<R05>
Sec. 1.992-1   Requirements of a DISC.

    (a) ``DISC'' defined. The term ``DISC'' refers to a domestic 
international sales corporation. The term ``DISC'' means a corporation 
which, for a taxable year--
    (1) Is duly incorporated and existing under the laws of any State or 
the District of Columbia,
    (2) Satisfies the gross receipts test described in paragraph (b) of 
this section,
    (3) Satisfies the assets test described in paragraph (c) of this 
section,
    (4) Satisfies the capitalization requirement described in paragraph 
(d) of this section,
    (5) Satisfies the requirement that an election to be treated as a 
DISC be in effect for such year, as described in paragraph (e) of this 
section,
    (6) [Reserved]
    (7) Maintains separate books and records, and
    (8) Is not an ineligible corporation described in paragraph (f) of 
this section.

A corporation which satisfies the requirements described in 
subparagraphs (1) through (8) of this paragraph for a taxable year is 
treated as a separate corporation for Federal tax purposes and qualifies 
as a DISC, even though such corporation would not be treated (if it were 
not a DISC) as a corporate entity for Federal income tax purposes. An 
association cannot qualify as a DISC even if such association is taxable 
as a corporation pursuant to section 7701(a)(3). In addition, a 
corporation created or organized in, or under the law of, a possession 
of the United States cannot qualify as a DISC. The rules contained in 
this paragraph constitute a relaxation of the general rules of corporate 
substance otherwise applicable under the Code. The separate 
incorporation of a DISC is required under section 992(a)(1) to make it 
possible to keep a better record of the income which is subject to the 
special treatment provided by sections 991 through 996, but this does 
not necessitate in all other respects the separate relationships which 
otherwise would be required between a parent corporation and its 
subsidiary. However, this relaxation of the general rules of corporate 
substance does not apply with respect to other corporations in other 
contexts. In the case of a transaction between a DISC and a person 
related to such DISC for purposes of section 482, see Sec. 1.993-1(l) 
for rules for determining whether income is income of a DISC to which 
the intercompany pricing rules authorized by section 994 apply.
    (b) Gross receipts test. In order for a corporation described in 
paragraph (a)(1) of this section to be a DISC for a taxable year, 95 
percent or more of its gross receipts (as defined in Sec. 1.993-6) for 
such year must consist of qualified export receipts (as defined in 
Sec. 1.993-1). Gross receipts for a taxable year are determined in 
accordance with the method of accounting adopted by the corporation 
pursuant to Sec. 1.991-1(b)(2). However, for rules regarding gross 
receipts in the case of a commission sale by such corporation, see 
Sec. 1.993-6.
    (c) Assets test--(1) In general. In order for a corporation 
described in paragraph (a)(1) of this section to be a DISC for a taxable 
year, the adjusted basis (determined under section 1011) of its 
qualified export assets at the close of such year must equal or exceed 
95 percent of the sum of the adjusted bases (determined under section 
1011) of all

[[Page 624]]

assets of such corporation at the close of such year.
    (2) Assets acquired to meet assets test. For purposes of determining 
whether the requirements of subparagraph (1) of this paragraph are 
satisfied by a corporation at the end of a taxable year, an asset which 
is a qualified export asset is treated as not being an asset of such 
corporation at such time if such asset is held for a total of 60 days or 
less and is acquired directly or indirectly through borrowing, unless 
the acquisition of such asset is established to the satisfaction of the 
Commissioner or his delegate to have been for bona fide purposes. Such 
acquisition is deemed to have been for bona fide purposes if, for 
example, it is made in the usual course of the corporation's trade or 
business.
    (d) Capitalization requirement--(1) In general. To qualify as a DISC 
for a taxable year, a corporation must have, on each day of that taxable 
year, only one class of stock. The par value (or, in the case of stock 
without par value, the stated value) of the corporation's outstanding 
stock must be on each day of the taxable year at least $2,500. In the 
case of a corporation which elects to be treated as a DISC for its first 
taxable year, the requirements of this paragraph (d)(1) are satisfied if 
the corporation has no more than one class of stock at any time during 
the year and if the par value (or, in the case of stock without par 
value, the stated value) of the corporation's outstanding stock is at 
least $2,500 on the last day of the period within which the election 
must be made and on each succeeding day of the year. For purposes of 
this paragraph (d)(1), the stated value of shares is the aggregate 
amount of the consideration paid for such shares which is not allotted 
to paid in surplus, or other surplus. The law of the State of 
incorporation of the DISC determines what consideration may be used to 
capitalize the DISC. A corporation will not be a qualified DISC unless 
at least $2,500 of valid consideration was used for this purpose. If a 
corporation has a realized or unrealized loss during a taxable year 
which results in the impairment of all or part of the capital required 
under this paragraph (d)(1), that impairment does not result in 
disqualification under this paragraph (d)(1), provided that the 
corporation does not take any legal or formal action under State law to 
reduce capital for that year below the amount required under this 
paragraph (d)(1).
    (2) Treatment of debt payable to shareholders--(i) In general. 
Purported debt of a DISC payable to any person, whether or not such 
person is a shareholder or a member of a controlled group (as defined in 
Sec. 1.993-1(k)) of which such DISC is a member, is treated as debt for 
all purposes of the Code, provided that such purported debt--
    (a) Would qualify as debt for purposes of the Code if the DISC were 
a corporation which did not qualify as a DISC,
    (b) Qualifies under subdivision (ii) of this subparagraph, or
    (c) Are trade accounts payable described in subdivision (iii) of 
this subparagraph.

Such debt is not treated as stock, and interest payable by the DISC on 
such debt is treated as interest by both the DISC and the holder of such 
debt. Payment of the principal of such debt by a DISC does not 
constitute the payment of a dividend by such DISC. The provisions of 
this subparagraph apply for a taxable year of a DISC, even though debt 
described in this subparagraph would be treated as stock of the 
corporation if such corporation did not qualify as a DISC for such year.
    (ii) Safe harbor rule. Purported debt of a DISC will in no event be 
treated as other than debt for purposes of subdivision (i) of this 
subparagraph if--
    (a) It is a written obligation to pay a sum certain on or before a 
fixed maturity date,
    (b) Interest is payable on such purported debt at an arm's length 
interest rate (as determined under Sec. 1.482-2(a)(2)), expressed as a 
fixed dollar amount or a fixed percentage of principal,
    (c) Such purported debt is not convertible into stock or into other 
purported debt unless such other purported debt qualifies under this 
subparagraph as debt of the DISC,
    (d) Such purported debt does not confer voting rights upon its 
holder, except in the event of default thereon, and

[[Page 625]]

    (e) Interest and principal are paid in accordance with the terms of 
such purported debt or with any modification of such terms consistent 
with (a) through (d) of this subdivision.

The determination of whether purported debt of a DISC constitutes debt 
described in this subdivision is made without regard to the proportion 
of debt of the DISC held by any of its shareholders, to the ratio of the 
outstanding debt of the DISC to its equity, or to the amount of 
outstanding debt of such DISC. The provisions of (e) of this subdivision 
do not prevent the modification of the terms of debt of a DISC where, 
for example, a DISC becomes unable to make timely payments of principal 
required under such terms, provided that such modification is consistent 
with (a) through (d) of this subdivision.
    (iii) Trade accounts payable. Trade accounts payable of a DISC which 
arise in the normal course of its trade or business (such as in 
consideration for inventory or supplies) constitute debt of the DISC 
(whether or not such accounts payable are debt described in subdivision 
(i) (a) or (b) of this subparagraph), provided that such accounts are 
payable within 15 months after they arise. If such accounts are payable 
more than 15 months after they arise, they are debt of such DISC only if 
they are debt described in subdivision (i) (a) or (b) of this 
subparagraph.
    (iv) Relation of subparagraph to other corporations. The provisions 
of this subparagraph generally constitute a relaxation of the ordinary 
rules used in determining whether purported debt of a corporation is 
debt or equity. This relaxation is in recognition of the principle that 
a corporation may qualify as a DISC even though it has relatively little 
capital. This relaxation does not apply with respect to purported debt 
of other corporations in other contexts. The provisions of subdivisions 
(i), (ii), and (iii) of this subparagraph apply only for taxable years 
for which a corporation qualifies (or is treated) as a DISC.
    (3) Classes of stock. [Reserved]
    (e) Election in effect. In order for a corporation to be a DISC for 
a taxable year, an election to be treated as a DISC must be made by such 
corporation pursuant to Sec. 1.992-2 and must be in effect for such 
taxable year. A corporation does not become or remain a DISC solely by 
making such an election. A corporation is a DISC for a taxable year only 
if such an election is in effect for that year and the corporation also 
satisfies the requirements of paragraphs (a) through (d) of this 
section. See Sec. 1.992-2 for rules regarding the time and manner of 
making such an election.
    (f) Ineligible corporations. The following corporations shall not be 
eligible to be treated as a DISC--
    (1) A corporation exempt from tax by reason of section 501,
    (2) A personal holding company (as defined in section 542),
    (3) A financial institution to which section 581 or 593 applies,
    (4) An insurance company subject to the tax imposed by subchapter L,
    (5) A regulated investment company (as defined in section 851(a)),
    (6) A China Trade Act corporation receiving the special deduction 
provided in section 941(a), or
    (7) An electing small business corporation (as defined in section 
1371(b)).
    (g) Status as DISC after having filed return as a DISC. Under 
section 992(a)(2), notwithstanding the failure of a corporation to meet 
the requirements of paragraph (a) of this section for a taxable year, 
such corporation will be treated as a DISC for purposes of the Code for 
such taxable year (and, thus, will not be able to claim that it is not 
eligible to be a DISC) if--
    (1) Such corporation files a return as a DISC for such taxable year,
    (2) Such corporation does not notify the district director, more 
than 30 days before the expiration of the period of limitation 
(including extensions thereof) on assessment for underpayment of tax for 
such taxable year (as determined under section 6501 and the regulations 
thereunder), that it is not a DISC for such taxable year, and
    (3) The Internal Revenue Service has not issued, within such period 
of limitation (including extensions thereof) on assessment for 
underpayment of tax for such taxable year, a notice of deficiency based 
on a determination that such corporation is not a DISC for such taxable 
year.


[[Page 626]]


A corporation is treated as a DISC, for all purposes, pursuant to the 
provisions of this paragraph for any taxable year for which it meets the 
requirements of this paragraph, even if such corporation is an 
ineligible corporation described in paragraph (f) of this section for 
such taxable year. Thus, for example, a corporation which is treated as 
a DISC for a taxable year pursuant to this paragraph is treated as a 
DISC for that taxable year for purposes of Sec. 1.992-2(e)(3) (relating 
to the termination of a DISC election if a corporation is not a DISC for 
each of any 5 consecutive taxable years). If a corporation is treated as 
a DISC for a taxable year pursuant to this paragraph, persons who held 
stock of such corporation at any time during such taxable year are 
treated, with respect to such stock, as holders of stock in a DISC for 
the period or periods during which they held such stock within such 
taxable year.
    (h) Definition of ``former DISC''. Under section 992(a)(3), the term 
``former DISC'' refers to a corporation which is not a DISC for a 
taxable year but which was (or was treated as) a DISC for a prior 
taxable year. However, a corporation is not a former DISC for a taxable 
year unless such corporation has, at the beginning of such taxable year, 
undistributed previously taxed income (as defined in Sec. 1.996-3(c) or 
accumulated DISC income (as defined in Sec. 1.996-3(b)). A corporation 
which is a former DISC for a taxable year is a former DISC for all 
purposes of the Code.

(Secs. 385 and 7805 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954 (83 Stat. 613 
and 68A Stat. 917; 26 U.S.C. 385 and 7805))

[T.D. 7323, 39 FR 34403, Sept. 25, 1974, as amended by T.D. 7420, 41 FR 
20654, May 20, 1976; 41 FR 22267, June 2, 1976; T.D. 7747, 45 FR 86459, 
Dec. 31, 1980; T.D. 7920, 48 FR 50712, Nov. 3, 1983; T.D. 8371, 56 FR 
55234, Oct. 25, 1991]


<R05>
Sec. 1.992-2   Election to be treated as a DISC.

    (a) Manner and time of election--(1) Manner--(i) In general. A 
corporation can elect to be treated as a DISC for a taxable year 
beginning after December 31, 1971. Except as provided in paragraph 
(a)(1)(ii) of this section, the election is made by the corporation 
filing Form 4876 with the service center with which it would file its 
income tax return if it were subject for such taxable year to all the 
taxes imposed by subtitle A of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954. The 
form shall be signed by any person authorized to sign a corporation 
return under section 6062, and shall contain the information required by 
such form. Except as provided in paragraphs (b)(3) and (c) of this 
section, such election to be treated as a DISC shall be valid only if 
the consent of every person who is a shareholder of the corporation as 
of the beginning of the first taxable year for which such election is 
effective is on or attached to such Form 4876 when filed with the 
service center.
    (ii) Transitional rule for corporations electing during 1972. If the 
first taxable year for which an election by a corporation to be treated 
as a DISC is a taxable year beginning after December 31, 1971, and on or 
before December 31, 1972, such election may be made either in the manner 
prescribed in subdivision (i) of this subparagraph or by filing, at the 
place prescribed in subdivision (i) of this subparagraph, a statement 
captioned ``Election to be Treated as a DISC.'' Such statement of 
election shall be valid only if the consent of each shareholder is filed 
with the service center in the form, and at the time, prescribed in 
paragraph (b) of this section. Such statement shall be signed by any 
person authorized to sign a corporation return under section 6062 and 
shall include the name, address, and employer identification number (if 
known) of the corporation, the beginning date of the first taxable year 
for which the election is effective, the number of shares of stock of 
the corporation issued and outstanding as of the earlier of the 
beginning of the first taxable year for which the election is effective 
or the time the statement is filed, the number of shares held by each 
shareholder as of the earlier of such dates, and the date and place of 
incorporation. As a condition of the election being effective, a 
corporation which elects to become a DISC by filing a statement in 
accordance with this subdivision must furnish (to the

[[Page 627]]

service center with which the statement was filed) such additional 
information as is required by Form 4876 by March 31, 1973.
    (2) Time of making election--(i) In general. In the case of a 
corporation making an election to be treated as a DISC for its first 
taxable year, such election shall be made within 90 days after the 
beginning of such taxable year. In the case of a corporation which makes 
an election to be treated as a DISC for any taxable year beginning after 
March 31, 1972 (other than the first taxable year of such corporation), 
the election shall be made during the 90-day period immediately 
preceding the first day of such taxable year.
    (ii) Transitional rules for certain corporations electing during 
1972. In the case of a corporation which makes an election to be treated 
as a DISC for a taxable year beginning after December 31, 1971, and on 
or before March 31, 1972 (other than its first taxable year), the 
election shall be made within 90 days after the beginning of such 
taxable year.
    (b) Consent by shareholders--(1) In general--(i) Time and manner of 
consent. Under paragraph (a)(1)(i) of this section, subject to certain 
exceptions, the election to be treated as a DISC is not valid unless 
each person who is a shareholder as of the beginning of the first 
taxable year for which the election is effective signs either the 
statement of consent on Form 4876 or a separate statement of consent 
attached to such form. A shareholder's consent is binding on such 
shareholder and all transferees of his shares and may not be withdrawn 
after a valid election is made by the corporation. In the case of a 
corporation which files an election to become a DISC for a taxable year 
beginning after December 31, 1972, if a person who is a shareholder as 
of the beginning of the first taxable year for which the election is 
effective does not consent by signing the statement of consent set forth 
on Form 4876, such election shall be valid (except in the case of an 
extension of the time for filing granted under the provisions of 
subparagraph (3) of this paragraph or paragraph (c) of this section) 
only if the consent of such shareholder is attached to the Form 4876 
upon which such election is made.
    (ii) Form of consent. A consent other than the statement of consent 
set forth on Form 4876 shall be in the form of a statement which is 
signed by the shareholder and which sets forth (a) the name and address 
of the corporation and of the shareholder and (b) the number of shares 
held by each such shareholder as of the time the consent is made and (if 
the consent is made after the beginning of the corporation's taxable 
year for which the election is effective) as of the beginning of such 
year. If the consent is made by a recipient of transferred shares 
pursuant to paragraph (c) of this section, the statement of consent 
shall also set forth the name and address of the person who held such 
shares as of the beginning of such taxable year and the number of such 
shares. Consent shall be made in the following form: ``I (insert name of 
shareholder), a shareholder of (insert name of corporation seeking to 
make the election) consent to the election of (insert name of 
corporation seeking to make the election) to be treated as a DISC under 
section 992(b) of the Internal Revenue Code. The consent so made by me 
is irrevocable and is binding upon all transferees of my shares in 
(insert name of corporation seeking to make the election).'' The 
consents of all shareholders may be incorporated in one statement.
    (iii) Who may consent. Where stock of the corporation is owned by a 
husband and wife as community property (or the income from such stock is 
community property), or is owned by tenants in common, joint tenants, or 
tenants by the entirety, each person having a community interest in such 
stock or the income therefrom and each tenant in common, joint tenant, 
and tenant by the entirety must consent to the election. The consent of 
a minor shall be made by his legal guardian or by his natural guardian 
if no legal guardian has been appointed. The consent of an estate shall 
be made by the executor or administrator thereof. The consent of a trust 
shall be made by the trustee thereof. The consent of an estate or trust 
having more than one executor, administrator, or trustee, may be made by 
any executor, administrator, or

[[Page 628]]

trustee, authorized to make a return of such estate or trust pursuant to 
section 6012(b)(5). The consent of a corporation or partnership shall be 
made by an officer or partner authorized pursuant to section 6062 or 
6063, as the case may be, to sign the return of such corporation or 
partnership. In the case of a foreign person, the consent may be signed 
by any individual (whether or not a U.S. person) who would be authorized 
under sections 6061 through 6063 to sign the return of such foreign 
person if he were a U.S. person.
    (2) Transitional rule for corporations electing during 1972. In the 
case of a corporation which files an election to be treated as a DISC 
for a taxable year beginning after December 31, 1971, and on or before 
December 31, 1972, such election shall be valid only if the consent of 
each person who is a shareholder as of the beginning of the first 
taxable year for which such election is effective is filed with the 
service center with which the election was filed within 90 days after 
the first day of such taxable year or within the time granted for an 
extension of time for filing such consent. The form of such consent 
shall be the same as that prescribed in subparagraph (1) of this 
paragraph. Such consent shall be attached to the statement of election 
or shall be filed separately (with such service center) with a copy of 
the statement of election. An extension of time for filing a consent may 
be granted in the manner, and subject to the conditions, described in 
subparagraph (3) of this paragraph.
    (3) Extension of time to consent. An election which is timely filed 
and would be valid except for the failure to attach the consent of any 
shareholder to the Form 4876 upon which the election was made or to 
comply with the 90-day requirement in subparagraph (2) of this paragraph 
or paragraph (c)(1) of this section, as the case may be, will not be 
invalid for such reason if it is shown to the satisfaction of the 
service center that there was reasonable cause for the failure to file 
such consent, and if such shareholder files a proper consent to the 
election within such extended period of time as may be granted by the 
Internal Revenue Service. In the case of a late filing of a consent, a 
copy of the Form 4876 or statement of election shall be attached to such 
consent and shall be filed with the same service center as the election. 
The form of such consent shall be the same as that set forth in 
paragraph (b)(1)(ii) of this section. In no event can any consent be 
made pursuant to this paragraph on or after the last day of the first 
taxable year for which a corporation elects to be treated as a DISC.
    (c) Consent by holder of transferred shares--(1) In general. If a 
shareholder of a corporation transfers--
    (i) Prior to the first day of the first taxable year for which such 
corporation elects to be treated as a DISC, some or all of the shares 
held by him without having consented to such election, or
    (ii) On or before the 90th day after the first day of the first 
taxable year for which such corporation elects to be treated as a DISC, 
some or all of the shares held by him as of the first day of such year 
(or if later, held by him as of the time such shares are issued) without 
having consented to such election, then consent may be made by any 
recipient of such shares on or before the 90th day after the first day 
of such first taxable year. If such recipient fails to file his consent 
on or before such 90th day, an extension of time for filing such consent 
may be granted in the manner, and subject to the conditions, described 
in paragraph (b)(3) of this section. In addition, if the transfer occurs 
more than 90 days after the first day of such taxable year, an extension 
of time for filing such consent may be granted to such recipient only if 
it is determined under paragraph (b)(3) of this section that an 
extension of time would have been granted the transferor for the filing 
of such consent if the transfer had not occurred. A consent which is not 
attached to the original Form 4876 or statement of election (as the case 
may be) shall be filed with the same service center as the original Form 
4876 or statement of election and shall have attached a copy of such 
original form or statement of election. The form of such consent shall 
be the same as that set forth in paragraph (b)(1)(ii) of this section. 
For the purposes of this paragraph, a transfer of shares includes any 
sale, exchange, or

[[Page 629]]

other disposition, including a transfer by gift or at death.
    (2) Requirement for the filing of an amended Form 4876 or statement 
of election. In any case in which a consent to a corporation's election 
to be treated as a DISC is made pursuant to subparagraph (1) of this 
paragraph, such corporation must file an amended Form 4876 or statement 
of election (as the case may be) reflecting all changes in ownership of 
shares. Such form must be filed with the same service center with which 
the original Form 4876 or statement of election was filed by such 
corporation.
    (d) Effect of election--(1) Effect on corporation. A valid election 
to be treated as a DISC remains in effect (without regard to whether the 
electing corporation qualifies as a DISC for a particular year) until 
terminated by any of the methods provided in paragraph (e) of this 
section. While such election is in effect, the electing corporation is 
subject to sections 991 through 997 and other provisions of the Code 
applicable to DISC's for any taxable year for which it qualifies as a 
DISC (or is treated as qualifying as a DISC pursuant to Sec. 1.992-
1(g)). Such corporation is also subject to such provisions for any 
taxable year for which it is treated as a former DISC as a result of 
qualifying or being treated as a DISC for any taxable year for which 
such election was in effect.
    (2) Effect on shareholders. A valid election by a corporation to be 
treated as a DISC subjects the shareholders of such corporation to the 
provisions of section 995 (relating to the taxation of the shareholders 
of a DISC or former DISC) and to all other provisions of the Code 
relating to the shareholders of a DISC or former DISC. Such provisions 
of the Code apply to any person who is a shareholder of a DISC or former 
DISC whether or not such person was a shareholder at the time the 
corporation elected to become a DISC.
    (e) Termination of election--(1) In general. An election to be 
treated as a DISC is terminated only as provided in subparagraph (2) or 
(3) of this paragraph.
    (2) Revocation of election--(i) Manner of revocation. An election by 
a corporation to be treated as a DISC may be revoked by the corporation 
for any taxable year of the corporation after the first taxable year for 
which the election is effective. Such revocation shall be made by the 
corporation filing a statement that the corporation revokes its election 
under section 992(b) to be treated as a DISC. Such statement shall 
indicate the corporation's name, address, employer identification 
number, and the first taxable year of the corporation for which the 
revocation is to be effective. The statement shall be signed by any 
person authorized to sign a corporation return under section 6062. Such 
revocation shall be filed with the service center with which the 
corporation filed its election, except that, if it filed an annual 
information return under section 6011(e)(2), the revocation shall be 
filed with the service center with which it filed its last such return.
    (ii) Years for which revocation is effective. If a corporation files 
a statement revoking its election to be treated as a DISC during the 
first 90 days of a taxable year (other than the first taxable year for 
which such election is effective), such revocation will be effective for 
such taxable year and all taxable years thereafter. If the corporation 
files a statement revoking its election to be treated as a DISC after 
the first 90 days of a taxable year, the revocation will be effective 
for all taxable years following such taxable year.
    (3) Continued failure to be a DISC. If a corporation which has 
elected to be treated as a DISC does not qualify as a DISC (and is not 
treated as a DISC pursuant to Sec. 1.992-1(g)) for each of any 5 
consecutive taxable years, such election terminates and will not be 
effective for any taxable year after such fifth taxable year. Such 
termination will be effective automatically, without notice to such 
corporation or to the Internal Revenue Service. If, during any 5-year 
period for which an election is effective, the corporation should 
qualify as a DISC (or be treated as a DISC pursuant to Sec. 1.992-1(g)) 
for a taxable year, a new 5-year period shall automatically start at the 
beginning of the following taxable year.
    (4) Election after termination. If a corporation has made a valid 
election to be treated as a DISC and such election

[[Page 630]]

terminates in either manner described in subparagraph (2) or (3) of this 
paragraph, such corporation is eligible to reelect to be treated as a 
DISC at any time by following the procedures described in paragraphs (a) 
through (c) of this section. If a corporation terminates its election 
and subsequently reelects to be treated as a DISC, the corporation and 
its shareholders continue to be subject to sections 995 and 996 with 
respect to the period during which its first election was in effect. 
Thus, for example, distributions upon disqualification includible in the 
gross incomes of shareholders of a corporation pursuant to section 
995(b)(2) continue to be so includible for taxable years for which a 
second election of such corporation is in effect without regard to the 
second election.

[T.D. 7323, 39 FR 34405, Sept. 25, 1974, as amended by T.D. 7420, 41 FR 
20655, May 20, 1976]


<R05>
Sec. 1.992-3   Deficiency distributions to meet qualification requirements.

    (a) In general. A corporation which meets the requirements described 
in Sec. 1.992-1 for treatment as a DISC for a taxable year, other than 
the 95 percent of gross receipts test described in Sec. 1.992-1(b) or 
the 95-percent assets test described in Sec. 1.992-1(c), or both tests, 
may nevertheless qualify as a DISC for such year by making deficiency 
distributions (attributable to its gross receipts other than qualified 
export receipts and its assets other than qualified export assets) if 
all of the following requirements are satisfied:
    (1) The corporation distributes the amount determined under 
paragraph (b) of this section as a deficiency distribution. The amount 
of a deficiency distribution is determined without regard to the amount 
by which the corporation fails to meet either test.
    (2) The reasonable cause requirements prescribed in paragraph (c)(1) 
of this section are satisfied with respect to both the corporation's 
failure to meet either test and its failure to make a deficiency 
distribution prior to the time the distribution is made.
    (3) The corporation makes such deficiency distribution pro rata to 
all its shareholders.
    (4) The corporation designates the distribution, at the time of the 
distribution, as a deficiency distribution, pursuant to section 992(c), 
to meet the qualification requirements to be a DISC. Such designation 
shall be in the form of a communication sent at the time of such 
distribution to each shareholder and to the service center with which 
the corporation has filed or will file its return for the taxable year 
to which the distribution relates. A corporation may not retroactively 
designate a prior distribution as a deficiency distribution to meet 
qualification requirements. Subject to the limitation described in 
paragraph (c)(3) of this section, a corporation may make a deficiency 
distribution with respect to a taxable year at any time after the close 
of such taxable year or, in the case of a deficiency distribution made 
on or before September 29, 1975, at any time during or after such 
taxable year.

See sections 246(d), 904(f), 995, and 996 for rules regarding the 
treatment of a deficiency distribution to meet qualification 
requirements by the shareholders and the corporation.
    (b) Amount of deficiency distribution--(1) In general. In order to 
meet the requirements of paragraph (a) of this section, the amount of a 
deficiency distribution must be, if the corporation fails to meet--
    (i) The 95 percent of gross receipts test, the amount determined in 
subparagraph (2) of this paragraph,
    (ii) The 95-percent assets test, the amount determined in 
subparagraph (3) of this paragraph, and
    (iii) Both such tests, except as provided in subparagraph (4) of 
this paragraph, the sum of the amounts determined in subparagraphs (2) 
and (3) of this paragraph.
    (2) Computation of deficiency distribution to meet 95 percent of 
gross receipts test--(i) In general. If a corporation fails to meet the 
95 percent of gross receipts test described in Sec. 1.992-1(b) for its 
taxable year, the amount of the deficiency distribution required by this 
subparagraph is an amount equal to the sum of its taxable income (if 
any) from each transaction giving rise to gross receipts (as defined in 
Sec. 1.993-6) which are

[[Page 631]]

not qualified export receipts (as defined in Sec. 1.993-1). A 
corporation's taxable income from a transaction shall be the amount of 
such gross receipts from such transaction reduced only by (a) its cost 
of goods sold attributable to such gross receipts, and by (b) its 
expenses, losses, and other deductions properly apportioned or allocated 
thereto in a manner consistent with the rules set forth in Sec. 1.861-8. 
For purposes of this subdivision, however, any expenses, losses, or 
other deductions which cannot definitely be allocated to some item or 
class of gross income in such manner shall not reduce such gross 
receipts. If the corporation is a commission agent for a principal in a 
transaction, the corporation's taxable income is the amount of the 
commission from such transaction reduced only by the amounts described 
in (b) of this subdivision.
    (ii) Example. The provisions of this subparagraph may be illustrated 
by the following example:

    Example. (a) X and Y are calendar year taxpayers. X, a domestic 
manufacturing company, owns all the stock of Y, which seeks to qualify 
as a DISC for 1973. During 1973, X manufactures a machine which is 
eligible to be export property as defined in Sec. 1.993-3. Y is made a 
commission agent with respect to exporting such machine. Thereafter, 
during 1973 Y is considered to receive gross receipts of $100,000, as 
determined under section 993(f), attributable to X's sale of the machine 
in a manner which causes the gross receipts to be excluded receipts 
pursuant to section 993(a)(2) and, therefore, not qualified export 
receipts. Y's total gross receipts for 1973 are $1 million of which 
$900,000 (i.e., 90 percent) are qualified export receipts. Therefore, Y 
does not satisfy the 95 percent of gross receipts test for 1973 because 
less than 95 percent of its gross receipts are qualified export 
receipts. Y has $9,000 of expenses properly apportioned or allocated to 
its gross income from such sale and $1,000 of other expenses which 
cannot definitely be allocated to some item or class of gross income, 
determined in a manner consistent with the rules set forth in 
Sec. 1.861-8. In order to satisfy the 95 percent of gross receipts test 
for 1973, if the commission due from X to Y were $15,000, Y must make a 
deficiency distribution of $6,000 computed as follows:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
Y's commission (gross income) from the transaction.........      $15,000
Less: Y's expenses apportioned or allocated to its gross                
 income from the transaction...............................        9,000
                                                            ------------
Required deficiency distribution by reason of $100,000 of               
 gross receipts which are not qualified export receipts....        6,000
                                                                        

    (b) If the commission due from X to Y were $9,400, resulting in a 
net loss of $600 to Y ($9,400 to $10,000), Y must make a deficiency 
distribution of $400 computed as follows:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
Y's commissions (gross income) from the transaction........       $9,400
Less: Y's expenses apportioned or allocated to its gross                
 income from the transaction...............................        9,000
                                                            ------------
Required deficiency distribution by reason of $100,000 of               
 gross receipts which are not qualified export receipts....          400
                                                                        

    (c) If the commission due from X to Y were $8,500, Y would not be 
required to make a deficiency distribution since, under this 
subparagraph, there would be no taxable income attributable to gross 
receipts from the sale.

    (3) Computation of deficiency distribution to meet 95 percent assets 
test--(i) In general. If a corporation fails to meet the 95 percent 
assets test described in Sec. 1.992-1(c) for its taxable year, the 
amount of the deficiency distribution required by this subparagraph is 
an amount equal to the fair market value as of the last day of such 
taxable year of the assets which are not qualified export assets held by 
such corporation on such last day.
    (ii) Asset held for more than 1 year. In the case of a corporation 
which holds continuously an asset which is not a qualified export asset 
at the close of more than 1 taxable year, it must distribute an amount 
equal to its fair market value (or, if greater, the amount determined 
under subparagraph (4) of this paragraph) only once if, at the close of 
the first such taxable year, such corporation reasonably believed that 
such asset was a qualified export asset. This subdivision shall not 
apply for any taxable year beginning after the date the corporation 
knows (or a reasonable man would have known) that an asset is not a 
qualified export asset and in order to qualify for each such year, the 
corporation must distribute the fair market value of such asset for each 
such year.
    (4) Computation in the case of a failure to meet both tests as a 
result of a single

[[Page 632]]

transaction. If a corporation fails to meet both the 95 percent of gross 
receipts test and the 95 percent assets test for a taxable year, and if 
the corporation holds at the end of such year assets (other than cash or 
qualified export assets) which were received as proceeds of a sale or 
exchange during such year which resulted in gross receipts other than 
qualified export receipts, then the amount of the deficiency 
distribution required by this paragraph with respect to such sale or 
exchange and assets held is the larger of the amount required by 
subparagraph (2) of this paragraph with respect to the sale or exchange 
or the amount required by subparagraph (3) of this paragraph with 
respect to such assets held. Thus, for example, if a corporation sells 
property which is not a qualified export asset for $100, receives $85 in 
cash and a note for $15, and derives $25 of taxable income from the sale 
as determined under subparagraph (2) of this paragraph, it must 
distribute $25. If the provisions of this subparagraph are applied with 
respect to assets of a DISC (other than qualified export assets), such 
provisions do not apply to any property received as proceeds from a sale 
or exchange of such assets.
    (c) Reasonable cause for failure--(1) In general. If for a taxable 
year, a corporation has failed to meet the 95 percent of gross receipts 
test, the 95 percent assets test, or both tests, such corporation may 
satisfy any such test for such year by means of a deficiency 
distribution in the amount determined under paragraph (b) of this 
section only if the reasonable cause requirements of this subparagraph 
are satisfied. Such reasonable cause requirements are satisfied if--
    (i) There is reasonable cause (as determined in accordance with 
subparagraph (2) of this paragraph) for such corporation's failure to 
satisfy such test and to make such distribution prior to the date on 
which it was made, the time limit in subparagraph (3) of this paragraph 
for making the distribution is satisfied, and interest (if required) is 
paid in the amount and in the manner prescribed by subparagraph (4) of 
this paragraph, or
    (ii) The time and ``70-percent'' requirements of the reasonable 
cause test of paragraph (d) of this section are satisfied.
    (2) Determination of reasonable cause. In general, whether a 
corporation's failure to meet the 95 percent of gross receipts test, the 
95 percent assets test, or both tests for a taxable year and its failure 
to make a pro rata distribution prior to the date on which it was made 
will be considered for reasonable cause where the action or inaction 
which resulted in such failure occurred in good faith, such as failure 
to meet the 95 percent assets test resulting from blocked currency or 
expropriation, or failure to meet either test because of reasonable 
uncertainty as to what constitutes a qualified export receipt or a 
qualified export asset. For further examples, if a corporation's 
reasonable determination of the percentage of its total gross receipts 
that are qualified export receipts is subsequently redetermined to be 
less than 95 percent as a result of a price adjustment by the Internal 
Revenue Service under section 482, or if the corporation has a casualty 
loss for which it receives an unanticipated insurance recovery which 
causes its qualified export receipts to be less than 95 percent of its 
total gross receipts, then the failure to satisfy the 95 percent of 
gross receipts test is considered to be due to reasonable cause.
    (3) Time limit for deficiency distribution. Except as otherwise 
provided in this subparagraph, the time limit prescribed by this 
subparagraph for making a deficiency distribution is satisfied if the 
amount of the distribution required by paragraph (b) of this section is 
made within 90 days from the date of the first written notification to 
the corporation by the Internal Revenue Service that it had not 
satisfied the 95 percent of gross receipts test or the 95 percent assets 
test or both tests, for a taxable year. Upon a showing by the 
corporation that an extension of the 90-day time limit is reasonable and 
necessary, the Commissioner may grant such extension of such time limit. 
In any case in which a corporation contests the decision of the Internal 
Revenue Service that such corporation has not met the 95 percent of 
gross receipts test, the 95 percent assets test, or both tests, an 
extension of the 90-day time limit will be allowed until 30

[[Page 633]]

days after the final determination of such contest. The date of the 
final determination of such contest shall, for purposes of section 
992(c), be established in the manner specified in subdivisions (i) 
through (iv) of this subparagraph:
    (i) The date of final determination by a decision of the United 
States Tax Court is the date upon which such decision becomes final, as 
prescribed in section 7481.
    (ii) The date of final determination in a case which is contested in 
a court (and upon which there is a judgment) other than the Tax Court is 
the date upon which the judgment becomes final and will be determined on 
the basis of the facts and circumstances of each particular case. For 
example, ordinarily a judgment of a United States district court becomes 
final upon the expiration of the time allowed for taking an appeal, if 
no such appeal is duly taken within such time; and a judgment of the 
United States Court of Claims becomes final upon the expiration of the 
time allowed for filing a petition for certiorari if no such petition is 
duly filed within such time.
    (iii) The date of a final determination by a closing agreement, made 
under section 7121, is the date such agreement is approved by the 
Commissioner.
    (iv) A final determination under section 992(c) may be made by an 
agreement signed by the district director or director of the service 
center with which the corporation files its annual return or by such 
other official to which authority to sign has been delegated, and by or 
on behalf of the taxpayer. The agreement shall set forth the total 
amount of the deficiency distribution to be paid to the shareholders of 
the DISC for the taxable year or years. An agreement under this 
subdivision shall be sent to the taxpayer at his last known address by 
either registered or certified mail. If registered mail is used for such 
purpose, the date of registration is considered the date of final 
determination; if certified mail is used for such purpose, the date of 
postmark on the sender's receipt for such mail is considered the date of 
final determination. If the corporation makes a deficiency distribution 
before such registration or postmark date but on or after the date the 
district director or director of the service center or other official 
has signed the agreement, the date of signature by the district director 
or director of the service center or other official is considered the 
date of final determination. If the corporation makes a deficiency 
distribution before the district director or director of the service 
center or other official signs the agreement, the date of final 
determination is considered to be the date of the making of the 
deficiency distribution. During any extension of time the interest 
charge provided in subparagraph (4) of this paragraph will continue to 
accrue at the rate provided for in such subparagraph.
    (4) Payment of interest for delayed distribution--(i) In general. If 
a corporation makes a deficiency distribution after the 15th day of the 
ninth month after the close of the taxable year with respect to which 
such distribution is made, such distribution will not be deemed to 
satisfy the 95 percent of gross receipts test or the 95 percent assets 
test for such year unless such corporation pays to the Internal Revenue 
Service a charge determined by multiplying (a) an amount equal to 4\1/2\ 
percent of such distribution by (b) the number of its taxable years 
which begin (1) after the taxable year with respect to which the 
distribution is made and (2) before such distribution is made. Such 
charge must be paid, within the 30-day period beginning with the day on 
which such distribution is made, to the service center with which the 
corporation files its annual information return for its taxable year in 
which the distribution is made. For purposes of the Internal Revenue 
Code, such charge is considered interest.
    (ii) Example. The provisions of subdivision (i) of this subparagraph 
may be illustrated by the following example:

    Example. X corporation, which uses the calendar year as its taxable 
year, meets the 95 percent assets test but fails to meet the 95 percent 
of gross receipts test for 1972 and does not by September 15, 1973, make 
the deficiency distribution required by reason of its failure to meet 
such test. Assume that reasonable cause exists for the corporation's 
failure to meet the 95 percent of gross receipts test and failure to 
make the required

[[Page 634]]

deficiency distribution. If X makes the required deficiency 
distribution, in the amount of $10,000, on April 1, 1976, X must pay on 
or before April 30, 1976, to the service center with which it files its 
annual information return a charge of $1,800, computed as follows:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
Deficiency distribution made by X..........................      $10,000
Multiplied by 4\1/2\ percent...............................         .045
                                                            ------------
Intermediate product.......................................          450
Multiplied by: Number of X's taxable years beginning after              
 1972 and before April 1, 1976.............................            4
                                                            ------------
Charge to be paid service center because of late deficiency             
 distribution (which is considered interest)...............        1,800
                                                                        

    (d) Certain distributions deemed for reasonable cause. If a 
corporation makes a distribution in the amount required by paragraph (b) 
of this section with respect to a taxable year on or before the 15th day 
of the ninth month after the close of such year, it will be deemed to 
have acted with reasonable cause with respect to its failure to satisfy 
the 95 percent of gross receipts test, the 95 percent assets test, or 
both tests, for such year and its failure to make such distribution 
prior to the date on which the distribution was made if--
    (1) At least 70 percent of the gross receipts of such corporation 
for such taxable year consist of qualified export receipts, and
    (2) The sum of the adjusted bases of the qualified export assets 
held by such corporation on the last day of each month of the taxable 
year equals or exceeds 70 percent of the sum of the adjusted bases of 
all assets held by the corporation on each such day.

[T.D. 7323, 39 FR 34407, Sept. 25, 1974; 39 FR 36009, Oct. 7, 1974, as 
amended by T.D. 7420, 41 FR 20655, May 20, 1976; T.D. 7854, 47 FR 51739, 
Nov. 17, 1982]


<R05>
Sec. 1.992-4   Coordination with personal holding company provisions in case of certain produced film rents.

    (a) In general. Section 992(d)(2) provides that a personal holding 
company is not eligible to be treated as a DISC. Section 543(a)(5)(B) 
provides that, for purposes of section 543, the term ``produced film 
rents'' means payments received with respect to an interest in a film 
for the use of, or the right to use, such film, but only to the extent 
that such interest was acquired before substantial completion of 
production of such film. Under section 992(e), if such produced film 
rents are included in the ordinary gross income (as defined in section 
543(b)(1)) of a qualified subsidiary for a taxable year of such 
subsidiary, and such interest was acquired by such subsidiary from its 
parent, such interest is deemed (for purposes of the application of 
sections 541, 543(b)(1), and 992(d)(2), and Sec. 1.992-1(f) for such 
taxable year) to have been acquired by such subsidiary at the time such 
interest was acquired by such parent. Thus, for example, if a parent 
acquires an interest in a film before it is substantially completed, 
then substantially completes such film prior to transferring an interest 
in such motion picture to a qualified subsidiary, the qualified 
subsidiary is considered as having acquired such interest prior to 
substantial completion of such motion picture for purposes of 
determining whether payments from the rental of such motion picture will 
be classified as produced film rents of such subsidiary. The provisions 
of section 992(e) and this section are not applicable in determining 
whether payments received with respect to an interest in a film are 
included in the ordinary gross income of a parent or a qualified 
subsidiary. Thus, even though a qualified subsidiary is treated pursuant 
to this section as having acquired an interest in a film at the time 
such interest was acquired by such subsidiary's parent, payments 
received by such parent with respect to such interest prior to the 
transfer of such interest to such subsidiary are includible in the 
ordinary gross income of such parent and not includible in the ordinary 
gross income of such subsidiary.
    (b) Definitions--(1) Qualified subsidiary. For purposes of this 
section, a corporation is a qualified subsidiary for a taxable year if--
    (i) Such corporation was established for the purpose of becoming a 
DISC,
    (ii) Such corporation would qualify (or be treated) as a DISC for 
such taxable year if it is not a personal holding company, and
    (iii) On every day of such taxable year on which shares of such 
corporation are outstanding, at least 80 percent of such shares are held 
directly by a second corporation.

[[Page 635]]

    (2) Parent. For purposes of this section, the term ``parent'' means 
a second corporation referred to in subparagraph (1)(iii) of this 
paragraph.

[T.D. 7323, 39 FR 34409, Sept. 25, 1974]


<R05>
Sec. 1.993-1   Definition of qualified export receipts.

    (a) In general. For a corporation to qualify as a DISC, at least 95 
percent of its gross receipts for a taxable year must consist of 
qualified export receipts. Under section 993(a), the term ``qualified 
export receipts'' means any of the eight amounts described in paragraphs 
(b) through (i) of this section, except to the extent that any of the 
eight amounts is an excluded receipt within the meaning of paragraph (j) 
of this section. For purposes of this section and Secs. 1.993-2 through 
1.993-6--
    (1) DISC. All references to a DISC mean a DISC, except when the 
context indicates that such term means a corporation in the process of 
meeting the conditions necessary for that corporation to become a DISC, 
or a corporation being tested as to whether it qualifies as a DISC.
    (2) Sale, lease, and license. The term ``sale'' includes an exchange 
or other disposition and the term ``lease'' includes a rental or a 
sublease. The term ``license'' includes a sublicense. All rules under 
this section and Secs. 1.993-2 through 1.993-6 applicable to leases of 
export property apply in the same manner to licenses of export property. 
See Sec. 1.993-3(f)(3) for a description of intangible property which 
cannot be export property.
    (3) Gross receipts. The term ``gross receipts'' is defined by 
section 993(f) and Sec. 1.993-6.
    (4) Qualified export assets. The term ``qualified export assests'' 
is defined by section 993(b) and Sec. 1.993-2.
    (5) Export property. The term ``export property'' is defined by 
section 993(c) and Sec. 1.993-3.
    (6) Related person. The term ``related person'' means a person who 
is related to another person if either immediately before or after a 
transaction--
    (i) The relationship between such persons would result in a 
disallowance of losses under section 267 (relating to disallowance of 
losses, etc., between related taxpayers), or section 707(b) (relating to 
losses disallowed, etc., between partners and controlled partnerships), 
and the regulations thereunder, or
    (ii) Such persons are members of the same controlled group of 
corporations, as defined in section 1563(a) (relating to definition of 
controlled group of corporations), except that (a) ``more than 50 
percent'' shall be substituted for ``at least 80 percent'' each place it 
appears in section 1563(a) and the regulations thereunder, and (b) the 
provisions of section 1563(b) shall not apply in determining whether 
such persons are members of the same controlled group.
    (7) Related supplier. The term ``related supplier'' is defined by 
Sec. 1.994-1(a)(3)(ii).
    (8) Controlled group. The term ``controlled group'' is defined by 
paragraph (k) of this section.
    (b) Sales of export property. Qualified export receipts of a DISC 
include gross receipts from the sale of export property by such DISC, or 
by any principal for whom such DISC acts as a commission agent (whether 
or not such principal is a related supplier), pursuant to the terms of a 
contract entered into with a purchaser by such DISC or by such principal 
at any time or by any other person and assigned to such DISC or such 
principal at any time prior to the shipment of such property to the 
purchaser. Any agreement, oral or written, which constitutes a contract 
at law, satisfies the contractual requirement of this paragraph. Gross 
receipts from the sale of export property, whenever received, do not 
constitute qualified export receipts unless the seller (or the 
corporation acting as commission agent for the seller) is a DISC at the 
time of the shipment of such property to the purchaser. For example, if 
a corporation which sells export property under the installment method 
is not a DISC for the taxable year in which the property is shipped to 
the purchaser, gross receipts from such sale do not constitute qualified 
export receipts for any taxable year of the corporation.
    (c) Leases of export property--(1) In general. Qualified export 
receipts of a DISC include gross receipts from the lease of export 
property provided that--

[[Page 636]]

    (i) Such property is held by such DISC (or by a principal for whom 
such DISC acts as commission agent with respect to the lease) either as 
an owner or lessee at the beginning of the term of such lease, and
    (ii) Such DISC qualified (or was treated) as a DISC for its taxable 
year in which the term of such lease began.
    (2) Prepayment of lease receipts. If part or all of the gross 
receipts from a lease of property are prepaid, then--
    (i) All such prepaid gross receipts are qualified export receipts of 
a DISC if it is reasonably expected at the time of such prepayment that 
throughout the term of such lease they would be qualified export 
receipts if received not as a prepayment; or
    (ii) If it is reasonably expected at the time of such prepayment 
that throughout the term of such lease they would not be qualified 
export receipts if received not as a prepayment, then only those prepaid 
receipts, for the taxable years of the DISC for which they would be 
qualified export receipts, are qualified export receipts.

Thus, for example, if a lessee makes a prepayment of the first and last 
years' rent, and it is reasonably expected that the leased property will 
be export property for the first half of the lease period but not the 
second half of such period, the amount of the prepayment which 
represents the first year's rent will be considered qualified export 
receipts if it would otherwise qualify, whereas the amount of the 
prepayment which represents the last year's rent will not be considered 
qualified export receipts.
    (d) Related and subsidiary services--(1) In general. Qualified 
export receipts of a DISC include gross receipts from services furnished 
by such DISC which are related and subsidiary to any sale or lease (as 
described in paragraph (b) or (c) of this section) of export property by 
such DISC or with respect to which such DISC acts as a commission agent, 
provided that such DISC derives qualified export receipts from such sale 
or lease. Such services may be performed within or without the United 
States.
    (2) Services furnished by DISC. Services are considered to be 
furnished by a DISC for purposes of this paragraph if such services are 
provided by--
    (i) The person who sold or lease the export property to which such 
services are related and subsidiary, provided that the DISC acts as a 
commission agent with respect to the sale or lease of such property and 
with respect to such services,
    (ii) The DISC as principal, or any other person pursuant to a 
contract between such person and such DISC, provided the DISC acted as 
principal or commission agent with respect to the sale or lease of such 
property, or
    (iii) A member of the same controlled group as the DISC where the 
sale or lease of the export property is made by another member of such 
controlled group provided, however, that the DISC act as principal or 
commission agent with respect to such sale or lease and as commission 
agent with respect to such services.
    (3) Related services. A service is related to a sale or lease of 
export property if--
    (i) Such service is of the type customarily and usually furnished 
with the type of transaction in the trade or business in which such sale 
or lease arose and
    (ii) The contract to furnish such service--
    (a) Is expressly provided for in or is provided for by implied 
warranty under the contract of sale or lease,
    (b) Is entered into on or before the date which is 2 years after the 
date on which the contract under which such sale or lease was entered 
into, provided that the person described in subparagraph (2) of this 
paragraph which is to furnish such service delivers to the purchaser or 
lessor a written offer or option to furnish such services on or before 
the date on which the first shipment of goods with respect to which the 
service is to be performed is delivered, or
    (c) Is a renewal of the services contract described in (a) or (b) of 
this subdivision. Services which may be related to a sale or lease of 
export property include but are not limited to warranty service, 
maintenance service, repair service, and installation service. 
Transportation (including insurance related to such transportation) may 
be related

[[Page 637]]

to a sale or lease of export property, provided that the cost of such 
transportation is included in the sale price or rental of the property 
or, if such cost is separately stated, is paid by the DISC (or its 
principal) which sold or leased the property to the person furnishing 
the transportation service. Financing or the obtaining of financing for 
a sale or lease is not a related service for purposes of this paragraph.
    (4) Subsidiary services--(i) In general. Services related to a sale 
or lease of export property are subsidiary to such sale or lease only if 
it is reasonably expected at the time of such sale or lease that the 
gross receipts from all related services furnished by the DISC (as 
defined in subparagraphs (2) and (3) of this paragraph) will not exceed 
50 percent of the sum of (a) the gross receipts from such sale or lease 
and (b) the gross receipts from related services furnished by the DISC 
(as described in subparagraph (2) of this paragraph). In the case of a 
sale, reasonable expectations at the time of the sale are based on the 
gross receipts from all related services which may reasonably be 
expected to be performed at any time before the end of the 10-year 
period following the date of such-sale. In the case of a lease, 
reasonable expectations at the time of the lease are based on the gross 
receipts from all related services which may reasonably be expected to 
be performed at any time before the end of the term of such lease 
(determined without regard to renewal options).
    (ii) Allocation of gross receipts from services. In determining 
whether the services related to a sale or lease of export property are 
subsidiary to such sale or lease, the gross receipts to be treated as 
derived from the furnishing of services may not be less than the amount 
of gross receipts reasonably allocated to such services as determined 
under the facts and circumstances of each case without regard to 
whether--
    (a) Such services are furnished under a separate contract or under 
the same contract pursuant to which such sale or lease occurs or
    (b) The cost of such services is specified in the contract of sale 
or lease.
    (iii) Transactions involving more than one item of export property. 
If more than one item of export property is sold or leased in a single 
transaction pursuant to one contract, the total gross receipts from such 
transaction and the total gross receipts from all services related to 
such transaction are each taken into account in determining whether such 
services are subsidiary to such transaction. However, the provisions of 
this subdivision apply only if such items could be included in the same 
product line, as determined under Sec. 1.994-1(c)(7).
    (iv) Renewed service contracts. If under the terms of a contract for 
related services, such contract is renewable within 10 years after a 
sale of export property, or during the term of a lease of export 
property, related services to be performed under the renewed contract 
are subsidiary to such sale or lease if it is reasonably expected at the 
time of such renewal that the gross receipts from all related services 
which have been and which are to be furnished by the DISC (as described 
in subparagraph (2) of this paragraph) will not exceed 50 percent of the 
sum of (a) the gross receipts from such sale or lease and (b) the gross 
receipts from related services furnished by the DISC (as so described). 
Reasonable expectations are determined as provided in subdivision (i) of 
this subparagraph.
    (v) Parts used in services. In a services contract described in 
subparagraph (3) of this paragraph provides for the furnishing of parts 
in connection with the furnishing of related services, gross receipts 
from the furnishing of such parts are not taken into account in 
determining whether under this subparagraph the services are subsidiary. 
See paragraph (b) or (c) of this section to determine whether the gross 
receipts from the furnishing of parts consitute qualified export 
receipts. See Sec. 1.993-3(c)(2)(iv) and (e)(3) for rules regarding the 
treatment of such parts with respect to the manufacture of export 
property and the foreign content of such property, respectively.
    (5) Relation to leases. If the gross receipts for services which are 
related and subsidiary to a lease of property have been prepaid at any 
time for all such services which are to be performed before the end of 
the term of such lease, then as of the time of the

[[Page 638]]

prepayment the rules in paragraph (c)(2) of this section (relating to 
prepayment of lease receipts) will determine whether prepaid services 
under this subdivision are qualified export receipts. Thus, for example 
if it is reasonably expected that leased property will be export 
property for the first year of the term of the lease but will not be 
export property for the second year of the term, prepaid gross receipts 
for related and subsidiary services to be furnished in the first year 
may be qualified export receipts. However, any prepaid gross receipts 
for such services to be furnished in the second year cannot be qualified 
export receipts.
    (6) Relation with export property determination. The determination 
as to whether gross receipts from the sale or lease of export property 
constitute qualified export receipts does not depend upon whether 
services connected with such sale or lease are related and subsidiary to 
such sale or lease. Thus, for example, assume that a DISC receives gross 
receipts of $1,000 from the sale of export property and gross, receipts 
of $1,100 from installation and maintenance services which are to be 
furnished by such DISC within 10 years after the sale and which are 
related to such sale. The $1,100 which the DISC receives for such 
services would not be qualified export receipts since the gross receipts 
from the services exceed 50 percent of the sum of the gross receipts 
from the sale and the gross receipts from the related services furnished 
by such DISC. The $1,000 which the DISC receives from the sale of export 
property would, however, be a qualified export receipt if the sale met 
the requirements of paragraph (b) of this section.
    (e) Gains from sales of certain qualified export assets. Qualified 
export receipts of a DISC include gross receipts from the sale by such 
DISC of any assets (wherever located) which, as of the date of such 
sale, are qualified export assets as defined in Sec. 1.993-2 even though 
such assets are not export property (as defined in Sec. 1.993-3). Gross 
receipts are derived from the sale of such assets only where such sale 
results in recognized gain (see Sec. 1.993-6(a)). For purposes of this 
paragraph, losses from the sale of such qualified export assets shall 
not be taken into account for purposes of determining the DISC's 
qualified export receipts.
    (f) Dividends. Qualified export receipts of a DISC for a taxable 
year include all dividends includible in the gross income of such DISC 
for such taxable year with respect to the stock of related foreign 
export corporations (as defined in Sec. 1.993-5) and all amounts 
includible in the gross income of such DISC with respect to such 
corporations pursuant to section 951 (relating to amounts included in 
the gross income of U.S. shareholders of controlled foreign 
corporations).
    (g) Interest on obligations which are qualified export assets. 
Qualified export receipts of a DISC include interest on any obligation 
which is a qualified export asset of such DISC, including any amount 
includible in gross income as interest (such as, for example, an amount 
treated as original issue discount pursuant to section 1232) or as 
imputed interest under section 483. Gain from the sale of obligations 
described in this paragraph is treated (to the extent such gain is not 
treated as interest on such obligations) as qualified export receipts 
pursuant to paragraph (e) of this section.
    (h) Engineering and architectural services--(1) In general. 
Qualified export receipts of a DISC include gross receipts from 
engineering services (as described in subparagraph (5) of this 
paragraph) or architectural services (as described in subparagraph (5) 
of this paragraph) or architectural services (as described in 
subparagraph (6) of this paragraph) furnished by such DISC (as described 
in subparagraph (7) of this paragraph) for a construction project (as 
defined in subparagraph (8) of this paragraph) located, or proposed for 
location, outside the United States. Such services may be performed 
within or without the United States.
    (2) Services included. Engineering and architectural services 
include feasibility studies for a proposed construction project whether 
or not such project is ultimately initiated.
    (3) Excluded services. Engineering and architectural services do not 
include--
    (i) Services connected with the exploration for minerals or
    (ii) Technical assistance or knowhow.


[[Page 639]]


For purposes of this paragraph, the term ``technical assistance or 
knowhow'' includes activities or programs designed to enable business, 
commerce, industrial establishments, and governmental organizations to 
acquire or use scientific, architectural, or engineering information.
    (4) Other services. Receipts from the performance of construction 
activities other than engineering and architectural services constitute 
qualified export receipts to the extent that such activities are related 
and subsidiary services (within the meaning of paragraph (d) of this 
section) with respect to a sale or lease of export property.
    (5) Engineering services. For purposes of this paragraph, 
engineering services in connection with any construction project (within 
the meaning of subparagraph (8) of this paragraph) include any 
professional services requiring engineering education, training, and 
experience and the application of special knowledge of the mathematical, 
physical, or engineering sciences to such professional services as 
consultation, investigation, evaluation, planning, design, or 
responsible supervision of construction for the purpose of assuring 
compliance with plans, specifications, and design.
    (6) Architectural services. For purposes of this paragraph, 
architectural services include the offering or furnishing of any 
professional services such as consultation, planning, aesthetic, and 
structural design, drawings and specifications, or responsible 
supervision of construction (for the purpose of assuring compliance with 
plans, specifications, and design) or erection, in connection with any 
construction project (within the meaning of subparagraph (8) of this 
paragraph).
    (7) Definition of ``furnished by such DISC''. For purposes of this 
paragraph, architectural and engineering services are considered 
furnished by a DISC if such services are provided--
    (i) By the DISC,
    (ii) By another person (whether or not a United States person) 
pursuant to a contract entered into by such person with the DISC at any 
time prior to the furnishing of such services, provided that the DISC 
acts as principal with respect to the furnishing of such services, or
    (iii) By another person (whether or not a United States person) 
pursuant to a contract for the furnishing of such services entered into 
at any time prior to the furnishing of such services provided that the 
DISC acts as commission agent with respect to such services.
    (8) Definition of ``construction project''. For purposes of this 
paragraph, the term ``construction project'' includes the erection, 
expansion, or repair (but not including minor remodeling or minor 
repairs) of new or existing buildings or other physical facilities 
including, for example, roads, dams, canals, bridges, tunnels, railroad, 
tracks, and pipelines. The term also includes site grading and 
improvement and installation of equipment necessary for the 
construction. Gross receipts from the sale or lease of construction 
equipment are not qualified export receipts unless such equipment is 
export property (as defined in Sec. 1.993-3).
    (i) Managerial services--(1) In general. Qualified export receipts 
of a first DISC for its taxable year include gross receipts from the 
furnishing of managerial services provided for another DISC, which is 
not a related person, to aid such unrelated DISC in deriving qualified 
export receipts, provided that at least 50 percent of the gross receipts 
of the first DISC for such year consists of qualified export receipts 
derived from the sale or lease of export property and the furnishing of 
related and subsidiary services, as described in paragraph (b), (c), and 
(d) of this section, respectively.
For purposes of this paragraph, managerial services are considered 
furnished by a DISC if such services are provided--
    (i) By the first DISC,
    (ii) By another person (whether or not a United States person) 
pursuant to a contract entered into by such person with the first DISC 
at any time prior to the furnishing of such services, provided that the 
first DISC acts as principal with respect to the furnishing of such 
services, or
    (iii) By another person (whether or not a United States person) 
pursuant to a contract for the furnishing of such

[[Page 640]]

services entered into at any time prior to the furnishing of such 
services provided that the DISC acts as commission agent with respect to 
such services.
    (2) Definition of ``managerial services.'' The term ``managerial 
services'' as used in this paragraph means activities relating to the 
operation of another unrelated DISC which derives qualified export 
receipts from the sale or lease of export property and from the 
furnishing of services related and subsidiary to such sales or leases. 
Such term includes staffing and operational services necessary to 
operate such other DISC, but does not include legal, accounting, 
scientific, or technical services. Examples of managerial services are: 
(i) Export market studies, (ii) making shipping arrangements, and (iii) 
contracting potential foreign purchasers.
    (3) Status of recipient of managerial services--(i) In general. 
Qualified export receipts of a first DISC include receipts from the 
furnishing of managerial services during any taxable year of a recipient 
if such recipient qualifies as a DISC (within the meaning of Sec. 1.992-
1(a) for such taxable year.
    (ii) Recipient deemed to qualify as a DISC. For purposes of 
subdivision (i) of this subparagraph, a recipient is deemed to qualify 
as a DISC for its taxable year if the first DISC obtains from such 
recipient a copy of such recipient's election to be treated as a DISC as 
described in Sec. 1.992-2(a) together with such recipient's sworn 
statement that such election has been filed with the Internal Revenue 
Service Center. The recipient may mark out the names of its shareholders 
on a copy of its election to be treated as a DISC before submitting it 
to the first DISC. The copy of the election and the sworn statement of 
such recipient must be received by the first DISC within 6 months after 
the beginning of the first taxable year of the recipient during which 
such first DISC furnishes managerial services for such recipient. The 
copy of the election and the sworn statement of the recipient need not 
be obtained by the first DISC for subsequent taxable years of the 
recipient.
    (iii) Recipient not treated as a DISC. For purposes of subdivision 
(i) of this subparagraph, a recipient of managerial services is not 
treated as a DISC with respect to such services performed during a 
taxable year for which such recipient does not qualify as a DISC if the 
DISC performing such services does not believe or if a reasonable person 
would not believe (taking into account the furnishing DISC's managerial 
relationship with such recipient DISC) at the beginning of such taxable 
year that the recipient will qualify as a DISC for such taxable year.
    (j) Excluded receipts--(1) In general. Notwithstanding the 
provisions of paragraphs (b) through (i) of this section, qualified 
export receipts of a DISC do not include any of the five amounts 
described in subparagraphs (2) through (6) of this paragraph.
    (2) Sales and leases of property for ultimate use in the United 
States. Property which is sold or leased for ultimate use in the United 
States does not constitute export property. See Sec. 1.993-3(d)(4) 
(relating to determination of where the ultimate use of the property 
occurs). Thus, qualified export receipts of a DISC described in 
paragraph (b) or (c) of this section do not include gross receipts of 
the DISC from the sale or lease of such property.
    (3) Sales of export property accomplished by subsidy. Qualified 
export receipts of a DISC do not include gross receipts described in 
paragraph (b) of this section if the sale of export property (whether or 
not such property consists of agricultural products) is pursuant to any 
of the following:
    (i) The development loan program, or grants under the technical 
cooperation and development grants program of the Agency for 
International Development, or grants under the military assistance 
program administered by the Department of Defense, pursuant to the 
Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, as amended (22 U.S.C. 2151), unless the 
DISC shows to the satisfaction of the district director that, under the 
conditions existing at the time of the sale, the purchaser had a 
reasonable opportunity to purchase, on competitive terms and from a 
seller who was not a U.S. person, goods which were substantially 
identical to such property and which were not manufactured, produced, 
grown, or extracted (as described in Sec. 1.993-3(c)) in the United 
States,

[[Page 641]]

    (ii) The Pub. L. 480 program authorized under title I of the 
Agricultural Trade Development and Assistance Act of 1954, as amended (7 
U.S.C. 1691, 1701-1710),
    (iii) For taxable years ending before January 1, 1974, the Barter 
program of the Commodity Credit Corporation authorized by section 4(h) 
of the Commodity Credit Corporation Charter Act, as amended (15 U.S.C. 
714b(h)), and section 303 of the Agricultural Trade Development and 
Assistance Act of 1954, as amended (7 U.S.C. 1692) but only if the 
taxpayer treats such sales as sales giving rise to excluded receipts,
    (iv) The Export Payment program of the Commodity Credit Corporation 
authorized by sections 5(d) and (f) of the Commodity Credit Corporation 
Charter Act, as amended (15 U.S.C. 714c (d) and (f)),
    (v) The section 32 export payment programs authorized by section 32 
of the Act of August 24, 1935, as amended (7 U.S.C. 612c), and
    (vi) For taxable years beginning after November 3, 1972, the Export 
Sales program of the Commodity Credit Corporation authorized by sections 
5 (d) and (f) of the Commodity Credit Corporation Charter Act, as 
amended (15 U.S.C. 714c (d) and (f)), other than the GSM-4 program 
provided under 7 CFR part 1488, and section 407 of the Agricultural Act 
of 1949, as amended (7 U.S.C. 1427), for the purpose of disposing of 
surplus agricultural commodities and exporting or causing to be exported 
agricultural commodities, except that for taxable years beginning on or 
before November 3, 1972, the taxpayer may treat such sales as sales 
giving rise to excluded receipts.
    (4) Sales or lease of export property and furnishing of engineering 
or architectural services for use by the United States--(i) In general. 
Qualified export receipts of a DISC do not include gross receipts 
described in paragraph (b), (c), or (h) of this section if a sale or 
lease of export property, or the furnishing of engineering or 
architectural services, is for use by the United States or an 
instrumentality thereof in any case in which any law or regulation 
requires in any manner the purchase or lease of property manufactured, 
produced, grown, or extracted in the United States or requires the use 
of engineering or architectural services performed by a U.S. person. For 
example, a sale by a DISC of export property to the Department of 
Defense for use outside the United States would not produce qualified 
export receipts for such DISC if the Department of Defense purchased 
such property from appropriated funds subject to any provisions of the 
Armed Services Procurement Regulations (32 CFR subchapter A, part 6, 
subpart A) or any appropriations act for the Department of Defense for 
the applicable year which restricts the availability of such 
appropriated funds to the procurement of items which are grown, 
reprocessed, reused, or produced in the United States.
    (ii) Direct or indirect sales or leases. Any sale or lease of export 
property is for use by the United States or an instrumentality thereof 
is such property is sold or leased by a DISC (or by a principal for whom 
such DISC acts as commission agent) to--
    (a) A person who is a related person with respect to such DISC or 
such principal and who sells or leases such property for use by the 
United States or an instrumentality thereof or
    (b) A person who is not a related person with respect to such DISC 
or such principal if, at the time of such sale or lease, there is an 
agreement or understanding that such property will be sold or leased for 
use by the United States or an instrumentality thereof (or if a 
reasonable person would have known at the time of such sale or lease 
that such property would be sold or leased for use by the United States 
or an instrumentality thereof) within 3 years after such sale or lease.
    (iii) Excluded programs. The provisions of subdivisions (i) and (ii) 
of this subparagraph do not apply in the case of a purchase by the 
United States or an instrumentality thereof if such purchase is pursuant 
to--
    (a) The Foreign Military Sales Act, as amended (22 U.S.C. 2751 et 
seq.), or a program under which the U.S. Government purchases property 
for resale, on commercial terms, to a foreign government or agency or 
instrumentality thereof, or

[[Page 642]]

    (b) A program (whether bilateral or multilateral) under which sales 
to the U.S. Government are open to international competitive bidding.
    (5) Services. Qualified export receipts of a DISC do not include 
gross receipts described in paragraph (d) of this section (concerning 
related and subsidiary services) if the services from which such gross 
receipts are derived are related and subsidiary to the sale or lease of 
property which results in excluded receipts pursuant to this paragraph.
    (6) Receipts within controlled group--(i) In general. Gross receipts 
of a corporation do not constitute qualified export receipts for any 
taxable year of such corporation if--
    (a) At the time of the sale, lease, or other transaction resulting 
in such gross receipts, such corporation and the person from whom such 
receipts are directly or indirectly derived (whether or not such 
corporation and such person are the same person) are members of the same 
controlled group (as defined in paragraph (k) of this section) and
    (b) Such corporation and such person each qualifies (or is treated 
under section 992(a)(2)) as a DISC for its taxable year in which its 
receipts arise.

Thus, for example, assume that R, S, X, and Y are members of the same 
controlled group and that X and Y are DISC's. If R sells property to S 
and pays X a commission relating to that sale and if S sells the same 
property to an unrelated foreign party and pays Y a commission relating 
to that sale, the receipts received by X from the sale of such property 
by R to S will be considered to be derived from Y, a DISC which is a 
member of the same controlled group as X, and thus will not result in 
qualified export receipts to X. The receipts received by Y from the sale 
to an unrelated foreign party may, however, result in qualified export 
receipts to Y. For another example, if R and S both assign the 
commissions to X, receipts derived from the sale from R to S will be 
considered to be derived from X acting as commission agent for S and 
will not result in qualified export receipts to X. Receipts derived by X 
from the sale of property by S to an unrelated foreign party, may, 
however, constitute qualified export receipts.
    (ii) Leased property. See Sec. 1.993-3(f)(2) regarding property not 
constituting export property in certain cases where such property is 
leased to any corporation which is a member of the same controlled group 
as the lessor.
    (k) Definition of ``controlled group''. For purposes of sections 991 
through 996 and the regulations thereunder, the term ``controlled 
group'' has the same meaning as is assigned to the term ``controlled 
group of corporations'' by section 1563(a), except that (1) the phrase 
``more than 50 percent'' is substituted for the phrase ``at least 80 
percent'' each place the latter phrase appears in section 1563(a), and 
(2) section 1563(b) shall not apply. Thus, for example, a foreign 
corporation subject to tax under section 881 may be a member of a 
controlled group. Furthermore, two or more corporations (including a 
foreign corporation) are members of a controlled group at any time such 
corporations meet the requirements of section 1563(a) (as modified by 
this paragraph).
    (l) DISC's entitlement to income--(1) Application of section 994. A 
corporation which meets the requirements of Sec. 1.992-1(a) to be 
treated as a DISC for a taxable year is entitled to income, and the 
intercompany pricing rules of section 994(a)(1) or (2) apply, in the 
case of any transactions described in Sec. 1.994-1(b) between such DISC 
and its related supplier (as defined in Sec. 1.994-1(a)(3)). For 
purposes of this subparagraph, such DISC need not have employees or 
perform any specific function.
    (2) Other transactions. In the case of a transaction to which the 
provisions of subparagraph (1) of this paragraph do not apply but from 
which a DISC derives gross receipts, the income to which the DISC is 
entitled as a result of the transaction is determined pursuant to the 
terms of the contract for such transaction and, if applicable, section 
482 and the regulations thereunder.
    (3) Examples. The provisions of this paragraph may be illustrated by 
the following examples:

    Example 1. P Corporation forms S Corporation as a wholly-owned 
subsidiary. S qualifies as a DISC for its taxable year. S has no

[[Page 643]]

employees on its payroll. S is granted a franchise with respect to 
specified exports of P. P will sell such exports to S for resale by S. 
Such exports are of a type which produce qualified export receipts as 
defined in paragraph (b) of this section. P's sales force will solicit 
orders in the name of S using S's order forms. S places orders with P 
only when S itself has received orders. No inventory is maintained by S. 
P makes shipments directly to customers of S. Employees of P will act 
for S and billings and collections will be handled by P in the name of 
S. Under these facts, the income derived by S for such taxable year from 
the purchase and resale of the specified export is treated for Federal 
income tax purposes as the income of S, and the amount of income 
allocable to S will be determined under section 994 of the Code.
    Example 2. P Corporation forms S Corporation as a wholly-owned 
subsidiary. S qualifies as a DISC for its taxable year. S has no 
employees on its payroll. S is granted a sales franchise with respect to 
specified exports of P and will receive commissions with respect to such 
exports. Such exports are of a type which will produce gross receipts 
for S which are qualified export receipts as defined in paragraph (b) of 
this section. P's sales force will solicit orders in the name of P. 
Billings and collections are handled directly by P. Under these facts, 
the commissions paid to S for such taxable year with respect to the 
specified exports shall be treated for Federal income tax purposes as 
the income of S, and the amount of income allocable to S is determined 
under section 994 of the Code.

[T.D. 7514, 42 FR 55454, Oct. 17, 1977; 42 FR 60910, Nov. 30, 1977, as 
amended by T.D. 7854, 47 FR 51739, Nov. 17, 1982]


<R05>
Sec. 1.993-2  Definition of qualified export assets.

    (a) In general. For a corporation to qualify as a DISC, at the close 
of its taxable year it must have qualified export assets with adjusted 
bases equal to at least 95 percent of the sum of the adjusted bases of 
all its assets. An asset which is a qualified export asset under more 
than one paragraph of this section shall be taken into account only once 
in determining the sum of the adjusted bases of all qualified export 
assets. Under section 993(b), the qualified export assets held by a 
corporation are--
    (1) Export property as defined in Sec. 1.993-3 (see paragraph (b) of 
this section),
    (2) Business assets described in paragraph (c) of this section,
    (3) Trade receivables described in paragraph (d) of this section,
    (4) Temporary investments to the extent described in paragraph (e) 
of this section,
    (5) Producer's loans as defined in Sec. 1.993-4 (see paragraph (f) 
of this section),
    (6) Stock or securities (described in paragraph (g) of this section) 
of related foreign export corporations as defined in Sec. 1.993-5,
    (7) Export-Import Bank and other obligations described in paragraph 
(h) of this section,
    (8) Financing obligations described in paragraph (i) of this 
section, and
    (9) Funds awaiting investment described in paragraph (j) of this 
section.
    (b) Export property. In general, export property is certain property 
held for sale or lease which meets the requirements of Sec. 1.993-3.
    (c) Business assets. For purposes of this section, business assets 
are assets used by a DISC (other than as a lessor) primarily in 
connection with--
    (1) The sale, lease, storage, handling, transportation, packaging, 
assembly, or servicing of export property, or
    (2) The performance of engineering or architectural services 
(described in Sec. 1.993-1(h)) or managerial services (described in 
Sec. 1.993-1(i)) in furtherance of the production of qualified export 
receipts.

Assets used primarily in the manufacture, production, growth, or 
extraction (within the meaning of Sec. 1.993-3(c)) of property are not 
business assets.
    (d) Trade receivables--(1) In general. For purposes of this section, 
trade receivables are accounts receivable and evidences of indebtedness 
which arise by reason of transactions of such corporation or of another 
corporation which is a DISC and which is a member of a controlled group 
which includes such corporation described in subparagraph (A), (B), (C), 
(D), (G), or (H), of section 993(a)(1) and which are due the DISC (or, 
if it acts as an agent, due its principal) and held by the DISC.
    (2) Trade receivables representing commissions. If a DISC acts as 
commission agent for a principal in a transaction described in 
Sec. 1.993-1 (b), (c), (d), (e), (h), or (i) which results in qualified 
export receipts for the DISC, and if an account

[[Page 644]]

receivable or evidence of indebtedness held by the DISC and representing 
the commission payable to the DISC as a result of the transaction arises 
(and, in the case of an evidence of indebtedness, designated on its face 
as representing such commission), such account receivable or evidence of 
indebtedness shall be treated as a trade receiveable. If, however, the 
principal is a related supplier (as defined in Sec. 1.994-1(a)(3)) with 
respect to the DISC, such account receivable or evidence of indebtedness 
will not be treated as a trade receivable unless it is payable and paid 
in a time and manner which satisfy the requirements of Sec. 1.994-
1(e)(3) or (5) (relating to initial payment of transfer price or 
commission and procedure for adjustments to transfer price or 
commission, respectively), as the case may be. However, see subparagraph 
(3) of this paragraph for rules regarding certain accounts receivable 
representing commissions payable to a DISC by its related supplier.
    (3) Indebtedness arising under Sec. 1.994-1(e). An indebtedness 
arising under Sec. 1.994-1(e)(3)(iii) (relating to initial payment of 
transfer price or commission) in favor of a DISC is not a qualified 
export asset. An indebtedness arising under Sec. 1.994-1(e)(5)(i) 
(relating to procedure for adjustments to transfer price or commission) 
in favor of a DISC is a trade receivable if it is paid in the time and 
manner described in Sec. 1.994-1(e)(5)(i) and (ii) and if it otherwise 
satisfies the requirements of subparagraph (2) of this paragraph. If 
such an indebtedness is not paid in the time and manner described in 
Sec. 1.994-1(e)(5)(i) and (ii), it is not a qualified export asset.
    (e) Temporary investments--(1) In general. For purposes of this 
section, temporary investments are money, bank deposits (not including 
time deposits of more than 1 year), and other similar temporary 
investments to the extent maintained by a DISC as reasonably necessary 
to meet its requirements for working capital. For purposes of this 
paragraph, a temporary investment is an obligation, including an 
evidence of indebtedness as defined in paragraph (d)(1) of this section, 
which is a demand obligation or has a period remaining to maturity of 
not more than 1 year at the date it is acquired by the DISC. A temporary 
investment does not include trade receivables.
    (2) Determination of amount of working capital maintained. For 
purposes of this paragraph--
    (i) The working capital of a DISC is the excess of its current 
assets over current liabilities.
    (ii) Current assets are cash and other assets (other than trade 
receivables) which may reasonably be expected to be converted into cash 
or sold or consumed during the current normal operating cycle of the 
DISC's trade or business.
    (iii) Current liabilities are obligations (or portions of 
obligations) due within the current normal operating cycle of the trade 
or business of the DISC whose satisfaction when due is reasonably 
expected to require the use of current assets.
    (iv) Generally accepted financial accounting treatments will be 
accepted, and
    (v) Current assets (other than temporary investments) are taken into 
account before temporary investments, and trade receivables are never 
taken into account, in determining whether such temporary investments 
are maintained by the DISC as reasonably necessary to meet his current 
liabilities and its requirements for working capital.
    (3) Determination of amount of working capital reasonably required. 
For purposes of this paragraph, a determination of the amount of money, 
bank deposits, and other similar temporary investments reasonably 
necessary to meet the requirements of the DISC for working capital will 
depend upon the nature and volume of the activities of the DISC existing 
at the end of the DISC's taxable year for which such determination is 
made, such as, for example--
    (i) In the case of a DISC which purchases and sells inventory, the 
amount of working capital reasonably required is limited to an amount 
reasonably necessary to meet the ordinary operating expenses during the 
current normal operating cycle of the trade or business of the DISC, an 
amount reasonably needed to meet specific and definite plans for 
expansion and any amounts necessary for reasonably anticipated 
extraordinary business expenses.

[[Page 645]]

    (ii) In the case of a DISC which actively conducts a trade or 
business (including the employment of a sales force) and receives 
commissions in respect of goods to which such DISC does not have title, 
the amount of working capital required will depend upon the nature and 
volume of the activities of the DISC which produce such income as they 
exist on the applicable determination date. In determining the amount of 
working capital which is reasonably required for the production of such 
income, the anticipated future needs of the business will be taken into 
account to the extent that such needs relate to the year of the DISC 
following the applicable determination date. Anticipated future needs 
relating to a later period will not be taken into account unless it is 
clearly established that such needs are reasonably related to the 
production of such income as of the applicable determination date.
    (iii) In the case of a DISC which does not actively conduct a trade 
or business, and which receives commissions solely by reason of section 
994(a)(1), (a)(2), or (b) with respect to goods to which such DISC does 
not have title, no working capital would be required beyond a de minimis 
amount unless it appears from the facts and circumstances that 
additional working capital will be required.
    (iv) In the case of a DISC deriving income from the leasing of 
property, the amount of working capital required will be determined on 
the basis of the facts and circumstances in such case.
    (4) Relationship of working capital to other qualified export 
assets. If a temporary investment is a qualified export asset under any 
provision of this section (other than this paragraph), this paragraph 
shall not affect its status as a qualified export asset. However, any 
such temporary investment is taken into account before other temporary 
investments in determining whether such other temporary investments are 
maintained by a DISC as reasonably necessary to meet its requirements 
for working capital. Current assets (other than temporary investments) 
are taken into account before temporary investments, and trade 
receivables are never taken into account, in determining whether such 
temporary investments are maintained by the DISC as reasonably necessary 
requirements for working capital. An obligation issued or incurred by a 
member of a controlled group (as defined in Sec. 1.993-1(k)) of which 
the DISC is a member is not a qualified export asset under this 
paragraph. For rules regarding working capital as of the end of each 
month of a taxable year for purposes of the 70-percent reasonableness 
standard with respect to certain deficiency distributions, see paragraph 
(j)(3) of this section.
    (f) Producer's loans. For purposes of this section, a producer's 
loan is an evidence of indebtedness arising in connection with 
producer's loans which are made by a DISC and which meet the 
requirements of Sec. 1.993-4. If a producer's loan is a qualified export 
asset, interest accrued with respect to the producer's loan will also be 
treated as a qualified export asset provided that payment is made in the 
form of money, property (valued at its fair market value on its date of 
transfer and including accounts receivable for sales by or through a 
DISC), a written obligation which qualifies as a debt under the safe 
harbor rule of Sec. 1.992-1(d)(2)(ii), or an accounting entry offsetting 
the account receivable against an existing debt owed by the person in 
whose favor the account receivable was established to the person with 
whom it engaged in the transaction and that payment is made no later 
than 60 days following the close of the taxable year of accrual of the 
interest. This paragraph (f) is effective for taxable years beginning 
after January 10, 1985 except that the taxpayer may at its option apply 
the provisions of this paragraph to taxable years ending after December 
31, 1971.
    (g) Stock or securities of related foreign corporations. For 
purposes of this section, the term ``stock or securities'', with respect 
to a related foreign export corporation (as defined in Sec. 1.993-5), 
has the same meaning as such term has as used in section 351 (relating 
to transfers to controlled corporations), except that the term 
``securities'' does not include obligations which are repaid, in whole 
or in part, at any time during the taxable year of the DISC following 
the taxable year of the DISC during which such obligations were acquired

[[Page 646]]

by the DISC or were issued, unless the DISC demonstrates to the 
satisfaction of the district director that the repayment was for bona 
fide business purposes and not for the purpose of avoidance of Federal 
income taxes.
    (h) Export-Import Bank obligations. For purposes of this section, 
the term ``Export-Import Bank obligations'' means obligations issued, 
guaranteed, insured, or reinsured (in whole or in part) by the Export-
Import Bank of the United States or by the Foreign Credit Insurance 
Association, but only if such obligations are acquired by the DISC--
    (1) From the Export-Import Bank of the United States,
    (2) From the Foreign Credit Insurance Association, or
    (3) From the person selling or purchasing the goods or services by 
reason of which such obligations arose, or from any corporation which is 
a member of the same controlled group (as defined in Sec. 1.993-1(k)) as 
such person.

For purposes of this paragraph, obligations issued by a person described 
in subparagraphs (1), (2), and (3) of this paragraph are treated as 
acquired from such person by the DISC if acquired from any person not 
more than 90 days after the date of original issue (as defined in 
Sec. 1.1232-3(b)(3)). Examples of specific types of Export-Import Bank 
obligations include debentures issued by such bank and certificates of 
loan participation.
    (i) Financing obligations. For purposes of this section, financing 
obligations are obligations (held by a DISC) of a domestic corporation 
organized solely for the purpose of financing sales of export property 
pursuant to an agreement with the Export-Import Bank of the United 
States under which such corporation makes export loans guaranteed by 
such Bank.
    (j) Funds awaiting investment--(1) In general. For purposes of this 
section, subject to the limitation descibed in subparagraph (2) of this 
paragraph, if, at the close of a DISC's taxable year, the sum of the 
DISC's money, bank deposits, and other similar temporary investments is 
determined under paragraph (e) of this section to exceed an amount 
reasonably necessary to meet the DISC's requirements for working 
capital, the amount of the DISC's bank deposits in the United States to 
the extent of the amount of this excess are funds awaiting investment at 
the close of such taxable year.
    (2) Limitation. Bank deposits described in subparagraph (1) of this 
paragraph are funds awaiting investment only if, by the last day of each 
of the sixth, seventh, and eighth months after the close of such taxable 
year, the sum of the adjusted bases of the qualified export assets of 
the DISC (other than such bank deposits) equals or exceeds 95 percent of 
the sum of the adjusted bases of all assets of the DISC (including such 
bank deposits) it held on the last day of such taxable year. For 
purposes of this subparagraph, the adjusted bases of assets of a DISC 
are determined as of the end of each of the months referred to in this 
subparagraph. Funds awaiting investment as described in this paragraph 
need not be traceable to any of the qualified export assets held by the 
DISC at the end of any of the months referred to in this subparagraph.
    (3) Coordination with certain deficiency distribution provisions. 
Under section 992(c)(3) and Sec. 1.992-3(d) a deficiency distribution 
made on or before the 15th day of the ninth month after the end of a 
corporation's taxable year is deemed to be for reasonable cause if 
certain requirements are met, including the requirement (described in 
section 992(c)(3)(B) and Sec. 1.992-3(d)(2)) that the sum of the 
adjusted bases of the qualified export assets held by the corporation on 
the last day of each month of such year equals or exceeds 70 percent of 
the sum of the adjusted bases of all assets held by the corporation on 
each such last day. If, on any such last day, the sum or a DISC's money, 
bank deposits, and other similar temporary investments is determined 
under paragraph (e) of this section to exceed an amount reasonably 
necessary to meet the DISC's requirements for working capital, the 
amount of the DISC's bank deposits to the extent of the amount of this 
excess are funds awaiting investment on such last day, if either--
    (i) The requirements of subparagraph (2) of this paragraph are 
satisfied with respect to the taxable year of the DISC which includes 
such month or

[[Page 647]]

    (ii) At the close of such taxable year the sum of the DISC's money, 
bank deposits, and other similar temporary investments is determined 
under paragraph (e) of this section not to exceed an amount reasonably 
necessary to meet the DISC's requirements for working capital.

(Secs. 995(e)(7), (8) and (10), 995(g) and 7805 of the Internal Revenue 
Code of 1954 (90 Stat. 1655, 26 U.S.C. 995 (e)(7), (8) and (10); 90 
Stat. 1659, 26 U.S.C. 995(g); and 68A Stat 917, 26 U.S.C. 7805))

[T.D. 7514, 42 FR 55459, Oct. 17, 1977; 42 FR 60910, Nov. 30, 1977, as 
amended by T.D. 7854, 47 FR 51740, Nov. 17, 1982; T.D. 7984, 49 FR 
40018, Oct. 12, 1984]


<R05>
Sec. 1.993-3  Definition of export property.

    (a) General rule. Under section 993(c), except as otherwise provided 
with respect to excluded property in paragraph (f) of this section and 
with respect to certain short supply property in paragraph (i) of this 
section, export property is property in the hands of any person (whether 
or not a DISC)--
    (1) Manufactured, produced, grown, or extracted in the United States 
by any person or persons other than a DISC (see paragraph (c) of this 
section),
    (2) Held primarily for sale or lease in the ordinary course of a 
trade or business to any person for direct use, consumption, or 
disposition outside the United States (see paragraph (d) of this 
section),
    (3) Not more than 50 percent of the fair market value of which is 
attributable to articles imported into the United States (see paragraph 
(e) of this section), and
    (4) Which is not sold or leased by a DISC, or with a DISC as 
commission agent, to another DISC which is a member of the same 
controlled group (as defined in Sec. 1.993-1(k)) as the DISC.
    (b) Services. For purposes of this section, services (including the 
written communication of services in any form) are not export property. 
Whether an item is property or services shall be determined on the basis 
of the facts and circumstances attending the development and disposition 
of the item. Thus, for example, the preparation of a map of a particular 
construction site would constitute services and not export property, but 
standard maps prepared for sale to customers generally would not 
constitute services and would be export property if the requirements of 
this section were otherwise met.
    (c) Manufacture, production, growth, or extraction of property--(1) 
By a person other than a DISC. Export property may be manufactured, 
produced, grown, or extracted in the United States by any person, 
provided that such person does not qualify (and is not treated) as a 
DISC. Property held by a DISC which was manufactured, produced, grown, 
or extracted by it at a time when it did not qualify (and was not 
treated) as a DISC is not export property of the DISC. Property which 
sustains further manufacture or production outside the United States 
prior to sale or lease by a person but after manufacture or production 
in the United States will not be considered as manufactured, produced, 
grown, or extracted in the United States by such person.
    (2) Manufactured or produced--(i) In general. For purposes of this 
section, property which is sold or leased by a person is considered to 
be manufactured or produced by such person if such property is 
manufactured or produced (within the meaning of either subdivision (ii), 
(iii), or (iv) of this subparagraph) by such person or by another person 
pursuant to a contract with such person. Except as provided in 
subdivision (iv) of this subparagraph, manufacture or production of 
property does not include assembly or packaging operations with respect 
to property.
    (ii) Substantial transformation. Property is manufactured or 
produced by a person if such property is substantially transformed by 
such person. Examples of substantial transformation of property would 
include the conversion of woodpulp to paper, steel rods to screws and 
bolts, and the canning of fish.
    (iii) Operations generally considered to constitute manufacturing. 
Property is manufactured or produced by a person if the operations 
performed by such person in connection with such property are 
substantial in nature and are generally considered to constitute the 
manufacture or production of property.

[[Page 648]]

    (iv) Value added to property. Property is manufactured or produced 
by a person if with respect to such property conversion costs (direct 
labor and factory burden including packaging or assembly) of such person 
account for 20 percent of more of--
    (a) The cost of goods sold or inventory amount of such person for 
such property is such property is sold or held for sale, or
    (b) The adjusted basis of such person for such property, as 
determined in accordance with the provisions of section 1011, if such 
property is held for lease or leased.

The value of parts provided pursuant to a services contract, as 
described in Sec. 1.993-1 (d)(4)(v), is not taken into account in 
applying this subdivision.
    (d) Primary purpose of which property is held--(1) In general--(i) 
General rule. Under paragraph (a)(2) of this section, export property 
(a) must be held primarily for the purpose of sale or lease in the 
ordinary course of trade or business to a DISC, or to any other person, 
and (b) such sale or lease must be for direct use, consumption, or 
disposition outside the United States. Thus, property cannot qualify as 
export property unless it is sold or leased for direct use, consumption 
or disposition outside the United States. Property is sold or leased for 
direct use, consumption, or disposition outside the United States if 
such sale or lease satisfies the destination test described in 
subparagraph (2) of this paragraph, the proof of compliance requirements 
described in subparagraph (3) of this paragraph, and the use outside the 
United States test described in subparagraph (4) of this paragraph.
    (ii) Factors not taken into account. In determining whether property 
which is sold or leased to a DISC is sold or leased for direct use 
consumption, or disposition outside the United States, the fact that the 
acquiring DISC holds the property in inventory or for lease prior to the 
time it sells or leases it for direct use, consumption, or disposition 
outside the United States will not affect the characterization of the 
property as export property. Export property need not be physically 
segregated from other property.
    (2) Destination test. (i) For purposes of subparagraph (1) of this 
paragraph the destination test in this subparagraph is satisfied with 
respect to property sold or leased by a seller or lessor only if it is 
delivered by such seller or lessor (or an agent of such seller or 
lessor) regardless of the F.O.B. point or the place at which title 
passes or risk of loss shifts from the seller or lessor--
    (a) Within the United States to a carrier or freight forwarder for 
ultimate delivery outside the United States to a purchaser or lessee (or 
to a subsequent purchaser or sublessee),
    (b) Within the United States to a purchaser or lessee, if such 
property is ultimately delivered, directly used, or directly consumed 
outside the United States (including delivery to a carrier or freight 
forwarder for delivery outside the United States) by the purchaser or 
lessee (or a subsequent purchaser or sublessee) within 1 year after such 
sale or lease,
    (c) Within or outside the United States to a purchaser or lessee 
which, at the time of the sale or lease, is a DISC and is not a member 
of the same controlled group (as defined in Sec. 1.993-1(k)) as the 
seller or lessor,
    (d) From the United States to the purchaser or lessee (or a 
subsequent purchaser or sublessee) at a point outside the United States 
by means of a ship, aircraft, or other delivery vehicle, owned, leased, 
or chartered by the seller or lessor,
    (e) Outside the United States to a purchaser or lessee from a 
warehouse, a storage facility, or assembly site located outside the 
United States, if such property was previously shipped by such seller or 
lessor from the United States, or
    (f) Outside the United States to a purchaser or lessee if such 
property was previously shipped by such seller or lessor from the United 
States and if such property is located outside the United States 
pursuant to a prior lease by the seller or lessor, and either (1) such 
prior lease terminated at the expiration of its term (or by the action 
of the prior lessee acting alone), (2) the sale occurred or the term of 
the subsequent lease began after the time at which the term of the prior 
lease would have expired, or (3) the lessee under the

[[Page 649]]

subsequent lease is not a related person (as defined in Sec. 1.993-
1(a)(6)) with respect to the lessor and the prior lease was terminated 
by the action of the lessor (acting alone or together with the lessee).
    (ii) For purposes of this subparagraph (other than (c) and (f)(3) of 
subdivision (i) thereof), any relationship between the seller or lessor 
and any purchaser, subsequent purchaser, lessee, or sublessee is 
immaterial.
    (iii) In no event is the destination test of this subparagraph 
satisfied with respect to property which is subject to any use (other 
than a resale or sublease), manufacture, assembly, or other processing 
(other than packaging) by any person between the time of the sale or 
lease by such seller or lessor and the delivery or ultimate delivery 
outside the United States described in this subparagraph.
    (iv) If property is located outside the United States at the time it 
is purchased by a person or leased by a person as lessee, such property 
may be export property in the hands of such purchaser or lessee only if 
it is imported into the United States prior to its further sale or lease 
(including a sublease) outside the United States. Paragraphs (a)(3) and 
(e) of this section (relating to 50 percent foreign content test) are 
applicable in determining whether such property is export property. 
Thus, for example, if such property is not subjected to manufacturing or 
production (as defined in paragraph (c) of this section) within the 
United States after such importation, it does not qualify as export 
property.
    (3) Proof of compliance with destination test--(i) Delivery outside 
the United States. For purposes of subparagraph (2) of this paragraph 
(other than subdivision (i)(c) thereof), a seller or lessor shall 
establish ultimate delivery, use, or consumption of property outside the 
United States by providing--
    (a) A facsimile or carbon copy of the export bill of lading issued 
by the carrier who delivers the property,
    (b) A certificate of an agent or representative of the carrier 
disclosing delivery of the property outside the United States,
    (c) A facsimile or carbon copy of the certificate of lading for the 
property executed by a customs officer of the country to which the 
property is delivered,
    (d) If such country has no customs administration, a written 
statement by the person to whom delivery outside the United States was 
made,
    (e) A facsimile or carbon copy of the shipper's export declaration, 
a monthly shipper's summary declaration filed with the Bureau of 
Customs, or a magnetic tape filed in lieu of the Shipper's Export 
Declaration, covering the property,
    (f) Any other proof (including evidence as to the nature of the 
property or the nature of the transaction) which establishes to the 
satisfaction of the Commissioner that the property was ultimately 
delivered, or directly sold, or directly consumed outside the United 
States within 1 year after the sale or lease.
    (ii) The requirements of subdivision (i) (a), (b), (c), or (e) of 
this subparagraph will be considered satisfied even though the name of 
the ultimate consignee and the price paid for the goods is marked out 
provided that, in the case of a Shipper's Export Declaration or other 
document listed in such subdivision (e) or a document such as an export 
bill of lading such document still indicates the country in which 
delivery to the ultimate consignee is to be made and, in the case of a 
certificate of an agent or representative of the carrier, that such 
document indicates that the property was delivered outside the United 
States.
    (iii) A seller or lessor shall also establish the meeting of the 
requirement of subparagraph (2)(i) of this paragraph (other than 
subdivision (c) thereof), that the property was delivered outside the 
United States without further use, manufacture, assembly, or other 
processing within the United States.
    (iv) Sale or lease to an unrelated DISC. For purposes of 
subparagraph (2)(i)(c) of this paragraph, a purchaser or lessee of 
property is deemed to qualify as a DISC for its taxable year if the 
seller or lessor obtains from such purchaser or lessee a copy of such 
purchaser's or lessee's election to be treated as a DISC as described in 
Sec. 1.992-2(a) together with such purchaser's or lessee's sworn 
statement that such election has

[[Page 650]]

been filed with the Internal Revenue Service Center. The copy of the 
election and the sworn statement of such purchaser or lessee must be 
received by the seller or lessor within 6 months after the sale or 
lease. A purchaser or lessee is not treated as a DISC with respect to a 
sale or lease during a taxable year for which such purchaser or lessee 
does not qualify as a DISC if the seller or lessor does not believe or 
if a reasonable person would not believe at the time such sale or lease 
is made that the purchaser or lessee will qualify as a DISC for such 
taxable year.
    (v) Failure of proof. If a seller or lessor fails to provide proof 
of compliance with the destination test as required by this 
subparagraph, the property sold or leased is not export property.
    (4) Sales and leases of property for ultimate use in the United 
States--(i) In general. For purposes of subparagraph (1) of this 
paragraph, the use test in this subparagraph is satisfied with respect 
to property which--
    (a) Under subdivisions (ii) through (iv) of this subparagraph is not 
sold for ultimate use in the United States or
    (b) Under subdivision (v) of this subparagraph is leased for 
ultimate use outside the United States.
    (ii) Sales of property for ultimate use in the United States. For 
purposes of subdivision (i) of this subparagraph, a purchaser of 
property (including components, as defined in subdivision (vii) of this 
subparagraph) is deemed to use such property ultimately in the United 
States if any of the following conditions exists:
    (a) Such purchaser is a related person (as defined in Sec. 1.993-
1(a)(6)) with respect to the seller and such purchaser ultimately uses 
such property, or a second product into which such property is 
incorporated as a component, in the United States.
    (b) At the time of the sale, there is an agreement or understanding 
that such property, or a second product into which such property is 
incorporated as a component, will be ultimately used by the purchaser in 
the United States.
    (c) At the time of the sale, a reasonable person would have believed 
that such property or such second product would be ultimately used by 
such purchaser in the United States unless, in the case of a sale of 
components, the fair market value of such components at the time of 
delivery to the purchaser constitutes less than 20 percent of the fair 
market value of the second product into which such components are 
incorporated (determined at the time of completion of the production, 
manufacture or assembly of such second product).

For purposes of (b) of this subdivision, there is an agreement or 
understanding that property will ultimately be used in the United States 
if, for example, a component is sold abroad under an express agreement 
with the foreign purchaser that the component is to be incorporated into 
a product to be sold back to the United States. As a further example 
there would also be such an agreement or understanding if the foreign 
purchaser indicated at the time of the sale or previously that the 
component is to be incorporated into a product which is designed 
principally for the United States market. However, such an agreement or 
understanding does not result from the mere fact that a second product, 
into which components exported from the United States have been 
incorporated and which is sold on the world market, is sold in 
substantial quantities in the United States.
    (iii) Use in the United States. For purposes of subdivision (ii) of 
this subparagraph, property (including components incorporated into a 
second product) is or would be ultimately used in the United States by 
such purchaser if, at any time within 3 years after the purchase of such 
property or components, either such property or components (or the 
second product into which such components are incorporated) is resold by 
such purchaser for use by a subsequent purchaser within the United 
States or such purchaser or subsequent purchaser fails, for any period 
of 365 consecutive days, to use such property or second product 
predominantly outside the United States as defined in subdivision (vi) 
of this subparagraph).
    (iv) Sales to retailers. For purposes of subdivision (ii)(c) of this 
subparagraph, property sold to any person whose principal business 
consists of selling from inventory to retail customers at retail outlets 
ouside the United States will be

[[Page 651]]

considered as property for ultimate use outside the United States.
    (v) Leases of property for ultimate use outside the United States. 
For purposes of subdivision (i) of this subparagraph a lessee of 
property is deemed to use such property ultimately outside the United 
States during a taxable year of the lessor if such property is used 
predominantly outside the United States (as defined in subdivision (vi) 
of this subparagraph) by the lessee during the portion of the lessor's 
taxable year which is included within the term of the lease. A 
determination as to whether the ultimate use of leased property 
satisfies the requirements of this subdivision is made for each taxable 
year of the lessor. Thus, leased property may be used predominantly 
outside the United States for a taxable year of the lessor (and thus, 
constitute export property if the remaining requirements of this section 
are met) even if the property is not used predominantly outside the 
United States in earlier taxable years or later taxable years of the 
lessor.
    (vi) Predominant use outside the United States. For purposes of this 
subparagraph, property is used predominantly outside the United States 
for any period if, during such period, such property is located outside 
the United States more than 50 percent of the time. An aircraft, 
railroad rolling stock, vessel, motor vehicle, container, or other 
property used for transportation purposes in deemed to be used 
predominantly outside the United States for any period if, during such 
period, either such property is located outside the United States more 
than 50 percent of the time or more than 50 percent of the miles 
traversed in the use of such property are traversed in outside the 
United States. However, any such property is deemed to be within the 
United States at all times during which it is engaged in transport 
between any two points within the United States, except where such 
transport constitutes uninterrupted international air transportation 
within the meaning of section 4262(c)(3) and the regulations thereunder 
(relating to tax on air transportation of persons). For purposes of 
applying section 4262(c)(3) to this subdivision, the term ``United 
States'' has the same meaning as in Sec. 1.993-7.
    (vii) Component. For purposes of this subparagraph, a component is 
property which is (or is reasonably expected to be) incorporated into a 
second product by the purchaser of such component by means of 
production, manufacture, or assembly.
    (e) Foreign content of property--(1) The 50 percent test. Under 
paragraph (a)(3) of this section, no more than 50 percent of the fair 
market value of export property may be attributable to the fair market 
value of articles which were imported into the United States. For 
purposes of this paragraph, articles imported into the United States are 
referred to as ``foreign content''. The fair market value of the foreign 
content of export property is computed in accordance with subparagraph 
(4) of this paragraph. The fair market value of export property which is 
sold to a person who is not a related person with respect to the seller 
is the sale price for such property (not including interest finance or 
carrying charges, or similar charges)
    (2) Application of 50 percent test. The 50 percent test described in 
subparagraph (1) of this paragraph is applied on an item-by-item basis 
If, however, a person sells or leases a substantial volume of 
substantially identical export property in a taxable year and if all of 
such property contains substantially identical foreign content is 
substantially the same proportion, such person may determine the portion 
of foreign content contained in such property on an aggregate basis.
    (3) Parts and services. If, at the time property is sold or leased 
the seller or lessor agrees to furnish parts pursuant to a services 
contract (as provided in Sec. 1.993-1(d)(4)(v)) and the price for the 
parts is not separately stated, the 50 percent test described in 
subparagraph (1) of this paragraph is applied on an aggregate basis to 
the property and parts. If the price for the parts is described in 
subparagraph (1) of this paragraph is applied separately to the property 
and to the parts.
    (4) Computation of foreign content-- (i) Valuation. For purposes of 
applying the

[[Page 652]]

50 percent test described in subparagraph (1) of this paragraph, it is 
necessary to determine the fair market value of all articles which 
constitute foreign content of the property being tested to determine if 
it is export property. The fair market value of such imported articles 
is determined as of the time such articles are imported into the United 
States. With respect to articles imported into the United States before 
July 1, 1980, the fair market value of such articles is their appraised 
value as determined under section 402 or 402a of the Tariff Act of 1930 
(19 U.S.C. 1401a or 1402) in connection with their importation. With 
respect to articles imported into the United States on or after July 1, 
1980, the fair market value of such articles is their appraised value as 
determined under section 402 of the Tariff Act of 1930 (19 U.S.C. 1401a) 
in connection with their importation. The appraised value of such 
articles is the full dutiable value of such articles, determined, 
however, without regard to any special provision in the United States 
tariff laws which would result in a lower dutiable value. Thus, an 
article which is imported into the United States is treated as entirely 
imported even if all or a portion of such article was originally 
manufactured, produced, grown, or extracted in the United States.
    (ii) Evidence of fair market value. For purposes of subdivision (i) 
of this subparagraph, the fair market value of imported articles 
constituting foreign content may be evidenced by the customs invoice 
issued on the importation of such articles into the United States. If 
the holder of such articles is not the importer (or a related person 
with respect to the importer), the fair market value of such articles 
may be evidenced by a certificate based upon information contained in 
the customs invoice and furnished to the holder by the person from whom 
such articles (or property incorporating such articles) were purchased. 
If a customs invoice or certificate described in the preceding sentence 
is not available to a person purchasing property, such person shall 
establish that no more than 50 percent of the fair market value of such 
property is attributable to the fair market value of articles which were 
imported into the United States.
    (iii) Interchangeable component articles--(a) Where identical or 
similar component articles can be incorporated interchangeably into 
property and a person acquires some such component articles that are 
imported into the United States and other such component articles that 
are not imported into the United States, the determination whether 
imported component articles were incorporated in such property as is 
exported from the United States shall be made on a substitution basis as 
in the case of the rules relating to drawback accounts under the customs 
laws. See section 313(b) of the Tariff Act of 1930, as amended (19 
U.S.C. 1313(b)).
    (b) The provisions of (a) of this subdivision may be illustrated by 
the following example:

    Example. Assume that a manufacturer produces a total of 20,000 
electronic devices. The manufacturer exports 5,000 of the devices and 
subsequently sells 11,000 of the devices to a DISC which exports the 
11,000 devices. The major single component article in each device is a 
tube which represents 60 percent of the fair market value of the device 
at the time the device is sold by the manufacturer. The manufacturer 
imports 8,000 of the tubes and produces the remaining 12,000 tubes. For 
purposes of this subdivision, in accordance with the substitution 
principle used in the customs drawback laws, the 5,000 devices exported 
by the manufacturer are each treated as containing an imported tube 
because the devices were exported prior to the sale to the DISC. The 
remaining 3,000 imported tubes are treated as being contained in the 
first 3,000 devices purchased and exported by the DISC. Thus, since the 
50 percent test is not met with respect to the first 3,000 devices 
purchased and exported by the DISC, those devices are not export 
property. The remaining 8,000 devices purchased and exported by the DISC 
are treated as containing tubes produced in United States, and those 
devices are export property (if they otherwise meet the requirements of 
this section).

    (f) Excluded property--(1) In general. Notwithstanding any other 
provision of this section, the following property is not export 
property--
    (i) Property described in subparagraph (2) of this paragraph 
(relating to property leased to a member of a controlled group),

[[Page 653]]

    (ii) Property described in subparagraph (3) of this paragraph 
(relating to certain types of intangible property),
    (iii) Products described in paragraph (g) of this section (relating 
to depletable products), and
    (iv) Products described in paragraph (h) of this section (relating 
to certain export controlled products).
    (2) Property leased to member of controlled group--(i) In general. 
Property leased to a person (whether or not a DISC) which is a member of 
the same controlled group (as defined in Sec. 1.993-1(k)) as the lessor 
constitutes export property for any period of time only if during the 
period--
    (a) Such property is held for sublease, or is subleased, by such 
person to a third person for the ultimate use of such third person;
    (b) Such third person is not a member of the same controlled group; 
and
    (c) Such property is used predominantly outside the United States by 
such third person.
    (ii) Predominant use. The provisions of paragraph (d)(4)(vi) of this 
section apply in determining under subdivision (i)(c) of this 
subparagraph whether such property is used predominently outside the 
United States by such third person.
    (iii) Leasing rule. For purposes of this subparagraph, leased 
property is deemed to be ultimately used by a member of the same 
controlled group as the lessor if such property is leased to a person 
which is not a member of such controlled group but which subleases such 
property to a person which is a member of such controlled group. Thus, 
for example, if X, a DISC for the taxable year, leases a movie film to 
Y, a foreign corporation which is not a member of the same controlled 
group as X, and Y then subleases the film to persons which are members 
of such group for showing to the general public, the film is not export 
property. On the other hand, if X, a DISC for the taxable year, leases a 
movie film to Z, a foreign corporation which is a member of the same 
controlled group as X, and Z then subleases the film to Y, another 
foreign corporation, which is not a member of the same controlled group 
for showing to the general public, the film is not disqualified under 
this subparagraph from being export property.
    (iv) Certain copyrights. With respect to a copyright which is not 
excluded by subparagraph (3) of this paragraph from being export 
property, the ultimate use of such property is the sale or exhibition of 
such property to the general public. Thus, if A, a DISC for the taxable 
year, leases recording tapes to B, a foreign corporation which is a 
member of the same controlled group as A, and if B makes records from 
the recording tape and sells the records to C, another foreign 
corporation, which is not a member of the same controlled group, for 
sale by C to the general public, the recording tape is not disqualified 
under this subparagraph from being export property, notwithstanding the 
leasing of the recording tape by A to a member of the same controlled 
group, since the ultimate use of the tape is the sale of the records 
(i.e., property produced from the recording tape).
    (3) Intangible property. Export property does not include any 
patent, invention, model, design, formula, or process, whether or not 
patented, or any copyright (other than films, tapes, records, or similar 
reproductions, for commercial or home use), goodwill, trademark, 
tradebrand, franchise, or other like property. Although a copyright such 
as a copyright on a book does not constitute export property, a 
copyrighted article (such as a book) if not accompanied by a right to 
reproduce it is export property if the requirements of this section are 
otherwise satisfied. However, a license of a master recording tape for 
reproduction outside the United States is not disqualified under this 
subparagraph from being export property.
    (g) Depletable products--(1) In general. Under section 993(c)(2)(C), 
a product or commodity which is a depletable product (as defined in 
subparagraph (2) of this paragraph) or contains a depletable product is 
not export property if--
    (i) It is a primary product from oil, gas, coal, or uranium (as 
described in subparagraph (3) of this paragraph), or
    (ii) It does not qualify as a 50-percent manufactured or processed 
product (as described in subparagraph (4) of this paragraph).

[[Page 654]]

    (2) Definition of ``depletable product''. For purposes of this 
paragraph, the term ``depletable product'' means any product or 
commodity of a character with respect to which a deduction for depletion 
is allowable under section 613 or 613A. Thus, the term depletable 
product includes any mineral extracted from a mine, an oil or gas well, 
or any other natural deposit, whether or not the DISC or related 
supplier is allowed a deduction, or is eligible to take a deduction, for 
depletion with respect to the mineral in computing its taxable income. 
Thus, for example, iron ore purchased by a DISC from a broker is a 
depletable product in the hands of the DISC for purposes of this 
paragraph even though the DISC is not eligible to take a deduction for 
depletion under section 613 or 613A.
    (3) Primary product from oil, gas, coal, or uranium. A primary 
product from oil, gas, coal, or uranium is not export property. For 
purposes of this paragraph--
    (i) Primary product from oil. The term ``primary product from oil'' 
means crude oil and all products derived from the destructive 
distillation of crude oil, including--
    (a) Volatile products,
    (b) Light oils such as motor fuel and kerosene,
    (c) Distillates such as naphtha,
    (d) Lubricating oils,
    (e) Greases and waxes, and
    (f) Residues such as fuel oil.

For purposes of this paragraph, a product or commodity derived from 
shale oil which would be a primary product from oil if derived from 
crude oil is considered a primary product from oil.
    (ii) Primary product from gas. The term ``primary product from gas'' 
means all gas and associated hydrocarbon components from gas wells or 
oil wells, whether recovered at the lease or upon further processing, 
including--
    (a) Natural gas,
    (b) Condensates,
    (c) Liquefied petroleum gases such as ethane, propane, and butane, 
and
    (d) Liquid products such as natural gasoline.
    (iii) Primary product from coal. The term ``primary product from 
coal'' means coal and all products recovered from the carbonization of 
coal including--
    (a) Coke,
    (b) Coke-oven gas,
    (c) Gas liquor,
    (d) Crude light oil, and
    (e) Coal tar.
    (iv) Primary product from uranium. The term ``primary product from 
uranium'' means uranium ore and uranium concentrates (known in the 
industry as ``yellow cake''), and nuclear fuel materials derived from 
the refining of uranium ore and uranium concentrates, or produced in a 
nuclear reaction, including--
    (a) Uranium hexafluoride,
    (b) Enriched uranium hexafluoride,
    (c) Uranium metal,
    (d) Uranium compounds, such as uranium carbide,
    (e) Uranium dioxide, and
    (f) Plutonium fuels.
    (v) Primary products and changing technology. The primary products 
from oil, gas, coal, or uranium described in subdivisions (i) through 
(iv) of this subparagraph and the processes described in those 
subdivisions are not intended to represent either the only primary 
products from oil, gas, coal, or uranium, or the only processes from 
which primary products may be derived under existing and future 
technologies, such as the gasification and liquefaction of coal.
    (vi) Petrochemicals. For purposes of this paragraph, petrochemicals 
are not considered primary products from oil, gas, or coal.
    (4) 50-percent manufactured or processed product--(i) In general. A 
product or commodity (other than a primary product from oil, gas, coal, 
or uranium) which is or contains a depletable product is not excluded 
from the term ``export property'' by reason of section 993(c)(2)(C) if 
it is a 50-percent manufactured or processed product. Such a product or 
commodity is a ``50-percent manufactured or processed product'' if, 
after the cutoff point of the depletable product, it is manufactured or 
processed (as defined in subdivision (ii) of this subparagraph) and 
either the cost test described in subdivision (iv) of this subparagraph 
or the fair market value test described in subdivision (v) of this 
subparagraph is satisfied. To determine

[[Page 655]]

cutoff point, see subdivisions (vi) and (vii) of this subparagraph.
    (ii) Manufactured or processed. A product is manufactured or 
processed if it is manufactured or produced within the meaning of 
paragraph (c)(2) of this section, except that for purposes of this 
subdivision the term manufacturing or processing does not include any 
excluded process (as defined in subdivision (iii) of this subparagraph) 
and the term conversion costs (as used in subdivision (iv) of such 
paragraph (c)(2)) does not include any costs attributable to any 
excluded process.
    (iii) Excluded processes. For purposes of this paragraph, excluded 
processes are extracting (i.e., all processes which are applied before 
the cutoff point of the mineral to which such processes are applied), 
and handling, packing, packaging, grading, storing, and transporting.
    (iv) Cost test. A product or commodity will qualify as a 50-percent 
manufactured or processed product if--
    (a) Its manufacturing and processing costs (that is, the portion of 
the cost of goods sold or inventory amount of the product or commodity 
attributable to the aggregate cost of manufacturing or processing each 
mineral contained therein) equal or exceed--
    (b) An amount equal to either of the following:
    (1) 50 percent of its cost of goods sold or inventory amount 
(decreased, at the DISC's option, by the portion of such cost or amount 
the DISC establishes is allocable to the difference between each prior 
owner's selling price for each depletable product contained in such 
product or commodity and such prior owner's cost of goods sold with 
respect thereto).
    (2) The aggregate of the cost at the cutoff point (see subdivisions 
(vi) and (vii) of this subparagraph) properly attributable to each 
mineral contained in such product or commodity. However, if this 
subdivision (2) is applied, then the amount in (a) of this subparagraph 
(iv) shall be decreased and the amount in this subdivision (2) shall be 
increased, by so much of the cost of goods sold or inventory amount of 
the product or commodity as is properly allocable to any process other 
than transportation applied after the cutoff point of such mineral which 
would be a mining process (within the meaning of Sec. 1.613-4) were it 
applied before such point.
    (v) Fair market value test. A product or commodity will qualify as a 
50-percent manufactured or processed product if--
    (a) The excess of its fair market value on the date it is sold, 
exchanged, or otherwise disposed of (or, if not sold, exchanged, or 
otherwise disposed of, the last day of the DISC's taxable year) over the 
portion thereof properly allocable to excluded processes other than 
extracting is equal to or greater than
    (b) Twice the aggregate of the fair market value at the cutoff point 
for each mineral contained in such product or commodity.

For purposes of this subdivision (v), the fair market value of a product 
or commodity on the date it is sold, exchanged, or otherwise disposed of 
is the price at which it is disposed of, subject to any adjustment that 
may be required under the arm's length standard of section 482 and the 
regulations thereunder. If such product or commodity is not sold, 
exchanged, or otherwise disposed of, then, for purposes of section 
992(a)(1)(B) (relating to the 95-percent test with respect to qualified 
export assets), the fair market value of a product or commodity on the 
last day of the DISC's taxable year is the arm's length price at which 
such product or commodity would have been sold on such date, determined 
by applying the principles of section 482 and the regulations 
thereunder.
    (vi) Cutoff point of a mineral. For purposes of this subparagraph:
    (a) The cutoff point is the point at which gross income from the 
property (within the meaning of section 613(a)) was in fact determined.
    (b) The cost at the cutoff point is deemed to be the amount of the 
gross income from the property of the taxpayer eligible for a depletion 
deduction with respect to the mineral.
    (c) The fair market value at the cutoff point is deemed to be the 
amount of the gross income from the property of the taxpayer eligible 
for a depletion deduction with respect to the mineral, except that, if 
(1) the fair market value of a product or commodity on the date

[[Page 656]]

specified in subdivision (v)(a) of this subparagraph exceeds the 
aggregate of the fair market value at the cutoff point for each mineral 
contained therein and (2) 10 percent or more of such excess is 
attributable to a net increase in the fair market values of such 
minerals by reason of factors other than manufacturing or processing or 
the application of excluded processes (such as, for example, increases 
in the fair market values of some minerals by reason of inflation or 
speculation exceed decreases in such values of other minerals by reason 
of deflation or speculation), then the aggregate of the fair market 
value at the cutoff point for each such mineral shall be increased to 
reflect the net excess so attributable.
    (d) The provisions of this subdivision (vi) are illustrated by the 
following example.

    Example. An integrated manufacturer, X, on February 1, 1976, had 
gross income from the property (within the meaning of section 613(a)) of 
$50 with respect to a specified volume of a mineral. Thus, the cost at 
the cutoff point of the mineral was $50. X converted the mineral into a 
product which it sold on July 15, 1976, for $75. Of the $25 excess of 
the selling price over the gross income from the property, $23 was 
attributable to manufacturing, processing, and the application or 
excluded processes, and $2 was attributable to an increase in the fair 
market value of the mineral due to inflation between February 1 and July 
15, 1976. Since only 8 percent of such excess ($2/$25) was attributable 
to factors other than manufacturing, processing, and the application of 
excluded processes, the fair market value at the cutoff point of the 
mineral is $50. However, had $3 of the $25 excess, or 12 percent, been 
attributable to an increase in the fair market value of the mineral due 
to inflation, then the fair market value at the cutoff point of the 
mineral would be $53.

    (vii) [Reserved]
    (viii) Special rule for certain used products and scrap products. If 
a product or commodity is a used 50-percent manufactured or processed 
product, or is recovered as scrap from a 50-percent manufactured or 
processed product, such product or commodity will be treated as a 50-
percent manufactured or processed product.
    (ix) Special rule for byproducts and waste products. For purposes of 
applying the cost test or fair market value test of subdivision (iv) or 
(v) of this subparagraph if a depletable product is recovered from a 
manufacturing process as a byproduct or waste product, then the cost and 
fair market value at the cutoff point are each deemed to be the lesser 
of--
    (a) The fair market value of the waste product or byproduct 
containing the depletable product, determined as of the date the 
byproduct or waste product is recovered, or
    (b) The amount the cost at the cut-off point would be for a 
depletable product of like kind and grade which is extracted, determined 
as of the date the byproduct or waste product is recovered.

For purposes of (b) of this subdivision the cutoff point for the 
depletable product of like kind and grade is deemed to be the point at 
which gross income from the property would be determined if such 
depletable product were sold by the taxpayer eligible to take a 
deduction for depletion after the completion of all mining processes 
applied to the depletable product and before the application of any 
nonmining process.
    (x) Proof of satisfaction of 50-percent manufactured or processed 
test. (a) No substantiation is required to establish that either the 
cost test or the fair market value test of subdivisions (iv) or (v) of 
this subparagraph is satisfied or that a product or commodity qualifies 
under (viii) of this subdivision as either a used 50-percent 
manufactured or processed product or as scrap from a 50-percent 
manufactured or processed product as long as it is reasonably obvious, 
on the basis of all relevant facts and circumstances, that either the 
cost test or fair market value test is satisfied, or that the product or 
commodity qualifies as either as used 50-percent manufactured or 
processed product or as scrap from a 50-percent manufactured or 
processed product. Thus, for example, in the case of a DISC exporting a 
high precision lens at least 50 percent of the fair market value of 
which is obviously attributable to grinding, no substantiation of gross 
income from the property properly allocable to the depletable products 
contained in the lens, cost, or fair market values will be required.

[[Page 657]]

    (b) In cases in which satisfaction of either the cost test or the 
fair market value test is not reasonably obvious, a DISC will be 
required to substantiate the gross income from the property properly 
allocable to each depletable product in a product or commodity and 
either all costs or fair market values relied upon the DISC.
    (c) For purposes of substantiating (1) gross income from the 
property properly allocable to a depletable product, (2) costs, and (3) 
fair market values, the DISC and related supplier shall each identify 
items in (or that were in) inventory in the same manner each used to 
identify items in inventory for purposes of computing Federal income 
tax.
    (xi) Application of 50-percent test. The 50-percent test described 
in this subparagraph is applied on an item-by-item basis. If, however, a 
DISC sells a substantial volume of substantially identical products or 
commodities and if all or a group of such products or commodities 
contain substantially identical depletable products in substantially the 
same proportions and have cost or fair market value relationships (as 
the case may be) that are in substantially the same proportions, such 
DISC may apply the 50-percent test on an aggregate basis with respect to 
all such products or commodities, or group, as the case may be.
    (5) Effective dates. Except as provided in subparagraph (6) of this 
paragraph, section 993(c)(2)(C) applies--
    (i) With respect to any product or commodity not owned by a DISC, to 
sales, exchanges, or other dispositions made after March 18, 1975, with 
respect to which the DISC derives gross receipts.
    (ii) With respect to any product or commodity acquired by a DISC 
after March 18, 1975.
    (iii) With respect to any product or commodity owned by a DISC on 
March 18, 1975, to sales, exchanges, or other dispositions made after 
March 18, 1976, and to owning such product or commodity after such date.

For purposes of this paragraph and subparagraph (6) of this paragraph, 
the date of a sale, exchange, or other disposition of a product or 
commodity is the date as of which title to such product or commodity 
passes. The accounting method of a person is not determinative of the 
date of a sale, exchange, or other disposition.
    (6) Fixed contracts. Section 1101(f) of the Tax Reform Act of 1976 
provides an exception to the effective date rules in this paragraph and 
in paragraph (h) of this section. Section 1101(f)(2) of the Act provides 
that section 993(c)(2)(C) and (D) shall not apply to sales, exchanges, 
and other dispositions made after March 18, 1975, but before March 19, 
1980, if they are made pursuant to a fixed contract. Section 1101(f)(2) 
also defines fixed contract. Under that definition, if the seller can 
vary the price of the product for unspecified cost increases (which 
could include tax cost increases), or if the quantity of products or 
commodities to be sold can be increased or decreased under the contract 
by the seller without penalty, the contract is not to be considered a 
fixed contract with respect to the amount over which the seller has 
discretion. For example, if a contract calls for a minimum delivery of x 
amount of a product but allows the seller to refuse to deliver goods 
beyond that minimum amount (or allows a renegotiation of the sales price 
of goods beyond that amount), then with respect to the amount above the 
minimum the contract is not a fixed quantity contract.
    (h) Export controlled products--(1) In general. An export controlled 
product is not export property. A product or commodity may be an export 
controlled product at one time but not an export controlled product at 
another time. For purposes of this paragraph, a product or commodity is 
an ``export controlled product'' at a particular time if at that time 
the export of such product or commodity is prohibited or curtailed under 
section 4(b) of the Export Administration Act of 1969 or section 7(a) of 
the Export Administration Act of 1979, to effectuate the policy relating 
to the protection of the domestic economy set forth in such Acts 
(paragraph (2)(A) of section 3 of the Export Administration Act of 1969 
and paragraph (2)(C) of section 3 of the Export Administration Act of 
1979). Such policy is to use export controls to the extent necessary 
``to protect the domestic economy from the excessive drain of scarce

[[Page 658]]

materials and to reduce the serious inflationary impact of foreign 
demand.''
    (2) Products considered export controlled products--(i) In general. 
For purposes of this paragraph, an export controlled product is a 
product or commodity which is subject to short supply export controls 
under 15 CFR part 377. A product or commodity is considered an export 
controlled product for the duration of each control period which applies 
to such product or commodity. A control period of a product or commodity 
begins on and includes the initial control date (as defined in 
subdivision (ii) of this subparagraph) and ends on and includes the 
final control date (as defined in subdivision (iii) of this 
subparagraph).
    (ii) Initial control date. The initial control date of a product or 
commodity which was subject to short supply export controls on March 19, 
1975, is March 19, 1975. The initial control date of a product or 
commodity which is subject to short supply export controls after March 
19, 1975, is the effective date stated in the regulations to 15 CFR part 
377 which subjects such product or commodity to short supply export 
controls. If there is no effective date stated in such regulations, the 
initial control date of such product or commodity is the date on which 
such regulations are filed for publications in the Federal Register.
    (iii) Final control date. The final control date of a product or 
commodity is the effective date stated in the regulations to 15 CFR part 
377 which removes such product or commodity from short supply export 
controls. If there is no effective date stated in such regulations, the 
final control date of such product or commodity is the date on which 
such regulations are filed for publication in the Federal Register.
    (iv) Expiration of Export Administration Act. An initial control 
date and a final control date cannot occur after the expiration date of 
the Export Administration Act under the authority of which the short 
supply export controls were issued.
    (3) Effective dates--(i) Products controlled on March 19, 1975. 
Except as provided in paragraph (g)(6) of this section, if a product or 
commodity was subject to short supply export controls on March 19, 1975, 
this paragraph applies--
    (a) With respect to any such product or commodity not owned by a 
DISC, to sales, exchanges, other dispositions, or leases made after 
March 18, 1975, with respect to which the DISC derives gross receipts.
    (b) With respect to any such product or commodity acquired by a DISC 
after March 18, 1975, and
    (c) With respect to any such product or commodity owned by a DISC on 
March 18, 1975, to sales, exchanges, other dispositions, and leases made 
after March 18, 1976, and to owning such product or commodity after such 
date.
    (ii) Products first controlled after March 19, 1975. If a product or 
commodity becomes subject to short supply export controls after March 
19, 1975, this paragraph applies to sales, exchanges, other 
dispositions, or leases of such product or commodity made on or after 
the initial control date of such product or commodity, and to owning 
such product or commodity on or after such date.
    (iii) Date of sale, exchange, lease, or other disposition. For 
purposes of this subparagraph, the date of sale, exchange, or other 
disposition of a product or commodity is the date as of which title to 
such product or commodity passes. The date of a lease is the date as of 
which the lessee takes possession of a product or commodity. The 
accounting method of a person is not determinative of the date of sale, 
exchange, other disposition, or lease.
    (iv) Property in short supply. If the President determines that the 
supply of any property which is otherwise export property as defined in 
this section is insufficient to meet the requirements of the domestic 
economy, he may by Executive order designate such property as in short 
supply. Any property so designated will be treated as property which is 
not export property during the period beginning with the date specified 
in such Executive order and ending with the date specified in an 
Executive order setting forth the

[[Page 659]]

President's determination that such property is no longer in short 
supply.

[T.D. 7514, 42 FR 55461, Oct. 17, 1977, as amended by T.D. 7513, 42 FR 
57309, Nov. 2, 1977; T.D. 7854, 47 FR 51740, Nov. 17, 1982]


<R05>
Sec. 1.993-4  Definition of producer's loans.

    (a) General rule--(1) Definition. Under section 993(d), a loan made 
by a DISC to a person, referred to in this section as the ``borrower,'' 
is a producer's loan if--
    (i) The loan is made out of accumulated DISC income within the 
meaning of subparagraph (3) of this paragraph.
    (ii) The loan is evidenced by an obligation described in 
subparagraph (4) of this paragraph.
    (iii) The requirement as to the trade or business of the borrower 
described in subparagraph (5) of this paragraph is satisfied.
    (iv) At the time the loan is made, the obligation referred to in 
subdivision (ii) of this subparagraph bears a legend stating ``This 
Obligation Is Designated A Producer's Loan Within The Meaning of section 
993(d) of the Internal Revenue Code'' or words of substantially the same 
meaning.
    (v) The limitation as to the export-related assets of the borrower 
described in paragraph (b) of this section is satisfied.
    (vi) The requirement as to the increased investment of the borrower 
in export-related assets described in paragraph (c) of this section is 
satisfied, and
    (vii) The requirement of paragraph (d) of this section as to proof 
of compliance with paragraphs (b) and (c) of this section is satisfied.
    (2) Application of this section--(i) In general. A loan which is a 
producer's loan is a qualified export asset of the DISC (see Sec. 1.993-
2(a)(5) and (F)). The interest on a producer's loan is a qualified 
export receipt of the DISC (see Sec. 1.993-1(g)). A producer's loan is 
not a dividend to a borrower which is also a shareholder of the DISC 
making the loan. For rules with respect to deemed distributions by 
reason of the amount of foreign investment attributable to producer's 
loans, see section 995(b)(1)(G) and (d) and the regulations thereunder.
    (ii) No tracing of loan proceeds. For purposes of applying this 
section, in order to qualify as a producer's loan, the proceeds of the 
loan need not be traced to an investment in any specific asset.
    (iii) Unrelated borrower. For purposes of applying this section, it 
is not necessary for a borrower to be a related person with respect to 
the DISC from which it receives a producer's loan, or a member of the 
same controlled group as the DISC.
    (iv) Unpaid balance of producer's loans. For purposes of applying 
this section, the unpaid balance of producer's loans does not include 
the unpaid balance of any producer's loan to the extent the loan has 
been deducted or charged off by the DISC as totally or partially 
worthless under section 165 or 166.
    (v) Refinancing, renewal, and extension. For purposes of applying 
this section, the refinancing, renewal, or extension of a producer's 
loan shall be treated as the making of a new loan which may qualify as a 
producer's loan only if the requirements of subparagraph (1) of this 
paragraph are met.
    (vi) Events subsequent to time loan is made. The determination as to 
whether a loan qualifies as a producer's loan is made on the basis of 
the relevant facts taken into account for purposes of determining 
whether the loan was a producer's loan when made. Thus, for example, if 
the accumulated DISC income of the lender is later reduced below the 
unpaid balance of all producer's loans previously made by the DISC, such 
subsequent decrease in the amount of accumulated DISC income will not 
result in later disqualification of such loan (or part thereof) as a 
producer's loan. Similarly, if a loan (or part of a loan) does not 
qualify as a producer's loan because of an insufficient amount of 
accumulated DISC income at the time the loan is made, a subsequent 
increase in the amount of accumulated DISC income will not result in 
later qualification of such loan (or part thereof) as a producer's loan. 
As a further example, for purposes of applying the borrower's export 
related assets limitation described in paragraph (b) of this section, a 
loan which qualifies as a producer's loan when made will not later be 
disqualified if

[[Page 660]]

property, the gross receipts from the sale or lease of which were 
includible in the numerator of the fraction described in paragraph 
(b)(3)(i) of this section at the time of sale or lease by the borrower, 
is later characterized as excluded property (as defined in Sec. 1.993-
3(f)).
    (vii) Application of tests under paragraphs (b) and (c) on 
controlled group bases. If the borrower is a member of a controlled 
group (as defined in Sec. 1.993-1(k)) at the time a loan is made, all 
amounts that must be determined for purposes of applying the limitation 
and increased investment requirement with respect to the export-related 
assets of the borrower (described in paragraphs (b) and (c), 
respectively, of this section) may be determined at the election of the 
borrower by aggregating such amounts for all members of the controlled 
group, determined for the taxable year of each member of the controlled 
group during which the loan is made, excluding only such members of the 
group as are DISC's or foreign corporations for such year. However, such 
amounts may be included only to the extent that such amounts have not 
already been taken into account in applying the limitation and increased 
investment requirement with respect to any other borrower. Amounts to be 
aggregated for all such members if such election is made include, for 
example, gross receipts (described in paragraphs (b)(3)(i) and (ii) of 
this section) and export-related assets (described in paragraph (b)(2) 
of this section). The borrower may make such election by causing its 
written statement of election to be attached to the lending DISC's 
return under section 6011(e)(2) for the first taxable year of the 
lending DISC within which or with which the borrower's taxable year for 
which the election is to apply ends. An election once made is binding on 
all members of the controlled group which includes the borrower with 
respect to all taxable years of the borrower beginning with its first 
taxable year for which the election is made. A borrower who makes such 
election may revoke it only if it secures the consent of the 
Commissioner to such revocation upon application made through the 
lending DISC.
    (3) Loan out of accumulated DISC income--(i) In general. A loan is a 
producer's loan only to the extent that it is made out of accumulated 
DISC income. A loan is made out of accumulated DISC income only if the 
amount of the loan, when added to the unpaid balance at the time such 
loan is made of all other producer's loans made by a DISC, does not 
exceed the amount of accumulated DISC income of the DISC at the 
beginning of the month in which the loan is made. The amount of 
accumulated DISC income at the beginning of any month is determined as 
if the DISC's taxable year closed at the end of the immediately 
preceding month.
    (ii) Presumption. A loan made during a taxable year shall be deemed 
under subdivision (i) of this subparagraph to have been made out of 
accumulated DISC income if the balance of producer's loans at the 
beginning of the year and those made during the year do not exceed 
accumulated DISC income at the end of the year.
    (iii) Deemed distributions. For purposes of this subparagraph, 
accumulated DISC income as of the end of any taxable year (or month) 
shall be determined without regard to deemed distributions under section 
995(b)(1)(G) for the amount of foreign investment attributable to 
producer's loans for such year (or for the taxable year for which such 
month is a part) but actual distributions shall be taken into account.
    (4) Evidence and terms of obligation. A loan is a producer's loan 
only if the loan is evidenced by a note or other evidence of 
indebtedness which is made by the borrower and which has a stated 
maturity date not more than 5 years from the date the loan is made. 
Accordingly, a loan which does not have a stated maturity date or which 
has a stated maturity date more than 5 years from the date such loan is 
made can never meet the 5-year requirement of this subparagraph. Thus, 
for example, even if there is a period of less than 5 years remaining to 
the stated maturity date of a loan, the loan can never be a producer's 
loan if it had a stated maturity date more than 5 years from the date it 
was made. For a further example, if a loan having a period remaining to 
maturity of 2 years is extended for a further period of 3 years (making 
a

[[Page 661]]

total of 5 years to maturity from the date of the extension), the 
extension of the loan would under subparagraph (2)(v) of this paragraph 
constitute the making of a new producer's loan and the original 
producer's loan would terminate. If, however, a loan having a period 
remaining to maturity of 2 years is extended for a further period of 4 
years (making a total of 6 years to maturity from the date of the 
extension), the original producer's loan will terminate and the new loan 
will not be a producer's loan. If a producer's loan is not paid in full 
at its maturity date and is not formally refinanced, renewed, or 
extended, such loan shall be deemed to be a new loan which does not have 
a stated maturity date and, thus, will not be a producer's loan. For 
purposes of this subparagraph, an evidence of indebtedness is a written 
instrument of indebtedness. Section 482 and the regulations thereunder 
are applicable to determine, in the case of a loan by the DISC to a 
borrower which is owned or controlled directly or indirectly by the same 
interests as the DISC within the meaning of section 482, whether the 
interest charged on such loan is at an arm's length rate.
    (5) Borrower's trade or business. A loan is a producer's loan only 
if the loan is made to a person engaged in the United States in the 
manufacture, production, growth, or extraction (within the meaning of 
Sec. 1.993-3(c)) of export property determined without regard to 
Sec. 1.993-3(f)(1)(iii) and (iv). The borrower may also be engaged in 
other trades or businesses and the loan need not be traceable to 
specific investments in export property.
    (b) Borrower's export related assets limitation--(1) General rule. A 
loan to a borrower is a producer's loan only to the extent that the 
amount of the loan, when added to the unpaid balance of all other 
producer's loans made by all DISC's to the borrower which are 
outstanding at the time the loan is made, does not exceed an amount 
equal to the amount of the borrower's export-related assets (determined 
under subparagraph (2) of this paragraph) multiplied by the fraction set 
forth in subparagraph (3) of this paragraph.
    (2) Amount of export-related assets--(i) In general. For purposes of 
subparagraph (1) of this paragraph, the amount of the borrower's export-
related assets is the sum of the amounts described in subdivisions (ii), 
(iii), and (iv) of this subparagraph.
    (ii) Borrower's plant and equipment. The amount described in this 
subdivision is the sum of the borrower's adjusted bases (determined as 
of the beginning of the borrower's taxable year in which a loan is made 
to it) for plant, machinery, equipment, and supporting production 
facilities, which are located in the United States. Supporting 
production facilities are all property used primarily in connection with 
the manufacture, production, growth, or extraction (within the meaning 
of Sec. 1.993-3(c)) or storage, handling, transportation, or assembly of 
property by the borrower.
    (iii) Borrower's property held primarily for sale or lease. The 
amount described in this subdivision is the amount of the borrower's 
property (at the beginning of the taxable year of the borrower in which 
a loan is made to it) held primarily for sale or lease to customers in 
the ordinary course of its trade or business. The amount of such 
property held for sale is determined under the methods of identifying 
and valuing inventory normally used by the borrower. The amount of such 
property held for lease or leased is the borrower's adjusted bases, 
determined under section 1011, for such property.
    (iv) Borrower's research and experimental expenditures. The amount 
described in this subdivision is the aggregate amount, whether or not 
charged to capital account, of research and experimental expenditures 
(within the meaning of section 174) incurred in the United States by the 
borrower during each of its taxable years which begin after December 31, 
1971, and precede the taxable year in which the loan is made to the 
borrower. Such research and experimental expenditures need bear no 
relationship to export property (as defined in Sec. 1.993-3) of the 
borrower. The aggregate amount of all such expenditures for each of such 
preceding taxable years is taken into account for purposes of this 
subparagraph, regardless of whether all or any portion of the aggregate 
amount has been taken into account with respect to producer's

[[Page 662]]

loans made to the borrower by any DISC in preceding taxable years. The 
aggregate amount of all such expenditures shall include such 
expenditures of a corporation, the assets of which were acquired by the 
borrower in a distribution or a transfer described in section 381(a)(1) 
or (2) (relating to carryovers in certain corporate acquisitions).
    (3) Fraction referred to in subparagraph (1) of this paragraph--(i) 
Numerator of fraction. The numerator of the fraction set forth in this 
subparagraph is the sum of the borrower's gross receipts for each of its 
3 taxable years immediately preceding the taxable year in which the loan 
is made (but not including any taxable year beginning before January 1, 
1972) from the sale or lease of export property (determined without 
regard to Sec. 1.993-3(f)(1)(iii) and (iv)) which is manufactured, 
produced, grown, or extracted (within the meaning of Sec. 1.993-3(c)) by 
the borrower whether or not sold or leased directly or through a related 
domestic person (notwithstanding Sec. 1.993-3(a)(4) and (f)(2)). For 
purposes of the preceding sentence, with respect to a sale or lease to a 
related DISC in which the transfer price is determined under section 
994(a)(1) or (2), the rules under Sec. 1.994-1(c)(5) (relating to 
incomplete transactions) shall be applied, and with respect to all other 
sales and leases the rules under Sec. 1.994-1(c)(5) other than 
subdivision (i)(d) thereof shall be applied.
    (ii) Denominator of fraction. The denominator of the fraction set 
forth in this subparagraph is the sum of the amount included in the 
numerator and all other gross receipts of the borrower, for each of its 
taxable years for which gross receipts are included in the numerator of 
the fraction, from all sales or leases of all property held by the 
borrower primarily for sale or lease to customers in the ordinary course 
of its trade or business. For purposes of subdivision (i) of this 
subparagraph and this subdivision, if such property is sold or leased to 
a domestic related person which resells or subleases such property, the 
borrower's gross receipts shall be the gross receipts derived by the 
domestic related person from the resale or sublease of the export 
property.
    (iii) Taxable years. If the borrower has not engaged in the sale or 
lease of property (as described in this subparagraph) for the 3 
immediately preceding taxable years, or if 3 taxable years beginning 
after December 31, 1971, have not elapsed, the fraction will be computed 
on the basis of such gross receipts for its taxable years immediately 
preceding the loan and beginning after December 31, 1971, during which 
the borrower has so engaged. No producer's loans can be made to a 
borrower until after the end of the first taxable year of the borrower 
beginning after December 31, 1971.
    (c) Requirement for increased investment in export-related assets--
(1) In general. A loan to a borrower is a producer's loan only to the 
extent that the amount of the loan, when added to the unpaid balance of 
all other producer's loans made by all DISC's to the borrower during the 
borrower's taxable year during which such loan is made, does not exceed 
the amount of the borrower's increase for the year in investment in 
export-related assets. Such increase for any taxable year is the sum 
of--
    (i) The increase (if any) in the borrowers adjusted basis of certain 
types of assets as determined under subparagraph (2) of this paragraph 
and
    (ii) The amount (if any) during the year of its research and 
experimental expenditures as determined under paragraph (b)(2)(iv) of 
this section.
    (2) Increase in adjusted basis. The amount under this subparagraph 
is the amount (not less than zero) by which--
    (i) The borrower's adjusted basis (determined as of the end of its 
taxable year in which the producer's loan is made) in all of its 
property which is described in paragraph (b)(2)(ii) (plant and 
equipment), and (iii) (property held primarily for sale or lease) of 
this section, including any such property acquired by it during such 
taxable year, exceeds
    (ii) Its adjusted bases in all such property (determined as of the 
beginning of such year).
    (3) Ordering rule. If during the borrower's taxable year the amount 
of increase in investment in export-related assets determined under this 
subparagraph is exceeded by amounts loaned to

[[Page 663]]

the borrower during such year that would otherwise qualify as producer's 
loans, such loans shall be applied in the order made against the amount 
of such increase in order to determine which loans qualify as producer's 
loans.
    (d) Proof of borrower's compliance with paragraphs (b) and (c) of 
this section. For purposes of paragraphs (b) and (c) of this section, a 
DISC shall be prepared to establish initially the compliance of the 
borrower with the requirements of such paragraphs by providing the 
written statement of the borrower, certified by a certified public 
accountant, stating that the borrower has complied with the limitation 
and increased investment requirement in section 993(d)(2) and (3) of the 
Internal Revenue Code of 1954. In lieu of certification by a certified 
public accountant, the DISC may attach to its return a statement signed 
by the borrower under penalties of perjury on a form provided by the 
Internal Revenue Service certifying that the borrower has complied with 
the limitation and increased investment requirement in section 993(d)(2) 
and (3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954. For taxable years ending 
after October 17, 1977, the DISC must attach either the certification by 
the certified public accountant or the certification by the borrower to 
its return. Additional full substantiation of the borrower's compliance 
with the requirements of such paragraphs may be required by the district 
director. If full substantiation of such compliance is not provided by 
the DISC (or the borrower) when required, the loan shall be deemed not 
to be a producer's loan.
    (e) Special limitation in the case of domestic film maker--(1) 
General rule. The limitation of paragraph (b) of this section as to the 
export-related assets of the borrower will be considered satisfied if 
the DISC--
    (i) Is engaged in the trade or business of selling or leasing films 
which are export property, or is acting as a commission agent for a 
person who is so engaged,
    (ii) Makes a loan to a borrower which is a domestic film maker (as 
defined in subparagraph (5) of this paragraph) for the purpose of making 
a film, and
    (iii) The amount of such loan, when added to the unpaid balance of 
all other producer's loans made by all DISC's to the borrower which are 
outstanding at the time the loan is made, does not exceed an amount 
determined by multiplying--
    (a) The sum of (1) the amount of the export-related assets of the 
borrower (determined under paragraph (b)(2)(i) of this section as of the 
beginning of the borrower's taxable year in which the loan is made), 
plus (2) the amount of a reasonable estimate of the amount of such 
export related assets obtained or to be obtained by the borrower during 
such year and subsequent years with respect to films as to which filming 
begins within such year by
    (b) The percentage which, based on the experience of other film 
makers of similar films for the 5 calendar years preceding the calendar 
year in which the loan is made, the annual gross receipts (as described 
in Sec. 1.993-6(a)(1), whether or not such films constitute property 
described therein) of such other film makers from the sale or lease of 
such films outside the United States is of the annual gross receipts of 
such other film makers from all sales or leases of such films.
    (2) Purpose of loan. A loan by a DISC will be deemed to be for the 
making of a film if there exists a written agreement between the DISC 
and the borrower, executed at or before the time the loan is made, 
stating that the loan is made or to be made to enable the borrower to 
make such film.
    (3) Reasonable estimate of amounts. For purposes of subparagraph 
(1)(iii)(a)(2) of this paragraph, a reasonable estimate shall be based 
on the conditions known by the DISC and borrower to exist at the time a 
loan is made (or which the DISC and borrower have reason to know to 
exist at such time).
    (4) Experience of film makers. For purposes of subparagraph 
(1)(iii)(b) of this paragraph, the experience of other film makers of 
similar films for the 5 calendar years preceding the calendar year in 
which the loan is made shall be derived from such records and statistics 
as are acknowledged in the trade as reasonably reliable.
    (5) Domestic film maker. For purposes of this section, a borrower is 
a domestic film maker with respect to a film if--

[[Page 664]]

    (i) The borrower is a U.S. person within the meaning of section 
7701(a)(30), except that (a) with respect to a partnership all of the 
partners must be U.S. persons and (b) with respect to a corporation all 
of its officers and at least a majority of its directors must be U.S. 
persons,
    (ii) The borrower is engaged in the trade or business of making the 
film with respect to which the loan is made,
    (iii) Each studio, if any, used or to be used for filming or for 
recording sound incorporated into such film is located in the United 
States (as defined in section 7701(a)(9)),
    (iv) At least 80 percent of the aggregate playing time of the film 
is or will be photographed within the United States (as defined in 
section 7701(a)(9)), and
    (v) At least 80 percent of the total amount (not including any 
amount which is contingent upon receipts or profits of such film and 
which is fully taxable by the United States) paid or to be paid for 
services performed in the making of the film is either paid or to be 
paid to persons who are U.S. persons at the time such services are 
performed or consists of amounts which are fully taxable by the United 
States.
    (6) Amounts as fully taxable. For purposes of subparagraph (5)(v) of 
this paragraph, an amount is considered fully taxable by the United 
States if the entire amount is included in gross income under section 61 
or is subject to withholding under any provision of U.S. law or treaty 
to which the U.S. is a party and is not exempt from taxation under any 
provision of such law or treaty. Where a nonresident alien individual is 
engaged for the making of a film or where a foreign corporation is 
engaged to furnish the services of one of its officers or employees for 
the making of a film, the amount paid such individual or corporation 
will be considered as fully taxable by the United States only if it 
meets the test of this subparagraph.

[T.D. 7514, 42 FR 55464, Oct. 17, 1977, as amended by T.D. 7513, 42 FR 
57311, Nov. 2, 1977; T.D. 7514, 42 FR 60910, Nov. 30, 1977; T.D. 7854, 
47 FR 51741, Nov. 17, 1982]


<R05>
Sec. 1.993-5  Definition of related foreign export corporation.

    (a) General rule--(1) Definition. Under section 993(e), a foreign 
corporation is a related foreign export corporation with respect to a 
DISC if--
    (i) It is a foreign international sales corporation described in 
paragraph (b) of this section,
    (ii) It is a real property holding company described in paragraph 
(c) of this section, or
    (iii) It is an associated foreign corporation described in paragraph 
(d) of this section.
    (2) Application of this section. It is necessary to determine 
whether a foreign corporation is a related foreign export corporation 
with respect to a DISC for the following two purposes:
    (i) Qualified export assets. Under Sec. 1.993-2(g), the stock or 
securities of a related foreign export corporation held by the DISC are 
qualified export assets.
    (ii) Qualified export receipts. Under Sec. 1.993-1 (e), (f), and 
(g), certain receipts of the DISC with respect to stock or securities of 
a related foreign export corporation held by the DISC are qualified 
export receipts.
    (b) Foreign international sales corporation--(1) In general. A 
foreign corporation is a foreign international sales corporation with 
respect to a taxable year of a DISC if--
    (i) On each day during such taxable year of the DISC on which the 
foreign corporation has stock issued and outstanding, the DISC owns 
directly stock of the foreign corporation possessing more than 50 
percent of the total combined voting power of all classes of stock of 
the foreign corporation entitled to vote as determined under the 
principles of Sec. 1.957-1(b) (relating to definition of controlled 
foreign corporation),
    (ii) 95 percent or more of such foreign corporation's gross receipts 
(as defined in Sec. 1.993-6) for its taxable year ending with or within 
such taxable year of the DISC consists of qualified export receipts 
described in Sec. 1.993-1 (b) through (e) or interest described in 
Sec. 1.993-1(g) derived from any obligations described in Sec. 1.993-2 
(d) or (e), and
    (iii) The sum of the adjusted bases of the assets of the foreign 
corporation

[[Page 665]]

which are qualified export assets described in Sec. 1.993-2 (b) through 
(e) and which are held by the foreign corporation at the close of its 
taxable year which ends with or within such taxable year of the DISC 
equals or exceeds 95 percent of the sum of the adjusted bases of all 
assets held by the foreign corporation at the close of such taxable 
year.
    (2) Certain determinations. The determinations as to whether gross 
receipts are qualified export receipts described in subparagraph (1)(ii) 
of this paragraph and as to whether assets are qualified export assets 
described in subparagraph (1)(iii) of this paragraph are made by 
applying the requirements of Secs. 1.993-1 and 1.993-2 to the foreign 
corporation as if it were a domestic corporation being tested to 
determine whether it is a DISC. For purposes of making either of such 
determinations, the principles of accounting applicable for purposes of 
computing earnings and profits under Sec. 1.964-1 (relating to a 
controlled foreign corporation's earnings and profits) shall apply.
    (c) Real property holding company--(1) In general. A foreign 
corporation is a real property holding company with respect to a taxable 
year of a DISC if--
    (i) On each day during such taxable year of the DISC on which the 
foreign corporation has stock issued and outstanding, the DISC owns 
directly stock of the foreign corporation possessing more than 50 
percent of the total combined voting power of all classes of stock of 
the foreign corporation entitled to vote as determined under the 
principles of Sec. 1.957-1(b) and
    (ii) The sole function of the foreign corporation is to hold title 
to real property situated outside the United States for the exclusive 
use of the DISC, title to which may not be held by the DISC (and, if the 
DISC subleases such property to a related supplier, as described in 
subparagraph (3) of this paragraph, by such related supplier) under the 
law of the country in which such property is situated.
    (2) Activities of the foreign corporation. For purposes of 
subparagraph (1)(ii) of this paragraph, a foreign corporation which 
holds title to real property situated outside the United States may also 
perform activities with respect to such property (such as management, 
maintenance, and payment of taxes) which are ancillary to its function 
of holding title to such property.
    (3) Exclusive use by the DISC. Real property held by the foreign 
corporation must be used exclusively by the DISC whether under a lease 
or any other arrangement. Real property is not so used by the DISC if 
the DISC subleases such property to any other person. If, however, 
during a taxable year of the DISC--
    (i) 90 percent or more of the qualified export receipts of the DISC 
for such year are derived from transactions with respect to which it is 
a commission agent for a related supplier (as defined in Sec. 1.994-
1(a)(3)(ii)), and
    (ii) The DISC subleases such property to such related supplier

then such property will be considered as used exclusively by the DISC 
during such year if such related supplier does not sublease such 
property.
    (d) Associated foreign corporation--(1) In general. A foreign 
corporation is an associated foreign corporation with respect to a 
taxable year of the DISC if--
    (i) On each day during such taxable year of the DISC on which the 
foreign corporation has stock issued and outstanding, the DISC, or one 
or more members of the same controlled group of corporations (as defined 
in subparagraph (2) of this paragraph) as the DISC, owns (within the 
meaning of section 1563 (d) and (e)) stock of the foreign corporation 
possessing less than 10 percent of the total combined voting power of 
all classes of stock of the foreign corporation entitled to vote, as 
determined under the principles of Sec. 1.957-1(b), or owns no stock of 
such corporation, and
    (ii) The ownership of stock, or of securities (as defined in 
Sec. 1.993-2(g)), of the foreign corporation by the DISC or by one or 
more members of such controlled group of corporations reasonably 
furthers a transaction or transactions giving rise to qualified export 
receipts for the DISC.
    (2) Controlled group of corporations. For purposes of this 
paragraph, the term ``controlled group of corporations'' has the same 
meaning assigned to the term in section 1563(a) and not section 
993(a)(3) and Sec. 1.993-1(k). Thus,

[[Page 666]]

for purposes of this paragraph, the test of control is 80 percent 
control and, since the rules of section 1563(b) apply, only domestic 
members are considered to be members of the controlled group.
    (3) Furtherance of qualified export receipts. Ownership of stock or 
securities of a foreign corporation will be considered as reasonably 
furthering a transaction or transactions giving rise to qualified export 
receipts for a DISC if--
    (i) The ownership is necessary to obtain or maintain the foreign 
corporation as a customer of the DISC or of a related supplier, as 
defined in Sec. 1.994-1(a)(3)(ii) of the DISC or to aid the sales 
distribution system of the DISC or of such related supplier, and
    (ii) The amount of the investment in the foreign corporation bears a 
reasonable relationship to the amount of the DISC's annual net profit 
from transactions in its trade or business which it may reasonably 
expect to derive on account of such ownership.
In determining whether the amount of the investment is reasonable, there 
shall be taken into account any stock or securities of the foreign 
corporation owned by any other foreign corporation which, if it were a 
domestic corporation, would be a member of the same controlled group of 
corporations as the DISC.

[T.D. 7514, 42 FR 55467, Oct. 17, 1977; 42 FR 60910, Nov. 30, 1977]


<R05>
Sec. 1.993-6  Definition of gross receipts.

    (a) General rule. Under section 993(f), for purposes of sections 991 
through 996, the gross receipts of a person for a taxable year are--
    (1) The total amounts received or accrued by the person from the 
sale or lease of property held primarily for sale or lease in the 
ordinary course of a trade or business, and
    (2) Gross income recognized from all other sources, such as, for 
example, from--
    (i) The furnishing of services (whether or not related to the sale 
or lease of property described in subparagraph (1) of this paragraph),
    (ii) Dividends and interest,
    (iii) The sale at a gain of any property not described in 
subparagraph (1) of this paragraph, and
    (iv) Commission transactions as and to the extent described in 
paragraph (e) of this section.
    (b) Nongross receipts items. For purposes of paragraph (a) of this 
section, gross receipts do not include amounts received or accrued by a 
person from--
    (1) The proceeds of a loan or of the repayment of a loan, or
    (2) A receipt of property in a transaction to which section 118 
(relating to contribution to capital) or 1032 (relating to exchange of 
stock for property) applies.
    (c) Nonreduction of total amounts. For purposes of paragraph (a) of 
this section, the total amounts received or accrued by a person are not 
reduced by returns and allowances, costs of goods sold, expenses, 
losses, a deduction for dividends received under section 243, or any 
other deductible amounts.
    (d) Method of accounting. For purposes of paragraph (a) of this 
section, the total amounts received or accrued by a person shall be 
determined under the method of accounting used in computing its taxable 
income. If, for example, a DISC receives advance or installment payments 
for the sale or lease of property described in paragraph (a)(1) of this 
section, for the furnishing of services, or which represent recognized 
gain from the sale of property not described in paragraph (a)(1) of this 
section, any amount of such advance payments is considered to be gross 
receipts of the DISC for the taxable year for which such amount is 
included in the gross income of the DISC.
    (e) Commission transactions. (1) In the case of transactions which 
give rise to a commission on the sale or lease of property or the 
furnishing of services by a principal, the amount recognized by the 
commission agent as gross income from all such transactions shall be the 
gross receipts derived by the principal from the sale or lease of the 
property, or the gross income derived by the principal from the 
furnishing of services, with respect to which the commissions are 
derived. In the case of a commission agent for a related supplier (as 
defined in Sec. 1.994-1(a)(3)(ii)), the gross receipts or gross income 
of such agent shall be determined as if it used the same method of 
accounting as its related supplier. In the case of a

[[Page 667]]

commission agent for a principal other than a related supplier, the 
gross receipts or gross income of such principal shall be determined as 
if such principal used the same method of accounting as its agent.
    (2) If the commission arrangement provides that the commission agent 
will receive a commission only with respect to sales or leases of export 
property, or the furnishing of services, which result in qualified 
export receipts, the commission agent will not take into account the 
gross receipts or gross income, as the case may be, derived by the 
principal from any transaction for which the commission agent would not 
be entitled to a commission under the commission arrangement.
    (f) Example. The provisions of this section may be illustrated by 
the following example:

    Example. During 1973, M, a related supplier (as defined in 
Sec. 1.994-1(a)(3)(ii)) of N, is engaged in the manufacture of machines 
in the United States. N, a calendar year taxpayer, is engaged in the 
sale and lease of such machines in foreign countries. N furnishes 
services which are related and subsidiary to its sale and lease of such 
machines. N also acts as a commission agent in foreign countries for Z, 
an unrelated supplier, with respect to Z's sale of products. N receives 
dividends on stock owned by it in a related foreign export corporation 
(as defined in Sec. 1.993-5), interest on producer's loans made to M, 
and proceeds from sales of business assets located outside the United 
States resulting in a recognized gains and losses. N's gross receipts 
for 1973 are $3,550, computed on the basis of the additional facts 
assumed in the table below:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
(1) N's sales receipts for machines manufactured by M (without          
 reduction for cost of goods sold and selling expenses)........   $1,500
(2) N's lease receipts for machines manufactured by M (without          
 reduction for depreciation and leasing expenses)..............      500
(3) N's gross income from services for machines manufactured by         
 M (without reduction for service expenses)....................      400
(4) Z's sale receipts for products manufactured by Z (without           
 reduction for Z's cost of goods sold, commissions on sales,            
 and commission sales expenses)................................      550
(5) Dividends received by N....................................      150
(6) Interest received by N on producer's loans.................      200
(7) Proceeds received by N representing recognized gain (but            
 not losses) from sales of business assets located outside the          
 United States.................................................      250
                                                                --------
(8) N's gross receipts.........................................    3,550
                                                                ========
                                                                        

[T.D. 7514, 42 FR 55468, Oct. 17, 1977]


<R05>
Sec. 1.993-7  Definition of United States.

    Under section 993(g), the term ``United States'' includes the 
States, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, and 
possessions of the United States. For the requirement that a DISC must 
be incorporated and existing under the laws of a State or the District 
of Columbia, see Sec. 1.992-1(a)(1).

[T.D. 7514, 42 FR 55468, Oct. 17, 1977]


<R05>
Sec. 1.994-1   Inter-company pricing rules for DISC's.

    (a) In general--(1) Scope. In the case of a transaction described in 
paragraph (b) of this section, section 994 permits a person related to a 
DISC to determine the allowable transfer price charged the DISC (or 
commission paid the DISC) by its choice of three methods described in 
paragraph (c)(2), (3), and (4) of this section: The ``4 percent'' gross 
receipts method, the ``50-50'' combined taxable income method, and the 
section 482 method. Under the first two methods, the DISC is entitled to 
10 percent of its export promotion expenses as additional taxable 
income. When the gross receipts method or combined taxable income method 
is applied to a transaction, the Commissioner may not make 
distributions, apportionments, or allocations as provided by section 482 
and the regulations thereunder. For rules as to certain ``incomplete 
transactions'' and for computing combined taxable income, see paragraph 
(c)(5) and (6) of this section. Grouping of transactions for purposes of 
applying the method chosen is provided by paragraph (c)(7) of this 
section. The rules in paragraph (c) of this section are directly 
applicable only in the case of sales or exchanges of export property to 
a DISC for resale, and are applicable by analogy to leases, commissions, 
and services as provided in paragraph (d) of this section. For rules 
limiting the application of the gross receipts method and combined 
taxable income method so that the supplier related to the DISC will not 
incur a loss on transactions, see paragraph (e)(1) of this section. 
Paragraph (e)(2) of this section provides for the applicability of 
section 482 to resales by the DISC to related persons. Paragraph (e)(3) 
of this

[[Page 668]]

section provides for the time by which a reasonable estimate of the 
transfer price (including commissions and other payments) should be 
paid. The subsequent determination and further adjustments to transfer 
prices are set forth in paragraph (e)(4) of this section. Export 
promotion expenses are defined in paragraph (f) of this section. 
Paragraph (g) of this section has several examples illustrating the 
provisions of this section. Section 1.994-2 prescribes the marginal 
costing rules authorized by section 994(b)(2).
    (2) Performance of substantial economic functions. The application 
of section 994(a)(1) or (2) does not depend on the extent to which the 
DISC performs substantial economic functions (except with respect to 
export promotion expenses). See paragraph (l) of Sec. 1.993-1.
    (3) Related party and related supplier. For the purposes of this 
section--
    (i) The term ``related party'' means a person which is owned or 
controlled directly or indirectly by the same interests as the DISC 
within the meaning of section 482 and Sec. 1.482-1(a).
    (ii) The term ``related supplier'' means a related party which 
singly engages in a transaction directly with the DISC which is subject 
to the rules of section 994 and this section. However, a DISC may have 
different related suppliers with respect to different transactions. If, 
for example, X owns all the stock of Y, a corporation, and of Z, a DISC, 
and sells a product to Y which is resold to Z, only Y is the related 
supplier of Z, and, thus, only the resale from Y to Z is subject to 
section 994 and this section. If, however, X sells directly to Z and Y 
also sells directly to Z, then, as to the transactions involving direct 
sales to Z, each of X and Y is a related supplier of Z.
    (b) Transactions to which section 994 applies. Section 994(a)(3) may 
be applied, as described in paragraph (a) of this section, to any 
transaction between a related supplier and a DISC. Section 994(a)(1) or 
(2) may be applied, as described in paragraph (a) of this section, to a 
transaction between a related supplier and a DISC only in the following 
cases:
    (1) Where the related supplier sells export property to the DISC for 
resale or where the DISC is commission agent for the related supplier on 
sales by the related supplier of export property to third parties 
whether or not related parties. For purposes of this section, references 
to sales include exchanges.
    (2) Where the related supplier leases export property to the DISC 
for sublease for a comparable period with comparable terms of payment or 
where the DISC is commission agent for the related supplier on leases by 
the related supplier of export property to third parties whether or not 
related parties.
    (3) Where services are furnished by a related supplier which are 
related and subsidiary to any sale or lease by the DISC, acting as 
principal or commission agent, of export property under subparagraph (1) 
or (2) of this paragraph.
    (4) Where engineering or architectural services for construction 
projects located (or proposed for location) outside of the United States 
are furnished by a related supplier where the DISC is acting as 
principal or commission agent with respect to the furnishing of such 
services to a third party whether or not a related party.
    (5) Where the related supplier furnishes managerial services in 
furtherance of the production of qualified export receipts of an 
unrelated DISC where the related DISC is acting as principal or 
commission agent with respect to the furnishing of such services to an 
unrelated DISC.

Transactions are included, for purposes of this paragraph, only if they 
give rise to qualified export receipts (within the meaning of section 
993(a)) in the hands of the related DISC. If a transaction is not 
included in subparagraph (1), (2), (3), (4), or (5) of this paragraph, 
the rules of section 994(a)(1) or (2) do not apply. Thus, for example, 
the rules of sectoin 994(a)(1) or (2) would not apply if a DISC 
purchased export property from its related supplier and leased such 
property to a third party.
    (c) Transfer price for sales of export property--(1) In general. 
Under this paragraph, rules are prescribed for computing the allowable 
price for a transfer from a related supplier to a DISC in the case of a 
sale of export property described in paragraph (b)(1) of this section.

[[Page 669]]

    (2) The ``4-percent'' gross receipts method. Under the gross 
receipts method of pricing, the transfer price for a sale by the related 
supplier to the DISC is the price as a result of which the taxable 
income derived by the DISC from the sale will not exceed the sum of (i) 
4 percent of the qualified export receipts of the DISC derived from the 
sale of the export property (as defined in section 993 (c)) and (ii) 10 
percent of the export promotion expenses (as defined in paragraph (f) of 
this section) of the DISC attributable to such qualified export 
receipts.
    (3) The ``50-50'' combined taxable income method. Under the combined 
taxable income method of pricing, the transfer price for a sale by the 
related supplier to the DISC is the price as a result of which the 
taxable income derived by the DISC from the sale will not exceed the sum 
of (i) 50 percent of the combined taxable income (as defined in 
subparagraph (6) of this paragraph) of the DISC and its related supplier 
attributable to the qualified export receipts from such sale and (ii) 10 
percent of the export promotion expenses (as defined in paragraph (f) of 
this section) of the DISC attributable to such qualified export 
receipts.
    (4) Section 482 method. If the rules of subparagraphs (2) and (3) of 
this paragraph are inapplicable to a sale or a taxpayer does not choose 
to use them, the transfer price for a sale by the related supplier to 
the DISC is to be determined on the basis of the sale price actually 
charged but subject to the rules provided by section 482 and the 
regulations thereunder.
    (5) Incomplete transactions. (i) For purposes of the gross receipts 
and combined taxable income methods, where property (encompassed within 
a transaction or group chosen under subparagraph (7) of this paragraph) 
is transferred by a related supplier to a DISC during a taxable year of 
either the DISC or related supplier, but some or all of such property is 
not sold by the DISC during such year--
    (a) The transfer price of such property sold by the DISC during such 
year shall be computed separately from the transfer price of the 
property not sold by the DISC during such year,
    (b) With respect to such property not sold by the DISC during such 
year, the transfer price paid by the DISC for such year shall be the 
related supplier's cost of goods sold (see subparagraph (6)(ii) of this 
paragraph) with respect to the property, except that, with respect to 
such taxable years ending on or before August 15, 1975, the transfer 
price paid by the DISC shall be at least (but need not exceed) the 
related supplier's cost of goods sold with respect to the property.
    (c) For the subsequent taxable year during which such property is 
resold by the DISC, an additional amount shall be paid by the DISC (to 
be treated as income for such year by the related supplier) equal to the 
excess of the amount which would have been the transfer price under this 
section had the transfer to the DISC by the related supplier and the 
resale by the DISC taken place during the taxable year of the DISC 
during which it resold the property over the amount already paid under 
(b) of this subdivision.
    (d) The time and manner of payment of transfer prices required by 
(b) and (c) of this subdivision shall be determined under paragraphs 
(e)(3), (4), and (5) of this section.
    (ii) For purposes of this paragraph, a DISC may determine the year 
in which it receives property from a related supplier and the year in 
which it sells property in accordance with the method of identifying 
goods in its inventory properly used under section 471 or 472 (relating 
respectively to general rule for inventories and to LIFO inventories). 
Transportation expense of the related supplier in connection with a 
transaction to which this subparagraph applies shall be treated as an 
item of cost of goods sold with respect to the property if the related 
supplier includes the cost of intracompany transportation between its 
branches, divisions, plants, or other units in its cost of goods sold 
(see subparagraph (6)(ii) of this paragraph).
    (6) Combined taxable income. For purposes of this section, the 
combined taxable income of a DISC and its related supplier from a sale 
of export property is the excess of the gross receipts (as defined in 
section 993(f)) of the DISC from such sale over the total costs of

[[Page 670]]

the DISC and related supplier which relate to such gross receipts. Gross 
receipts from a sale do not include interest with respect to the sale. 
Combined taxable income under this paragraph shall be determined after 
taking into account under paragraph (e)(2) of this section all 
adjustments required by section 482 with respect to transactions to 
which such section is applicable. In determining the gross receipts of 
the DISC and the total costs of the DISC and related supplier which 
relate to such gross receipts, the following rules shall be applied:
    (i) Subject to subdivisions (ii) through (v) of this subparagraph, 
the taxpayer's method of accounting used in computing taxable income 
will be accepted for purposes of determining amounts and the taxable 
year for which items of income and expense (including depreciation) are 
taken into account. See Sec. 1.991-1(b)(2) with respect to the method of 
accounting which may be used by a DISC.
    (ii) Cost of goods sold shall be determined in accordance with the 
provisions of Sec. 1.61-3. See sections 471 and 472 and the regulations 
thereunder with respect to inventories. With respect to property to 
which an election under section 631 applies (relating to cutting of 
timber considered as a sale or exchange), cost of goods sold shall be 
determined by applying Sec. 1.631-1(d)(3) and (e) (relating to fair 
market value as of the beginning of the taxable year of the standing 
timber cut during the year considered as its cost).
    (iii) Costs (other than cost of goods sold) which shall be treated 
as relating to gross receipts from sales of export property are (a) the 
expenses, losses, and other deductions definitely related, and therefore 
allocated and apportioned, thereto, and (b) a ratable part of any other 
expenses, losses, or other deductions which are not definitely related 
to a class of gross income, determined in a manner consistent with the 
rules set forth in Sec. 1.861-8.
    (iv) The taxpayer's choice in accordance with subparagraph (7) of 
this paragraph as to the grouping of transactions shall be controlling, 
and costs deductible in a taxable year shall be allocated and 
apportioned to the items or classes of gross income of such taxable year 
resulting from such grouping.
    (v) If an account receivable arising with respect to a sale of 
export property is transferred by the related supplier to a DISC which 
is a member of the same controlled group within the meaning of 
Sec. 1.993-1(k) for an amount reflecting a discount from the selling 
price taken into account in computing (without regard to this 
subdivision) combined taxable income of the DISC and its related 
supplier, then the combined taxable income from such sale shall be 
reduced by the amount of the discount.
    (7) Grouping transactions. (i) Generally, the determinations under 
this section are to be made on a transaction-by-transaction basis. 
However, at the annual choice of the taxpayer some or all of these 
determinations may be made on the basis of groups consisting of products 
or product lines.
    (ii) A determination by a taxpayer as to a product or a product line 
will be accepted by a district director if such determination conforms 
to any one of the following standards: (a) A recognized industry or 
trade usage, or (b) the 2-digit major groups (or any inferior 
classifications or combinations thereof, within a major group) of the 
Standard Industrial Classification as prepared by the Statistical Policy 
Division of the Office of Management and Budget, Executive Office of the 
President.
    (iii) A choice by the taxpayer to group transactions for a taxable 
year on a product or product line basis shall apply to all transactions 
with respect to that product or product line consummated during the 
taxable year. However, the choice of a product or product line grouping 
applies only to transactions covered by the grouping and, as to 
transactions not encompassed by the grouping, the determinations are 
made on a transaction-by-transaction basis. For example, the taxpayer 
may choose a product grouping with respect to one product and use the 
transaction-by-transaction method for another product within the same 
taxable year.
    (iv) For rules as to grouping certain related and subsidiary 
services, see paragraph (d)(3)(ii) of this section.

[[Page 671]]

    (d) Rules under section 994(a)(1) and (2) for transactions other 
than sales. The following rules are prescribed for purposes of applying 
the gross receipts method or combined taxable income method to 
transactions other than sales:
    (1) Leases. In the case of a lease of export property by a related 
supplier to a DISC for sublease by the DISC to produce gross receipts, 
for any taxable year the amount of rent the DISC must pay to the related 
supplier shall be determined under the DISC's lease with its related 
supplier but must be computed in a manner consistent with the rules in 
paragraph (c) of this section for computing the transfer price in the 
case of sales and resales of export property under the gross receipts 
method or combined taxable income method. For purposes of applying this 
subparagraph, transactions may not be so grouped on a product or product 
line basis under the rules of paragraph (c)(7) of this section as to 
combine in any one group of transactions both lease transactions and 
sale transactions involving the same product or product line.
    (2) Commissions. If any transaction to which section 994 applies is 
handled on a commission basis for a related supplier by a DISC and such 
commissions give rise to qualified export receipts under section 
993(a)--
    (i) The amount of the income that may be earned by the DISC in any 
year is the amount, computed in a manner consistent with paragraph (c) 
of this section, which the DISC would have been permitted to earn under 
the gross receipts method, the combined taxable income method, or 
section 482 method if the related supplier had sold (or leased) the 
property or service to the DISC and the DISC in turn sold (or subleased) 
to a third party, whether or not a related party, and
    (ii) The maximum commission the DISC may charge the related supplier 
is the sum of the amount of income determined under subdivision (i) of 
this subparagraph plus the DISC's total costs for the transaction as 
determined under paragraph (c)(6) of this section.
    (3) Receipts from services--(i) Related and subsidiary services 
attributable to the year of the export transaction. The gross receipts 
for related and subsidiary services described in paragraph (b)(3) of 
this section shall be treated as part of the receipts from the export 
transaction to which such services are related and subsidiary, but only 
if, under the arrangement between the DISC and its related supplier and 
the accounting method otherwise employed by the DISC, the income from 
such services is includible for the same taxable year as income from 
such export transaction.
    (ii) Other services. In the case of related and subsidiary services 
to which subdivision (i) of this subparagraph does not apply and other 
services described in paragraph (b)(4) or (5) of this section performed 
by a related supplier (relating respectively to engineering and 
architectural services and certain managerial services), the amount of 
taxable income which the DISC may derive for any taxable year shall be 
determined under the arrangement between the DISC and its related 
supplier and shall be computed in a manner consistent with the rules in 
paragraph (c) of this section for computing the transfer price in the 
case of sales for resale of export property under the gross receipts 
method or combined taxable income method. Related and subsidiary 
services to which subdivision (i) of this subparagraph does not apply 
may be grouped, under the rules for grouping of transactions in 
paragraph (c)(7) of this section, with the products or product lines to 
which they are related and subsidiary, so long as the grouping of 
services chosen is consistent with the grouping of products or product 
lines chosen for the taxable year in which either the product or product 
lines were sold or in which payment for such services is received or 
accrued. The rules for grouping of transactions in paragraph (c)(7) of 
this section shall not apply with respect to the determination of 
taxable income which the DISC may derive from other services described 
in paragraph (b)(4) or (5) of this section performed by a related 
supplier or commissions on such services, and such determination shall 
be made only on a transaction-by-transaction basis.
    (e) Methods of applying paragraphs (c) and (d) of this section--(1) 
Limitation on DISC income (``no loss'' rule)--(i) In general. Except as 
otherwise provided in

[[Page 672]]

this subparagraph, neither the gross receipts method nor the combined 
taxable income method may be applied to cause in any taxable year a loss 
to the related supplier, but either method may be applied to the extent 
it does not cause a loss. A loss to a related supplier would result if 
the taxable income of the DISC would exceed the combined taxable income 
of the related supplier and the DISC. If, however, there is no combined 
taxable income of the DISC and the related supplier (because, for 
example, a combined loss is incurred), a transfer price (or commission) 
will not be deemed to cause a loss to the related supplier if it allows 
the DISC to recover an amount not in excess of its costs (if any).
    (ii) Special rule for applying ``4 percent'' gross receipts method 
to sales. A transfer price or commission, determined under the ``4 
percent'' gross receipts method (determined without regard to 
subdivision (i) of this subparagraph), for a sale of export property 
referred to in paragraph (b)(1) of this section, will not be considered 
to cause a loss for the related supplier if for the DISC's taxable year, 
the ratio that (a) the taxable income of the DISC derived from such sale 
by using such price or commission bears to (b) the DISC's gross receipts 
from such sale is not greater than the ratio that (c) all of the taxable 
income of the related supplier and the DISC from all sales of the same 
product or product line (domestic and foreign) to third parties whether 
or not related parties bears to (d) the total gross receipts of the 
related supplier and the DISC from such sales. For purposes of the 
preceding sentence, sales between the DISC and its related suppliers 
shall not be taken into account under (c) or (d) of this subdivision. 
For example, assume that for a taxable year of a DISC the total costs of 
the related supplier and the DISC with respect to all sales ($150 for 
domestic and $44 for foreign) of a product line are $194 and the total 
gross receipts of the related supplier and the DISC with respect to such 
sales are $200 so that the total taxable income of the related supplier 
and the DISC with respect to such sales is $6. The parties would thus be 
entitled to compute a transfer price determined under the gross receipts 
method on any given sale of product A of such product line by the 
related supplier to the DISC which would allocate to the DISC taxable 
income equal to not more than 3 percent (i.e., $6/$200) of its gross 
receipts derived from its resale of such product. If the DISC were to 
resell an item of product A for $10, the transfer price paid by the DISC 
to the related supplier determined under the gross receipts method could 
be as low as $9.70.
    (iii) Grouping transactions. For purposes of subdivision (i) of this 
subparagraph, the basis for grouping transactions chosen by the taxpayer 
under paragraph (c)(7) of this section for the taxable year shall be 
applied. For purposes of making the computations of subdivision (ii) (c) 
and (d) of this subparagraph, however, the taxpayer may choose any basis 
for grouping transactions permissible under paragraph (c)(7) of this 
section, even though it may not be the same basis as that already chosen 
under paragraph (c)(7) of this section for computing transfer prices or 
commissions to a DISC. If, for example, the taxpayer has chosen to group 
transactions on a product basis for computing transfer prices or 
commissions to a DISC for a taxable year, the taxpayer may still group 
transactions on a product line basis for purposes of computing taxable 
income and total gross receipts under subdivision (ii) (c) and (d) of 
this subparagraph. For a further example, if the taxpayer computes 
taxable income for one group of transactions under the gross receipts 
method and computes taxable income for a second group of transactions 
under the combined taxable income method, the taxpayer may aggregate 
these transactions for purposes of computing taxable income and total 
gross receipts under subdivision (ii) (c) and (d) of this subparagraph.
    (2) Relationship to section 482. In applying the rules under section 
994, it may be necessary to first take into account the price of a 
transfer (or other transaction) between the DISC (or related supplier) 
and a related party which is subject to the arm's length standard of 
section 482. Thus, for example, where a related supplier sells export 
property to a DISC which the related supplier purchased from related

[[Page 673]]

parties, the costs taken into account in computing the combined taxable 
income of the DISC and the related supplier are determined after any 
necessary adjustment under section 482 of the price paid by the related 
supplier to the related parties. In applying section 482 to a transfer 
by a DISC, however, the DISC and its related supplier are treated as if 
they were a single entity carrying on all the functions performed by the 
DISC and the related supplier with respect to the transaction and the 
DISC shall be allowed to receive under the section 482 standard the 
amount the related supplier would have received had there been no DISC.
    (3) Initial payment of transfer price or commission. (i) The amount 
of a transfer price (or reasonable estimate thereof) actually charged by 
a related supplier to a DISC, or a sales commission (or reasonable 
estimate thereof) actually charged by a DISC to a related supplier, in a 
transaction to which section 994 applies must be paid no later than 60 
days following the close of the taxable year of the DISC during which 
the transaction occurred.
    (ii) Payment must be in the form of money, property (including 
accounts receivable from sales by or through the DISC), a written 
obligation which qualifies as debt under the safe harbor rule of 
Sec. 1.992-1(d)(2)(ii), or an accounting entry offsetting the account 
receivable against an existing debt owed by the person in whose favor 
the account receivable was established to the person with whom it 
engaged in the transaction. The form of the payment to a DISC need not 
be a qualified export asset under Sec. 1.993-2. However, for the 
requirement that the adjusted basis of the qualified export assets of 
the DISC at the close of its taxable year must equal or exceed 95 
percent of the sum of the adjusted bases of all assets of the DISC at 
the close of its taxable year, see section 992(a)(1)(B).
    (iii) If the district director can demonstrate, based upon the data 
available as of the 60th day after the close of such taxable year, that 
the amount actually paid did not represent a reasonable estimate of the 
transfer price or commission (as the case may be) to be determined under 
section 994 and this section, an indebtedness will be deemed to arise, 
from the person required to make the payment in favor of the person to 
whom the payment is required to be made, in an amount equal to the 
difference between the amount of the transfer price or commission 
determined under section 994 and this section and the amount (if any) 
actually paid and received. Such indebtedness will be deemed to arise as 
of the date the transaction occurred which gave rise to the 
indebtedness, except that, if such transaction occurred in a taxable 
year of the DISC ending on or before August 15, 1975, at the taxpayer's 
option, the indebtedness will be deemed to arise as of the date by which 
payment was required under subdivision (i) of this paragraph (e)(3). 
Such indebtedness owed to a DISC shall be treated as an asset but shall 
not be treated as a trade receivable or other qualified export asset 
(see Sec. 1.993-2(d)(3)) as of the end of the taxable year of the DISC 
in which the indebtedness is deemed to arise.
    (iv)(a) Except with respect to incomplete transactions to which 
paragraph (c)(5)(i)(b) of this section applies, if the amount actually 
paid results in the DISC realizing at least 50 percent of the DISC's 
taxable income from the transaction as reported in its tax return for 
the taxable year the transaction is completed, then the amount actually 
paid shall be deemed to be a reasonable estimate of such transfer price 
or commission.
    (b) With respect to incomplete transactions to which paragraph 
(c)(5)(i)(b) of this section applies and which were initiated during a 
taxable year ending after August 15, 1975, the amount actually paid 
shall be deemed to be a reasonable estimate of such transfer price if 
any one of the following three tests is met:
    (1) The amount actually paid by the DISC to the related supplier in 
respect of the property does not exceed the related supplier's cost of 
goods sold (see paragraph (c)(6)(ii) of this section) with respect to 
the property.
    (2) If the transaction is completed by the date on which the DISC's 
return is required to be filed for the year in which the transaction was 
initiated, the amount actually paid by the DISC to the related supplier 
in respect of the

[[Page 674]]

property results in the DISC realizing at least 50 percent of the DISC's 
taxable income from the transaction when completed.
    (3) The percentage that (i) an amount equal to (a) the amount 
actually paid by the DISC to the related supplier in respect of the 
property minus (b) the related supplier's cost of goods sold with 
respect to the property, bears to (ii) the related supplier's cost of 
goods sold in respect of the property, is not greater than 50 percent of 
the percentage that (iii) the combined taxable income for completed 
transactions of the same group as the property during the DISC's taxable 
year in which the incomplete transaction was initiated, bears to (iv) 
the cost of goods sold of the related supplier and DISC with respect to 
such transactions.
    (c) For purposes of this subdivision (iv), whether the transfer 
price or commission actually paid is deemed a reasonable estimate may be 
determined on the basis for grouping transactions chosen by the taxpayer 
under paragraph (c)(5) and (7) of this section.
    (v) An indebtedness arising under subdivision (iii) of this 
subparagraph shall bear interest at an arm's length rate, computed in 
the manner provided by Sec. 1.482-2(a)(2) from the 61st day after the 
close of the DISC's taxable year in which the transaction occurred which 
gave rise to the indebtedness to the date of payment. The interest so 
computed shall be accrued and included in the taxable income of the 
person to whom the indebtedness is owed for each taxable year during 
which the indebtedness is unpaid.
    (4) Subsequent determination of transfer price or commission. The 
DISC and its related supplier would ordinarily determine under section 
994 and this section the transfer price payable by the DISC (or the 
commission payable to the DISC) for a transaction before the DISC files 
its return for the taxable year of the transaction. After the DISC has 
filed its return, a redetermination of the transfer price (or 
commission) may only be made if permitted by the Code and the 
regulations thereunder. Such a redetermination would include a 
redetermination by reason of an adjustment under section 482 and the 
regulations thereunder or section 861 and Sec. 1.861-8 which affects the 
amounts which entered into the determination of the transfer price or 
commission.
    (5) Procedure for adjustments to transfer price or commission--
(i)(a) If the transfer price (or commission) for a transaction 
determined under section 994 is different from the price (or commission) 
actually charged, the person who received too small a transfer price (or 
commission) or paid too large a transfer price (or commission) shall 
establish (or be deemed to have established), at the date of the 
determination or redetermination under subparagraph (4) of this 
paragraph of the transfer price (or commission) under section 994, an 
account receivable due the DISC from the person with whom it engaged in 
the transaction equal to the difference in amount between the transfer 
price (or commission) so determined and the transfer price (or 
commission) previously paid and received. If the account receivable is 
paid within 90 days after the date it is established (or deemed 
established), then as of the end of the taxable year of the DISC in 
which the transaction occurred which gave rise to the indebtedness, the 
account receivable shall be treated as an asset and, under Sec. 1.993-
2(d)(3) as a trade receivable, and thus as a qualified export asset.
    (b) If, for example, during 1972, a DISC which uses the calendar 
year as its taxable year sold a product which it purchased that year 
from its related supplier and paid a price of $10,000 which price is a 
reasonable estimate under subparagraph (3)(iii) of this paragraph but is 
later determined under section 994 to be $8,000 immediately before the 
DISC filed its return for 1972, the DISC must be paid $2,000 (i.e., 
$10,000-$8,000) by its related supplier or establish an account 
receivable from its related supplier of $2,000. The account receivable 
may be paid without tax consequences, provided that such account 
receivable is paid within 90 days after the date it is established (or 
deemed established). Such account receivable paid within such 90 days 
will be considered to relate to the taxable year in which the 
transaction occurred which gave rise thereto rather than the taxable 
year during which it is established or paid.

[[Page 675]]

    (ii) Payment must be in a form specified in subparagraph (3) of this 
paragraph.
    (iii) If an account receivable of a DISC described in subdivision 
(i) of this paragraph (e)(5) is not paid within 90 days of the date it 
is established (or deemed established), then, as of the end of the 
taxable year of the DISC in which the transaction occurred which gives 
rise to the indebtedness, the account receivable shall be treated as an 
asset except that, if the account receivable is established (or deemed 
established) in a taxable year of the DISC ending on or before August 
15, 1975, at the taxpayer's option, the account receivable shall be 
treated as an asset as of the end of such taxable year. However, under 
Sec. 1.993-2(d)(3), an account receivable referred to in the preceding 
sentence shall not be treated as a trade receivable or other qualified 
export asset.
    (iv) An account receivable established in accordance with 
subdivision (i) of this subparagraph shall bear interest at an arm's 
length rate, computed in the manner provided by Sec. 1.482-2(a)(2) from 
the day after the date the account receivable is deemed established to 
the date of payment. The interest so computed shall be accrued and 
included in the taxpayer's taxable income for each taxable year during 
which the account receivable is outstanding.
    (v)(a) In lieu of establishing an account receivable in accordance 
with subdivision (i) of this subparagraph for all or part of an amount 
due a related supplier, the related supplier and DISC are permitted to 
treat all or part of any distribution which was made by the DISC out of 
its previously taxed income with respect to the year to which the 
determination or redetermination relates as an additional payment of 
transfer price or repayment of commission (and not as a distribution) 
made as of the date the distribution was made. Any additional amount 
arising on the determination or redetermination due the related supplier 
after this treatment shall be represented by an account receivable 
established under subdivision (i) of this subparagraph. To the extent 
that a distribution is so treated under this subdivision (v), it shall 
cease to qualify as distribution for any Federal income tax purpose, and 
the DISC's account for previously taxed income shall be adjusted 
accordingly. If all or part of any distribution made to a shareholder 
other than the related supplier is recharacterized under this 
subdivision (v), the related supplier shall establish an account 
receivable from that shareholder for the amount so recharacterized. Such 
account receivable shall be paid in the time and manner set forth in 
this paragraph (e)(5). In order to obtain the relief provided by this 
subdivision (v), the conditions and procedures prescribed by Revenue 
Procedure 84-3 must be met. The provisions of this paragraph (e)(5)(v) 
shall apply to all open taxable years ending after December 31, 1971.
    (b) If, for example, during 1982, a DISC commission from a related 
supplier with respect to a transaction completed in 1980 was 
redetermined to be $1,000 less than the commission actually charged by, 
and paid to, the DISC, the amount of any distribution previously made by 
the DISC from its 1980 previously taxed income to the related supplies 
as a shareholder may, to the extent of $1,000, be treated not as a 
distribution but as a repayment of the commission.
    (vi) The procedure for adjustments to transfer price provided by 
this subparagraph does not apply to incomplete transactions described in 
paragraph (c)(5)(i)(b) of this section. Such procedure will, however, be 
applied to any such transaction with respect to the taxable year in 
which the transaction is completed.
    (6) Examples. The provisions of this paragraph may be illustrated by 
the following examples:

    Example 1. (i) During 1975, a DISC which uses the calendar year as 
its taxable year purchased a product from its related supplier and made 
an initial payment of $8,500. If $8,500 were determined to be the 
transfer price under section 994, the DISC's taxable income from the 
transaction would be $1,000. Immediately before the DISC filed its 
return for 1975, under section 994 it is determined that the transfer 
price is $8,000 and the DISC's taxable income is $1,500. Thus, the 
requirement of a reasonable estimate under subparagraph (3) of this 
paragraph was met

[[Page 676]]

because the amount ($8,500) actually paid resulted in the DISC realizing 
taxable income of $1,000 which is not less than 50 percent of the DISC's 
taxable income ($1,500) from the transaction as determined under section 
994.
    (ii) Pursuant to subparagraph (5) of this paragraph, an account 
receivable due the DISC for $500, i.e., $8,500-$8,000, is established on 
September 15, 1976, the date the DISC files its return for 1975, and is 
paid on December 1, 1976. The account receivable for $500 will be 
considered to relate to the taxable year (1975) in which the transaction 
occurred which gave rise thereto and will be a qualified export asset 
under Sec. 1.993-2(d)(3) for the last day of such year.
    Example 2. Assume the same facts as in example 1 except that the 
account receivable for $500 is paid on January 1, 1977. The account 
receivable for $500 will still be considered to relate to the taxable 
year (1975) in which the transaction occurred which gave rise thereto. 
However, such account receivable will be treated as an asset which is 
not a qualified export asset under Sec. 1.993-2(d)(3) for the last day 
of such year.

    (f) Export promotion expenses--(1) Purpose of expense. (i) In order 
for an expense or cost of a type described in subparagraph (2) of this 
paragraph to be an export promotion expense, the expense or cost must be 
incurred or treated as incurred by the DISC (under subparagraph (7) of 
this paragraph) to advance the sale, lease, or other distribution of 
export property for use, consumption, or distribution outside the United 
States. Costs of services in performing installation (but not assembly) 
on the site and for meeting warranty commitments if such services are 
related and subsidiary (within the meaning of Sec. 1.993-1(d)) to any 
qualified sale, lease, or other distribution of export property by the 
DISC (or with respect to which the DISC received a commission) will be 
considered to advance the sale, lease, or other distribution of export 
property. General and administrative expenses attributable to billing 
customers, other clerical functions of the DISC, or generally operating 
the DISC, will also be considered to advance the sale, lease, or other 
distribution of export property.
    (ii) Where an expense or cost incurred or treated as incurred by the 
DISC qualifies only in part as an export promotion expense, such expense 
or cost must be allocated between the qualified portion and such other 
portion on a reasonable basis. See Sec. 1.994-2(b)(2) for the option of 
the related supplier not to claim expenses as export promotion expenses.
    (2) Types of expenses. The only expenses or costs which may be 
export promotion expenses are those expenses or costs meeting the test 
of subparagraph (1) of this paragraph which constitute--
    (i) Ordinary and necessary expenses of the DISC paid or incurred 
during the DISC's taxable year in carrying on any trade or business, 
allowable as deductions under section 162, such as expenses for market 
studies, advertising, salaries and wages (including contributions or 
compensations deductible under section 404) of sales, clerical, and 
other personnel, rentals on property, sales commissions, warehousing, 
and other selling expenses,
    (ii) A reasonable allowance under section 167 for exhaustion, wear 
and tear, or obsolescence of the property of the DISC,
    (iii) Costs of freight (subject to the limitations of subparagraph 
(4) of this paragraph),
    (iv) Costs of packaging for export (as defined in subparagraph (5) 
of this paragraph), or
    (v) Costs of designing and labeling packages exclusively for export 
markets (under subparagraph (6) of this paragraph).
    (3) Ineligible expenses. Items ineligible to be export promotion 
expenses include, for example, interest expenses, bad debt expenses, 
freight insurance, State and local income and franchise taxes, the cost 
of manufacture or assembly operations, and items of cost of goods sold 
(except as otherwise provided in this paragraph in the case of certain 
freight, packaging, and designing and labeling expenses). Income or 
similar taxes eligible for a foreign tax credit under sections 901 and 
903 are also not eligible to be export promotion expenses.
    (4) Freight expenses--(i) In general. Export promotion expenses 
include one-half of the freight expense (not including insurance) for 
shipping export property aboard a U.S.-flag carrier in those cases where 
law or regulation of the United States or of any State or political 
subdivision thereof or of any agency or instrumentality of any of these

[[Page 677]]

does not require that the export property be shipped aboard a U.S.-flag 
carrier. For purposes of this paragraph, the term ``freight expense'' 
includes charges paid for c.o.d. service, miscellaneous ground charges, 
such as charges incurred for services normally performed by U.S.-flag 
carriers, charges for services of loading aboard U.S.-flag carriers 
normally performed by such carriers, freight forwarders, or independent 
contractors engaged in loading property, and charges attributable to a 
freight consolidation function normally performed by freight forwarders. 
In order for one-half of freight expenses paid to the owner (or the 
agent of the owner) of a U.S.-flag carrier to be claimed as an export 
promotion expense, the DISC must obtain a written statement (such as, 
for example, a bill of lading) from the owner (or the agent) disclosing 
that the export property was shipped aboard the owner's U.S.-flag 
carrier or another U.S.-flag carrier, and the DISC must have no 
reasonable basis for disbelieving such statement of the owner (or the 
agent). For the requirement of a written statement from a freight 
forwarder, see subdivision (iv) of this subparagraph.
    (ii) U.S.-flag carrier defined. For purposes of this paragraph, the 
term ``U.S.-flag carrier'' is an airplane owned and operated by a U.S. 
person or persons (as defined in section 7701(a)(30)) or a ship 
documented under the laws of the United States. Shipment initiated by 
delivery to the U.S. Postal Service shall be considered shipment aboard 
a U.S.-flag carrier, but not if shipped to a place to which mail 
shipments from the United States are ordinarily accomplished by land 
transportation, such as to Canada or Mexico, unless airmail is 
specified.
    (iii) Shipment pursuant to law or regulation. Shipment pursuant to 
law or regulation includes instances where a U.S.-flag carrier must be 
used in order to obtain permission from the Government to make the 
export. If the law or regulation requires a fixed portion of the export 
property to be shipped aboard a U.S.-flag carrier, the freight expense 
on that portion of such export property that was so shipped in order to 
satisfy such requirement cannot qualify as an export promotion expense.
    (iv) Freight forwarders. A payment to a freight forwarder shall be 
considered freight expense within the meaning of this paragraph to the 
extent the forwarder utilizes a U.S.-flag carrier. For purposes of this 
paragraph, the term ``freight forwarder'' includes air freight 
consolidators and carriers owned and operated by U.S. persons utilizing 
U.S.- flag carriers such as non-vessel-owning common carriers. In order 
for one-half of freight expenses paid to a freight forwarder to be 
claimed as export promotion expenses, the DISC must obtain a written 
statement (such as, for example, a bill of lading) from the freight 
forwarder disclosing that the export property was shipped aboard a U.S.-
flag carrier, and the DISC must have no reasonable basis for 
disbelieving such statement of the freight forwarder.
    (v) Freight within the United States. A DISC may not claim as export 
promotion expense any amount that is attributable to carriage of export 
property between points within the United States. If, however, export 
property is carried from the United States to a foreign country on a 
through shipment pursuant to a single bill of lading or similar document 
aboard one or more U.S.-flag carriers, the freight expense of such 
carriage shall not be apportioned between the domestic and foreign 
portions of such carriage, even though a carrier may stop en route 
within the United States or the export property may be shifted from one 
carrier to another, and one-half of such freight expense may be claimed 
as an export promotion expense. Freight expense does not include the 
cost of transporting the export property to the depot of the U.S.-flag 
carrier or freight forwarder for shipment abroad. The expense of 
shipment of export property initiated by delivery to the U.S. Postal 
Service for ultimate delivery outside the United States shall be 
considered as attributable entirely to carriage of such property outside 
the United States.
    (5) Packaging for export. (i) Export promotion expenses include the 
direct and indirect cost of packaging export property (including the 
cost of the package) for export whether or not the

[[Page 678]]

packaging is the same as domestic packaging. Such packaging costs do not 
include costs of manufacturing (as defined in the regulations under 
section 993) and assembly. Thus, if a DISC buys and packages export 
property for resale, its costs of packaging the export property are 
export promotion expenses. If, however, the process of such packaging by 
the DISC is physically integrated with the process of manufacturing the 
export property by the related supplier, the costs of such packaging are 
not export promotion expenses.
    (ii) The cost of containers leased from a shipping company to which 
the DISC also pays freight for the property packaged is not a cost of 
packaging. However, in such circumstances, one-half of the rental charge 
may be allowable as a freight expense if permitted under subparagraph 
(4) of this paragraph.
    (6) Designing and labeling packages. Export promotion expenses 
include the direct and indirect costs of designing and labeling 
packages, including bottles, cans, jars, boxes, cartons, or containers, 
to the extent incurred for export markets. Thus, for example, to the 
extent incurred for supplying export markets, the cost of designing 
labels in a foreign language and the cost of printing such labels are 
export promotion expenses.
    (7) DISC must incur export promotion expenses--(i) In general. In 
order for an expense to be an export promotion expense it must be 
incurred or treated as incurred under this subparagraph by the DISC. For 
example, an expense is incurred by a DISC if the expense results from 
(a) the DISC incurring an obligation to pay compensation to its 
employees, (b) depreciation of property owned by the DISC and used by 
its employees, (c) the DISC incurring an obligation to pay for office 
supplies used by its employees, (d) the DISC incurring an obligation to 
pay space costs for use by its employees, or (e) the DISC incurring an 
obligation to pay other costs supporting efforts by its employees.
    (ii) Payments to independent contractors. A payment to an 
independent contractor, directly or indirectly, is treated as incurred 
by the DISC if the cost of performing the function performed by the 
independent contractor would be considered an export promotion expense 
described in subparagraphs (1) and (2) of this paragraph if performed by 
the DISC, and if, in a case where the services of the independent 
contractor were engaged by a party related to the DISC, such related 
party and such DISC agreed in writing before the contract was entered 
into that a specified portion or all of the contract was for the benefit 
of the DISC and that all of the expenses of the contract (eligible to be 
considered as export promotion expenses) with respect to such portion 
would be borne by the DISC.
    (iii) Expenses incurred by related parties. Reimbursements or other 
payments by a DISC to a related party are export promotion expenses only 
if the expenses of the related party for which reimbursement is made are 
for space in a building actually used by employees of the DISC or for 
export property owned by the DISC. Except as otherwise provided in the 
preceding sentence, expenses incurred by a foreign international sales 
corporation (FISC) or a real property holding company (as defined in 
section 993(e)(1) and (2), respectively) shall not be treated as export 
promotion expenses of its DISC.
    (iv) Selling commissions paid by a DISC. A commission paid by a DISC 
to a person other than a related person, with respect to a transaction 
which gives rise to qualified export receipts of the DISC, is an export 
promotion expense of the DISC. A commission paid by a DISC to a related 
person is not an export promotion expense.
    (v) Sales of promotional material. If a DISC sells promotional 
material to a buyer of export property from the DISC at a price which is 
greater than the costs of the DISC for such material, such costs are not 
export promotion expenses. If, however, the DISC sells promotional 
material at a price which is less than its costs for such material, the 
excess of such costs over such price is an export promotion expense. For 
rules relating to the status of promotional material as qualified export 
assets and export property, see Secs. 1.993-2 and 1.993-3, respectively.
    (vi) An expense may be incurred by the DISC under subdivisions (i)

[[Page 679]]

through (v) of this subparagraph even if the accounting for and payment 
of such expense is handled by a related party and the DISC reimburses 
the related party for such expenses.
    (8) Incomplete transactions. Expenses eligible to be treated as 
export promotion expenses which are attributable to the sale, lease, or 
other distribution of export property and which are incurred prior to 
the taxable year of sale, lease, or other distribution by the DISC are 
not treated as export promotion expenses until the taxable year of sale, 
lease, or other distribution or until the taxable year in which it is 
first determined that no transaction is reasonably expected to result 
from the expense incurred (whether or not a transaction subsequently 
results). Thus, for example, if a DISC incurs a packaging cost which is 
otherwise eligible to be treated as an export promotion expense, the 
DISC may not include such charge as an export promotion expense until 
the year in which the export property with respect to which the 
packaging cost was incurred is actually sold by the DISC. If no 
transaction is reasonably expected to result from the packaging cost, 
such cost should be allocated as an export promotion expense to the 
group of transactions to which such cost is most closely related.
    (g) Examples. The provisions of this section may be illustrated by 
the following examples:

    Example 1. J and K are calendar year taxpayers. J, a domestic 
manufacturing company, owns all the stock of K, a DISC for the taxable 
year. During 1972, J manufactures only 100 units of a product (which is 
eligible to be export property as defined in section 993(c)). J enters 
into a written agreement with K whereby K is granted a sales franchise 
with respect to exporting such property and K will receive commissions 
with respect to such exports equal to the maximum amount permitted to be 
received under the intercompany pricing rules of section 994. 
Thereafter, the 100 units are sold for $1,000. J's cost of goods sold 
attributable to the 100 units is $650. J's direct selling expenses so 
attributable are $100. Although J has other deductible expenses, for 
purposes of this example assume that J has no other deductible expenses. 
K pays $230 to independent contractors which qualify as export promotion 
expenses under paragraph (f)(7)(ii) of this section. K does not perform 
functions substantial enough to entitle it to an allocation of income 
which meets the arm's length standard of section 482. The income which K 
may earn under section 994 under the franchise is $20, computed as 
follows:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
(1) Combined taxable income:                                            
  (a) K's sales price.................................  .......   $1,000
  (b) Less deductions:                                                  
    J's cost of goods sold............................     $650         
    J's direct selling expenses.......................      100         
    K's export promotion expenses.....................      230         
                                                       ---------        
        Total deductions..............................  .......      980
                                                                --------
  (c) Combined taxable income.........................  .......       20
                                                                ========
(2) K's profit under combined taxable income method (before             
 application of loss limitation):                                       
  (a) 50 percent of combined taxable income....................       10
  (b) Plus: 10 percent of K's export promotion expenses (10% of         
   $230).......................................................       23
                                                       ----------       
  (c) K's profit...............................................       33
                                                       ==========       
(3) K's profit under gross receipts method (before application          
 of loss limitation):                                                   
  (a) 4 percent of K's sales price (4% of $1,000)..............       40
  (b) Plus: 10 percent of K's export promotion expenses (10% of         
   $230).......................................................       23
                                                       ----------       
  (c) K's profit...............................................       63
                                                       ==========       
                                                                        

    Since combined taxable income ($20) is lower than both K's profit 
under the combined taxable income method ($33) and under the gross 
receipts method ($63), the maximum income K may earn is $20. 
Accordingly, the commissions K may receive from J are $250, i.e., K's 
expenses ($230) plus K's profit ($20).
    Example 2. M and N are calendar year taxpayers. M, a domestic 
manufacturing company, owns all the stock of N, a DISC for the taxable 
year. During 1972, M produces and sells a particular product line of 
export property to N for $75, a price which can be justified as 
satisfying the standard of arm's length price of section 482. N performs 
substantial functions with respect to the transaction and resells the 
export property for $100. M's cost of goods sold attributable to the 
export property is $60. M's direct selling expenses so attributable 
(relating to advertising of the product line in foreign markets) are 
$12. Although M has other deductible expenses, for purposes of this 
example, assume that M has no other deductible expenses. N's expenses 
attributable to resale of the export property are $22 of which $20 are 
export promotion expenses. The maximum profit which N may earn with 
respect to the product line is $6, computed as follows:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
(1) Combined taxable income:                                            
  (a) N's sales price.................................  .......     $100
  (b) Less deductions:                                                  
    M's cost of goods sold............................      $60         
    M's direct selling expenses.......................       12         
    N's expenses......................................       22         
                                                                --------

[[Page 680]]

                                                                        
      Total deductions................................  .......       94
                                                                --------
  (c) Combined taxable income.........................  .......        6
                                                                ========
(2) N's profit under combined taxable income method (before             
 application of loss limitation):                                       
  (a) 50 percent of combined taxable income....................        3
  (b) Plus: 10 percent of N's export promotion expenses (10% of         
   $20)........................................................        2
                                                       ----------       
  (c) N's profit...............................................        5
                                                       ==========       
(3) N's profit under gross receipts method (before application          
 of loss limitation):                                                   
  (a) 4 percent of N's sales price (4% of $100)................        4
  (b) Plus: 10 percent of N's export promotion expenses (10% of         
   $20)........................................................        2
                                                       ----------       
  (c) N's profit...............................................        6
                                                       ==========       
(4) N's profit under section 482 method:                                
  (a) N's sales price..........................................     100 
  (b) Less deductions:                                                  
    N's cost of goods sold (price paid by N to M).....       75         
    N's expenses......................................       22         
                                                                --------
      Total deductions................................  .......       97
                                                                --------
  (c) N's profit......................................  .......        3
                                                                ========
                                                                        

    Since the gross receipts method results in greater profit to N ($6) 
than does the combined taxable income method ($5) or section 482 method 
($3), and does not exceed combined taxable income ($6), N may earn a 
maximum profit of $6. Accordingly, the transfer price from M to N may be 
readjusted as long as the transfer price is not readjusted below $72, 
computed as follows:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
(5) Transfer price from M to N:                                         
  (a) N's sales price...................................  ......    $100
  (b) Less:                                                             
    N's expenses........................................     $22        
    N's profit..........................................       6        
                                                         --------       
      Total subtractions................................  ......      28
                                                                 -------
  (c) Transfer price....................................  ......      72
                                                                        

    Example 3. Q and R are calendar year taxpayers. Q, a domestic 
manufacturing company, owns all the stock of R, a DISC for the taxable 
year. During 1972, Q produces and sells a product line of export 
property to R for $170, a price which can be justified as satisfying the 
standards of arm's length price of section 482, and R resells the export 
property for $200. Q's cost of goods sold attributable to the export 
property is $115 so that the combined gross income from the sale of the 
export property is $85 (i.e., $200 minus $115). Q's expenses incurred in 
connection with the property sold are $35. Q's deductible overhead and 
other supportive expenses allocable to all gross income are $6. 
Apportionment of these supportive expenses on the basis of gross income 
does not result in a material distortion of income and is a reasonable 
method of apportionment. Q's gross income from sources other than the 
transaction is $170 making total gross income of Q and R (excluding the 
transfer price paid by R) $255 (i.e., $85 plus $170). R's expenses 
attributable to resale of the export property are $20, all of which are 
export promotion expenses. The maximum profit which R may earn with 
respect to the product line is $16, computed as follows:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
(1) Combined taxable income:                                            
  (a) R's sales price...................................  ......    $200
  (b) Less deductions:                                                  
    (i) Q's cost of goods sold..........................     115        
    (ii) Q's expenses incurred in connection with the                   
     property sold......................................      35        
    (iii) Apportionment of Q's supportive                               
     expenses:                                                          
      Q's supportive expenses.................        $6                
      Combined gross income from sale of                                
       export property........................        85                
      Total gross income of Q and R...........       255                
      Apportionment...........................  (6 x 85)/               
                                                     255       2        
    (iv) R's expenses.........................  ........      20        
                                                         --------       
      Total deductions........................  ........  ......     172
                                                                 -------
  (c) Combined taxable income...................................      28
                                               ===========              
(2) R's profit under combined taxable income method (before             
 application of loss limitation):                                       
  (a) 50 percent of combined taxable income.....................      14
  (b) Plus: 10 percent of R's export promotion expenses (10% of         
   $20).........................................................       2
                                               -----------              
  (c) R's profit................................................      16
                                               ===========              
(3) R's profit under gross receipts method (before application          
 of loss limitation):                                                   
  (a) 4 percent of R's sales price (4% of $200).................       8
  (b) Plus: 10 percent of R's export promotion expenses (10% of         
   $20).........................................................       2
                                               -----------              
  (c) R's profit................................................      10
                                               ===========              
(4) R's profit under section 482 method:                                
  (a) R's sales price...........................................     200
  (b) Less deductions:                                                  
    R's cost of goods sold (price paid by R to Q).......     170        
    R's expenses........................................      20        
                                               ----------               
      Total deductions..................................  ......     190
                                                         ---------      
  (c) R's profit........................................  ......      10
                                                         =========      
                                                                        

    Since the combined taxable income method results in greater profit 
to R ($16) than does the gross receipts method ($10) or section 482 
method ($10), and does not exceed combined taxable income ($28), R may 
earn a maximum profit of $16. Accordingly, the transfer price from Q to 
R may be readjusted as long as the transfer price is not readjusted 
below $164 computed as follows:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
(5) Transfer price from Q to R:                                         
  (a) R's sales price...................................  ......    $200
  (b) Less:                                                             
    R's expenses........................................     $20        

[[Page 681]]

                                                                        
    R's profit..........................................      16        
                                                         --------       
      Total.............................................  ......      36
                                                                 -------
  (c) Transfer price....................................  ......     164
                                                                 =======
                                                                        

    Example 4. S and T are calendar year taxpayers. S, a domestic 
manufacturing company, owns all the stock of T, a DISC for the taxable 
year. During 1972, S produces and sells 100 units of a particular 
product to T under a written agreement which provides that the transfer 
price between S and T shall be that price which allocates to T the 
maximum permitted to be received under the intercompany pricing rules of 
section 994. Thereafter, the 100 units are sold by T for $950. S's cost 
of goods sold attributable to the 100 units is $650. S's other 
deductible expenses so attributable are $300. Although S has other 
deductible expenses, for purposes of this example, assume that S has no 
deductible expenses not definitely allocable to any item of gross 
income. T's expenses attributable to the resale of the 100 units are 
$50. S chooses not to apply the section 482 method. T may not earn any 
income under the gross receipts or combined taxable income method with 
respect to resale of the 100 units because combined taxable income is a 
negative figure, computed as follows:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
(1) Combined taxable income:                                            
  (a) T's sales price...................................  ......    $950
  (b) Less deductions:                                                  
    S's cost of goods sold..............................    $650        
    S's expenses........................................     300        
    T's expenses........................................      50        
                                                         --------       
      Total deductions..................................  ......   1,000
                                                                 -------
  (c) Combined taxable income (loss)....................  ......   ($50)
                                                                 =======
                                                                        

    Under paragraph (e)(1)(i) of this section, T is permitted to recover 
its expenses attributable to the 100 units ($50) even though such 
recovery results in a loss or increased loss to the related supplier. 
Accordingly, the transfer price from S to T may be readjusted as long as 
the transfer price is not readjusted below $900, computed as follows:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
(2) Transfer price from S to T:                                         
  (a) T's sales price...........................................    $950
  (b) Less: T's expenses........................................      50
                                                                 -------
  (c) Transfer price............................................     900
                                                                 =======
                                                                        

    Example 5. Assume the same facts as in example 4 except that S 
chooses to apply the section 482 method and that under arm's length 
dealings T would have derived $10 of income. Accordingly, the transfer 
price from S to T may be set at an amount not less than $890, computed 
as follows:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
(1) Transfer price from S to T:                                         
  (a) T's sales price...................................  ......    $950
  (b) Less:                                                             
    T's expenses........................................     $50        
    T's profit..........................................      10        
                                                         --------       
      Total deductions..................................  ......      60
                                                                 -------
  (c) Transfer price....................................  ......     890
                                                                 =======
                                                                        

    Example 6. X and Y are calendar year taxpayers. X, a domestic 
manufacturing company, owns all the stock of Y, a DISC for the taxable 
year. During March 1972, X manufactures a particular product of export 
property which it leases on April 1, 1972, to Y for a term of 1 year at 
a monthly rental of $1,000, a rent which satisfies the standard of arm's 
length rental under section 482. Y subleases the product on April 1, 
1972, for a term of 1 year at a monthly rental of $1,200. X's cost for 
the product leased is $40,000. X's other deductible expenses 
attributable to the product are $900, all of which are incurred in 1972. 
Although X has other deductible expenses, for purposes of this example, 
assume that X has no other deductible expenses. Y's expenses 
attributable to sublease of the export property are $450, all of which 
are incurred in 1972 and are export promotion expenses. X depreciates 
the property on a straight line basis without the use of an averaging 
convention, assuming a useful life of 8 years and no salvage value. The 
profit which Y may earn with respect to the transaction is $2,895 for 
1972 and $1,175 for 1973, computed as follows:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                          computation for 1972                          
(1) Combined taxable income:                                            
  (a) Y's sublease rental receipts for year ($1,200                     
   x 9 months)......................................  ........   $10,800
  (b) Less deductions:                                                  
    X's depreciation ($40,000 x 1/8 x 9/12).........    $3,750          
    X's other expenses..............................       900          
    Y's expenses....................................       450          
                                                     ----------         
      Total deductions..............................  ........     5,100
                                                               ---------
  (c) Combined taxable income.......................  ........     5,700
                                                               =========
(2) Y's profit under combined taxable income method (before             
 application of loss limitation):                                       
  (a) 50 percent of combined taxable income...................     2,850
  (b) Plus: 10 percent of Y's export promotion expenses (10%            
   of $450)...................................................        45
                                                     -----------        
  (c) Y's profit..............................................     2,895
                                                     ===========        
(3) Y's profit under gross receipts method (before application          
 of loss limitation):                                                   
  (a) 4 percent of Y's sublease rental receipts for year (4%            
   of $10,800)................................................       432
  (b) Plus: 10 percent of Y's export promotion expenses (10%            
   of $450)...................................................        45
                                                     -----------        
  (c) Y's profit..............................................       477
                                                     ===========        
(4) Y's profit under section 482 method:                                
  (a) Y's sublease rental receipts for year...................   $10,800
  (b) Less deductions:                                                  
    Y's lease rental payments for year..............    $9,000          

[[Page 682]]

                                                                        
    Y's expenses....................................       450          
                                                     ----------         
  Total deductions..................................  ........     9,450
                                                               ---------
  (c) Y's profit....................................  ........     1,350
                                                                        

    Since the combined taxable income method results in greater profit 
to Y ($2,895) than does the gross receipts method ($477) or section 482 
method ($1,350), Y may earn a profit of $2,895 for 1972. Accordingly, 
the monthly rental payable by Y to X for 1972 may be readjusted as long 
as the monthly rental payable is not readjusted below $828.33, computed 
as follows:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
(5) Monthly rental payable by Y to X for 1972:                          
  (a) Y's sublease rental receipts for year.................  $10,800.00
  (b) Less:                                                             
    Y's expenses..................................    450.00            
    Y's profit....................................  2,895.00            
                                                   ----------           
      Total.......................................  ........    3,345.00
                                                             -----------
  (c) Rental payable for 1972...............................    7,455.00
                                                   -----------          
  (d) Rental payable each month ($7,455<divide>9 months)....      828.33
                                                   ===========          
                          computation for 1973                          
                                                                        
(1) Combined taxable income:                                            
  (a) Y's sublease rental receipts for year ($1,200 x 3                 
   months)..................................................      $3,600
  (b) Less: X's depreciation ($40,000 x 1/8 x 3/12).........       1,250
                                                   -----------          
  (c) Combined taxable income...............................       2,350
                                                   ===========          
(2) Y's profit under combined taxable income method (before             
 application of loss limitation):                                       
  (a) 50 percent of combined taxable income.................      $1,175
                                                   -----------          
  (b) Y's profit............................................       1,175
                                                   ===========          
(3) Y's profit under gross receipts method (before                      
 application of loss limitation):                                       
  (a) 4 percent of Y's sublease rental receipts for year (4%            
   of $3,600)...............................................         144
                                                   ===========          
  (b) Y's profit............................................         144
                                                   ===========          
(4) Y's profit under section 482 method:                                
  (a) Y's sublease rental receipts for year.................       3,600
  (b) Less: Y's lease rental payments for year..............       3,000
                                                   -----------          
  (c) Y's profit............................................         600
                                                                        

    Since the combined taxable income method results in greater profit 
to Y ($1,175) than does the gross receipts method ($144) or section 482 
method ($600), Y may earn a profit of $1,175 for 1973. Accordingly, the 
monthly rental payable by Y to X for 1973 may be readjusted as long as 
the monthly rental payable is not readjusted below $808.33, computed as 
follows:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
(5) Monthly rental payable by Y to X for 1973:                          
  (a) Y's sublease rental receipts for year.................   $3,600.00
  (b) Less: Y's profit......................................    1,175.00
                                                             -----------
  (c) Rental payable for 1973...............................    2,425.00
                                                             ===========
  (d) Rental payable for each month ($2,425<divide>3 months)      808.33
                                                             ===========
                                                                        

(Secs. 995(e)(7), (8) and (10), 995(g) and 7805 of the Internal Revenue 
Code of 1954 (90 Stat. 1655, 26 U.S.C. 995 (e)(7), (8) and (10); 90 
Stat. 1659, 26 U.S.C. 995(g); and 68A Stat 917, 26 U.S.C. 7805))

[T.D. 7364, 40 FR 29827, July 16, 1975, as amended by T.D. 7435, 41 FR 
43142, Sept. 30, 1976; T.D. 7854, 47 FR 51741, Nov. 17, 1982; T.D. 7984, 
49 FR 40018, Oct. 12, 1984]


<R05>
Sec. 1.994-2   Marginal costing rules.

    (a) In general. This section prescribes the marginal costing rules 
authorized by section 994(b)(2). If under paragraph (c)(1) of this 
section a DISC is treated for its taxable year as seeking to establish 
or maintain a foreign market for sales of an item, product, or product 
line of export property (as defined in Sec. 1.993-3) from which 
qualified export receipts are derived, the marginal costing rules 
prescribed in paragraph (b) of this section may be applied to allocate 
costs between gross receipts derived from such sales and other gross 
receipts for purposes of computing, under the ``50-50'' combined taxable 
income method of Sec. 1.994-1(c)(3), the combined taxable income of the 
DISC and related supplier derived from such sales. Such marginal costing 
rules may be applied whether or not the related supplier manufactures, 
produces, grows, or extracts (within the meaning of Sec. 1.993-3(c)) the 
export property sold. Such marginal costing rules do not apply to sales 
of export property which in the hands of a purchaser related under 
section 954(d)(3) to the seller give rise to foreign base company sales 
income as described in section 954(d) unless, for the purchaser's year 
in which it resells the export property, section 954(b)(3)(A) is 
applicable or such income is under the exceptions in section 954(b)(4). 
Such marginal costing rules do not apply to leases of property or the 
performance of any services whether or not related and subsidiary 
services (as defined in Sec. 1.994-1(b)(3).
    (b) Marginal costing rules for allocations of costs--(1) In general. 
Marginal costing is a method under which only marginal or variable costs 
of producing and selling a particular item, product, or product line are 
taken into account for purposes of section 994. Where this

[[Page 683]]

section is applicable, costs attributable to deriving qualified export 
receipts for the DISC's taxable year from sales of an item, product, or 
product line may be determined in any manner the related supplier (as 
defined in Sec. 1.994-1(a)(3)(ii)) chooses, provided that the 
requirements of both subparagraphs (2) and (3) of this paragraph are 
met.
    (2) Variable costs taken into account. There are taken into account 
in computing the combined taxable income of the DISC and its related 
supplier from sales of an item, product, or product line the following 
costs:
    (i) Direct production costs (as defined in Sec. 1.471-11(b)(2)(i)) 
and
    (ii) Costs which are export promotion expenses, but only if they are 
claimed as export promotion expenses in determining taxable income 
derived by the DISC under the combined taxable income method of 
Sec. 1.994-1(c)(3).
At the taxpayer's option, all, a part, or none of the costs which 
qualify as export promotion expenses may be so claimed as export 
promotion expenses.
    (3) Overall profit percentage limitation. As a result of such 
determination of costs attributable to such qualified export receipts 
for the DISC's taxable year, the combined taxable income of the DISC and 
its related supplier from sales of such item, product, or product line 
for the DISC's taxable year does not exceed gross receipts (determined 
under Sec. 1.993-6) of the DISC derived from such sales, multiplied by 
the overall profit percentage (determined under paragraph (c)(2) of this 
section).
    (c) Definitions--(1) Establishing or maintaining a foreign market. A 
DISC shall be treated for its taxable year as seeking to establish or 
maintain a foreign market with respect to sales of an item, product, or 
product line of export property from which qualified export receipts are 
derived if the combined taxable income computed under paragraph (b) of 
this section is greater than the combined taxable income computed under 
Sec. 1.994-1(c)(6).
    (2) Overall profit percentage. (i) For purposes of this section, the 
overall profit percentage for a taxable year of the DISC for a product 
or product line is the percentage which--
    (a) The combined taxable income of the DISC and its related supplier 
plus all other taxable income of its related supplier from all sales 
(domestic and foreign) of such product or product line during the DISC's 
taxable year, computed under the full costing method, is of
    (b) The total gross receipts (determined under Sec. 1.993-6) from 
all such sales.
    (ii) At the annual option of the related supplier, the overall 
profit percentage for the DISC's taxable year for all products and 
product lines may be determined by aggregating the amounts described in 
subdivision (i) (a) and (b) of this subparagraph of the DISC, and all 
domestic members of the controlled group (as defined in Sec. 1.993-1(k)) 
of which the DISC is a member, for the DISC's taxable year and for 
taxable years of such members ending with or within the DISC's taxable 
year.
    (iii) For purposes of determining the amounts in subdivisions (i) 
(b) and (ii) of this subparagraph, a sale of property between a DISC and 
its related supplier or between domestic members of the controlled group 
shall be taken into account only during the DISC's taxable year (or 
taxable year of the member ending within the DISC's taxable year) during 
which the property is ultimately sold to a person which is neither the 
DISC nor such a domestic member.
    (3) Grouping of transactions. (i) In general, for purposes of this 
section, an item, product, or product line is the item or group 
consisting of the product or product line pursuant to Sec. 1.994-1(c)(7) 
used by the taxpayer for purposes of applying the intercompany pricing 
rules of Sec. 1.994-1.
    (ii) However, for purposes of determining the overall profit 
percentage under subparagraph (2) of this paragraph, any product or 
product line grouping permissible under Sec. 1.994-1(c)(7) may be used 
at the annual choice of the taxpayer, even though it may not be the same 
item or grouping referred to in subdivision (i) of this subparagraph, as 
long as the grouping chosen for determining the overall profit 
percentage is at least as broad as the grouping referred to in such 
subdivision (i).
    (4) Full costing method. For purposes of this section, the term 
``full costing

[[Page 684]]

method'' is the method for determining combined taxable income set forth 
in Sec. 1.994-1(c)(6).
    (d) Application of limitation on DISC income (``no loss'' rule). If 
the marginal costing rules of this section are applied, the combined 
taxable income method of Sec. 1.994-1(c)(3) may not be applied to cause 
in any taxable year a loss to the related supplier, but such method may 
be applied to the extent it does not cause a loss. For purposes of the 
preceding sentence, a loss to a related supplier would result if the 
taxable income of the DISC would exceed the combined taxable income of 
the related supplier and the DISC determined in accordance with 
paragraph (b) of this section. If, however, there is no combined taxable 
income (so determined), see the last sentence of Sec. 1.994-1(e)(1)(i).
    (e) Examples. The provisions of this section may be illustrated by 
the following examples:

    Example 1. X and Y are calendar year taxpayers. X, a domestic 
manufacturing company, owns all the stock of Y, a DISC for the taxable 
year. During 1973, X manufactures a product line which is eligible to be 
export property (as defined in Sec. 1.993-3). X enters into a written 
agreement with Y whereby Y is granted a sales franchise with respect to 
exporting such product line from which qualified export receipts will be 
derived and Y will receive commissions with respect to such exports 
equal to the maximum amount permitted to be received under the 
intercompany pricing rules of section 994. Commissions are computed 
using the combined taxable income method under Sec. 1.994-1(c)(3). For 
purposes of applying the combined taxable income method, X and Y compute 
their combined taxable income attributable to the product line of export 
property under the marginal costing rules in accordance with the 
additional facts assumed in the table below:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
(1) Maximum combined taxable income (determined under                   
 paragraph (b)(2) of this section):                                     
  (a) Y's gross receipts from export sales....................    $95.00
  (b) Less:                                                             
    (i) Direct materials............................     40.00          
    (ii) Direct labor...............................     20.00          
    (iii) Y's export promotion expenses claimed in                      
     determining Y's DISC taxable income............      5.00          
    (iv) Total deductions...........................     65.00          
                                                     ----------         
  (c) Maximum combined taxable income.........................     30.00
                                                     ===========        
(2) Overall profit percentage limitation (determined under              
 paragraph (b)(3) of this section):                                     
  (a) Gross receipts of X and Y from all domestic and foreign           
   sales......................................................    400.00
  (b) Less deductions:                                                  
    (i) Direct materials............................    160.00          
    (ii) Direct labor...............................     80.00          
    (iii) Other costs (of which $8 are costs of the                     
     DISC including $5 of export promotion expenses                     
     claimed in determining Y's taxable income).....     40.00          
                                                     ----------         
  (c) Total deductions........................................    280.00
                                                     -----------        
  (d) Total taxable income from all sales computed on a full            
   costing method.............................................    120.00
                                                     ===========        
  (e) Overall profit percentage (line (d) ($120) divided by             
   line (a) ($400)) (percent).................................       30%
  (f) Multiply by gross receipts from Y's export sales (line            
   (1)(a))....................................................    $95.00
                                                     ===========        
  (g) Overall profit percentage limitations...................     28.50
                                                                        

Since the overall profit percentage limitation under line (2)(g) 
($28.50) is less than maximum combined taxable income under line (1)(c) 
($30), combined taxable income under marginal costing is limited to 
$28.50. Since under the franchise agreement Y is to earn the maximum 
commission permitted under the intercompany pricing rules of section 
994, combined taxable income on the transactions is $28.50. Accordingly, 
the costs attributable to export sales (other than for direct material, 
direct labor, and export promotion expenses) are $1.50, i.e., line 
(1)(c) ($30) minus line (2)(g) ($28.50). Under the combined taxable 
income method of Sec. 1.994-1 (c)(3), Y will have taxable income 
attributable to the sales of $14.75, i.e., the sum of 1/2 of combined 
taxable income (1/2 of $28.50) and 10 percent of Y's export promotion 
expenses claimed in determining Y's taxable income (10 percent of $5). 
Accordingly, the commissions Y receives from X are $22.75, i.e., Y's 
costs ($8, see line (2)(b)(iii)) plus Y's profit ($14.75).
    Example 2. (1) Assume the same facts as in example 1, except that 
gross receipts from export sales are only $85 and gross receipts from 
all sales remain at $400. For purposes of applying the combined taxable 
income method, X and Y may compute their combined taxable income 
attributable to the product line of export property under the marginal 
costing rules as follows:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
(1) Maximum combined taxable income (determined under paragraph         
 (b)(2) of this section):                                               
  (a) Y's gross receipts from export sales.....................   $85.00
  (b) Less:                                                             
    (i) Direct materials..............................    40.00         
    (ii) Direct labor.................................    20.00         
    (iii) Y's export promotion expenses claimed in                      
     determining Y's taxable income...................     5.00         
                                                       ---------        
    (iv) Total deductions......................................    65.00
                                                       ----------       

[[Page 685]]

                                                                        
  (c) Maximum combined taxable income..........................    20.00
                                                       ==========       
(2) Overall profit percentage limitation (determined under              
 paragraph (b)(3) of this section):                                     
  (a) Gross receipts from Y's export sales (line (1)(a)).......    85.00
  (b) Multiply by overall profit percentage (as determined in           
   example 1) (percent)........................................      30%
                                                       ----------       
  (c) Overall profit percentage limitation.....................   25.50 
                                                       ==========       
                                                                        

Since maximum combined taxable income under line (1)(c) ($20) is less 
than the overall profit percentage limitation under line (2)(c) 
($25.50), combined taxable income under marginal costing is limited to 
$20. Since under the franchise agreement Y is to earn the maximum 
commission permitted under the intercompany pricing rules of section 
994, combined taxable income on the transactions is $20. Accordingly, no 
costs (other than for direct material, direct labor, and export 
promotion expenses) will be attributed to export sales. Under the 
combined taxable income method of Sec. 1.994-1(c)(3), Y will have 
taxable income attributable to the sales of $10.50, i.e., the sum of 1/2 
of combined taxable income (1/2 of $20) and 10 percent of Y's export 
promotion expenses claimed in determining Y's taxable income (10 percent 
of $5). Accordingly, the Commissions Y receives from X are $18.50, i.e., 
Y's costs ($8, see line (2)(b)(iii) of example 1) plus Y's profit 
($10.50).
    (2) If export promotion expenses are not claimed in determining 
taxable income of Y under the combined taxable income method, the 
taxable income of Y would be increased to $12.50 and commissions payable 
to Y would be increased to $20.50, computed as follows:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
(3) Maximum combined taxable income (determined under paragraph         
 (b)(2) of this section):                                               
  (a) Y's gross receipts from export sales.....................   $85.00
  (b) Less:                                                             
    (i) Direct materials..............................    40.00         
    (ii) Direct labor.................................    20.00         
                                                       ---------        
    (iii) Total deductions............................             60.00
                                                                --------
  (c) Maximum combined taxable income..........................    25.00
                                                       ==========       
(4) Overall profit percentage limitation (line (2)(c)).........    25.50
                                                       ==========       
                                                                        

Since maximum combined taxable income under line (3)(c) ($25) is less 
than the overall profit percentage under line (4) ($25.50), combined 
taxable income under marginal costing is limited to $25. Since under the 
franchise agreement Y is to earn the maximum commission permitted under 
the intercompany pricing rules of section 994, combined taxable income 
on the transactions is $25. Accordingly, no costs (other than for direct 
material and direct labor) will be attributed to export sales. Under the 
combined taxable income method of Sec. 1.994-1(c)(3), Y will have 
taxable income attributable to the sales of $12.50, i.e., 1/2 of 
combined taxable income (1/2 of $25). Accordingly, the commissions Y 
receives from X are $20.50, i.e., Y's costs ($8, see line (2)(b)(iii) of 
example 1) plus Y's profit ($12.50).
    Example 3. (1) Assume the same facts as in example 1, except that 
gross receipts from export sales are only $85, gross receipts from all 
sales remain at $400, and Y has costs of $40 consisting of Y's export 
promotion expenses of $35 and costs of $5 other than for direct 
material, direct labor, or export promotion expenses. For purposes of 
applying the combined taxable income method, X and Y may compute their 
combined taxable income attributable to the product line of export 
property under the marginal costing rules as follows:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
(1) Maximum combined taxable income (determined under paragraph         
 (b)(2) of this section):                                               
  (a) Y's gross receipts from export sales.....................   $85.00
  (b) Less:                                                             
    (i) Direct materials..............................    40.00         
    (ii) Direct labor.................................    20.00         
    (iii) Y's export promotion expenses claimed in                      
     determining Y's taxable income...................    35.00         
                                                       ---------        
    (iv) Total deductions.............................             95.00
                                                                --------
  (c) Maximum combined taxable income (loss)...................  (10.00)
                                                       ==========       
(2) Overall profit percentage limitation (as determined in              
 example 2)....................................................    25.50
                                                       ==========       
                                                                        

Since maximum combined taxable income under line (1)(c) (which is a loss 
of $10) is less than the overall profit percentage limitation under line 
(2)(c) ($25.50), combined taxable income under marginal costing is a 
loss of $10 and, under the combined taxable income method of Sec. 1.994-
1(c)(3), Y will have no taxable income or loss attributable to the 
sales. Accordingly, the commissions Y receives from X are $40, i.e., Y's 
costs ($40).
    (2) If export promotion expenses are not claimed in determining Y's 
taxable income under the combined taxable income method, the taxable 
income of Y would be increased to $12.50 and commissions payable to Y 
would be increased to $52.50 computed as follows:

[[Page 686]]



                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
(3) Maximum combined taxable income (determined under paragraph         
 (b)(2) of this section) (line (3)(c) of example 2)............   $25.00
(4) Overall profit percentage limitation (as determined in              
 example 2)....................................................    25.50
                                                                        

The results would be the same as in part (2) of example 2, except that 
the commissions Y receives from X are $52.50, i.e., Y's costs ($40) plus 
Y's profit ($12.50).

[T.D. 7364, 40 FR 29836, July 16, 1975; 40 FR 33972, Aug. 13, 1975]


<R05>
Sec. 1.995-1   Taxation of DISC income to shareholders.

    (a) In general. (1) Under Sec. 1.991-1(a), a corporation which is a 
DISC for a taxable year is not subject to any tax imposed by subtitle A 
of the Code (sections 1 through 1564) for the taxable year, except for 
the tax imposed by chapter 5 thereof (sections 1491 through 1494) on 
certain transfers to avoid tax.
    (2) Under section 995(a), the shareholders of a DISC, or a former 
DISC, are subject to taxation on the earnings and profits of the DISC in 
accordance with the provisions of chapter 1 of the Code generally 
applicable to shareholders, but subject to the modifications provided in 
sections 995, 996, and 997.
    (3) Under Sec. 1.996-3, three divisions of earnings and profits of a 
DISC, or former DISC, are defined: ``accumulated DISC income'', 
``previously taxed income'', and ``other earnings and profits''. Under 
Sec. 1.995-2, certain amounts of the DISC's earnings and profits are 
deemed to be distributed as dividends to shareholders of the DISC at the 
close of the DISC's taxable year in which such earnings were derived. 
Such deemed distributions do not cause a reduction in the DISC's 
earnings and profits, but are taken into account in Sec. 1.996-3(c) as 
an increase in previously taxed income. To the extent the DISC's 
earnings and profits are paid out in a subsequent distribution which is, 
under Sec. 1.996-1, treated as made out of such ``previously taxed 
income,'' they will not be taxable to the shareholders a second time.
    (4) In general, ``accumulated DISC income'' is the earnings and 
profits of the DISC which have not been deemed distributed and which may 
be deferred from taxation so long as they are not actually distributed 
with respect to its stock. However, deferral of taxation on 
``accumulated DISC income'' may be terminated, in whole or in part, in 
the event of: (i) Certain foreign investment attributable to producer's 
loans (see Sec. 1.995-2(a)(5) and Sec. 1.995-5); (ii) revocation of the 
election to be treated as a DISC or other disqualification (see 
Sec. 1.995-3); and (iii) certain dispositions of DISC stock in which 
gain is realized (see Sec. 1.995-4).
    (5) Since a DISC is not taxed on its taxable income, section 246(d) 
and Sec. 1.246-4 provide that the deduction otherwise allowed under 
section 243 shall not be allowed with respect to a dividend from a DISC, 
or former DISC, paid or treated as paid out of accumulated DISC income 
or previously taxed income or with respect to a deemed distribution in a 
qualified year under Sec. 1.995-2(a).
    (b) Amounts and character of amounts includible in shareholder's 
gross income. Each shareholder of a corporation which is a DISC, or 
former DISC, shall include in his gross income--
    (1) Amounts actually distributed to him that are includible in his 
gross income in accordance with paragraph (c) of this section.
    (2) Amounts which, pursuant to Sec. 1.995-2, he is deemed to receive 
as a distribution taxable as a dividend on the last day of each of the 
corporation's taxable years for which it qualifies as a DISC,
    (3) Amounts which, pursuant to Sec. 1.995-3, he is deemed to receive 
as a distribution taxable as a dividend in the event the corporation 
revokes its election to be treated as a DISC or otherwise is 
disqualified as a DISC, and
    (4) Gain realized on certain dispositions of stock in the 
corporation which, under Sec. 1.995-4, is includible in his gross income 
as a dividend.
    (c) Treatment of actual distributions. (1) Except as provided in 
subparagraph (3) of this paragraph, amounts actually distributed to a 
shareholder of a DISC, or former DISC, with respect to his stock are 
includible in his gross income in accordance with section 301.
    (2) Since a deemed distribution does not reduce the earnings and 
profits of a DISC, it does not affect the determination as to whether a 
subsequent actual distribution is a ``dividend'' under section 316(a). 
Since, however, the amount of a deemed distribution increases

[[Page 687]]

``previously taxed income'', it does affect the determination as to 
whether a subsequent actual distribution is excluded (as described in 
subparagraph (3) of this paragraph) from gross income.
    (3) Under Sec. 1.996-1(c), the amount of any actual distribution 
(including a deficiency distribution made pursuant to Sec. 1.992-3), 
with respect to stock in a DISC, or former DISC, which is treated under 
Sec. 1.996-1 as made out of previously taxed income, is excluded by the 
distributee from gross income, but only to the extent that such amount 
does not exceed the adjusted basis of the distributee's stock. Under 
Sec. 1.996-5(b), that portion of any actual distribution which is 
treated as made out of previously taxed income shall be applied against 
and reduce the adjusted basis of the stock and, to the extent that it 
exceeds the adjusted basis of the stock, it shall be treated as gain 
from the sale or exchange of property.
    (4) A deficiency distribution pursuant to Sec. 1.992-3 may be made 
after the close of the DISC's taxable year with respect to which it is 
made. The determinations as to whether such deficiency distribution is a 
dividend under section 301 and as to which division of earnings and 
profits is the source thereof depend upon the status of the DISC's 
earnings and profits account and divisions thereof at the time the 
distribution is actually made. See Sec. 1.996-1(d) for the priority of 
such deficiency distribution over other actual distributions made during 
the same taxable year.
    (d) Personal holding company income. (1) Any amount includible in a 
shareholder's gross income as a dividend with respect to the stock of a 
DISC, or former DISC, pursuant to paragraph (b) of this section shall be 
treated as a dividend for all purposes of the Code, except that for 
purposes of determining whether such shareholder is a personal holding 
company within the meaning of section 542 any amount deemed distributed 
for qualified years under Sec. 1.995-2 or upon disqualification under 
Sec. 1.995-3, any amount of gain on certain dispositions of DISC stock 
to which Sec. 1.995-4 applies, and any amount treated under Sec. 1.996-1 
as distributed out of accumulated DISC income or previously taxed income 
shall not be treated as a dividend or any other kind of income described 
in section 543(a).
    (2) Notwithstanding subparagraph (1) of this paragraph, the 
shareholder may treat as an item of income described under section 543 
(for example, rents) any amount to which the exception in such 
subparagraph (1) applies, if it establishes to the satisfaction of the 
district director that such amount is attributable to earnings and 
profits derived from such item of income.

[T.D. 7324, 39 FR 35109, Sept. 30, 1974]


<R05>
Sec. 1.995-2  Deemed distributions in qualified years.

    (a) General rule. Under section 995 (b)(1), each shareholder of a 
DISC shall be treated as having received a distribution taxable as a 
dividend with respect to his stock on the last day of each taxable year 
of the DISC, in an amount which is equal to his pro rata share of the 
sum (as limited by paragraph (b) of this section), of the following 
seven items:
    (1) An amount equal to the gross interest derived by the DISC during 
such year from producer's loans (as defined in Sec. 1.993-4).
    (2) An amount equal to the lower of--
    (i) Any gain recognized by the DISC during such year on the sale or 
exchange of property (other than property which in the hands of the DISC 
is a qualified export asset) which was previously transferred to it in a 
transaction in which the transferor realized gain which was not 
recognized in whole or in part, or
    (ii) The amount of the transferor's gain which was not recognized on 
the previous transfer of the property to the DISC.

For purposes of this subparagraph, each item of property shall be 
considered separately. See paragraph (d) of this section for special 
rules with respect to certain tax-free acquisitions of property by the 
DISC.
    (3) An amount equal to the lower of--
    (i) Any gain recognized by the DISC during such year on the sale or 
exchange of property which in the hands of the DISC is a qualified 
export asset (other than stock in trade or property described in section 
1221(1)) and which was previously transferred to the DISC

[[Page 688]]

in a transaction in which the transferor realized gain which was not 
recognized in whole or in part, or
    (ii) The amount of the transferor's gain which was not recognized on 
the previous transfer of the property to the DISC and which would have 
been includible in the transferor's gross income as ordinary income if 
its entire realized gain had been recognized upon the transfer.

For purposes of this subparagraph, each item of property shall be 
considered separately. See paragraph (d) of this section for special 
rules with respect to certain tax-free acquisitions of property by the 
DISC.
    (4) For taxable years beginning after December 31, 1975, an amount 
equal to 50 percent of the taxable income of the DISC for the taxable 
years attributable to military property (as defined in Sec. 1.995-6).
    (5) For taxable years beginning after December 31, 1975, the taxable 
income for the taxable year attributable to base period export gross 
receipts (as defined in Sec. 1.995-7).
    (6) The sum of--
    (i)(A) In the case of a corporate share holder, an amount equal to 
57.5 percent of the excess (if any) (one-half for DISCs' taxable years 
beginning before January 1, 1983) of the taxable income of the DISC for 
such year (computed as provided in Sec. 1.991-1(b)(1)) over the sum of 
the amounts deemed distributed for the taxable year in accordance with 
subparagraphs (1), (2), (3), (4) and (5) of this paragraph, or
    (B) In the case of a non-corporate share holder, an amount equal to 
one-half of the excess (if any) of the taxable income of the DISC for 
such year (computed as provided in Sec. 1.991-1(b)(1)) over the sum of 
the amounts deemed distributed for the taxable year in accordance with 
subparagraphs (1), (2), (3), (4), and (5) of this paragraph.
    (ii)(A) An amount equal to the amount under subdivision (i) of 
paragraph (a)(6) of this section multiplied by the international boycott 
factor as determined under section 999 (c)(1) , or
    (B) In lieu of the amount determined under subdivision (ii)(A) of 
paragraph (a)(6) of this section, the amount described under section 999 
(c)(2) of such international boycott income, and
    (iii) An amount equal to the sum of any illegal bribes, kickbacks, 
or other payments paid by or on behalf of the DISC directly or 
indirectly to an official, employee, or agent in fact of a government. 
An amount is paid by a DISC where it is paid by any officer, director, 
employee, shareholder, or agent of the DISC for the benefit of such 
DISC. For purposes of this section, the principles of section 162 (c) 
and the regulations thereunder shall apply. The fair market value of an 
illegal payment made in the form of property or services shall be 
considered the amount of such illegal payment.
    (7) The amount of foreign investment attributable to producer's 
loans of the DISC, as of the close of the ``group taxable year'' ending 
with such taxable year of the DISC, determined in accordance with 
Sec. 1.995-5. The amount of such foreign investment attributable to 
producer's loans so determined for any taxable year of a former DISC 
shall be deemed distributed as a dividend to the shareholders of such 
former DISC on the last day of such taxable year. See Sec. 1.995-3(e) 
for the effect that such deemed distribution has on scheduled 
installments of deemed distributions of accumulated DISC income under 
Sec. 1.995-3(a) upon disqualification.
    (b) Limitation on amount of deemed distributions under section 
995(b)(1). (1) The sum of the amounts described in paragraph (a)(1) 
through (a)(6) of this section which is deemed distributed pro rata to 
the DISC's shareholders a dividend for any taxable year of the 
corporation shall not exceed the DISC's earnings and profits for such 
year.
    (2) The amount of foreign investment attributable to producer's 
loans of the DISC (as described in paragraph (a)(7) of this section) 
which is deemed to be distributed pro rata to the DISC's shareholders as 
dividends for any taxable year of the corporation shall not exceed the 
lower of the corporation's accumulated DISC income at the beginning of 
such year or the corporation's accumulated earnings and profits at the 
beginning of such year (but not less than zero)--
    (i) Increased by any DISC income of the corporation for such year as 
defined in Sec. 1.996-3(b)(2) (i.e., any excess of the DISC's earnings 
and profits for

[[Page 689]]

such year over the sum of the amounts described in paragraph (a)(1) 
through (a)(6) of this section), or
    (ii) Decreased by any deficit in the corporation's earnings and 
profits for such year.

Thus, for example, if a DISC has a deficit in accumulated earnings and 
profits at the beginning of a taxable year of $10,000, current earnings 
and profits of $12,000, no amounts described in paragraphs (a)(1) 
through (a)(6) of this section for the year, and foreign investment 
attributable to producer's loans for the taxable year of $5,000, the 
DISC would have a deemed distribution described in paragraph (a)(7) of 
this section of $5,000 for the taxable year. On the other hand, suppose 
the DISC had accumulated earnings and profits of $13,000 at the 
beginning of the taxable year, accumulated DISC income of $10,000 at the 
beginning of the taxable year, a deficit in earnings and profits for the 
taxable year of $12,000, no amounts described in paragraphs (a)(1) 
through (a)(6) of this section for the taxable year, and foreign 
investment attributable to producer's loans for the taxable year of 
$5,000. Under these facts the DISC would have no deemed distribution 
described in paragraph (a)(7) of this section because the corporation 
had no DISC income for the taxable year and the current year's deficit 
in earnings and profits subtracted from the DISC's accumulated DISC 
income at the beginning of the year produces a negative amount. For 
rules relating to the carryover to a subsequent year of the $5,000 of 
foreign investment attributable to producer's loans, see Sec. 1.995-
5(a)(6).
    (3) If, by reason of the limitation in subparagraph (1) of this 
paragraph, less than the sum of the amounts described in paragraphs 
(a)(1) through (a)(6) of this section is deemed distributed, then the 
portion of such sum which is deemed distributed shall be attributed 
first to the amount described in subparagraph (1) of such paragraph, to 
the extent thereof; second to the amount described in subparagraph (2) 
of such paragraph, to the extent thereof; third to the amount described 
in subparagraph (3) of such paragraph, to the extent thereof; and so 
forth, and finally to the amount described in paragraph (b)(6) of this 
paragraph.
    (c) Examples. Paragraphs (a) and (b) of this section may be 
illustrated by the following examples:

    Example 1. Y is a corporation which uses the calendar year as its 
taxable year and which elects to be treated as a DISC beginning with 
1972. X is its sole shareholder. In 1972, X transfers certain property 
to Y in exchange for Y's stock in a transaction in which X does not 
recognize gain or loss by reason of the application of section 351(a). 
Included in the property transferred to Y is depreciable property 
described in paragraph (a)(3) of this section on which X realizes, but 
does not recognize by reason of the application of section 1245(b)(3), a 
gain of $20,000. If X had sold such property for cash, the $20,000 gain 
would have been recognized as ordinary income under section 1245. Also 
included in the transfer to Y is 100 shares of stock in a third 
corporation (which is not a related foreign export corporation) on which 
X realizes, but does not recognize, a gain of $5,000. In 1973, Y sells 
such property and recognizes a gain of $25,000 on the depreciable 
property and $8,000 on the 100 shares of stock. Y has accumulated 
earnings and profits at the beginning of 1973 of $5,000, earnings and 
profits for 1973 of $72,000, and taxable income for 1973 of $100,000. At 
the beginning of 1973, Y has $6,000 of accumulated DISC income, no 
previously taxed income, and a deficit of $1,000 of other earnings and 
profits. Under these facts and the additional facts assumed in the table 
below, X is treated as having received a deemed distribution taxable as 
a dividend of $76,000 on December 31, 1973, determined as follows:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
(1) Gross interest derived by Y in 1973 from producer's loans..   $7,000
(2) Amount of gain on depreciable property (lower of Y's                
 recognized gain ($25,000) or X's gain not recognized on                
 section 1245 property ($20,000))..............................   20,000
(3) Amount of gain on stock (lower of X's gain not recognized           
 or Y's recognized gain ($8,000) ($5,000)).....................    5,000
(4) One-half excess of taxable income for 1973 over the sum of          
 lines (1), (2), and (3) (1/2 of ($100,000 minus $32,000)).....   34,000
                                                                --------
(5) Limitation on lines (1) through (4):                                
  (a) Sum of lines (1) through (4).............................   66,000
  (b) Earnings and profits for 1973............................   72,000
                                                                --------
  (c) Lower of lines (a) and (b)...............................   66,000
                                                                --------
(6) Amount under paragraph (a)(5) of this section:                      
    (a) Foreign investment attributable to producer's loans             
     under Sec.  1.995-5.......................................   10,000
    (b) Sum of the lower of accumulated earnings and profits at         
     beginning of 1973 ($5,000) or accumulated DISC income at           
     beginning of 1973 ($6,000) and excess of earnings and              
     profits for 1973 over line (5)(c) ($72,000 minus $66,000).   11,000
                                                                --------

[[Page 690]]

                                                                        
    (c) Lower of lines (a) and (b).............................   10,000
                                                                --------
(7) Total deemed distribution (sum of lines (5)(c) and (6)(c)).   76,000
                                                                ========
                                                                        

    Example 2. Assume the facts are the same as in example 1, except 
that earnings and profits for 1973 amount to only $60,000. Under these 
facts, X is treated as receiving a deemed distribution taxable as a 
dividend of $65,000 on December 31, 1973, determined as follows:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
(5) Limitation on lines (1) through (4):                                
    (a) Line (5)(a) of example 1..............................   $66,000
    (b) Earnings and profits for 1973.........................    60,000
                                                               ---------
    (c) Lower of lines (a) and (b)............................    60,000
                                                               ---------
(6) Amount under paragraph (a)(5) of this section:                      
    (a) Line (6)(a) of example 1..............................    10,000
    (b) Sum of the lower of accumulated earnings and profits            
     at beginning of 1973 ($5,000) or accumulated DISC income           
     at beginning of 1973 ($6,000) plus excess of earnings and          
     profits for 1973 over line (5)(c) ($60,000 minus $60,000)     5,000
                                                               ---------
    (c) Lower of lines (a) and (b)............................     5,000
                                                               ---------
(7) Total deemed distribution (sum of lines (5)(c) and (6)(c))    65,000
                                                               =========
                                                                        

    Example 3. Assume the facts are the same as in example 1, except 
that Y has a deficit in accumulated earnings and profits at the 
beginning of 1973 of $4,000. Such deficit is comprised of accumulated 
DISC income of $1,000, no previously taxed income, and a deficit in 
other earnings and profits of $5,000. Under these facts, X is treated as 
receiving a deemed distribution taxable as a dividend in the amount of 
$72,000 on December 31, 1973, determined as follows:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
(5) Limitation on lines (1) through (4):                                
  (a) Line (5)(a) of example 1................................   $66,000
  (b) Earnings and profits for 1973...........................    72,000
                                                               ---------
  (c) Lower of lines (a) and (b)..............................    66,000
                                                               ---------
(6) Amount under paragraph (a)(5) of this section:                      
  (a) Line (6)(a) of example 1................................    10,000
  (b) Sum of accumulated earnings and profits at beginning of           
   1973 (not less than $0), and excess of earnings and profits          
   for 1973 over amount in line (5)(c) ($72,000 minus $66,000)     6,000
                                                               ---------
  (c) Lower of lines (a) and (b)..............................     6,000
                                                               ---------
(7) Total deemed distribution sum of lines (5)(c) and (6)(c)..    72,000
                                                               =========
                                                                        

    (d) Special rules for certain tax-free acquisitions of property by 
the DISC. (1) For purposes of paragraph (a)(2)(i) and (3)(i) of this 
section, if--
    (i) A DISC acquires property in a first transaction and in a second 
transaction it disposes of such property in exchange for other property, 
and
    (ii) By reason of the application of section 1031 (relating to like-
kind exchanges) or section 1033 (relating to involuntary conversions), 
the basis in the DISC's hands of the other property acquired in such 
second transaction is determined in whole or in part with reference to 
the basis of the property acquired in the first transaction,

then upon a disposition of such other property in a third transaction by 
the DISC such other property shall be treated as though it had been 
transferred to the DISC in the first transaction. Thus, if the first 
transaction is a purchase of the property for cash, then paragraphs 
(a)(2) and (3) of this section will not apply to a sale by the DISC of 
the other property acquired in the second transaction.
    (2) For purposes of paragraphs (a)(2)(i) and (3)(i) of this section, 
if a DISC acquires property in a first transaction and it transfers such 
property to a transferee DISC in a second transaction in which the 
transferor DISC's gain is not recognized in whole or in part, then such 
property shall be treated as though it had been transferred to the 
transferee DISC in the same manner in which it was acquired in the first 
transaction by the transferor DISC. For example, if X and Y both qualify 
as DISC's and X transfers property to Y in a second transaction in which 
gain or loss is not recognized, paragraph (a)(2) or (3) of this section 
does not apply to a sale of such property by Y in a third transaction if 
X had acquired the property in a first transaction by a purchase for 
cash. If, however, X acquired the property from a transferor other than 
a DISC in the first transaction in which the transferor's realized gain 
was not recognized, then paragraph (a)(2) or (3) of this section may 
apply to the sale by Y if the other conditions of such paragraph (a)(2) 
or (3) are met.
    (3) If a DISC acquires property in a second transaction described in 
subparagraph (1) or (2) of this paragraph in which it (or, in the case 
of a second transaction described in subparagraph (2) of this paragraph, 
the transferor

[[Page 691]]

DISC) recognizes a portion (but not all) of the realized gain, then the 
amount described in paragraph (a)(2)(ii) or (a)(3)(ii) of this section 
with respect to a disposition by the DISC of such acquired property in a 
third transaction shall not exceed the transferor's gain which was not 
recognized on the first transaction minus the amount of gain recognized 
by the DISC (or transferor DISC) on the second transaction.
    (4) The provisions of this paragraph may be illustrated by the 
following examples:

    Example 1. X and Y are corporations each of which qualifies as a 
DISC and uses the calendar year as its taxable year. In 1972, X acquires 
section 1245 property in a first transaction in which the transferor's 
entire realized gain of $17 is not recognized. In 1973, X transfers such 
property to Y in a second transaction in which X realizes a gain of $20 
of which only $4 is recognized. (On December 31, 1973, X's shareholders 
are treated as having received a deemed distribution of a dividend which 
includes such $4 under paragraph (a)(3) of this section, provided the 
limitation in paragraph (b) of this section is met.) In a third 
transaction in 1974, Y sells such property and recognizes a gain of $25. 
With respect to Y's shareholders on December 31, 1974, the amount 
described in paragraph (a)(3)(ii) of this section would be limited to 
$13, which is the amount of the transferor's gain which was not 
recognized on the first transaction ($17) minus the amount of gain 
recognized by X on the second transaction ($4).
    Example 2. Z is a DISC using the calendar year as its taxable year. 
In a first transaction in 1972, in exchange for its stock, Z acquires 
section 1245 property from A, an individual who is its sole shareholder, 
in a transaction in which A's realized gain of $30 is not recognized by 
reason of the application of section 351(a). In a second transaction in 
1973, Z exchanges such property for other property in a like-kind 
exchange to which section 1031(b) applies and recognizes $10 of a 
realized gain of $35. (On December 31, 1973, A is treated as having 
received a deemed distribution of a dividend which includes such $10 
under paragraph (a)(3) of this section, provided the limitation in 
paragraph (b) of this section is met.) In a third transaction in 1974, Z 
sells the property acquired in the like-kind exchange and recognizes a 
gain of $25. With respect to A on December 31, 1974, the amount 
described in paragraph (a)(3)(ii) of this section is limited to $20, 
which is the amount of A's gain which was not recognized on the first 
transaction ($30) minus the amount of gain recognized by Z on the second 
transaction ($10).

    (e) Carry back of net operating loss and capital loss to prior DISC 
taxable year. For purposes of sections 991, 995, and 996, the amount of 
the deduction for the taxable year under section 172 for a net operating 
loss carryback or carryover or under section 1212 for a capital loss 
carryback or carryover shall be determined in the same manner as if the 
DISC were a domestic corporation which had not elected to be treated as 
a DISC. Thus, the amount of the deduction will be the same whether or 
not the corporation was a DISC in the year of the loss or in the year to 
which the loss is carried. For provisions setting forth adjustments to 
the DISC's, or former DISC's, deemed distributions, adjustments to its 
divisions of earnings and profits, and other tax consequences arising 
from such carrybacks, see Sec. 1.996-8.

(Secs. 995(e)(7), (8) and (10), 995(g) and 7805 of the Internal Revenue 
Code of 1954 (90 Stat. 1655, 26 U.S.C. 995 (e)(7), (8) and (10); 90 
Stat. 1659, 26 U.S.C. 995(g); and 68A Stat 917, 26 U.S.C. 7805))

[T.D. 7324, 39 FR 35110, Sept. 30, 1974, as amended by T.D. 7862, 47 FR 
56492, Dec. 17, 1982; T.D. 7984, 49 FR 40018, Oct. 12, 1984]


<R05>
Sec. 1.995-3   Distributions upon disqualification.

    (a) General rule. Under section 995 (b)(2), a shareholder of a 
corporation which is disqualified from being a DISC, either because 
pursuant to Sec. 1.992-2(e)(2) it revoked its election to be treated as 
a DISC or because it has failed to satisfy the requirements as set forth 
in Sec. 1.992-1 to be a DISC for a taxable year, shall be deemed to have 
received (at the times specified in paragraph (b) of this section) 
distributions taxable as dividends aggregating an amount equal to his 
pro rata share of the accumulated DISC income (as defined in Sec. 1.996-
3(b)) of such corporation which was accumulated during the immediately 
preceding consecutive taxable years for which the corporation was a 
DISC. The pro rata share referred to in the preceding sentence shall be 
determined as of the close of the last of such consecutive taxable years 
for which the corporation was a DISC. See Sec. 1.996-7(c) for rules 
relating to the carryover of, and maintaining a separate

[[Page 692]]

account for, such accumulated DISC income in certain reorganizations.
    (b) Time of receipt of deemed distributions. Distributions described 
in paragraph (a) of this section shall be deemed to be received in equal 
installments on the last day of each of the 10 taxable years of the 
corporation following the year of the disqualification described in 
paragraph (a) of this section, except that in no case may the number of 
equal installments exceed the number of the immediately preceding 
consecutive taxable years for which the corporation was a DISC.
    (c) Transfer of shares. Deemed distributions are includible under 
paragraphs (a) and (b) of this section in a shareholder's gross income 
as a dividend only so long as he continues to hold the shares with 
respect to which the distribution is deemed made. Thus, the transferee 
of such shareholder will include in his gross income under paragraphs 
(a) and (b) of this section the remaining installments of the deemed 
distribution which the transferor would have included in his gross 
income as a dividend had he not transferred the shares. However, if the 
transferee acquires the shares in a transaction in which the 
transferor's gain is treated under Sec. 1.995-4 in whole or in part as a 
dividend, then under Sec. 1.996-4(a) such transferee does not include 
subsequent installments in his gross income to the extent that the 
transferee treats such subsequent installments as made out of previously 
taxed income.
    (d) Effect of requalification. Deemed distributions under paragraphs 
(a) and (b) of this section continue and are includible in gross income 
as dividends by the shareholders whether or not the corporation 
subsequently requalifies and is treated as a DISC.
    (e) Effect of actual distributions and deemed distributions under 
section 995(b)(1)(G). If, during the period a shareholder of a DISC, or 
former DISC, is taking into account deemed distributions under 
paragraphs (a) and (b) of this section, an actual distribution is made 
to him out of accumulated DISC income or a deemed distribution because 
of foreign investment attributable to producer's loans is made under 
Sec. 1.995-2(a)(5) out of accumulated DISC income, such actual or deemed 
distribution shall first reduce the last installment of the deemed 
distributions scheduled to be included in the shareholder's gross income 
as a dividend, and then the preceding scheduled installments in reverse 
order. If deemed distributions are scheduled to be included in gross 
income for two or more disqualifications, an actual distribution or a 
deemed distribution under Sec. 1.995-2 (a)(5) which is treated as made 
out of accumulated DISC income reduces the deemed distributions 
resulting from the earlier disqualification first.
    (f) Examples. This section may be illustrated by the following 
examples:

    Example 1. X Corporation, which uses the calendar year as its 
taxable year, elects to be treated as a DISC beginning with 1972. X 
qualifies as a DISC for taxable years 1972 through 1975, but, pursuant 
to Sec. 1.992-2(e)(2), revokes its election as of January 1, 1976, and 
is disqualified as a DISC. On that date, X has $24,000 of accumulated 
DISC income. X's shareholders will be deemed to receive $6,000 in 
distributions taxable as a dividend on the last day of each of X's four 
succeeding taxable years (1977, 1978, 1979, and 1980).
    Example 2. Assume the same facts as in example 1, except that in 
1978 X makes an actual distribution of $22,000 to its shareholders of 
which $10,000 is treated under Sec. 1.996-1 as made out of accumulated 
DISC income. (The remaining $12,000 of such distribution is treated as 
made out of previously taxed income.) The actual distribution would 
first reduce the $6,000 deemed distribution scheduled for 1980 to zero 
and then reduce the $6,000 deemed distribution scheduled for 1979 to 
$2,000. Thus, X's shareholders include in 1978 $16,000 is gross income 
as dividends ($10,000 of actual distributions and the $6,000 deemed 
distribution scheduled for that year) and $2,000 as a dividend in 1979.
    Example 3. Assume the same facts as in example 2, except that X 
requalifies as a DISC for taxable year 1977 during which it derives 
$7,000 of DISC income (computed after taking into account a deemed 
distribution under Sec. 1.995-2(a)(4) of $7,000), but is again 
disqualified in 1978. In addition X makes an actual distribution in 1977 
equal to the deemed distribution of $7,000. Such actual distribution is 
excluded from gross income under Sec. 1.996-1(c). In 1977. X's 
shareholders include in gross income as dividends the $6,000 deemed 
distribution upon disqualification (in addition to the deemed 
distributions of $7,000 under Sec. 1.995-2 for 1977 when it was treated 
as a DISC). The actual distribution in 1978 still reduces the 
installments resulting from the earlier disqualification. Thus, in 1978, 
X's

[[Page 693]]

shareholders include $16,000 in gross income as dividends. In 1979, X's 
shareholders include $9,000 in gross income as dividends (the final 
installment of $2,000 from the earlier disqualification plus the single 
deemed distribution of $7,000 resulting from the later 
disqualification).

[T.D. 7324, 39 FR 35112, Sept. 30, 1974, as amended by T.D. 7854, 47 FR 
51741, Nov. 17, 1982]


<R05>
Sec. 1.995-4  Gain on disposition of stock in a DISC.

    (a) Disposition in which gain is recognized--(1) In general. If a 
shareholder disposes, or is treated as disposing, of stock in a DISC, or 
former DISC, then any gain recognized on such disposition shall be 
included in the shareholder's gross income as a dividend, 
notwithstanding any other provision of the Code, to the extent of the 
accumulated DISC income amount (described in paragraph (d) of this 
section). To the extent the recognized gain exceeds the accumulated DISC 
income amount, it is taxable as gain from the sale or exchange of the 
stock.
    (2) Nonapplication of subparagraph (1). The provisions of 
subparagraph (1) of this paragraph do not apply (i) to the extent gain 
is not recognized (such as, for example, in the case of a gift or an 
exchange of stock to which section 354 applies) and (ii) to the amount 
of any recognized gain which is taxable as a dividend (such as, for 
example, under section 301 or 356(a)(2)) or as gain from the sale or 
exchange of property which is not a capital asset. The amount taxable as 
a dividend under section 301 or 356(a)(2) is subject to the rules 
provided in Sec. 1.995-1(c) for the treatment of actual distributions by 
a DISC.
    (b) Disposition in which separate corporate existence of DISC is 
terminated--(1) General. If stock in a corporation that is a DISC, or 
former DISC, is disposed of in a transaction in which its separate 
corporate existence as a DISC, or former DISC, is terminated, then, 
notwithstanding any other provision of the Code, an amount of realized 
gain shall be recognized and included in the transferor's gross income 
as a dividend. The realized gain shall be recognized to the extent that 
such gain--
    (i) Would not have been recognized but for the provisions of this 
paragraph, and
    (ii) Does not exceed the accumulated DISC income amount (described 
in paragraph (d) of this section).
    (2) Cessation of separate corporate existence as a DISC, or former 
DISC. For purposes of subparagraph (1) of this paragraph, separate 
corporate existence as a DISC, or former DISC, will be treated as having 
ceased if, as a result of the transaction, there is no separate entity 
which is a DISC and to which is carried over the accumulated DISC income 
and other tax attributes of the DISC, or former DISC, the stock of which 
is disposed of. Thus, for example, if stock in a DISC, or former DISC, 
is exchanged in a transaction described in section 381(a) (relating to 
carryovers in certain corporate acquisitions), the gain realized on the 
transfer of such stock will not be recognized under subparagraph (1) of 
this paragraph if the assets of such DISC, or former DISC, are acquired 
by a corporation which immediately after the acquisition qualifies as a 
DISC. For a further example, if a DISC, or former DISC, is liquidated in 
a transaction to which section 332 (relating to complete liquidations of 
subsidiaries) applies, the transaction will be subject to subparagraph 
(1) of this paragraph if the basis to the transferee corporation of the 
assets acquired on the liquidation is determined under section 334(b)(2) 
(as in effect prior to amendment by the Tax Equity and Fiscal 
Responsibility Act of 1982) or if immediately after such liquidation the 
transferee of such assets does not qualify as a DISC. However, separate 
corporate existence as a DISC, or former DISC, will not be treated as 
having ceased in the case of a mere change in place of organization, 
however effected. See Sec. 1.996-7 for rules for the carryover of the 
divisions of a DISC's earnings and profits to one or more DISC's.
    (c) Disposition to which section 311, 336, or 337 applies--(1) In 
general. If, after December 31, 1976, a shareholder distributes, sells, 
or exchanges stock in a DISC, or former DISC, in a transaction to which 
section 311, 336, or 337 applies, then an amount equal to the excess of 
the fair market value of such stock over its adjusted basis in the hands 
of the shareholder shall, notwithstanding

[[Page 694]]

any other provision of the Code, be included in gross income of the 
shareholder as a dividend to the extent of the accumulated DISC income 
amount (described in paragraph (d) of this section).
    (2) Nonapplication of subparagraph (1). Subparagraph (1) shall not 
apply if the person receiving the stock in the disposition has a holding 
period for the stock which includes the period for which the stock was 
held by the shareholder disposing of such stock.
    (d) Accumulated DISC income amount--(1) General. For purposes of 
this section, the accumulated DISC income amount is the accumulated DISC 
income of the DISC or former DISC which is attributable to the stock 
disposed of and which was accumulated in taxable years of such DISC or 
former DISC during the period or periods such stock was held by the 
shareholder who disposed of such stock.
    (2) Period during which a shareholder has held stock. For purposes 
of this section, the period during which a shareholder has held stock 
includes the period he is considered to have held it by reason of the 
application of section 1223 and, if his basis is determined in whole or 
in part under the provisions of section 1014(d) (relating to special 
rule for DISC stock acquired from decedent), the holding period of the 
decedent. Such holding period is to exclude the day of acquisition but 
include the day of disposition. Thus, for example, if A purchases stock 
in a DISC on December 31, 1972, and makes a gift of such stock to B on 
June 30, 1973, then on December 31, 1974, B will be treated as having 
held the stock for 2 full years. If the basis of the stock in C's hands 
is determined under section 1014(d) upon a transfer from B's estate on 
December 31, 1976, by reason of B's death on June 30, 1974, then on 
December 31, 1976, C will be treated as having held the stock for 4 full 
years.
    (e) Accumulated DISC income allocable to shareholder under section 
995(c)(2)--(1) In general. Under this paragraph, rules are prescribed 
for purposes of paragraph (d) of this section as to the manner of 
determining, with respect to the stock of a DISC, or former DISC, 
disposed of, the amount of accumulated DISC income which is attributable 
to such stock and which was accumulated in taxable years of the 
corporation during the period or periods the stock disposed of was held 
or treated under paragraph (d)(2) of this section as held by the 
transferor. Subparagraphs (2), (3), and (4) of this paragraph set forth 
a method of computation which may be employed to determine such amount. 
Any other method may be employed so long as the result obtained would be 
the same as the result obtained under such method.
    (2) Step 1. Determine the increase (or decrease) in accumulated DISC 
income for each taxable year of the DISC, or former DISC, by subtracting 
from the amount of accumulated DISC income (as defined in Sec. 1.996-
3(b)) at the close of each taxable year the amount thereof as of the 
close of the immediately preceding taxable year.
    (3) Step 2. (i) Determine for each taxable year of the DISC, or 
former DISC, the increase (or decrease) in accumulated DISC income per 
share by dividing such increase (or decrease) for the year by the number 
of shares outstanding or deemed outstanding on each day of such year.
    (ii) If the number of shares of stock in the corporation outstanding 
on each day of a taxable year of the DISC, or former DISC, is not 
constant, then the number of such shares deemed outstanding on each day 
of such year shall be the sum of the fractional amounts in respect of 
each share which was outstanding on any day of the taxable year. The 
fractional amount in respect of a share shall be determined by dividing 
the number of days in the taxable year on which such share was 
outstanding (excluding the day the share became outstanding, but 
including the day the share ceased to be outstanding), by the total 
number of days in such taxable year.
    (iii) If for any taxable year of a DISC, or former DISC, the share 
disposed of was not held (or treated under paragraph (d)(2) of this 
section as held) by the disposing shareholder for the entire year, then 
the amount of increase (or decrease) in accumulated DISC income 
attributable to such share for such year is the amount determined as if 
he held the share until the end of such

[[Page 695]]

year multiplied by a fraction the numerator of which is the number of 
days in the taxable year on which the shareholder held (or under 
paragraph (d)(2) of this section is treated as having held) such share 
and the denominator of which is the total number of days in the taxable 
year.
    (4) Step 3. Add the amounts computed in step 2 for each taxable year 
of the DISC, or former DISC, in which the shareholder held such share of 
stock.
    (5) Examples. This paragraph may be illustrated by the following 
examples:

    Example 1. X Corporation uses the calendar year as its taxable year 
and elects to be a DISC for the first time for 1973. On January 1, 1973, 
X has 20 shares issued and outstanding. A and B each own 10 shares. On 
July 1, 1976, X issues 10 shares to C. On December 31, 1977, A sells his 
10 shares to D and recognizes a gain of $120. Under these facts and 
other facts assumed in the table below, A includes in his gross income 
for 1977 a dividend under paragraph (b) of this section of $61.30 and 
long-term capital gain of $58.70.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                                                   (d)--Increase
                                                           (a)--Year   (b)--Increase                 (decrease) 
                                                              end      (decrease) in  (c)--Shares    per share  
                          Year                            accumulated   accumulated   outstanding   (column (b) 
                                                          DISC income   DISC income                  divided by 
                                                                                                    column (c)) 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1973....................................................         $80           $80            20         $4.00  
1974....................................................          50          (30)            20        (1.50)  
1975....................................................          80            30            20          1.50  
1976....................................................         100            20         \1\25           .80  
1977....................................................         140            40            30          1.33  
                                                         -------------------------------------------------------
(1) Total increase in accumulated DISC income for each                                                          
 share disposed of (sum of amounts in column (d)).......  ...........  .............  ...........         6.13  
Multiply by number of shares disposed of................  ...........  .............  ...........           10  
                                                         -------------------------------------------------------
(2) Total amount of accumulated DISC income attributable                                                        
 to A's shares disposed of..............................  ...........  .............  ...........        61.30  
(3) A's gain............................................  ...........  .............  ...........       120.00  
(4) Portion of A's gain taxable as a dividend (lower of                                                         
 lines (2) and (3)).....................................  ...........  .............  ...........        61.30  
(5) Portion of A's gain taxable as long-term capital                                                            
 gain (line (3) minus line (4)).........................  ...........  .............  ...........        58.70  
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\Under subparagraph (3)(ii) of this paragraph, the aggregate fractional amounts of the 10 shares issued on    
  July 1, 1976, is 5 shares, i.e., 10 shares, multiplied by (183 days/366 days). Thus, the number of shares     
  deemed outstanding for 1976 is 25 shares, i.e., 20 shares plus 5 shares.                                      

    Example 2. Assume the same facts as in example 1, except that A 
sells his 10 shares to D on July 1, 1977. Under subparagraph (3)(iii) of 
this paragraph, the amount of increase in accumulated DISC income for 
1977 which is attributable to each share disposed of is limited to $.67, 
i.e., $1.33 multiplied by 182 days/365 days. Therefore, the sum of the 
yearly increases (and decreases) in accumulated DISC income for each 
share is reduced by $.66 (i.e., $1.33 minus $.67). The total increase in 
accumulated DISC income for each share disposed of is $5.47 (i.e., $6.13 
minus $.66). Under these facts, A would include in his gross income for 
1977 a dividend of $54.70 and long-term capital gain of $65.30 
determined as follows:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
(1) Total increase in accumulated DISC income for each                  
 share disposed of.........................................        $5.47
Multiplied by number of shares disposed of.................           10
                                                            ------------
(2) Total amount of accumulated DISC income attributable of             
 to all shares disposed of.................................        54.70
(3) A's gain...............................................       120.00
(4) Portion of A's gain taxable as a dividend (lower of                 
 lines (2) and (3))........................................        54.70
(5) Portion of A's gain taxable as long-term capital gain               
 (line (3) minus line (4)).................................        65.30
                                                                        

[T.D. 7324, 39 FR 35112, Sept. 30, 1974, as amended by T.D. 7854, 47 FR 
51741, Nov. 17, 1982]



<R05>
Sec. 1.995-5   Foreign investment attributable to producer's loans.

    (a) In general--(1) Limitation. Under section 995(d), the amount as 
of the close of a ``group taxable year'' (as defined in subparagraph (3) 
of this paragraph) of foreign investment attributable to producer's 
loans of a DISC for purposes of section 995(b)(1)(G) shall be the excess 
(as of the close of such year) of--
    (i) The smallest of--

[[Page 696]]

    (a) The amount of the net increase in foreign assets (as defined in 
paragraph (b) of this section) by domestic and foreign members of the 
controlled group which includes the DISC,
    (b) The amount of the actual foreign investment by the domestic 
members of such group (as determined under paragraph (c) of this 
section), or
    (c) The amount of outstanding producer's loans (as determined under 
Sec. 1.993-4) by such DISC to members of such controlled group, over
    (ii) The amount (determined under Sec. 1.995-2 (a)(5) and (b)(2)) of 
foreign investment attributable to producer's loans treated under 
section 995(b)(1)(G) as deemed distributions by the particular DISC 
taxable as dividends for prior taxable years of that particular DISC.

Thus, for example, if the shareholders of a DISC which uses the calendar 
year as its taxable year (and which is a member of a controlled group in 
which all of the members use the calendar year as their taxable year) 
are treated under section 995(b)(1)(G) as receiving foreign investment 
attributable to producer's loans of a DISC of $0 in 1972, $10 in 1973, 
and $30 in 1974, or a total of $40, and if the smallest of the amounts 
described in subdivision (i) of this subparagraph at the end of 1975 is 
$90, then the amount of the foreign investment attributable to 
producer's loans of a DISC at the end of 1975 is $50, i.e., the excess 
(as of the close of 1975) of the smallest of the amounts described in 
subdivision (i) of this subparagraph ($90) over the sum of the amounts 
of foreign investment attributable to producer's loans treated under 
section 995(b)(1)(G) as deemed distributions by the DISC taxable as 
dividends for prior taxable years of the DISC ($40). If the separate 
corporate existence of the DISC as to which the amount described in 
subdivision (ii) of this subparagraph relates ceases to exist within the 
meaning of Sec. 1.995-4(c)(2), then such amount shall no longer be taken 
into account by the group for any purpose. For inclusion of amounts 
because of certain corporate acquisitions, see paragraph (d) of this 
section.
    (2) Controlled group; domestic and foreign member. For purposes of 
this section--
    (i) The term ``controlled group'' has the meaning assigned to such 
term by Sec. 1.993-1(k).
    (ii) The term domestic member means a domestic corporation which is 
a member of a controlled group, and the term foreign member means a 
foreign corporation which is a member of a controlled group.
    (3) Group taxable year. (i) The term group taxable year refers 
collectively to the taxable year of the DISC and to the taxable year of 
each corporation in the controlled group which includes the DISC ending 
with or within the taxable year of the DISC. Thus, for example, if a 
corporation has a subsidiary which uses the calendar year as its taxable 
year and which elects to be treated as a DISC, and if the parent has a 
taxable year ending on October 31, the ``group taxable year'' for 1973 
would refer to calendar year 1973 for the DISC and to the parent's 
taxable year ending October 31, 1973.
    (ii) In cases in which the DISC makes a return for a short taxable 
year, that is, for a taxable year consisting of a period of less than 12 
months, pursuant to section 443 and the regulations thereunder, or 
Sec. 1.991-1(b)(3), the following rules shall apply--
    (a) In the case of a change in the annual accounting period of the 
DISC resulting in a short taxable year, the group taxable year refers 
collectively to the short taxable year and to the taxable year of each 
corporation in the controlled group which includes the DISC ending with 
or within the short taxable year.
    (b) In the case of a DISC which is in existence during only part of 
what would otherwise be its taxable year, the group taxable year refers 
collectively to the short period during which the DISC was in existence 
and to the taxable year of each corporation in the controlled group 
which includes the DISC ending with or within the 12-month period ending 
on the last day of the short period.
    (iii) With respect to periods prior to the first taxable year for 
which a member of the group qualified (or is treated) as a DISC, each 
group taxable year shall be determined under subdivision (i) of this 
subparagraph as if such member was in existence, it qualified as a

[[Page 697]]

DISC, and its taxable year ended on that date corresponding to the date 
such member's first taxable year ended after it qualified (or is 
treated) as a DISC whether or not the corporation which qualifies (or is 
treated) as a DISC used the same taxable year before it so qualified (or 
is so treated). Thus, for example, if a corporation which is organized 
on March 3, 1975, uses the calendar year as its taxable year, and is a 
member of a controlled group which does not include a DISC, first 
qualifies (or is treated) as a DISC for calendar year 1975, then the 
term ``group taxable year'' with respect to years prior to 1975 refers 
collectively to such prior calendar years and to the taxable year of 
each corporation in the group ending with or within such prior calendar 
years.
    (iv) For special rules in the case of a group which includes more 
than one DISC, see paragraph (g) of this section.
    (4) Amounts determined for prior years. Unless the 3-year limitation 
is properly elected under subparagraph (5) of this paragraph, the 
amounts described in paragraphs (b) (relating to net increase in foreign 
assets) and (c) (relating to actual foreign investments by domestic 
members) of this section reflect, as of the close of a group taxable 
year, amounts for all taxable years of members of the group beginning 
after December 31, 1971 (and amounts arising after December 31, 1971, or 
such other date prescribed in paragraph (b)(7) of this section), 
provided that such amounts relate to such group taxable year and 
preceding group taxable years. Thus, for example, if all members of a 
controlled group use the calendar year as the taxable year, and 1980 is 
the first taxable year for which any member of the group qualifies (or 
is treated) as a DISC, then, unless the 3-year limitation is elected 
under subparagraph (5) of this paragraph, the amounts described in 
paragraphs (b) and (c) of this section will be taken into account 
beginning with the dates specified in the preceding sentence. For rules 
as to carryovers on certain corporate acquisitions and reorganizations, 
see paragraph (d) of this section.
    (5) Three-year elective limitation. (i) A DISC may elect to take 
into account only amounts described in paragraphs (b) (relating to net 
increase in foreign assets) and (c) (relating to actual foreign 
investment by domestic members) of this section for the 3 taxable years 
of each member immediately preceding its taxable year included in that 
first group taxable year which includes a member's first taxable year 
during which it qualifies (or is treated) as a DISC. For purposes of the 
preceding sentence, determinations shall be made by reference to the 
taxable year of the issuer or transferor (as the case may be). If an 
election is made under this subdivision, the offset for uncommitted 
transitional funds under paragraph (b)(7) of this section is not 
allowed. If an election is made under this subdivision, the 3-year 
limitation applies to amounts described in paragraphs (b)(4) and (c)(1) 
and (2) of this section.
    (ii) An election under subdivision (i) of this subparagraph shall 
not apply with respect to amounts which must be carried over under 
paragraph (d) of this section in the case of certain corporate 
acquisitions and reorganizations.
    (iii) An election under subdivision (i) of this subparagraph shall 
be made by the DISC attaching to its first return, filed under section 
6011(e)(2), a statement to the effect that the 3-year limitation is 
being elected under Sec. 1.995-5(a)(5)(i).
    (6) Cumulative basis. Pursuant to section 995(d)(5), all 
determinations of amounts specified in this section are to be made on a 
cumulative basis from the 1st year (or date) provided for in this 
section. Thus, each such determination shall take into account a net 
increase or a net decrease during the year, as the case may be. However, 
if the 3-year limitation is elected under subparagraph (5) of this 
paragraph, then only amounts with respect to periods specified in such 
subparagraph (5) are amounts taken into account for years before a 
member of the group qualifies (or is treated) as a DISC. The 
computations described in this section may be made in any way chosen by 
the DISC (including a corporation being tested as to whether it 
qualifies as a DISC), provided such method results in the amount 
prescribed by this section.
    (7) Example. The provisions of this paragraph may be illustrated by 
the following example:


[[Page 698]]


    Example. X Corporation, which uses the calendar year as its taxable 
year, is a member of a controlled group (within the meaning of 
subparagraph (2) of this paragraph). X elects to be treated as a DISC 
beginning with 1972. The amount of foreign investment attributable to 
X's producer's loans treated under section 995(b)(1)(G) as a 
distribution taxable as a dividend as of the close of each group taxable 
year with respect to each taxable year of X from 1972 through 1975 are 
set forth in the table below, computed on the basis of the facts assumed 
(the amounts on lines (1), (2), (3), and (5) being running balances):

------------------------------------------------------------------------
         Taxable year of X             1972      1973     1974     1975 
------------------------------------------------------------------------
(1) Net increase (or decrease) in                                       
 foreign assets since January 1,                                        
 1972, at close of group taxable                                        
 year..............................     ($30)      $10     $100     $150
(2) Actual foreign investment at                                        
 close of group taxable year.......        20       60       80      140
(3) Outstanding producer's loans of                                     
 X (the DISC) as of the close of                                        
 group taxable year................         0       40       90      120
                                    ====================================
(4) Smallest of lines (1), (2), or                                      
 (3) (not less than zero)..........         0       10       80      120
(5) Less section 995(b)(1)(G)                                           
 deemed distributions for prior                                         
 taxable years (sum of lines (5)                                        
 and (6) from prior year)..........         0        0       10       80
                                    ------------------------------------
(6) Section 995(b)(1)(G) deemed                                         
 distribution as of close of                                            
 taxable year......................         0       10       70       40
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (b) Net increase in foreign assets--(1) In general. (i) The term net 
increase in foreign assets when used in this section means the excess 
for the controlled group (as of the close of the group taxable year) of 
(a) the investment in foreign assets to be taken into account under 
subparagraph (2) of this paragraph over (b) the aggregate of the five 
offsets allowed by subparagraphs (3) through (7) of this paragraph.
    (ii) No amount described in this paragraph (other than amounts 
described in subparagraphs (4) and (7) of this paragraph) with respect 
to a member of the group (or foreign branch of a member) shall be taken 
into account unless it is attributable to a taxable year of such member 
beginning after December 31, 1971. For a 3-year elective limitation with 
respect to the first taxable year for which a member qualifies (or is 
treated) as a DISC, see paragraph (a)(5) of this section. For manner of 
determining amounts on a cumulative basis, see paragraph (a)(6) of this 
section.
    (2) Investments made in foreign assets. (i) For purposes of 
subparagraph (1) of this paragraph, there shall be taken into account as 
investment in foreign assets the aggregate of the amounts expended 
(within the meaning of subdivision (ii) of this subparagraph) during the 
period described in subparagraph (1)(ii) of this paragraph by all 
members of the controlled group which includes the DISC to acquire 
assets described in section 1231(b) (determined without regard to any 
holding period therein provided) which are located outside the United 
States (as defined in Sec. 1.993-7) reduced by the aggregate of the 
amounts received by all such members of the controlled group from the 
sale, exchange, or involuntary conversion of such assets described in 
section 1231(b) which are located outside the United States. For 
purposes of this section, amounts expended for assets which are 
qualified export assets (as defined in Sec. 1.993-2) of a DISC (or which 
would be qualified export assets if owned by a DISC) shall not be taken 
into account. Thus, for example, if a DISC acquires a qualified export 
asset located outside the United States, the asset is not to be taken 
into account for purposes of determining the net increase in foreign 
assets.
    (ii) As used in subdivision (i) of this subparagraph, the term 
amounts expended (or amounts received) means the amount of any money or 
the fair market value (on the date of acquisition, sale, exchange, or 
involuntary conversion) of any property (other than money) used to 
acquire (or received for) the assets described in such subdivision (i).
    (iii) For purposes of this subparagraph, an asset (other than an 
aircraft or vessel) is considered as located outside the United States 
if it was used predominantly outside the United States during the group 
taxable year. The determination as to whether such an asset is used 
predominantly outside

[[Page 699]]

the United States during the group taxable year in which it was acquired 
or sold, exchanged, or involuntarily converted shall be made by applying 
the rules of Sec. 1.993-3(d) except that an aircraft described in 
section 48(a)(2)(B)(i) or a vessel described in section 48(a)(2)(B)(iii) 
shall be considered located in the United States and all other aircraft 
or vessels shall be considered located outside the United States. Thus, 
for example, if a member of a controlled group which includes a DISC 
acquires a vessel which is documented under the laws of a foreign 
country, the amount expended to acquire that vessel is an amount 
described in subdivision (i) of this subparagraph.
    (iv) Examples. The provisions of this subparagraph may be 
illustrated by the following examples:

    Example 1. X Corporation, which uses the calendar year as its 
taxable year, is a domestic member of a controlled group (within the 
meaning of paragraph (a)(2) of this section). During 1972, in a 
transaction to which section 1031 applies, X acquires a warehouse 
located outside the United States and having a fair market value of 
$100. As consideration, X transfers $20 in cash and a warehouse located 
within the United States and having a fair market value of $80. Under 
these facts, $100 will be taken into account as investment in foreign 
assets.
    Example 2. The facts are the same as in example 1, except that the 
warehouse transferred by X as consideration is located outside the 
United States. Under these facts, only $20 will be taken into account as 
investment in foreign assets because the amount expended for such assets 
(i.e., $100) is reduced by the fair market value of any property located 
outside the United States received in exchange for such assets (i.e., 
$80).

    (3) Depreciation with respect to all foreign assets of a controlled 
group. (i) An offset allowed by this subparagraph is the depreciation 
(determined under subdivision (ii) of this subparagraph) or depletion 
(determined under subdivision (iii) of this subparagraph) attributable 
to taxable years of the member beginning after December 31, 1971, with 
respect to all of the group's foreign assets described in subparagraph 
(2) of this paragraph including such assets acquired prior to the date 
provided in such subparagraph (2), and without regard to whether the 3-
year election in paragraph (a)(5) of this section is made. Thus, for 
example, depreciation for a taxable year of a member beginning after 
December 31, 1971, with respect to an asset described in section 1231(b) 
which is located outside of the United States and which was acquired 
during a taxable year of the member beginning before January 1, 1972, is 
an offset allowed by this subparagraph. For a further example, 
depreciation with respect to a qualified export asset is not such an 
offset.
    (ii) The depreciation taken into account under subdivision (i) of 
this subparagraph shall be--
    (a) In the case of an asset owned by a domestic member, only the 
amount allowed under section 167(b)(1) (relating to the allowance of the 
straight-line method of depreciation) and Sec. 1.162-11 (b) (relating to 
amortization in lieu of depreciation), but not the amount allowed under 
section 179 (relating to the additional first-year depreciation 
allowance).
    (b) In the case of an asset owned by a foreign member, the 
depreciation and amortization (referred to in (a) of this subdivision) 
allowable for purposes of computing earnings and profits under 
subparagraph (5)(i) of this paragraph.
    (iii) The depletion taken into account under subdivision (i) of this 
subparagraph shall be limited to cost depletion computed under sections 
611 and 612 and the regulations thereunder. Thus, percentage depletion 
is not to be taken into account in computing the offset under this 
subparagraph.
    (4) Amount of outstanding stock or debt. (i) An offset allowed by 
this subparagraph is the outstanding amount of stock (including treasury 
stock) or debt obligations of any member of the group issued, sold, or 
exchanged after December 31, 1971, by any member (whether or not the 
same member) to persons who (on the date of such issuance, sale, or 
exchange) were neither United States persons (within the meaning of 
section 7701(a)(30)) nor members of the group: Provided, That, in the 
case of a debt obligation, such obligation is not repaid within 12 
months after such issuance, sale, or exchange. Thus, for example, if 
stock is issued to a member of the group before January 1, 1972, and 
after December 31,

[[Page 700]]

1971, it is sold to a person who is neither a United States person nor a 
member of the group, an offset allowed by this subparagraph includes the 
outstanding amount of such stock. For purposes of this subparagraph, 
foreign branches of United States banks are not considered to be United 
States persons.
    (ii) The outstanding amount of stock or debt obligations shall be 
determined in accordance with the following provisions:
    (a) The outstanding amount of stock or debt obligations described in 
subdivision (i) of this subparagraph is equal to the net amount 
described in (b) of this subdivision reduced (but not below zero) by the 
amount described in (c) of this subdivision.
    (b) The net amount described in this subdivision (b) is the excess 
of (1) the aggregate of the amount of money and the fair market value of 
property (other than money) transferred by persons who are not members 
of the group and who are not U.S. persons as consideration for such 
stock and debt obligations over (2) fees and commission expenses borne 
by the issuer or transferror with respect to their issuance, sale, or 
exchange.
    (c) The amount described in this subdivision (c) is the aggregate 
amount of money and fair market value of property (other than money) 
distributed to such persons on distributions in respect of such stock 
from other than earnings and profits or on distributions in redemption 
of such stock and the amount of principal paid pursuant to such debt 
obligations.
    (d) For purposes of this subdivision (ii), in the case of a 
redemption, the stock or debt redeemed shall be charged against the 
earliest of such stock or debt issued, sold, or exchanged in order to 
determine the amount by which the balance of outstanding stock or debt 
is to be reduced. For purposes of this subparagraph, the fair market 
value of property received as consideration shall be determined as of 
the date the transaction occurs, and a contribution to capital within 
the meaning of section 118 shall be treated as the issuance of stock.
    (iii) The provisions of subdivision (i) of this subparagraph apply 
regardless of the treatment under the Code of the transaction in which 
the stock or debt was issued, sold, or exchanged. Thus, for example, if 
X Corporation, a member of a controlled group which includes a DISC, 
acquires from a nonresident alien individual in exchange solely for X's 
voting stock all of the stock of Y Corporation pursuant to a 
reorganization as defined in section 368(a)(1)(B), the fair market value 
of the Y stock on the date of the exchange would be an offset allowed by 
this subparagraph.
    (iv) The provisions of this subparagraph may be illustrated by the 
following example:

    Example. X Corporation is a member of a controlled group (within a 
meaning of paragraph (a)(2) of this section) every member of which uses 
the calendar year as its taxable year. On January 1, 1972, X issues in a 
public offering its stock to persons described in subdivision (i) of 
this subparagraph who, in the aggregate, pay $1,000 as consideration. X 
pays $100 in underwriting fees. On the same date, X receives $425 upon 
issuing a $500 debt obligation to such persons at a discount of $75 and 
pays $25 in underwriting fees. On December 31, 1972, the offset allowed 
under this subparagraph is $1,300, i.e., ($1,000 minus $100) plus ($425 
minus $25). If, during 1973, X makes a distribution of $150 (not in 
redemption) from other than earnings and profits with respect to such 
stock, then the offset is reduced to $1,150.

    (5) Earnings and profits. (i) An offset allowed by this subparagraph 
is one-half the aggregate of the earnings and profits accumulated for 
all taxable years beginning after December 31, 1971, computed (without 
regard to any distributions from earnings and profits by a foreign 
corporation to a domestic corporation in accordance with Sec. 1.964-1 
(relating to a controlled foreign corporation's earnings and profits), 
of each foreign member of the group which is controlled directly or 
indirectly (as determined under the principles of section 958 and the 
regulations thereunder) by a domestic member of the group and each 
foreign branch of a domestic member of the group (computed as if the 
branch were a foreign corporation). The DISC is bound by any action on 
behalf of a foreign member that was taken pursuant to Sec. 1.964-1(c)(3) 
or by any failure to take action by or on behalf of a foreign member

[[Page 701]]

within the time specified in Sec. 1.964-1(c)(6). With respect to a 
foreign member for which action was not previously required under 
Sec. 1.964-1(c)(6) to be taken, the DISC may take action on behalf of 
such member by attaching a statement to that effect to the return of the 
DISC under section 6011(e)(2) for the first taxable year during which it 
qualifies (or is treated) as a DISC and there is outstanding a 
producer's loan made by such DISC to a member of the controlled group 
which includes the DISC.
    (ii) If the aggregate of the accumulated earnings and profits 
described in subdivision (i) of this subparagraph is a deficit, the 
amount allowable as an offset under this subparagraph is zero.
    (6) Royalties and fees. An offset allowed by this subparagraph is 
one-half the royalties and fees paid by foreign members of the group to 
domestic members of the group and by foreign branches of domestic 
members of the group to domestic members of the group during the taxable 
years of such members beginning after December 31, 1971.
    (7) Uncommitted transitional funds. (i) An offset allowed by this 
subparagraph for the uncommitted transitional funds of the group is the 
sum described in subdivision (ii) of this subparagraph of the amount of 
certain capital raised under the foreign direct investment program and 
the amounts described in subdivision (iv) of this subparagraph of 
certain foreign excess working capital held on October 31, 1971.
    (ii) The amount described in this subdivision of certain capital 
raised under the foreign direct investment program is the excess (if 
any) of--
    (a) The amount of the offset allowed by subparagraph (4) of this 
paragraph, determined, however, with respect to the stock and debt 
obligations of domestic members of the group outstanding on December 31, 
1971 (including amounts treated as stock outstanding by reason of a 
contribution to capital), whether or not outstanding after such date, 
which were issued, sold, or exchanged on or after January 1, 1968, by 
any member (whether or not the same member) to persons who (on the date 
of such issuance, sale, or exchange) were neither United States persons 
(within the meaning of section 7701(a)(30)) nor members of the group, 
but only to the extent the taxpayer establishes that such amount 
constitutes a long-term borrowing (see 15 CFR 1000.324\1\) for purposes 
of the foreign direct investment program (see 15 CFR part 1000\1\), over
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \1\ Editorial Note: 15 CFR part 1000 was removed at 39 FR 30481, 
Aug. 23, 1974.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (b) The amount (determined under paragraph (c) of this section) of 
actual foreign investment by the domestic members of the group during 
the portion of the period such stock or debt obligations have been 
outstanding prior to January 1, 1972, such determination to be made by 
substituting January 1, 1968, for the December 31, 1971, date specified 
in such paragraph (c) and by not taking into account the earnings and 
profits described in paragraph (c)(3) of this section.

For purposes of this subparagraph, foreign branches of United States 
banks are not considered to be United States persons.
    (iii)(a) A taxpayer may establish that an amount under subdivision 
(ii) (a) of this subparagraph constitutes a long-term borrowing for 
purposes of the foreign direct investment program by keeping records 
sufficient to demonstrate that appropriate reports were filed with the 
Office of Foreign Direct Investment of the Department of Commerce with 
respect to the foreign borrowing or by any other method satisfactory to 
the district director.
    (b) The amounts described in subdivision (ii) (a) of this 
subparagraph include amounts with respect to which an election under 
section 4912(c), to subject certain obligations of a United States 
person to the interest equalization tax, has been made: Provided, That 
the obligations to which such amounts relate were issued by an 
``overseas financing subsidiary'' described in 15 CFR part 1000\1\ and 
were assumed by a United States person from such overseas financing 
subsidiary. Thus, for example, if an overseas financing subsidiary 
issues its notes to a foreign person in 1968, and such notes are assumed 
by its United States parent in 1973, which parent elects under

[[Page 702]]

section 4912(c) to have the notes subject to the interest equalization 
tax, then the amount of money received by the subsidiary is an amount 
described in subdivision (ii)(a) of this subparagraph.
    (iv) The amount described in this subdivision of foreign excess 
working capital is the amount of liquid assets held by the foreign 
members of such group and foreign branches of domestic members of such 
group on October 31, 1971 (whether or not so held after such date) in 
excess of their reasonable working capital needs (as defined in 
Sec. 1.993-2 (e)) on that date, but only to the extent not included in 
subdivision (ii) of this subparagraph. For purposes of this subdivision, 
the term liquid assets means money, bank deposits (not including time 
deposits), and indebtedness of any kind (including time deposits) which 
on the day acquired had a maturity of 2 years or less.
    (8) Example. The provisions of this paragraph may be illustrated by 
the following example:

    Example. X Corporation, which uses the calendar year as its taxable 
year is a member of a controlled group (within the meaning of paragraph 
(a)(2) of this section). X elects to be treated as a DISC beginning with 
1972. The amount of net increase in foreign assets of the group at the 
close of each group taxable year with respect to each taxable year of X 
from 1972 through 1975 are set forth in the table below, computed on the 
basis of the facts assumed (the amounts on each line being running 
balances):

------------------------------------------------------------------------
          Taxable year of X             1972     1973     1974     1975 
------------------------------------------------------------------------
(1) Investment in foreign assets....     $150     $165     $260     $300
                                     ===================================
(2) Depreciation with respect to                                        
 foreign assets of group............       20       40       60       80
(3) Amount of stock or debt                                             
 outstanding issued after December                                      
 31, 1971...........................       30       30       30       30
(4) One-half earnings and profits of                                    
 foreign members....................       40       70      100      130
(5) Royalties and fees paid by                                          
 foreign members to domestic members       10       15       20       20
(6) Uncommitted transitional funds..       10       10       10       10
                                     -----------------------------------
(7) Sum of lines (2) through (6)....      110      165      220      270
                                     -----------------------------------
(8) Net increase in foreign assets                                      
 (line (1) minus line (6))..........       40        0       40       30
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (c) Actual foreign investment by domestic members. For purposes of 
determining the limitation in paragraph (a) of this section, the amount 
of the actual foreign investment by domestic members of a controlled 
group is the sum (as of the close of the group taxable year) determined 
on a cumulative basis (see paragraph (a)(6) of this section) of--
    (1) Outstanding stock or debt (including contributions to capital). 
The outstanding amount (determined in accordance with the principles of 
paragraph (b)(4)(ii) of this section, applied with respect to stock or 
debt obligations described in this subparagraph) of stock (including 
treasury stock) or debt obligations (other than normal trade 
indebtedness) of foreign members of the group issued, sold, or exchanged 
after December 31, 1971, by any person (whether or not a member) which 
is not a domestic member to domestic members of the group: Provided, 
That the outstanding amount of debt obligations of any foreign member 
shall be the greater of such amount outstanding at the close of the 
taxable year of such member or the highest such amount outstanding at 
any time during the immediately preceding 90 days,
    (2) Transfers to foreign branches. The amount of money or the fair 
market value of property (other than money) transferred by domestic 
members of the group after December 31, 1971, to foreign branches of 
such members in transactions which would, if the branch were a 
corporation, be in consideration for the sale of stock or debt 
obligations of (or a contribution of capital to) such foreign branches 
(as determined under subparagraph (1) of this paragraph), and
    (3) Earnings and profits of foreign members. One-half of the 
earnings and profits (computed in accordance with paragraph (b)(5) of 
this section for purposes of computing net increase in foreign assets) 
of foreign members of the group which are controlled directly or 
indirectly (as determined under the principles of section 958 and the 
regulations

[[Page 703]]

thereunder) by a domestic member of the group and foreign branches 
(treated for this purpose as a corporation) of domestic members of the 
group accumulated during the taxable years of such foreign members (or 
branches) beginning after December 31, 1971, or, if later, the taxable 
year referred to in paragraph (a)(5)(i) of this section if the 3-year 
election provided for in such paragraph (a)(5)(i) is made.
    (d) Carryovers on certain corporate acquisitions and 
reorganizations--(1) Certain corporate acquisitions. (i) If--
    (a) A member of a controlled group (``first controlled group'') 
acquires in a transaction to which section 381 applies the assets of a 
corporation which is a member of a second controlled group or acquires 
stock in such a corporation pursuant to a reorganization as defined in 
section 368(a)(1)(B) to which section 361 applies, or
    (b) A member or combination of members of the first controlled group 
acquire in a transaction not described in (a) of this subdivision a 
majority interest (as defined in paragraph (e)(2) of this section) in 
the stock of a corporation which is a member of a second controlled 
group which includes a DISC so that such DISC after the acquisition is a 
member of the new controlled group,

then, for purposes of computing foreign investment attributable to 
producer's loans with respect to the new controlled group as constituted 
after such acquisition, all amounts described in paragraphs (a) through 
(c) of this section, including the amount specified in paragraph 
(a)(1)(ii) of this section (relating to amounts treated under section 
995(b)(1)(G) as deemed distributions by the DISC taxable as dividends 
for prior taxable years of the DISC), with respect to members of the 
second controlled group which become members of the new controlled group 
shall carry over to such new controlled group. For purposes of this 
subdivision (i), a controlled group may consist of only one member. With 
respect to certain transactions involving foreign corporations, see 
section 367.
    (ii) If a member or combination of members of a controlled group, 
immediately after an acquisition of stock to which subdivision (i) of 
this subparagraph applies, do not control the total combined voting 
power (determined under Sec. 1.957-1(b)) of the corporation whose stock 
was acquired, proper apportionment consistent with the principles of 
paragraph (e)(5) of this section shall be made with respect to amounts 
to which paragraphs (a) through (c) of this section apply.
    (iii)(a) If subdivision (i) of this subparagraph applies, then for 
purposes of determining the application of the 3-year elective 
limitation provided for in paragraph (a)(5) of this section, the rules 
in (b), (c), and (d) of this subdivision (iii) apply.
    (b) If both the ``first controlled group'' and the ``second 
controlled group'' (as those terms are defined in subdivision (i) of 
this subparagraph) include a DISC, and a DISC in either group has 
elected the 3-year limitation provided in paragraph (a)(5) of this 
section, then only those amounts taken into account under such paragraph 
(a)(5) by the electing DISC or DISC's shall be taken into account.
    (c) If one of the groups includes a DISC and the other does not, and 
if the DISC has elected the 3-year limitation provided in paragraph 
(a)(5) of this section, then, for purposes of computing foreign 
investment attributable to producer's loans with respect to the new 
controlled group as constituted after the acquisition, all amounts 
described in paragraphs (a) through (c) of this section with respect to 
members of the controlled group which did not include the DISC shall 
carry over to such new controlled group, but only to the extent provided 
in such paragraph (a)(5), computed as if the group taxable year in which 
the acquisition occurred was the first group taxable year which includes 
a member's first taxable year during which it qualifies (or is treated) 
as a DISC.
    (d) If (c) of this subdivision (iii) applies, except that the DISC 
has not elected the 3-year limitation provided in paragraph (a)(5) of 
this section, then the DISC in the new controlled group as constituted 
after the acquisition may, with respect to members of the controlled 
group which did not include the DISC, make the election provided in such 
paragraph (a)(5), and treat the year in which the acquisition occurred

[[Page 704]]

as if it were the first group taxable year which includes a member's 
first taxable year during which it qualifies (or is treated) as a DISC.
    (iv) If a majority interest, or an interest in addition to a 
majority interest, is acquired in a transaction other than a transaction 
described in subdivision (i) of this subparagraph, then the rules in 
paragraph (e) of this section (relating to the acquisition of the 
foreign assets of a corporation) apply.
    (2) Corporation ceasing to be a member. As of the date a corporation 
which is a member of a controlled group ceases to be a member of such 
group, the amounts of such group described in paragraphs (a) through (c) 
of this section will be reduced by such amounts which are attributable 
to the corporation which is no longer a member of the group.
    (e) Acquisition of a majority interest in a corporation--(1) In 
general. If paragraph (d)(1)(i) of this section (relating to certain 
corporate acquisitions in which all amounts described in paragraphs (a) 
through (c) of this section carry over) does not apply, then, for 
purposes of determining under paragraph (b)(2) of this section the 
investments made in foreign assets by a controlled group, the 
acquisition of a majority interest (as defined in subparagraph (2) of 
this paragraph) or an interest in addition to a majority interest in a 
corporation by any member or combination of members of the controlled 
group is considered an acquisition of the assets (to the extent provided 
in subparagraph (5) of this paragraph) of the acquired corporation by 
the group, including the assets of any foreign corporation in which the 
acquired corporation owns a majority interest (to the extent provided in 
subparagraph (5) of this paragraph). For the rules concerning the date 
upon which an acquisition of a majority interest is considered to have 
occurred, see subparagraph (3) of this paragraph.
    (2) Majority interest. For purposes of this section, a majority 
interest is more than 50 percent of the total combined voting power of 
all classes of a corporation's stock entitled to vote, as determined 
under Sec. 1.957-1(b).
    (3) Acquisition date. For purposes of this paragraph, an acquisition 
of a majority interest shall be considered to have occurred on the day 
on which the combined voting power of the group first reached the 
percentage required in subparagraph (2) of this paragraph.
    (4) Valuation of assets. For purposes of this section, the amount of 
a corporation's assets deemed acquired is the fair market value of the 
assets on the date a majority interest, or an interest in addition to a 
previously held majority interest, is acquired.
    (5) Apportionment in the case of the acquisition of less than all of 
the voting stock. (i) If the acquisition described in subparagraph (1) 
of this paragraph of a majority interest is of less than 100 percent of 
the total combined voting power of all classes of stock of the acquired 
corporation entitled to vote, then for purposes of subparagraph (1) of 
this paragraph the amount of the foreign assets of the corporation 
deemed acquired as of the day the majority interest is considered 
acquired shall be an amount equal to the fair market value of all of the 
corporation's foreign assets described in paragraph (b)(2) of this 
section as of such day multiplied by the percentage of the total 
combined voting power (determined under Sec. 1.957-1(b)) held by members 
of the group on the day the majority interest is considered acquired.
    (ii) If any member or combination of members of the controlled group 
hold a majority interest in a corporation, then for purposes of 
subparagraph (1) of this paragraph the acquisition of additional 
combined voting power by members of the controlled group shall be 
considered an acquisition of its foreign assets described in paragraph 
(b)(2) of this section in an amount equal to the fair market value of 
all such assets held by the foreign corporation on the date of the 
acquisition, multiplied by the increase (expressed in percentage points) 
in total combined voting power (as determined under Sec. 1.957-1(b)) 
which occurred.
    (6) Examples. The application of this paragraph may be illustrated 
by the following examples:

    Example 1. M Corporation uses the calendar year as its taxable year. 
On November 18, 1973, M acquires from A, an individual United States 
person, for $1 million cash all 10,000

[[Page 705]]

shares of the voting stock of N, a foreign corporation. N's only asset 
is a warehouse located in France with a fair market value on the date of 
acquisition of $1 million. Under subparagraph (1) of this paragraph, the 
controlled group of which M is a member is considered to have expended 
$1 million for the acquisition of foreign assets described in paragraph 
(b)(2) of this section.
    Example 2. The facts are the same as in example 1, except that on 
November 18, 1973, M acquires only 80 percent of N's voting stock. M is 
considered to have expended $800,000 for the acquisition of assets 
described in paragraph (b)(2) of this section, computed as follows:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
(1) Fair market value of N's foreign assets described in                
 paragraph (b)(2) of this section..........................   $1,000,000
(2) Multiply by percentage of total combined voting power               
 of all classes of N stock entitled to vote acquired by M..           .8
                                                            ------------
(3) Amount considered expended.............................     $800,000
                                                            ============
                                                                        

    Example 3. The facts are the same as in example 2, except that 
individual A is not a United States person, and M acquires the 80 
percent of N voting stock in exchange for cash of $100,000 and M stock 
having a fair market value on the date of the acquisition of $700,000. M 
is considered to have acquired assets described in paragraph (b)(2) of 
this section in the amount of $800,000 (see computations in example 2) 
and to have an offset under paragraph (b)(4) of this section (relating 
to outstanding stock or debt) of $700,000 (the fair market value of the 
M stock transferred to A who is not a United States person). However, 
the controlled group of which M is a member is not considered to have 
acquired any other amounts described in paragraphs (a) through (c) of 
this section with respect to N for taxable years prior to the taxable 
year of N during which the acquisition occurred.
    Example 4. P Corporation, which uses the calendar year as its 
taxable year, is a member of a controlled group which includes a DISC. 
During 1973, P acquires from B, an individual United States person, for 
cash, 30 percent of the total combined voting power of all classes of 
stock entitled to vote of Q, a foreign corporation. All of Q's assets 
are assets described in paragraph (b)(2) of this section. No additional 
interest in Q is acquired by members of the group during 1973. The 
controlled group of which Q is a member is not considered to have made 
any investments in foreign assets described in such paragraph (b)(2) as 
of the close of 1973.
    Example 5. Assume the same facts as in example 4. Assume further 
that during 1974, R Corporation, a member of the controlled group which 
includes P, acquires for cash 40 percent of the total combined voting 
power of all classes of stock of Q entitled to vote as follows: 20 
percent on July 31, and 20 percent on December 31. Thus, on December 31, 
1974, members of the controlled group own 70 percent of Q's voting power 
(30+20+20) and on that date are considered to have acquired a majority 
interest in Q. The fair market value of Q's assets on December 31, 1974, 
is $5 million. The group is considered to have expended $3,500,000 for 
the acquisition of assets described in paragraph (b)(2) of this section 
computed as follows:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
(1) Fair market value of Q's foreign assets described in                
 paragraph (b)(2) of this section as of the date the                    
 acquisition is deemed to have occurred under subparagraph              
 (3) of this paragraph (December 31, 1974).................   $5,000,000
(2) Multiply by percentage of total combined voting power               
 of all classes of Q stock entitled to vote held by members             
 of the group on such date.................................           .7
                                                            ------------
                                                              $3,500,000
                                                            ============
                                                                        

    Example 6. The facts are the same as in example 5. Assume further 
that on July 15, 1975, P acquires the remaining 30 percent of the total 
combined voting power of all classes of Q stock entitled to vote, and on 
such date the fair market value of Q's assets is $5,500,000. The group 
is considered to have expended $5,150,000 for the acquisition of assets 
described in paragraph (b)(2) of this section as of the close of 1975, 
computed as follows:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
(1) Amount of prior years' investment......................   $3,500,000
                                                            ============
(2) Investment during 1975:                                             
  (a) Fair market value of Q's foreign assets described in              
   paragraph (b)(2) of this section on July 15, 1975.......   $5,500,000
  (b) Multiply by additional percentage acquired of total               
   combined voting power of all classes of Q stock entitled             
   to vote.................................................           .3
                                                            ------------
  (c) Investment during 1975...............................   $1,650,000
                                                            ============
(3) Amount considered expended for foreign assets described             
 in paragraph (b)(2) of this section by reason of the                   
 acquisition of Q stock....................................   $5,150,000
                                                                        

    (f) Records. A DISC shall keep or be readily able to produce such 
permanent books of account or records as are sufficient to establish the 
transactions and amounts described in this section. Where applicable, 
such books of account or records shall be cumulative and shall show 
transactions and amounts of the members of the controlled group which 
includes the DISC which occurred prior to the date the DISC qualified 
(or is treated) as a DISC.
    (g) Multiple DISC's--(1) Allocation among DISC's. In the case of a 
controlled group which includes more than

[[Page 706]]

one DISC, the amounts described in paragraphs (b) and (c) of this 
section shall be allocated among the DISC's in order to determine the 
limitation in paragraph (a) of this section. Each DISC's allocable 
portion of these amounts shall be equal to the total of such amounts 
multiplied by a fraction the numerator of which is the individual DISC's 
outstanding producer's loans to members of the group, and the 
denominator of which is the aggregate amounts of outstanding producer's 
loans to members of the group by all DISC's which are members of the 
group.
    (2) Different taxable years. If all of the DISC's which are members 
of the controlled group do not have the same taxable year, then one such 
DISC shall on behalf of all such DISC's elect to make all computations 
under section 995(d) as if all DISC's that are members of the group use 
the same taxable year as the actual taxable year of any one of the 
DISC's. The election as to which DISC's taxable year is to be used shall 
be made by the electing DISC attaching to its first return, filed under 
section 6011(e)(2), a statement indicating which such taxable year will 
be used. Once such an election is made it may not be revoked until such 
time as all of the DISC's which are members of the group use the same 
taxable year. If this subparagraph applies, books and records must be 
kept by the group which are adequate to show the necessary computations 
under section 995(d).
    (3) This paragraph may be illustrated by the following example:

    Example. Corporation X and corporation Y are members of the same 
controlled group and each has elected to be treated as a DISC. X uses a 
taxable year ending March 31, and Y uses a taxable year ending November 
30. Notwithstanding the fact that all other members of the group use the 
calendar year as their taxable year, all computations for purposes of 
determining the amount of foreign investment attributable to producer's 
loans under section 995(d) must be made as if both DISC's use a taxable 
year ending either March 31 (X's taxable year) or November 30 (Y's 
taxable year).

[T.D. 7324, 39 FR 35114, Sept. 30, 1974, as amended by T.D. 7420, 41 FR 
20655, May 20, 1976; T.D. 7854, 47 FR 51742, Nov. 17, 1982]


<R05>
Sec. 1.995-6  Taxable income attributable to military property.

    (a) Gross income attributable to military property. For purposes of 
section 995(b)(3)(A)(i), the term ``gross income which is attributable 
to military property'' includes income from the sale, exchange, lease, 
or rental of military property (as described in paragraph (c) of this 
section). The term also includes gross income from the performance of 
services which are related and subsidiary (as defined in Sec. 1.993-
1(d)) to any qualified sale, exchange, lease, or rental of military 
property. Where gross income cannot be determined on an item by item 
basis, the gross income with respect to those items not so determinable 
shall be apportioned. Such apportionment shall be accomplished using 
appropriate facts and circumstances, so that the gross income 
apportioned to sale of military property bears a reasonably close 
factual relationship to the actual gross income earned on such sales. 
The apportionment shall be based on methods which include the fair 
market value of property sold or exchanged, the fair rental value of any 
leaseholds granted, the fair market value of any related or subsidiary 
services performed in connection with such sale or leases or methods 
based on gross receipts or costs of goods sold, where appropriate.
    (b) Deductions. For purposes of section 995(b)(3)(A)(ii), deductions 
shall be properly allocated and apportioned to gross income, described 
in paragraph (a) of this section, in accordance with the rules of 
Sec. 1.861-8. These deductions include all applicable deductions from 
gross income provided under part VI of subchapter B of chapter 1 of the 
Code.
    (c) Military property. For purposes of this section, the term 
military property means any property which is an arm, ammunition, or 
implement of war designated in the munitions list published pursuant to 
section 38 of the International Security Assistance and Arms Export 
Control Act of 1976 (22 U.S.C. 2778 which superseded 22 U.S.C. 1934) and 
the regulations thereunder (22 CFR 121.01).
    (d) Illustration. The principles of this section may be illustrated 
by the following example:


[[Page 707]]


    Example.  X Corporation elects to be a DISC for the first time in 
1976. X has taxable income of $50,000, of which $30,000 is attributable 
to military property and $10,000 to interest on producer's loans. The 
total deemed distributions with respect to X are as follows:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
(1) Gross interest from Producer's loans in 1976.............    $10,000
(2) 50 percent of the taxable income of the DISC attributable           
 to military property in 1976................................     15,000
(3) One-half of the excess of taxable income for 1976 over              
 the sum of lines (1) and (2) (\1/2\ of ($50,000 minus                  
 $25,000))...................................................     12,500
(4) Total deemed distributions (sum of total lines (1), (2),            
 and (3))....................................................     37,500
                                                                        

(Secs. 995(e)(7), (8) and (10), 995(g) and 7805 of the Internal Revenue 
Code of 1954 (90 Stat. 1655, 26 U.S.C. 995 (e)(7), (8) and (10); 90 
Stat. 1659, 26 U.S.C. 995(g); and 68A Stat 917, 26 U.S.C. 7805))

[T.D. 7984, 49 FR 40019, Oct. 12, 1984]


<R05>
Sec. 1.996-1   Rules for actual distributions and certain deemed distributions.

    (a) General rule. Under section 996(a)(1), any actual distribution 
(other than a distribution described in paragraph (b) of this section or 
to which Sec. 1.995-4 applies) to a shareholder by a DISC, or former 
DISC, which is made out of earnings and profits shall be treated as 
made--
    (1) First, out of ``previously taxed income'' (as defined in 
Sec. 1.996-3(c)) to the extent thereof,
    (2) Second, out of ``accumulated DISC income'' (as defined in 
Sec. 1.996-3(b)) to the extent thereof, and
    (3) Third, out of ``other earnings and profits'' (as defined in 
Sec. 1.996-3(d)) to the extent thereof.
    (b) Rules for qualifying distributions and deemed distributions 
under section 995(b)(1)(G)--(1) In general. Except as provided in 
subparagraph (2), any actual distribution to meet qualification 
requirements made pursuant to Sec. 1.992-3 and any deemed distribution 
pursuant to Sec. 1.995-2(a)(5) (relating to foreign investment 
attributable to producer's loans) which is made out of earnings and 
profits shall be treated as made--
    (i) First, out of ``accumulated DISC income'' (as defined in 
Sec. 1.996-3(b)) to the extent thereof.
    (ii) Second, out of ``other earnings and profits'' (as defined in 
Sec. 1.996-3(d)) to the extent thereof, and
    (iii) Third, out of ``previously taxed income'' (as defined in 
Sec. 1.996-3(c)) to the extent thereof.
    (2) Special rule. For taxable years beginning after December 31, 
1975, paragraph (b)(1) of this section shall apply to one-half of the 
amount of an actual distribution made pursuant to Sec. 1.992-3 to 
satisfy the condition of Sec. 1.992-1(b) (the gross receipts test) and 
paragraph (a) of this section shall apply to the remaining one-half of 
such amount.
    (c) Exclusion from gross income. Under section 996(a)(3), amounts 
distributed out of previously taxed income shall be excluded by the 
distributee from gross income. However, see Sec. 1.996-5(b) for 
treatment as gain from the sale or exchange of property of the portion 
of an actual distribution out of previously taxed income to the extent 
it exceeds the adjusted basis of the stock with respect to which the 
distribution is made.
    (d) Priority of distributions. Under section 996(c), for purposes of 
determining their treatment under paragraphs (a), (b), and (c) of this 
section, distributions made during a taxable year shall be treated as 
being made in the following order--
    (1) Deemed distributions under Secs. 1.995-2 and 1.995-3.
    (2) Actual distributions to meet qualification requirements made 
pursuant to Sec. 1.992-3 in the order in which they are made, and
    (3) Other actual distributions in the order in which they are made.

Thus, the treatment of any distribution shall be determined after the 
divisions of earnings and profits have been properly adjusted by taking 
into account distributions of higher priority which are made or deemed 
made during the same taxable year.
    (e) Examples. The provisions of this section may be illustrated by 
the following examples:

    Example 1. Y Corporation, which uses the calendar year as its 
taxable year elects to be treated as a DISC beginning with 1972. During 
1973, Y makes a cash distribution of $100 to X Corporation, Y's sole 
shareholder. For 1973, Y has no earnings and profits. As of the 
beginning of 1973, Y has $300 of accumulated

[[Page 708]]

earnings and profits, which consist of $70 of accumulated DISC income, 
$40 of previously taxed income, and $190 of other earnings and profits. 
The entire $100 distribution is a dividend under section 316. However, 
$40 thereof is treated as made out of previously taxed income and is 
thus excluded from gross income. Accordingly, only $60 is treated as 
distributed out of accumulated DISC income and includible in gross 
income. See Sec. 1.246-4 for the inapplicability of the dividend 
received deduction with respect to the entire distribution of $100.
    Example 2. Assume the same facts as in example 1, except that the 
cash distribution is designated as a distribution to meet qualification 
requirements made pursuant to Sec. 1.992-3. Under these facts, X 
includes the entire distribution in its gross income as a dividend. Of 
the $100 distributed, $70 is treated as made out of accumulated DISC 
income and the remaining $30 is treated as made out of other earnings 
and profits. The dividend received deduction under section 243 is 
available only with respect to such $30.
    Example 3. Y Corporation, which uses the calendar year as its 
taxable year, elects to be treated as a DISC beginning with 1972. As of 
the end of 1975, Y had failed to meet the gross receipts test for that 
year. In 1975 Y had $100 of taxable income, $80 of which was 
attributable to qualified export receipts and $20 of which was 
attributable to receipts that did not qualify as qualified export 
receipts. As of the beginning of 1976, Y had $300 of accumulated 
earnings and profits, which consisted of $70 of accumulated DISC income, 
$40 of previously taxed income, and $190 of other earnings and profits. 
In 1976 Y makes a cash distribution of $20 pursuant to Sec. 1.992-3 in 
order to satisfy the gross receipts test for 1975. For 1976 Y has no 
earnings and profits and no deemed distributions. The entire $20 
distribution is a dividend under section 316. Under Sec. 1.996-1(b)(2), 
half of the $20 cash distribution is treated pursuant to Sec. 1.996-
1(b)(1) and half is treated pursuant to Sec. 1.996-1(a). Thus, $10 is 
treated as distributed out of accumulated DISC income and is includible 
in gross income. The other $10 is treated as made out of previously 
taxed income and is thus excluded from gross income. As of the beginning 
of 1977, Y has $280 of accumulated earnings and profits, which consists 
of $60 of accumulated DISC income, $30 of previously taxed income, and 
$190 of other earnings and profits.

[T.D. 7324, 39 FR 35120, Sept. 30, 1974, as amended by T.D. 7854, 47 FR 
51742, Nov. 17, 1982]


<R05>
Sec. 1.996-2   Ordering rules for losses.

    (a) In general. Under section 996(b), if for any taxable year a 
DISC, or a former DISC, incurs a deficit in earnings and profits, such 
deficit shall be charged--
    (1) First, to other earnings and profits (as defined in Sec. 1.996-
3(d)) to the extent thereof,
    (2) Second, to accumulated DISC income (as defined in Sec. 1.996-
3(b)) to the extent thereof, subject to the special rule in paragraph 
(b) of this section,
    (3) Third, to previously taxed income (as defined in Sec. 1.996-
3(c)) to the extent thereof, and
    (4) To the extent that the amount of such deficit exceeds the sum of 
the amounts charged in accordance with subparagraphs (1), (2), and (3) 
of this paragraph, to other earnings and profits (as defined in 
Sec. 1.996-3(d)).

Thus, the excess deficit charged to other earnings and profits under 
subparagraph (4) of this paragraph will create a deficit therein in the 
amount of such excess. To determine the amount of any division of 
earnings and profits for the purpose of determining under Sec. 1.996-1 
the treatment of any actual and certain deemed distributions, the 
portion of a deficit in earnings and profits chargeable under this 
paragraph to such division prior to such distribution shall be 
determined in a manner consistent with the rules in Sec. 1.316-2(b) for 
determining the amount of earnings and profits available on the date of 
any distribution.
    (b) Deficits subsequent to a disqualification. A deficit in earnings 
and profits of a DISC, or former DISC, shall not be charged to 
accumulated DISC income which has been determined is to be deemed 
distributed to the shareholders pursuant to Sec. 1.995-3 as a result of 
a revocation of election or other disqualification. Thus, in accordance 
with paragraph (a) of this section as modified by this paragraph, a 
deficit incurred by a former DISC following such a revocation or 
disqualification shall be charged first to other earnings and profits 
and then to previously taxed income with any balance being charged to 
other earnings and profits and creating a deficit therein. The preceding 
sentence shall also apply in the case of a deficit incurred by a DISC 
which has no accumulated DISC income accumulated during its current 
taxable year and all immediately preceding consecutive taxable years for 
which it was a

[[Page 709]]

DISC. If as a result of the application of this paragraph the amount of 
a deficit in other earnings and profits exceeds the amount of a deficit 
in accumulated earnings and profits, then upon any subsequent actual 
distribution the deficit in other earnings and profits shall be reduced 
by the lower of (1) the amount of such actual distribution chargeable to 
accumulated DISC income or previously taxed income or (2) the amount of 
such excess.
    (c) Examples. The provisions of this section may be illustrated by 
the following examples:

    Example 1. X Corporation, which uses the calendar year as its 
taxable year, becomes a DISC beginning with 1976. In addition to other 
facts assumed in the table below, X incurs a deficit in earnings and 
profits for 1979 of $70. Such deficit is charged to the divisions of X's 
earnings and profits pursuant to paragraph (a) of this section in the 
manner set forth in such table.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                  Other 
                                       Accumulated  Previously  earnings
                                       DISC income     taxed       and  
                                                      income     profits
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Balance January 1, 1976..............  ...........  ..........      $50 
Increase for 1976....................        $10          $8            
Increase for 1977....................         10           8            
Increase for 1978....................         10           8            
                                      ----------------------------------
  Balance January 1, 1979............         30          24         50 
Deficit for 1979 of $70:                                                
  Charge No. 1.......................  ...........  ..........     (50) 
  Charge No. 2.......................       (20)    ..........  ........
                                      ----------------------------------
    Balance January 1, 1980..........         10    ..........        0 
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    Example 2. Assume the same facts as in example 1, except that 
effective for taxable years beginning with 1979, X revokes its election 
to be treated as a DISC. Under Sec. 1.995-3, X has $30 of accumulated 
DISC income which is to be deemed distributed $10 per year in 1980, 
1981, and 1982. The deficit in earnings and profits for 1979 is charged 
to the divisions of X's earnings and profits pursuant to paragraph (b) 
of this section in the manner set forth in the table below:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                  Other 
                                       Accumulated  Previously  earnings
                                       DISC income     taxed       and  
                                                      income     profits
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Balance January 1, 1979..............        $30         $24        $50 
Deficit for 1979 of $70:.............                                   
  Charge No. 1.......................  ...........  ..........     (50) 
  Charge No. 2.......................  ...........      (20)    ........
                                      ----------------------------------
    Balance January 1, 1980..........         30           4          0 
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    Example 3. Assume the same facts as in example 2, except that the 
deficit in earnings and profits for 1979 is $120. Assume further that 
for 1980, 1981, and 1982, during which years X's shareholders are 
receiving scheduled installments of the deemed distributions of 
accumulated DISC income under Sec. 1.995-3, X, a former DISC, has 
neither earnings and profits nor a deficit in earnings and profits. The 
$120 deficit for 1979 is charged to the divisions of X's earnings and 
profits pursuant to paragraph (b) of this section in the manner set 
forth in the table below:

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                                             Other              
                                                                  Accumulated  Previously  earnings  Accumulated
                                                                  DISC income     taxed       and      earnings 
                                                                                 income     profits  and profits
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Balance January 1, 1979.........................................        $30         $24        $50        $104  
Deficit for 1979 of $120........................................  ...........  ..........  ........      (120)  
  Charge No. 1..................................................  ...........  ..........     (50)   ...........
  Charge No. 2..................................................  ...........      (24)    ........  ...........
  Charge No. 3..................................................  ...........  ..........     (46)   ...........
                                                                 -----------------------------------------------
    Balance January 1, 1980.....................................         30           0       (46)        (16)  
Deemed distributions in 1980 under Sec.  1.995-3................       (10)          10    ........  ...........
                                                                 -----------------------------------------------
    Balance January 1, 1981.....................................         20          10       (46)        (16)  
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    Example 4. Assume the same facts as in example 3, except that on 
December 31, 1980, X makes an actual distribution of $10 out of 
previously taxed income. On January 1, 1981, X has $20 of accumulated 
DISC income, no previously taxed income, and a deficit of $36 in other 
earnings and profits. The deficit of $16 in accumulated earnings and 
profits remains the same.

[T.D. 7324, 39 FR 35120, Sept. 30, 1974]


<R05>
Sec. 1.996-3   Divisions of earnings and profits.

    (a) In general. For purposes of sections 991 through 997, the 
earnings and profits of a DISC, or former DISC, shall be treated as 
composed of the following three divisions:
    (1) Accumulated DISC income (as defined in paragraph (b) of this 
section),
    (2) Previously taxed income (as defined in paragraph (c) of this 
section), and
    (3) Other earnings and profits (as defined in paragraph (d) of this 
section),
    (b) Accumulated DISC income defined. (1) Accumulated DISC income is 
that portion of a corporation's earnings and profits which were derived 
during taxable years for which it qualified as a DISC and which were 
deferred from

[[Page 710]]

taxation. Accumulated DISC income as of the close of each taxable year 
of the corporation is--
    (i) The amount of accumulated DISC income as of the close of the 
immediately preceding taxable year increased by,
    (ii) The amount of DISC income for the year (as determined in 
subparagraph (2) of this paragraph) and reduced (but not below zero) by,
    (iii) The items enumerated in subparagraph (3) of this paragraph.
    (2) Under section 996(f)(1), DISC income is (i) the earnings and 
profits derived by the corporation during a taxable year for which such 
corporation is a DISC minus (ii) amounts deemed distributed under 
Sec. 1.995-2 other than the amount of foreign investment attributable to 
producer's loans described in Sec. 1.995-2(a)(5). For example, the 
earnings and profits of a DISC for a taxable year include any amounts 
includible in such DISC's gross income pursuant to section 951(a) 
(relating to controlled foreign corporations). Deemed distributions 
under Sec. 1.995-2(a)(5) are taken into account under subparagraph (3) 
of this paragraph as a reduction in computing accumulated DISC income.
    (3) The accumulated DISC income (as increased by DISC income for the 
year determined under subparagraph (2) of this paragraph) is reduced by 
each of the following items in the following order:
    (i) Any amount deemed distributed for such year under Sec. 1.995-3 
(relating to deemed distributions upon disqualification),
    (ii) Any amount of foreign investment attributable to producer's 
loans deemed distributed for such year under Sec. 1.995-2(a)(5) to the 
extent it is charged to accumulated DISC income under Sec. 1.996-
1(b)(1)(i),
    (iii) The amount of any adjustment to accumulated DISC income for 
such year under Sec. 1.966-4(b)(1), and
    (iv) To the extent they are treated, under Sec. 1.996-1 (a) or (b) 
(relating to ordering rules for distributions), as made out of 
accumulated DISC income, the amounts of any actual qualifying 
distributions pursuant to Sec. 1.992-3 in the order in which they are 
made, and thereafter by the amounts of any other actual distributions in 
the order in which they are made, except that, prior to each actual 
distribution, accumulated DISC income shall be reduced by the portion of 
any deficit in earnings and profits for the taxable year chargeable at 
that time under Sec. 1.996-2(a)(2) to accumulated DISC income.
    (4) Every distribution or other reduction in accumulated DISC income 
pursuant to subparagraph (3) of this paragraph shall be charged to the 
most recently accumulated DISC income.
    (c) Previously taxed income. Under section 996(f)(2), previously 
taxed income as of the close of each taxable year of the corporation is 
an amount equal to--
    (1) The sum of--
    (i) The amount of previously taxed income as of the close of the 
immediately preceding taxable year,
    (ii) Amounts deemed distributed for the current year under 
Sec. 1.995-2 (relating to deemed distributions in qualified years),
    (iii) Amounts deemed distributed for the current year under 
Sec. 1.995-3 (relating to deemed distributions upon disqualification),
    (iv) With respect to a distribution in redemption to which 
Sec. 1.996-4(b)(1) applies, an amount equal to the excess (if any) of 
(a) the amount of the reduction under Sec. 1.996-4(b)(1) in accumulated 
DISC income over (b) the reduction in the corporation's earnings and 
profits (see section 312(e)), and
    (v) Any amount by which accumulated DISC income is reduced under 
paragraph (b)(3)(ii) of this section by reason of a deemed distribution 
as a dividend, under Sec. 1.995-2(a)(5), of an amount of foreign 
investment attributable to producer's loans,
    (2) Decreased (but not below zero), to the extent they are treated, 
under Sec. 1.996-1 (a) or (b) (relating to ordering rules for 
distributions), as made out of previously taxed income, by the amounts 
of any actual qualifying distributions pursuant to Sec. 1.992-3 in the 
order in which they are made, and thereafter by the amounts of any other 
actual distributions in the order in which they are made, except that, 
prior to any actual distribution, previously taxed income shall be 
reduced by the portion of any deficit in earnings and profits for the 
taxable year chargeable

[[Page 711]]

at that time under Sec. 1.996-2(a)(3) to previously taxed income.
    (d) Other earnings and profits. Under section 996(f)(3), other 
earnings and profits consist of earnings and profits other than 
accumulated DISC income and previously taxed income described 
respectively in paragraphs (b) and (c) of this section. Other earnings 
and profits as of the close of each taxable year of the corporation is 
(subject to paragraph (e) of this section) an amount equal to the amount 
of other earnings and profits as of the close of the immediately 
preceding taxable year decreased (if necessary, below zero) in the 
following order by--
    (1) To the extent they are treated, under Sec. 1.996-1 (a) or (b) 
(relating to ordering rules for distributions), as made out of other 
earnings and profits, the amounts of any actual qualifying distributions 
pursuant to Sec. 1.992-3 in the order in which they are made, and 
thereafter the amounts of any other actual distributions in the order in 
which they are made, except that, prior to any actual distribution, 
other earnings and profits shall be reduced by the portion of any 
deficit in earnings and profits for the taxable year chargeable at that 
time under Sec. 1.996-2(a)(1) to other earnings and profits, and
    (2) With respect to a distribution in redemption to which 
Sec. 1.996-4(b)(1) applies, an amount equal to the excess (if any) of 
(a) the reduction in the corporation's earnings and profits (see section 
312(e)) over (b) the amount of the reduction under Sec. 1.996-4(b)(1) in 
accumulated DISC income.
    (e) Distributions in kind. (1) For purposes of determining, under 
paragraphs (b), (c), and (d) of this section, the amount by which any 
division of earnings and profits is reduced by reason of a distribution 
of property (other than money or the DISC's, or former DISC's, own 
obligations), the amount of such distribution is the fair market value 
of such property at the time of the distribution.
    (2) For any taxable year in which the DISC makes a distribution of 
such property, the amount of other earnings and profits determined under 
paragraph (d) of this section (without regard to this subparagraph) 
shall be--
    (i) Increased by the excess (if any) of the amount of such 
distribution treated as a dividend under section 316(a) over the 
adjusted basis of such property, and
    (ii) Decreased by the excess (if any) of the adjusted basis of such 
property over the amount of such distribution treated as a dividend 
under section 316 (a).

Each item of property shall be considered separately for purposes of 
making the adjustment under this subparagraph.
    (f) Examples. The provisions of Secs. 1.996-1, 1.996-2, and this 
section may be illustrated by the following examples:

    Example 1. M Corporation, which uses the calendar year as its 
taxable year, elects to be treated as a DISC beginning with 1974. During 
1975, M derives no earnings and profits and makes no deemed or actual 
distributions, except that on December 31, 1975, M's shareholders are 
treated as having received a dividend distribution of $100 under 
Sec. 1.995-2 (a)(5) (relating to foreign investment attributable to 
producer's loans). M's earnings and profits are adjusted as shown on 
line (2) of the table below on the basis of facts assumed therein.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                                                         Other  
                                                                Accumulated  Accumulated  Previously   earnings 
                                                                  earnings   DISC income     taxed        and   
                                                                and profits                 income      profits 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
(1) Balance January 1, 1975...................................         $450         $100        $250        $100
(2) Adjustments (see paragraphs (b)(3)(ii) and (c)(1)(v) of                                                     
 this section)................................................            0        (100)         100           0
                                                               -------------------------------------------------
(3) Balance January 1, 1976...................................          450            0         350         100
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Example 2. N Corporation, which uses the calendar year as its taxable 
year, elects to be treated as a DISC beginning with 1972. During 1973, N 
derives no earnings and profits for the year and makes no deemed or 
actual distributions, except that A, a shareholder, realized $200 of 
gain upon receiving an actual cash distribution of $300

[[Page 712]]

in redemption of N stock having an adjusted basis of $100 in his hands. 
The redemption is treated as an exchange under section 302(a) but, under 
section 995(c), A includes the $200 of gain in his gross income as a 
dividend. Assuming that, under section 312(e), $240 is properly 
chargeable to capital account of N and that, under Sec. 1.996-4(b), 
accumulated DISC income is reduced by $200, N's accounts are adjusted on 
line (2) of the table below on the basis of facts assumed therein.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                                                         Other  
                                                                Accumulated  Accumulated  Previously   earnings 
                                                       Capital    earnings   DISC income     taxed        and   
                                                                and profits                 income      profits 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
(1) Balance January 1, 1973.........................    $2,000         $400         $300        $100           0
(2) Adjustments (see Sec.  1.996-4(b) and paragraph                                                             
 (c)(1)(iv) of this section)........................     (240)         (60)        (200)         140           0
                                                     -----------------------------------------------------------
(3) Balance January 1, 1974.........................     1,760          340          100         240           0
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Example 3. P Corporation, which uses the calendar year as its taxable 
year, elects to be treated as a DISC beginning with 1973. During 1974, P 
derives no earnings and profits for the year and makes no deemed or 
actual distributions, except for a distribution to B, its sole 
shareholder, of property with a fair market value of $100 and an 
adjusted basis in P's hands of $40. Under Sec. 1.996-1(a)(1), B treats 
the entire amount of the distribution as being made out of previously 
taxed income and, under Sec. 1.996-1(c), excludes it from his gross 
income. P's earnings and profits, divisions are adjusted on lines (2) 
and (3) of the table below on the basis of facts assumed therein.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                                                         Other  
                                                                Accumulated  Accumulated  Previously   earnings 
                                                                  earnings   DISC income     taxed        and   
                                                                and profits                 income      profits 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
(1) Balance January 1, 1974...................................         $200          $80        $120           0
(2) Adjustment under paragraphs (c)(2) and (e)(1) this section         (40)            0       (100)           0
(3) Adjustment under paragraph (e)(2)(i) of this section......            0            0           0         $60
                                                               -------------------------------------------------
(4) Balance January 1, 1975...................................          160           80          20          60
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Example 4. Q Corporation, which uses the calendar year as its taxable 
year, elects to be treated as a DISC beginning with 1974. On January 1, 
1975, Q has accumulated earnings and profits of $1,200 and, during 1975, 
Q incurs a deficit in earnings and profits of $365. The amount of such 
deficit incurred as of any date before the close of 1975 cannot be 
shown. On July 1, 1975, Q makes a cash distribution of $650, with 
respect to its stock to C, Q's sole shareholder. C subsequently 
transfers by gift all of his Q stock to D. On December 31, 1975, Q makes 
a cash distribution of $650, with respect to its stock, to D. Under 
these facts and additional facts assumed in the table below, C is 
treated as having received a dividend of $650 of which $320 is treated 
as distributed out of previously taxed income and excluded from gross 
income. D is treated as receiving a dividend of $186. Adjustments to Q's 
earnings and profits accounts are illustrated in the table below:

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                                                         Other  
                                                                Accumulated  Accumulated  Previously   earnings 
                                                                  earnings   DISC income     taxed        and   
                                                                and profits                 income      profits 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
(1) Balance January 1, 1975...................................       $1,200         $800        $320         $80
(2) Portion of 1975 deficit of $365 chargeable as of June 30,                                                   
 1975, pursuant to Sec.  1.996-2(a)...........................        (181)        (101)           0        (80)
                                                               -------------------------------------------------
(3) Balance July 1, 1975......................................        1,019          699         320           0
(4) $650 distributed to C on July 1, 1975.....................        (650)        (330)       (320)           0
(5) Portion of 1975 deficit of $365 chargeable as of December                                                   
 30, 1975, pursuant to Sec.  1.996-2(a).......................        (183)        (183)           0           0
                                                               -------------------------------------------------
(6) Balance December 31, 1975.................................         $186         $186           0           0
(7) $650 distributed to D on December 31, 1975 \1\............        (186)        (186)           0           0
                                                               -------------------------------------------------

[[Page 713]]

                                                                                                                
(8) Balance January 1, 1976...................................            0            0           0          0 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ $60 treated as return of capital pursuant to section 301(c)(2).                                             

    Examples 5--(1) Facts. R Corporation, which uses the calendar year 
as its taxable year elects to be treated as a DISC beginning with 1972. 
X Corporation is its sole shareholder. At the beginning of 1974, R has a 
deficit in earnings and profits of $60 all of which is composed of 
``other earnings and profits''. For 1974, R has earnings and profits of 
$80 before reduction for any distributions and taxable income of $70. On 
June 15, 1974, R makes a cash distribution to X of $60, with respect to 
its stock, to which section 301 applies. On August 15, 1974, R makes a 
cash distribution to X of $30 designated as a distribution to meet 
qualification requirements pursuant to Sec. 1.992-3. Under Sec. 1.995-
2(a), X is deemed to receive, on December 31, 1974, a distribution of a 
dividend of $35, i.e., one-half of R's taxable income of $70. The tax 
consequences of these facts to X and their effect on R's earnings and 
profits are set forth in the subsequent subparagraphs of this example.
    (2) Dividend treatment of actual distributions. Since R had $80 of 
earnings and profits for 1974 and a deficit in accumulated earnings and 
profits at the beginning of 1974, only $80 of the actual distributions 
($90) are treated as dividends under sections 301(c)(1) and 316(a)(2). 
($10 of the actual distribution, which is not treated as a dividend is 
treated in the manner specified in section 301(c) (2) and (3).) Thus, 
under Sec. 1.316-2(b), $26.67 of the actual qualifying distribution made 
on August 15, 1974 ($30 x  $80/$90), and $53.33 of the actual 
distribution made on June 15, 1974 ($60 x $80/$90), are considered made 
out of earnings and profits.
    (3) Priority of distributions. Under Sec. 1.996-1(d), for purposes 
of adjusting the divisions of R's earnings and profits and determining 
the treatment of subsequent distributions, the sequence in which each 
distribution is treated as having been made is--
    (i) First, the deemed distribution of $35,
    (ii) Second, the actual qualifying distribution of $30 made on 
August 15, 1974, pursuant to Sec. 1.992-3, and
    (iii) Finally, the actual distribution of $60 made on June 15, 1974.
    (4) Treatment and effect of deemed distribution. Under Sec. 1.995-
2(a), on December 31, 1974, X includes the deemed distribution of $35 in 
its gross income as a dividend. Under paragraph (c)(1)(ii) of this 
section, R's previously taxed income is increased by $35 as shown on 
line (3) of the table in subparagraph (7) of this example. Under 
paragraph (b)(1)(ii) and (2) of this section, accumulated DISC income is 
increased by $45 of DISC income, i.e., R's earnings and profits for 
1974, $80, minus the deemed distribution of $35, as shown on line (4) of 
the table.
    (5) Treatment and effect of actual qualifying distribution of $30. 
As indicated in subparagraph (2) of this example, $26.67 of the $30 
qualifying distribution on August 15, 1974, is treated as made out of 
earnings and profits for 1974. Under Sec. 1.996-1(b)(1)(i), the entire 
$26.67 is treated as distributed out of accumulated DISC income. Thus, 
on August 15, 1974, X includes $26.67 in its gross income as a dividend. 
No deduction is allowable under section 243. Under paragraph (b)(3)(iv) 
of this section, R's accumulated DISC income is reduced by $26.67 as 
shown on line (6) of the table in subparagraph (7) of this example.
    (6) Treatment and effect of actual distribution of $60. As indicated 
in subparagraph (2) of this example, $53.33 of the $60 distribution on 
June 15, 1974, is treated as made out of earnings and profits for 1974. 
Under Sec. 1.996-1(a), the $53.33 is treated as distributed out of 
previously taxed income to the extent thereof, $35, and then out of 
accumulated DISC income, $18.33. Thus, on June 15, 1974, X includes 
$18.33 in its gross income as a dividend. Under Sec. 1.996-1(c), the 
distribution of $35 out of previously taxed income is excluded from 
gross income. No deduction is allowable under section 243 with respect 
to the actual distribution of $53.33. Under paragraph (b)(3)(iv) of this 
section, accumulated DISC income is reduced by $18.33 and, under 
paragraph (c)(2) of this section, previously taxed income is reduced by 
$35, as shown on line (7) of the table in subparagraph (7) of this 
example.
    (7) Summary. The effects on earnings and profits and the divisions 
of earnings and profits are summarized in the following table:

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                   Earnings   Accumulated                Previously     Other   
                                                 and profits    earnings   Accumulated     taxed       earnings 
                                                   for year   and profits  DISC income     income    and profits
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
(1) Balance January 1, 1974....................  ...........     ($60.00)  ...........  ...........     ($60.00)

[[Page 714]]

                                                                                                                
(2) Earnings and profits for year before                                                                        
 reduction for distributions...................       $80.00  ...........  ...........  ...........  ...........
(3) Deemed distribution of $35 to X on December                                                                 
 31, 1974, under Sec.  1.995-2(a)..............  ...........  ...........  ...........       $35.00  ...........
(4) DISC income for 1974 of $45 as defined in                                                                   
 paragraph (b)(2) of this section (line 2 ($80)                                                                 
 minus line 3 ($35))...........................  ...........  ...........       $45.00  ...........  ...........
                                                ----------------------------------------------------------------
(5) Balance before actual distributions........        80.00      (60.00)        45.00        35.00      (60.00)
(6) Qualifying distribution of $30 to X on                                                                      
 August 15, 1974, pursuant to Sec.  1.992-3....      (26.67)  ...........      (26.67)  ...........  ...........
(7) Actual distribution to P of $60 on June 15,                                                                 
 1974..........................................      (53.33)  ...........      (18.33)      (35.00)  ...........
                                                ----------------------------------------------------------------
(8) Balance January 1, 1975....................            0      (60.00)            0  ...........      (60.00)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Example 6. Assume the facts are the same as in example 5, except that at 
the beginning of 1974 R's accumulated earnings and profits amount to $60 
consisting of accumulated DISC income of $20, previously taxed income of 
$10, and other earnings and profits of $30. In addition, on August 1, 
1974, X transfers all R's stock to Y Corporation in a reorganization 
described in section 368(a)(1)(B) in which under section 354 X 
recognizes no gain or loss. Under these facts, X includes in its gross 
income for 1974 a dividend of $15 which is attributable to the actual 
distribution of $60 paid out of earnings and profits on June 15, 1974. X 
excludes from gross income the balance of the $60 distribution ($45) 
paid out of earnings and profits because, under Sec. 1.996-1(a), it is 
treated as paid out of previously taxed income. Y includes in its gross 
income for 1974 a dividend of $65 of which $35 is attributable to the 
deemed distribution of a dividend to Y on December 31, 1974, under 
Sec. 1.995-2(a) and $30 is attributable to the qualifying distribution 
paid out of earnings and profits to Y on August 15, 1974. The 
adjustments to R's earnings and profits are summarized in the following 
table:

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                   Earnings   Accumulated                Previously     Other   
                                                 and profits    earnings   Accumulated     taxed       earnings 
                                                   for year   and profits  DISC income     income    and profits
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
(1) Balance January 1, 1974....................  ...........          $60          $20          $10          $30
(2) Earnings and profits for year before                                                                        
 reduction for distributions...................          $80  ...........  ...........  ...........  ...........
(3) Deemed distribution of $35 to Y on December                                                                 
 31, 1974, under Sec.  1.995-2(a)..............  ...........  ...........  ...........           35  ...........
(4) DISC income for 1974 of $45 as defined in                                                                   
 paragraph (b)(2) of this section (line 2 ($80)                                                                 
 minus line 3 ($35))...........................  ...........  ...........           45  ...........  ...........
                                                ----------------------------------------------------------------
(5) Balance before actual distributions........           80           60           65           45           30
(6) Qualifying distribution of $30 to Y on                                                                      
 August 15, 1974, pursuant to Sec.  1.992-3....      (26.67)       (3.33)         (30)  ...........  ...........
(7) Actual distribution to X of $60 on June 15,                                                                 
 1974..........................................      (53.33)       (6.67)         (15)         (45)  ...........
                                                ----------------------------------------------------------------
(8) Balance January 1, 1975....................  ...........           50           20            0           30
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (g) DISCs having corporate and noncorporate shareholders. In the 
case of a DISC having one or more corporate shareholders but less than 
all of its shareholders subject to the special rules of section 
291(a)(4), relating to certain deferred DISC income as a corporate 
preference item, accumulated DISC income and previously taxed income of 
the DISC are divided between the corporate shareholders, as a class, and 
the other shareholders, as a class, in proportion to amounts of DISC 
income not deemed distributed and amounts deemed distributed to each 
class. Subsequent taxation of actual and qualifying distributions shall 
be based upon this division. Thus, if a DISC is owned 50 percent by 
corporate

[[Page 715]]

shareholders and 50 percent by individual shareholders and has 
undistributed taxable income of $2,000 for its year, the division is 
made as follows:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
Corporate shareholders:                                                 
    Previously taxed income (57.5% of $2,000<divide>2).....         $575
    Accumulated DISC income (42.5% of $2,000<divide>2).....          425
Individual shareholders:                                                
    Previously taxed income (50% of $2,000<divide>2).......          500
    Accumulated DISC income (50% of $2,000<divide>2).......          500
                                                                        

(Secs. 995(e)(7), (8) and (10), 995(g) and 7805 of the Internal Revenue 
Code of 1954 (90 Stat. 1655, 26 U.S.C. 995 (e)(7), (8) and (10); 90 
Stat. 1659, 26 U.S.C. 995(g); and 68A Stat. 917, 26 U.S.C. 7805))

[T.D. 7324, 39 FR 35121, Sept. 30, 1974, as amended by T.D. 7854, 47 FR 
51742, Nov. 17, 1982; T.D. 7984, 49 FR 40024, Oct. 12, 1984]


<R05>
Sec. 1.996-4   Subsequent effect of previous disposition of DISC stock.

    (a) Shareholder adjustment for previously taxed income. (1) Under 
section 996(d)(1), except as provided in subparagraph (2) of this 
paragraph, if--
    (i) Gain with respect to a share of stock of a DISC, or former DISC, 
is treated under Sec. 1.995-4 as a dividend, and
    (ii) With respect to such share, any person subsequently receives an 
actual distribution made out of accumulated DISC income, or a deemed 
distribution made, pursuant to Sec. 1.995-3, by reason of 
disqualification, out of accumulated DISC income,

then such person shall treat such distribution in the same manner as a 
distribution from previously taxed income (and thus excludable from 
gross income under Sec. 1.996-1(c)) to the extent that the gain referred 
to in subdivision (i) of this subparagraph exceeds the aggregate amount 
of any other distributions with respect to such share which were treated 
under this subparagraph as made from previously taxed income.
    (2) In applying subparagraph (1) of this paragraph with respect to a 
share of stock in a DISC, or former DISC, the gain referred to in 
subparagraph (1)(i) of this paragraph does not include any gain to a 
shareholder on a redemption of such share which qualifies as an exchange 
under section 302(a) or any gain on a disposition of such share prior to 
such redemption. Distributions described in subparagraph (1)(ii) of this 
paragraph do not include a distribution in a redemption which qualifies 
as an exchange under section 302(a). For adjustments to accumulated DISC 
income by reason of dividend treatment under Sec. 1.995-4 with respect 
to gain upon a redemption of DISC stock to which section 302(a) applies 
and upon a prior disposition of such stock, see paragraph (b) of this 
section.
    (3) Example. The provisions of this paragraph may be illustrated by 
the following example:

    Example. In 1974, under Sec. 1.995-4, A, a shareholder of a DISC, on 
the sale of his DISC stock to B, is required to treat $20 of his gain as 
a dividend. The DISC has no previously taxed income and $40 of 
accumulated DISC income. Subsequently in the same year, B, the purchaser 
of the stock, receives an actual dividend distribution of $15 with 
respect to such stock which, under Sec. 1.996-1(a), is treated as made 
out of accumulated DISC income. The amounts of the DISC's previously 
taxed income and accumulated DISC income were not adjusted by reason of 
the $20 treated as a dividend on the prior sale. However, even though 
the DISC had no previously taxed income, the purchaser would treat the 
$15 as though it had been paid out of previously taxed income and, 
therefore would not include the $15 in gross income. If in 1975, B 
receives another actual distribution of $9 with respect to such stock, 
$5 (i.e., $20 dividend on A's sale less the $15 distribution to B in 
1974 which was treated under subparagraph (1) of this paragraph as made 
from previously taxed income) is treated as made from previously taxed 
income and excluded from gross income. The result would be the same if, 
on January 1, 1975, B had transferred such stock to C by gift and the $9 
distribution had been made to C.

    (b) Corporate adjustment upon redemption. (1) Under section 
996(d)(2), if by reason of Sec. 1.995-4 gain on a redemption of stock in 
a DISC, or former DISC, is included in the shareholder's gross income as 
a dividend, then the accumulated DISC income shall be reduced by an 
amount equal to the sum of--
    (i) The amount of gain on such redemption which, under Sec. 1.995-4, 
is treated as a dividend, and
    (ii) The amount of any gain with respect to such redeemed stock 
which,

[[Page 716]]

under Sec. 1.995-4, was treated as a dividend on a disposition prior to 
such redemption minus the amount of distributions with respect to such 
stock which have been treated as made out of previously taxed income by 
reason of the application of paragraph (a)(1) of this section.
    (2) The provisions of this paragraph may be illustrated by the 
following examples:

    Example 1. The entire stock of a DISC, which uses the calendar year 
as its taxable year, has been owned equally by A, B, C, and D since it 
was organized. At the close of 1976, when the DISC has $100 of 
accumulated DISC income, it redeems all of A's shares in a transaction 
qualifying as an exchange under section 302(a) and A, under Sec. 1.995-
4, includes $25 in his gross income as a dividend. The redemption has 
the effect of reducing accumulated DISC income by $25 to $75.
    Example 2. Assume the same facts as in example 1 except that the 
stock of the DISC has not been held equally by A, B, C, and D since its 
organization. A purchased his shares from X in 1974 in a transaction in 
which X, under Sec. 1.995-4, included in his gross income $30 as a 
dividend. In 1975, A receives a distribution of $10 out of accumulated 
DISC income which, under paragraph (a)(1) of this section, is treated as 
made out of previously taxed income. Under these facts, the redemption 
of A's stock in 1976 has the effect of reducing accumulated DISC income 
by $45 to $55 determined as follows:

                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
(a) Accumulated DISC income.......................  .........       $100
(b) Minus sum of:                                                       
  (1) Dividend on redemption of A's stock.........        $25           
  (2) Excess of dividend on X's sale ($30) over                         
   distribution to A treated as made out of                             
   previously taxed income ($10)..................        $20           
    Total.........................................  .........         45
                                                              ----------
(c) Accumulated DISC income on 12/31/76......................         55
                                                                        

[T.D. 7324, 39 FR 35121, Sept. 30, 1974]


<R05>
Sec. 1.996-5   Adjustment to basis.

    (a) Addition to basis. Under section 996(e)(1) amounts representing 
deemed distributions as provided in section 995(b) shall increase the 
basis of the stock with respect to which the distribution is made.
    (b) Reductions of basis. Under section 996(e)(2), the portion of an 
actual distribution treated as made out of previously taxed income shall 
reduce the basis of the stock with respect to which it is made and, to 
the extent that it exceeds the adjusted basis of such stock, shall be 
treated as gain from the sale or exchange of property. In the case of 
stock includible in the gross estate of a decedent for which an election 
is made under section 2032 (relating to alternate valuation), this 
paragraph shall not apply to any distribution made after the date of the 
decendent's death and before the alternate valuation date provided by 
section 2032. See section 1014(d) for a special rule for determining the 
basis of stock in a DISC, or former DISC, acquired from a decedent.

[T.D. 7324, 39 FR 35124, Sept. 30, 1974]


<R05>
Sec. 1.996-6   Effectively connected income.

    In the case of a shareholder who is a nonresident alien individual 
or a foreign corporation, trust, or estate, amounts taxable as dividends 
by reason of the application of Sec. 1.995-4 (relating to gain on 
disposition of stock in a DISC), amounts treated under Sec. 1.996-1 as 
distributed out of accumulated DISC income, and amounts deemed 
distributed under Sec. 1.995-2(a) (1) through (4) shall be treated as 
gains and distributions which are effectively connected with the conduct 
of a trade or business conducted through a permanent establishment of 
such shareholder within the United States, and shall be subject to tax 
in accordance with the provisions of section 871(b) and the regulations 
thereunder in the case of nonresident alien individuals, trusts, or 
estates, or section 882 and the regulations thereunder in the case of 
foreign corporations. In no case, however shall other income of such 
shareholder be taxable as effectively connected with the conduct of a 
trade or business through a permanent establishment in the United States 
solely because of the application of this section.

[T.D. 7324, 39 FR 35124, Sept. 30, 1974]


<R05>
Sec. 1.996-7   Carryover of DISC tax attributes.

    (a) In general. Carryover of a DISC's divisions of earnings and 
profits to acquiring corporations in nontaxable transactions shall be 
subject to rules generally applicable to other corporate tax attributes. 
For example, a DISC which acquires the assets of another DISC in a 
transaction to which section

[[Page 717]]

381(a) applies shall succeed to, and take into account, the divisions of 
the earnings and profits of the transferor DISC in accordance with 
section 381(c)(2).
    (b) Allocation of divisions of earnings and profits in corporate 
separations. (1) If one DISC transfers part of its assets to a 
controlled DISC in a transaction to which section 368(a)(1)(D) applies 
and immediately thereafter the stock of the controlled DISC is 
distributed in a distribution or exchange to which section 355 (or so 
much of section 356 as relates to section 355) applies, then--
    (i) The earnings and profits of the distributing DISC immediately 
before the transaction shall be allocated between the distributing DISC 
and the controlled DISC in accordance with the provisions of Sec. 1.312-
10.
    (ii) Each of the divisions of such earnings and profits, namely 
previously taxed income, accumulated DISC income, and other earnings and 
profits, shall be allocated between the distributing DISC and the 
controlled DISC on the same basis as the earnings and profits are 
allocated.
    (iii) Any assets of the distributing DISC whose status as qualified 
export assets is limited by its accumulated DISC income (e.g., 
producer's loans described in Sec. 1.993-4, Export-Import Bank and other 
obligations described in Sec. 1.993-2(h), and financing obligations 
described in Sec. 1.993-2(i)) shall be treated as having been allocated, 
for the purpose of determining the classification of such assets in the 
hands of the distributing DISC or the controlled DISC, on the same basis 
as the earnings and profits are allocated regardless of how such assets 
are actually allocated.
    (2) Example. The provisions of this paragraph may be illustrated by 
the following example:

    Example. On January 1, 1974, P Corporation transfers part of its 
assets to S Corporation, a newly organized subsidiary of P, in a 
transaction described in section 368(a)(1)(D) and distributes all the S 
stock in a transaction which qualifies under section 355. Immediately 
before such transfer, P had earnings and profits of $120,000 of which 
$100,000 constitutes accumulated DISC income. The unpaid balance of P's 
producer's loans is $80,000 all of which is retained by P. Pursuant to 
Sec. 1.312-10, 25 percent of P's accumulated DISC income is allocated to 
S (i.e., $25,000). P's producer's loans will be treated as allocated to 
S in the same proportion. Accordingly, for purposes of determining, 
under Sec. 1.993-4(a)(3), the amount of producer's loans which S is 
entitled to make, S is treated as having an unpaid balance of producer's 
loans of $20,000 (i.e., 25%  x  $80,000) and P is treated as having an 
unpaid balance of $60,000 (i.e., 75%  x  $80,000).

    (c) Accumulated DISC income accounts of separate DISC's maintained 
after corporate combination. If two or more DISC's combine to form a new 
DISC, or if the assets of one DISC are acquired by another DISC, in a 
transaction described in section 381(a), accumulated DISC income of the 
acquired DISC or DISC's shall carry over and be taken into account by 
the acquiring or new DISC, except that a separate account shall be 
maintained for the accumulated DISC income of any DISC scheduled to be 
received as a deemed distribution by its shareholders under Sec. 1.995-3 
(relating to deemed distributions upon disqualification). If, as a part 
of such transaction, the stock of the DISC which has accumulated DISC 
income scheduled to be deemed distributed is exchanged for stock of the 
acquiring or new DISC to which such accumulated DISC income is carried 
over and which maintains a separate account, then such accumulated DISC 
income shall be deemed distributed pro rata to shareholders of the 
acquiring or new DISC on the basis of stock ownership immediately after 
the exchange.

[T.D. 7324, 39 FR 35125, Sept. 30, 1974]


<R05>
Sec. 1.996-8   Effect of carryback of capital loss or net operating loss to prior DISC taxable year.

    (a) Under Sec. 1.995-2(e), the deduction under section 172 for a net 
operating loss carryback or under section 1212 for a capital loss 
carryback is determined as if the DISC were a domestic corporation which 
had not elected to be treated as a DISC. A carryback of a net operating 
loss or of a capital loss of any corporation which reduces its taxable 
income for a preceding taxable year for which it qualified as a DISC 
will have the consequences enumerated in paragraphs (b) through (e) of 
this section.
    (b) For such preceding taxable year, the amount of a deemed 
distribution of one-half of certain taxable income described in 
Sec. 1.995-2(a)(4) will ordinarily

[[Page 718]]

be reduced in effect (but not below zero) by one-half of the sum of the 
amount of the deduction under section 172 for such year for net 
operating loss carrybacks and the amount of the deduction under section 
1212 for such year for capital loss carrybacks.
    (c) The amount of reduction in the deemed distribution under 
paragraph (b) of this section will have the effect of increasing the 
limitation, provided in Sec. 1.995-2(b)(2), on the amount of foreign 
investment attributable to producer's loans which is deemed distributed 
under Sec. 1.995-2(a)(5).
    (d) If the amount of a deemed distribution for a preceding taxable 
year is reduced as described in paragraph (b) of this section, then for 
such preceding taxable year the previously taxed income (as defined in 
Sec. 1.996-3(c)) shall be decreased by the amount of such reduction and 
the accumulated DISC income (as defined in Sec. 1.996-3(b)) shall be 
increased by the amount of such reduction. Such adjustments shall be 
made as of the time the deemed distribution for such preceding taxable 
year is treated as having occurred. See Sec. 1.996-1(d) for the priority 
of such deemed distribution in relation to other distributions made in 
that preceding taxable year.
    (e) The amount and treatment of any actual distribution made in such 
preceding taxable year or a year subsequent to such preceding year, and 
the treatment of gain on a disposition (in any such year) of the DISC's 
stock to which Sec. 1.995-4 applies, shall be properly adjusted to 
reflect the adjustments to previously taxed income and accumulated DISC 
income described in paragraph (d) of this section.

[T.D. 7324, 39 FR 35125, Sept. 30, 1974]


<R05>
Sec. 1.997-1   Special rules for subchapter C of the Code.

    (a) For purposes of applying the provisions of sections 301 through 
395 of the Code, any distribution in property to a corporation by a 
DISC, or former DISC, which is made out of previously taxed income or 
accumulated DISC income shall be treated as a distribution in the same 
amount as if such distribution of property were made to an individual, 
and have a basis, in the hands of the recipient corporation, equal to 
such amount treated as having been distributed.
    (b) This section may be illustrated by the following example:

    Example. X Corporation is the sole shareholder of Y Corporation 
which is a DISC. Y makes an actual distribution of property to X with 
respect to X's stock in Y. The property has a basis of $50 and a fair 
market value of $100. The distribution is treated as made out of 
accumulated DISC income under section 996(a) and is taxable as a 
dividend under section 301(c)(1). Even though X is a corporation, the 
amount of the distribution is $100 notwithstanding the provisions of 
section 301(b)(1)(B) and the basis the property in X's hands is $100 
notwithstanding the provisions of section 301(d)(2).

[T.D. 7324, 39 FR 35125, Sept. 30 1974]

[[Page 719]]


<R02>
                              FINDING AIDS


<R03>

  --------------------------------------------------------------------

  A list of CFR titles, subtitles, chapters, subchapters and parts and 
an alphabetical list of agencies publishing in the CFR are included in 
the CFR Index and Finding Aids volume to the Code of Federal Regulations 
which is published separately and revised annually.

  Table of CFR Titles and Chapters
  Alphabetical List of Agencies Appearing in the CFR
  Table of OMB Control Numbers
  List of CFR Sections Affected


                                                                    Chap.

[[Page 721]]


<R03>
                    Table of CFR Titles and Chapters

<R04>

                      (Revised as of April 1, 1997)

                      Title 1--General Provisions

         I  Administrative Committee of the Federal Register 
                (Parts 1--49)
        II  Office of the Federal Register (Parts 50--299)
        IV  Miscellaneous Agencies (Parts 400--500)

                          Title 2--[Reserved]

                        Title 3--The President

         I  Executive Office of the President (Parts 100--199)

                           Title 4--Accounts

         I  General Accounting Office (Parts 1--99)
        II  Federal Claims Collection Standards (General 
                Accounting Office--Department of Justice) (Parts 
                100--299)

                   Title 5--Administrative Personnel

         I  Office of Personnel Management (Parts 1--1199)
        II  Merit Systems Protection Board (Parts 1200--1299)
       III  Office of Management and Budget (Parts 1300--1399)
        IV  Advisory Committee on Federal Pay (Parts 1400--1499)
         V  The International Organizations Employees Loyalty 
                Board (Parts 1500--1599)
        VI  Federal Retirement Thrift Investment Board (Parts 
                1600--1699)
       VII  Advisory Commission on Intergovernmental Relations 
                (Parts 1700--1799)
      VIII  Office of Special Counsel (Parts 1800--1899)
        IX  Appalachian Regional Commission (Parts 1900--1999)
        XI  Armed Forces Retirement Home (Part 2100)
       XIV  Federal Labor Relations Authority, General Counsel of 
                the Federal Labor Relations Authority and Federal 
                Service Impasses Panel (Parts 2400--2499)
        XV  Office of Administration, Executive Office of the 
                President (Parts 2500--2599)
       XVI  Office of Government Ethics (Parts 2600--2699)
       XXI  Department of the Treasury (Parts 3100--3199)
      XXII  Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (Part 3201)
     XXIII  Department of Energy (Part 3301)

[[Page 722]]

      XXIV  Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (Part 3401)
      XXVI  Department of Defense (Part 3601)
    XXVIII  Department of Justice (Part 3801)
      XXIX  Federal Communications Commission (Parts 3900--3999)
       XXX  Farm Credit System Insurance Corporation (Parts 4000--
                4099)
      XXXI  Farm Credit Administration (Parts 4100--4199)
    XXXIII  Overseas Private Investment Corporation (Part 4301)
      XXXV  Office of Personnel Management (Part 4501)
        XL  Interstate Commerce Commission (Part 5001)
       XLI  Commodity Futures Trading Commission (Part 5101)
      XLII  Department of Labor (Part 5201)
     XLIII  National Science Foundation (Part 5301)
       XLV  Department of Health and Human Services (Part 5501)
      XLVI  Postal Rate Commission (Part 5601)
     XLVII  Federal Trade Commission (Part 5701)
    XLVIII  Nuclear Regulatory Commission (Part 5801)
         L  Department of Transportation (Part 6001)
       LII  Export-Import Bank of the United States (Part 6201)
      LIII  Department of Education (Parts 6300--6399)
       LIV  Environmental Protection Agency (Part 6401)
      LVII  General Services Administration (Part 6701)
     LVIII  Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (Part 
                6801)
       LIX  National Aeronautics and Space Administration (Part 
                6901)
        LX  United States Postal Service (Part 7001)
       LXI  National Labor Relations Board (Part 7101)
      LXII  Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (Part 7201)
     LXIII  Inter-American Foundation (Part 7301)
       LXV  Department of Housing and Urban Development (Part 
                7501)
      LXVI  National Archives and Records Administration (Part 
                7601)
      LXIX  Tennessee Valley Authority (Part 7901)
      LXXI  Consumer Product Safety Commission (Part 8101)
     LXXIV  Federal Mine Safety and Health Review Commission (Part 
                8401)
     LXXVI  Federal Retirement Thrift Investment Board (Part 8601)
    LXXVII  Office of Management and Budget (Part 8701)

                          Title 6--[Reserved]

                         Title 7--Agriculture

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of Agriculture 
                (Parts 0--26)
            Subtitle B--Regulations of the Department of 
                Agriculture
         I  Agricultural Marketing Service (Standards, 
                Inspections, Marketing Practices), Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 27--209)
        II  Food and Consumer Service, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 210--299)

[[Page 723]]

       III  Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service, Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Federal Crop Insurance Corporation, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 400--499)
         V  Agricultural Research Service, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Natural Resources Conservation Service, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 600--699)
       VII  Farm Service Agency, Department of Agriculture (Parts 
                700--799)
      VIII  Grain Inspection, Packers and Stockyards 
                Administration (Federal Grain Inspection Service), 
                Department of Agriculture (Parts 800--899)
        IX  Agricultural Marketing Service (Marketing Agreements 
                and Orders; Fruits, Vegetables, Nuts), Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 900--999)
         X  Agricultural Marketing Service (Marketing Agreements 
                and Orders; Milk), Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 1000--1199)
        XI  Agricultural Marketing Service (Marketing Agreements 
                and Orders; Miscellaneous Commodities), Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 1200--1299)
       XIV  Commodity Credit Corporation, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 1400--1499)
        XV  Foreign Agricultural Service, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 1500--1599)
       XVI  Rural Telephone Bank, Department of Agriculture (Parts 
                1600--1699)
      XVII  Rural Utilities Service, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 1700--1799)
     XVIII  Rural Housing Service, Rural Business-Cooperative 
                Service, Rural Utilities Service, and Farm Service 
                Agency, Department of Agriculture (Parts 1800--
                2099)
      XXVI  Office of Inspector General, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 2600--2699)
     XXVII  Office of Information Resources Management, Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 2700--2799)
    XXVIII  Office of Operations, Department of Agriculture (Parts 
                2800--2899)
      XXIX  Office of Energy, Department of Agriculture (Parts 
                2900--2999)
       XXX  Office of Finance and Management, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 3000--3099)
      XXXI  Office of Environmental Quality, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 3100--3199)
     XXXII  [Reserved]
    XXXIII  Office of Transportation, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 3300--3399)
     XXXIV  Cooperative State Research, Education, and Extension 
                Service, Department of Agriculture (Parts 3400--
                3499)
      XXXV  Rural Housing Service, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 3500--3599)

[[Page 724]]

     XXXVI  National Agricultural Statistics Service, Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 3600--3699)
    XXXVII  Economic Research Service, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 3700--3799)
   XXXVIII  World Agricultural Outlook Board, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 3800--3899)
       XLI  [Reserved]
      XLII  Rural Business-Cooperative Service and Rural Utilities 
                Service, Department of Agriculture (Parts 4200--
                4299)

                    Title 8--Aliens and Nationality

         I  Immigration and Naturalization Service, Department of 
                Justice (Parts 1--499)

                 Title 9--Animals and Animal Products

         I  Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service, Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 1--199)
        II  Grain Inspection, Packers and Stockyards 
                Administration (Packers and Stockyards Programs), 
                Department of Agriculture (Parts 200--299)
       III  Food Safety and Inspection Service, Meat and Poultry 
                Inspection, Department of Agriculture (Parts 300--
                599)

                           Title 10--Energy

         I  Nuclear Regulatory Commission (Parts 0--199)
        II  Department of Energy (Parts 200--699)
       III  Department of Energy (Parts 700--999)
         X  Department of Energy (General Provisions) (Parts 
                1000--1099)
        XI  United States Enrichment Corporation (Parts 1100--
                1199)
        XV  Office of the Federal Inspector for the Alaska Natural 
                Gas Transportation System (Parts 1500--1599)
      XVII  Defense Nuclear Facilities Safety Board (Parts 1700--
                1799)

                      Title 11--Federal Elections

         I  Federal Election Commission (Parts 1--9099)

                      Title 12--Banks and Banking

         I  Comptroller of the Currency, Department of the 
                Treasury (Parts 1--199)
        II  Federal Reserve System (Parts 200--299)
       III  Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Export-Import Bank of the United States (Parts 400--
                499)
         V  Office of Thrift Supervision, Department of the 
                Treasury (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Farm Credit Administration (Parts 600--699)

[[Page 725]]

       VII  National Credit Union Administration (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Federal Financing Bank (Parts 800--899)
        IX  Federal Housing Finance Board (Parts 900--999)
        XI  Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council 
                (Parts 1100--1199)
       XIV  Farm Credit System Insurance Corporation (Parts 1400--
                1499)
        XV  Thrift Depositor Protection Oversight Board (Parts 
                1500--1599)
      XVII  Office of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight, 
                Department of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 
                1700-1799)
     XVIII  Community Development Financial Institutions Fund, 
                Department of the Treasury (Parts 1800--1899)

               Title 13--Business Credit and Assistance

         I  Small Business Administration (Parts 1--199)
       III  Economic Development Administration, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 300--399)

                    Title 14--Aeronautics and Space

         I  Federal Aviation Administration, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 1--199)
        II  Office of the Secretary, Department of Transportation 
                (Aviation Proceedings) (Parts 200--399)
       III  Commercial Space Transportation, Federal Aviation 
                Administration, Department of Transportation 
                (Parts 400--499)
         V  National Aeronautics and Space Administration (Parts 
                1200--1299)

                 Title 15--Commerce and Foreign Trade

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of Commerce (Parts 
                0--29)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Commerce and 
                Foreign Trade
         I  Bureau of the Census, Department of Commerce (Parts 
                30--199)
        II  National Institute of Standards and Technology, 
                Department of Commerce (Parts 200--299)
       III  International Trade Administration, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Foreign-Trade Zones Board, Department of Commerce 
                (Parts 400--499)
       VII  Bureau of Export Administration, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Bureau of Economic Analysis, Department of Commerce 
                (Parts 800--899)
        IX  National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, 
                Department of Commerce (Parts 900--999)
        XI  Technology Administration, Department of Commerce 
                (Parts 1100--1199)
      XIII  East-West Foreign Trade Board (Parts 1300--1399)

[[Page 726]]

       XIV  Minority Business Development Agency (Parts 1400--
                1499)
            Subtitle C--Regulations Relating to Foreign Trade 
                Agreements
        XX  Office of the United States Trade Representative 
                (Parts 2000--2099)
            Subtitle D--Regulations Relating to Telecommunications 
                and Information
     XXIII  National Telecommunications and Information 
                Administration, Department of Commerce (Parts 
                2300--2399)

                    Title 16--Commercial Practices

         I  Federal Trade Commission (Parts 0--999)
        II  Consumer Product Safety Commission (Parts 1000--1799)

             Title 17--Commodity and Securities Exchanges

         I  Commodity Futures Trading Commission (Parts 1--199)
        II  Securities and Exchange Commission (Parts 200--399)
        IV  Department of the Treasury (Parts 400--499)

          Title 18--Conservation of Power and Water Resources

         I  Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, Department of 
                Energy (Parts 1--399)
       III  Delaware River Basin Commission (Parts 400--499)
        VI  Water Resources Council (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Susquehanna River Basin Commission (Parts 800--899)
      XIII  Tennessee Valley Authority (Parts 1300--1399)

                       Title 19--Customs Duties

         I  United States Customs Service, Department of the 
                Treasury (Parts 1--199)
        II  United States International Trade Commission (Parts 
                200--299)
       III  International Trade Administration, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 300--399)

                     Title 20--Employees' Benefits

         I  Office of Workers' Compensation Programs, Department 
                of Labor (Parts 1--199)
        II  Railroad Retirement Board (Parts 200--399)
       III  Social Security Administration (Parts 400--499)
        IV  Employees' Compensation Appeals Board, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 500--599)
         V  Employment and Training Administration, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 600--699)
        VI  Employment Standards Administration, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 700--799)
       VII  Benefits Review Board, Department of Labor (Parts 
                800--899)

[[Page 727]]

      VIII  Joint Board for the Enrollment of Actuaries (Parts 
                900--999)
        IX  Office of the Assistant Secretary for Veterans' 
                Employment and Training, Department of Labor 
                (Parts 1000--1099)

                       Title 21--Food and Drugs

         I  Food and Drug Administration, Department of Health and 
                Human Services (Parts 1--1299)
        II  Drug Enforcement Administration, Department of Justice 
                (Parts 1300--1399)
       III  Office of National Drug Control Policy (Parts 1400--
                1499)

                      Title 22--Foreign Relations

         I  Department of State (Parts 1--199)
        II  Agency for International Development, International 
                Development Cooperation Agency (Parts 200--299)
       III  Peace Corps (Parts 300--399)
        IV  International Joint Commission, United States and 
                Canada (Parts 400--499)
         V  United States Information Agency (Parts 500--599)
        VI  United States Arms Control and Disarmament Agency 
                (Parts 600--699)
       VII  Overseas Private Investment Corporation, International 
                Development Cooperation Agency (Parts 700--799)
        IX  Foreign Service Grievance Board Regulations (Parts 
                900--999)
         X  Inter-American Foundation (Parts 1000--1099)
        XI  International Boundary and Water Commission, United 
                States and Mexico, United States Section (Parts 
                1100--1199)
       XII  United States International Development Cooperation 
                Agency (Parts 1200--1299)
      XIII  Board for International Broadcasting (Parts 1300--
                1399)
       XIV  Foreign Service Labor Relations Board; Federal Labor 
                Relations Authority; General Counsel of the 
                Federal Labor Relations Authority; and the Foreign 
                Service Impasse Disputes Panel (Parts 1400--1499)
        XV  African Development Foundation (Parts 1500--1599)
       XVI  Japan-United States Friendship Commission (Parts 
                1600--1699)
      XVII  United States Institute of Peace (Parts 1700--1799)

                          Title 23--Highways

         I  Federal Highway Administration, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 1--999)
        II  National Highway Traffic Safety Administration and 
                Federal Highway Administration, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 1200--1299)
       III  National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 
                Department of Transportation (Parts 1300--1399)

[[Page 728]]

                Title 24--Housing and Urban Development

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary, Department of 
                Housing and Urban Development (Parts 0--99)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Housing and Urban 
                Development
         I  Office of Assistant Secretary for Equal Opportunity, 
                Department of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 
                100--199)
        II  Office of Assistant Secretary for Housing-Federal 
                Housing Commissioner, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Parts 200--299)
       III  Government National Mortgage Association, Department 
                of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 300--399)
         V  Office of Assistant Secretary for Community Planning 
                and Development, Department of Housing and Urban 
                Development (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Office of Assistant Secretary for Community Planning 
                and Development, Department of Housing and Urban 
                Development (Parts 600--699) [Reserved]
       VII  Office of the Secretary, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Housing Assistance Programs and 
                Public and Indian Housing Programs) (Parts 700--
                799)
      VIII  Office of the Assistant Secretary for Housing--Federal 
                Housing Commissioner, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Section 8 Housing Assistance 
                Programs and Section 202 Direct Loan Program) 
                (Parts 800--899)
        IX  Office of Assistant Secretary for Public and Indian 
                Housing, Department of Housing and Urban 
                Development (Parts 900--999)
         X  Office of Assistant Secretary for Housing--Federal 
                Housing Commissioner, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Interstate Land Sales 
                Registration Program) (Parts 1700--1799)
       XII  Office of Inspector General, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Parts 2000--2099)
        XX  Office of Assistant Secretary for Housing--Federal 
                Housing Commissioner, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Parts 3200--3899)
       XXV  Neighborhood Reinvestment Corporation (Parts 4100--
                4199)

                           Title 25--Indians

         I  Bureau of Indian Affairs, Department of the Interior 
                (Parts 1--299)
        II  Indian Arts and Crafts Board, Department of the 
                Interior (Parts 300--399)
       III  National Indian Gaming Commission, Department of the 
                Interior (Parts 500--599)
        IV  Office of Navajo and Hopi Indian Relocation (Parts 
                700--799)
         V  Bureau of Indian Affairs, Department of the Interior, 
                and Indian Health Service, Department of Health 
                and Human Services (Part 900)
        VI  Office of the Assistant Secretary-Indian Affairs, 
                Department of the Interior (Part 1001)

[[Page 729]]

       VII  Office of the Special Trustee for American Indians, 
                Department of the Interior (Parts 1200--1299)

                      Title 26--Internal Revenue

         I  Internal Revenue Service, Department of the Treasury 
                (Parts 1--799)

           Title 27--Alcohol, Tobacco Products and Firearms

         I  Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, Department of 
                the Treasury (Parts 1--299)

                   Title 28--Judicial Administration

         I  Department of Justice (Parts 0--199)
       III  Federal Prison Industries, Inc., Department of Justice 
                (Parts 300--399)
         V  Bureau of Prisons, Department of Justice (Parts 500--
                599)
        VI  Offices of Independent Counsel, Department of Justice 
                (Parts 600--699)
       VII  Office of Independent Counsel (Parts 700--799)

                            Title 29--Labor

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of Labor (Parts 
                0--99)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Labor
         I  National Labor Relations Board (Parts 100--199)
        II  Office of Labor-Management Standards, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 200--299)
       III  National Railroad Adjustment Board (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Office of Labor-Management Standards, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 400--499)
         V  Wage and Hour Division, Department of Labor (Parts 
                500--899)
        IX  Construction Industry Collective Bargaining Commission 
                (Parts 900--999)
         X  National Mediation Board (Parts 1200--1299)
       XII  Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service (Parts 
                1400--1499)
       XIV  Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (Parts 1600--
                1699)
      XVII  Occupational Safety and Health Administration, 
                Department of Labor (Parts 1900--1999)
        XX  Occupational Safety and Health Review Commission 
                (Parts 2200--2499)
       XXV  Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration, 
                Department of Labor (Parts 2500--2599)
     XXVII  Federal Mine Safety and Health Review Commission 
                (Parts 2700--2799)
        XL  Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation (Parts 4000--
                4999)

[[Page 730]]

                      Title 30--Mineral Resources

         I  Mine Safety and Health Administration, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 1--199)
        II  Minerals Management Service, Department of the 
                Interior (Parts 200--299)
       III  Board of Surface Mining and Reclamation Appeals, 
                Department of the Interior (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Geological Survey, Department of the Interior (Parts 
                400--499)
        VI  Bureau of Mines, Department of the Interior (Parts 
                600--699)
       VII  Office of Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement, 
                Department of the Interior (Parts 700--999)

                 Title 31--Money and Finance: Treasury

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of the Treasury 
                (Parts 0--50)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Money and Finance
         I  Monetary Offices, Department of the Treasury (Parts 
                51--199)
        II  Fiscal Service, Department of the Treasury (Parts 
                200--399)
        IV  Secret Service, Department of the Treasury (Parts 
                400--499)
         V  Office of Foreign Assets Control, Department of the 
                Treasury (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Bureau of Engraving and Printing, Department of the 
                Treasury (Parts 600--699)
       VII  Federal Law Enforcement Training Center, Department of 
                the Treasury (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Office of International Investment, Department of the 
                Treasury (Parts 800--899)

                      Title 32--National Defense

            Subtitle A--Department of Defense
         I  Office of the Secretary of Defense (Parts 1--399)
         V  Department of the Army (Parts 400--699)
        VI  Department of the Navy (Parts 700--799)
       VII  Department of the Air Force (Parts 800--1099)
            Subtitle B--Other Regulations Relating to National 
                Defense
       XII  Defense Logistics Agency (Parts 1200--1299)
       XVI  Selective Service System (Parts 1600--1699)
       XIX  Central Intelligence Agency (Parts 1900--1999)
        XX  Information Security Oversight Office, National 
                Archives and Records Administration (Parts 2000--
                2099)
       XXI  National Security Council (Parts 2100--2199)
      XXIV  Office of Science and Technology Policy (Parts 2400--
                2499)
     XXVII  Office for Micronesian Status Negotiations (Parts 
                2700--2799)
    XXVIII  Office of the Vice President of the United States 
                (Parts 2800--2899)
      XXIX  Presidential Commission on the Assignment of Women in 
                the Armed Forces (Part 2900)

[[Page 731]]

               Title 33--Navigation and Navigable Waters

         I  Coast Guard, Department of Transportation (Parts 1--
                199)
        II  Corps of Engineers, Department of the Army (Parts 
                200--399)
        IV  Saint Lawrence Seaway Development Corporation, 
                Department of Transportation (Parts 400--499)

                          Title 34--Education

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary, Department of 
                Education (Parts 1--99)
            Subtitle B--Regulations of the Offices of the 
                Department of Education
         I  Office for Civil Rights, Department of Education 
                (Parts 100--199)
        II  Office of Elementary and Secondary Education, 
                Department of Education (Parts 200--299)
       III  Office of Special Education and Rehabilitative 
                Services, Department of Education (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Office of Vocational and Adult Education, Department 
                of Education (Parts 400--499)
         V  Office of Bilingual Education and Minority Languages 
                Affairs, Department of Education (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Office of Postsecondary Education, Department of 
                Education (Parts 600--699)
       VII  Office of Educational Research and Improvement, 
                Department of Education (Parts 700--799)
        XI  National Institute for Literacy (Parts 1100-1199)
            Subtitle C--Regulations Relating to Education
       XII  National Council on Disability (Parts 1200--1299)

                        Title 35--Panama Canal

         I  Panama Canal Regulations (Parts 1--299)

             Title 36--Parks, Forests, and Public Property

         I  National Park Service, Department of the Interior 
                (Parts 1--199)
        II  Forest Service, Department of Agriculture (Parts 200--
                299)
       III  Corps of Engineers, Department of the Army (Parts 
                300--399)
        IV  American Battle Monuments Commission (Parts 400--499)
         V  Smithsonian Institution (Parts 500--599)
       VII  Library of Congress (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Advisory Council on Historic Preservation (Parts 800--
                899)
        IX  Pennsylvania Avenue Development Corporation (Parts 
                900--999)
        XI  Architectural and Transportation Barriers Compliance 
                Board (Parts 1100--1199)
       XII  National Archives and Records Administration (Parts 
                1200--1299)
       XIV  Assassination Records Review Board (Parts 1400-1499)

[[Page 732]]

             Title 37--Patents, Trademarks, and Copyrights

         I  Patent and Trademark Office, Department of Commerce 
                (Parts 1--199)
        II  Copyright Office, Library of Congress (Parts 200--299)
        IV  Assistant Secretary for Technology Policy, Department 
                of Commerce (Parts 400--499)
         V  Under Secretary for Technology, Department of Commerce 
                (Parts 500--599)

           Title 38--Pensions, Bonuses, and Veterans' Relief

         I  Department of Veterans Affairs (Parts 0--99)

                       Title 39--Postal Service

         I  United States Postal Service (Parts 1--999)
       III  Postal Rate Commission (Parts 3000--3099)

                  Title 40--Protection of Environment

         I  Environmental Protection Agency (Parts 1--799)
         V  Council on Environmental Quality (Parts 1500--1599)

          Title 41--Public Contracts and Property Management

            Subtitle B--Other Provisions Relating to Public 
                Contracts
        50  Public Contracts, Department of Labor (Parts 50-1--50-
                999)
        51  Committee for Purchase From People Who Are Blind or 
                Severely Disabled (Parts 51-1--51-99)
        60  Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs, Equal 
                Employment Opportunity, Department of Labor (Parts 
                60-1--60-999)
        61  Office of the Assistant Secretary for Veterans 
                Employment and Training, Department of Labor 
                (Parts 61-1--61-999)
            Subtitle C--Federal Property Management Regulations 
                System
       101  Federal Property Management Regulations (Parts 101-1--
                101-99)
       105  General Services Administration (Parts 105-1--105-999)
       109  Department of Energy Property Management Regulations 
                (Parts 109-1--109-99)
       114  Department of the Interior (Parts 114-1--114-99)
       115  Environmental Protection Agency (Parts 115-1--115-99)
       128  Department of Justice (Parts 128-1--128-99)
            Subtitle D--Other Provisions Relating to Property 
                Management [Reserved]
            Subtitle E--Federal Information Resources Management 
                Regulations System
       201  Federal Information Resources Management Regulation 
                (Parts 201-1--201-99) [Reserved]
            Subtitle F--Federal Travel Regulation System
       301  Travel Allowances (Parts 301-1--301-99)
       302  Relocation Allowances (Parts 302-1--302-99)

[[Page 733]]

       303  Payment of Expenses Connected with the Death of 
                Certain Employees (Parts 303-1--303-2)
       304  Payment from a Non-Federal Source for Travel Expenses 
                (Parts 304-1--304-99)

                        Title 42--Public Health

         I  Public Health Service, Department of Health and Human 
                Services (Parts 1--199)
        IV  Health Care Financing Administration, Department of 
                Health and Human Services (Parts 400--499)
         V  Office of Inspector General-Health Care, Department of 
                Health and Human Services (Parts 1000--1999)

                   Title 43--Public Lands: Interior

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of the Interior 
                (Parts 1--199)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Public Lands
         I  Bureau of Reclamation, Department of the Interior 
                (Parts 200--499)
        II  Bureau of Land Management, Department of the Interior 
                (Parts 1000--9999)
       III  Utah Reclamation Mitigation and Conservation 
                Commission (Parts 10000--10005)

             Title 44--Emergency Management and Assistance

         I  Federal Emergency Management Agency (Parts 0--399)
        IV  Department of Commerce and Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 400--499)

                       Title 45--Public Welfare

            Subtitle A--Department of Health and Human Services, 
                General Administration (Parts 1--199)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Public Welfare
        II  Office of Family Assistance (Assistance Programs), 
                Administration for Children and Families, 
                Department of Health and Human Services (Parts 
                200--299)
       III  Office of Child Support Enforcement (Child Support 
                Enforcement Program), Administration for Children 
                and Families, Department of Health and Human 
                Services (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Office of Refugee Resettlement, Administration for 
                Children and Families Department of Health and 
                Human Services (Parts 400--499)
         V  Foreign Claims Settlement Commission of the United 
                States, Department of Justice (Parts 500--599)
        VI  National Science Foundation (Parts 600--699)
       VII  Commission on Civil Rights (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Office of Personnel Management (Parts 800--899)

[[Page 734]]

         X  Office of Community Services, Administration for 
                Children and Families, Department of Health and 
                Human Services (Parts 1000--1099)
        XI  National Foundation on the Arts and the Humanities 
                (Parts 1100--1199)
       XII  ACTION (Parts 1200--1299)
      XIII  Office of Human Development Services, Department of 
                Health and Human Services (Parts 1300--1399)
       XVI  Legal Services Corporation (Parts 1600--1699)
      XVII  National Commission on Libraries and Information 
                Science (Parts 1700--1799)
     XVIII  Harry S. Truman Scholarship Foundation (Parts 1800--
                1899)
       XXI  Commission on Fine Arts (Parts 2100--2199)
      XXII  Christopher Columbus Quincentenary Jubilee Commission 
                (Parts 2200--2299)
     XXIII  Arctic Research Commission (Part 2301)
      XXIV  James Madison Memorial Fellowship Foundation (Parts 
                2400--2499)
       XXV  Corporation for National and Community Service (Parts 
                2500--2599)

                          Title 46--Shipping

         I  Coast Guard, Department of Transportation (Parts 1--
                199)
        II  Maritime Administration, Department of Transportation 
                (Parts 200--399)
        IV  Federal Maritime Commission (Parts 500--599)

                      Title 47--Telecommunication

         I  Federal Communications Commission (Parts 0--199)
        II  Office of Science and Technology Policy and National 
                Security Council (Parts 200--299)
       III  National Telecommunications and Information 
                Administration, Department of Commerce (Parts 
                300--399)

           Title 48--Federal Acquisition Regulations System

         1  Federal Acquisition Regulation (Parts 1--99)
         2  Department of Defense (Parts 200--299)
         3  Department of Health and Human Services (Parts 300--
                399)
         4  Department of Agriculture (Parts 400--499)
         5  General Services Administration (Parts 500--599)
         6  Department of State (Parts 600--699)
         7  Agency for International Development (Parts 700--799)
         8  Department of Veterans Affairs (Parts 800--899)
         9  Department of Energy (Parts 900--999)
        10  Department of the Treasury (Parts 1000--1099)

[[Page 735]]

        12  Department of Transportation (Parts 1200--1299)
        13  Department of Commerce (Parts 1300--1399)
        14  Department of the Interior (Parts 1400--1499)
        15  Environmental Protection Agency (Parts 1500--1599)
        16  Office of Personnel Management Federal Employees 
                Health Benefits Acquisition Regulation (Parts 
                1600--1699)
        17  Office of Personnel Management (Parts 1700--1799)
        18  National Aeronautics and Space Administration (Parts 
                1800--1899)
        19  United States Information Agency (Parts 1900--1999)
        20  Nuclear Regulatory Commission (Parts 2000--2099)
        21  Office of Personnel Management, Federal Employees 
                Group Life Insurance Federal Acquisition 
                Regulation (Parts 2100--2199)
        23  Social Security Administration (Parts 2300--2399)
        24  Department of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 
                2400--2499)
        25  National Science Foundation (Parts 2500--2599)
        28  Department of Justice (Parts 2800--2899)
        29  Department of Labor (Parts 2900--2999)
        34  Department of Education Acquisition Regulation (Parts 
                3400--3499)
        35  Panama Canal Commission (Parts 3500--3599)
        44  Federal Emergency Management Agency (Parts 4400--4499)
        51  Department of the Army Acquisition Regulations (Parts 
                5100--5199)
        52  Department of the Navy Acquisition Regulations (Parts 
                5200--5299)
        53  Department of the Air Force Federal Acquisition 
                Regulation Supplement (Parts 5300--5399)
        54  Defense Logistics Agency, Department of Defense (Part 
                5452)
        57  African Development Foundation (Parts 5700--5799)
        61  General Services Administration Board of Contract 
                Appeals (Parts 6100--6199)
        63  Department of Transportation Board of Contract Appeals 
                (Parts 6300--6399)
        99  Cost Accounting Standards Board, Office of Federal 
                Procurement Policy, Office of Management and 
                Budget (Parts 9900--9999)

                       Title 49--Transportation

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of Transportation 
                (Parts 1--99)
            Subtitle B--Other Regulations Relating to 
                Transportation
         I  Research and Special Programs Administration, 
                Department of Transportation (Parts 100--199)
        II  Federal Railroad Administration, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 200--299)

[[Page 736]]

       III  Federal Highway Administration, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Coast Guard, Department of Transportation (Parts 400--
                499)
         V  National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 
                Department of Transportation (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Federal Transit Administration, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 600--699)
       VII  National Railroad Passenger Corporation (AMTRAK) 
                (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  National Transportation Safety Board (Parts 800--999)
         X  Surface Transportation Board, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 1000--1399)

                   Title 50--Wildlife and Fisheries

         I  United States Fish and Wildlife Service, Department of 
                the Interior (Parts 1--199)
        II  National Marine Fisheries Service, National Oceanic 
                and Atmospheric Administration, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 200--299)
       III  International Fishing and Related Activities (Parts 
                300--399)
        IV  Joint Regulations (United States Fish and Wildlife 
                Service, Department of the Interior and National 
                Marine Fisheries Service, National Oceanic and 
                Atmospheric Administration, Department of 
                Commerce); Endangered Species Committee 
                Regulations (Parts 400--499)
         V  Marine Mammal Commission (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Fishery Conservation and Management, National Oceanic 
                and Atmospheric Administration, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 600--699)

                      CFR Index and Finding Aids

            Subject/Agency Index
            List of Agency Prepared Indexes
            Parallel Tables of Statutory Authorities and Rules
            Acts Requiring Publication in the Federal Register
            List of CFR Titles, Chapters, Subchapters, and Parts
            Alphabetical List of Agencies Appearing in the CFR



[[Page 737]]




<R03>
           Alphabetical List of Agencies Appearing in the CFR

<R04>

                      (Revised as of April 1, 1997)

                                                  CFR Title, Subtitle or
                     Agency                               Chapter

ACTION                                            45, XII
Administrative Committee of the Federal Register  1, I
Advanced Research Projects Agency                 32, I
Advisory Commission on Intergovernmental          5, VII
     Relations
Advisory Committee on Federal Pay                 5, IV
Advisory Council on Historic Preservation         36, VIII
African Development Foundation                    22, XV
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 57
Agency for International Development              22, II
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 7
Agricultural Marketing Service                    7, I, IX, X, XI
Agricultural Research Service                     7, V
Agriculture Department
  Agricultural Marketing Service                  7, I, IX, X, XI
  Agricultural Research Service                   7, V
  Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service      7, III; 9, I
  Commodity Credit Corporation                    7, XIV
  Cooperative State Research, Education, and      7, XXXIV
       Extension Service
  Economic Research Service                       7, XXXVII
  Energy, Office of                               7, XXIX
  Environmental Quality, Office of                7, XXXI
  Farm Service Agency                             7, VII, XVIII
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 4
  Federal Crop Insurance Corporation              7, IV
  Finance and Management, Office of               7, XXX
  Food and Consumer Service                       7, II
  Food Safety and Inspection Service              9, III
  Foreign Agricultural Service                    7, XV
  Forest Service                                  36, II
  Grain Inspection, Packers and Stockyards        7, VIII; 9, II
       Administration
  Information Resources Management, Office of     7, XXVII
  Inspector General, Office of                    7, XXVI
  National Agricultural Library                   7, XLI
  National Agricultural Statistics Service        7, XXXVI
  Natural Resources Conservation Service          7, VI
  Operations, Office of                           7, XXVIII
  Rural Business-Cooperative Service              7, XVIII, XLII
  Rural Development Administration                7, XLII
  Rural Housing Service                           7, XVIII, XXXV
  Rural Telephone Bank                            7, XVI
  Rural Utilities Service                         7, XVII, XVIII, XLII
  Secretary of Agriculture, Office of             7, Subtitle A
  Transportation, Office of                       7, XXXIII
  World Agricultural Outlook Board                7, XXXVIII
Air Force Department                              32, VII
  Federal Acquisition Regulation Supplement       48, 53
Alaska Natural Gas Transportation System, Office  10, XV
     of the Federal Inspector
Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, Bureau of          27, I
AMTRAK                                            49, VII
American Battle Monuments Commission              36, IV
Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service        7, III; 9, I

[[Page 738]]

Appalachian Regional Commission                   5, IX
Architectural and Transportation Barriers         36, XI
     Compliance Board
Arctic Research Commission                        45, XXIII
Armed Forces Retirement Home                      5, XI
Arms Control and Disarmament Agency, United       22, VI
     States
Army Department                                   32, V
  Engineers, Corps of                             33, II; 36, III
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 51
Assassination Records Review Board                36, XIV
Benefits Review Board                             20, VII
Bilingual Education and Minority Languages        34, V
     Affairs, Office of
Blind or Severely Disabled, Committee for         41, 51
     Purchase From People Who Are
Board for International Broadcasting              22, XIII
Census Bureau                                     15, I
Central Intelligence Agency                       32, XIX
Child Support Enforcement, Office of              45, III
Children and Families, Administration for         45, II, III, IV, X
Christopher Columbus Quincentenary Jubilee        45, XXII
     Commission
Civil Rights, Commission on                       45, VII
Civil Rights, Office for                          34, I
Coast Guard                                       33, I; 46, I; 49, IV
Commerce Department                               44, IV
  Census Bureau                                   15, I`
  Economic Affairs, Under Secretary               37, V
  Economic Analysis, Bureau of                    15, VIII
  Economic Development Administration             13, III
  Emergency Management and Assistance             44, IV
  Export Administration, Bureau of                15, VII
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 13
  Fishery Conservation and Management             50, VI
  Foreign-Trade Zones Board                       15, IV
  International Trade Administration              15, III; 19, III
  National Institute of Standards and Technology  15, II
  National Marine Fisheries Service               50, II, IV
  National Oceanic and Atmospheric                15, IX; 50, II, III, IV, 
       Administration                             VI
  National Telecommunications and Information     15, XXIII; 47, III
       Administration
  National Weather Service                        15, IX
  Patent and Trademark Office                     37, I
  Productivity, Technology and Innovation,        37, IV
       Assistant Secretary for
  Secretary of Commerce, Office of                15, Subtitle A
  Technology, Under Secretary for                 37, V
  Technology Administration                       15, XI
  Technology Policy, Assistant Secretary for      37, IV
Commercial Space Transportation                   14, III
Commodity Credit Corporation                      7, XIV
Commodity Futures Trading Commission              5, XLI; 17, I
Community Planning and Development, Office of     24, V, VI
     Assistant Secretary for
Community Services, Office of                     45, X
Comptroller of the Currency                       12, I
Construction Industry Collective Bargaining       29, IX
     Commission
Consumer Product Safety Commission                5, LXXI; 16, II
Cooperative State Research, Education, and        7, XXXIV
     Extension Service
Copyright Office                                  37, II
Cost Accounting Standards Board                   48, 99
Council on Environmental Quality                  40, V
Customs Service, United States                    19, I
Defense Contract Audit Agency                     32, I
Defense Department                                5, XXVI; 32, Subtitle A
  Advanced Research Projects Agency               32, I
  Air Force Department                            32, VII
  Army Department                                 32, V; 33, II; 36, III, 
                                                  48, 51
  Defense Intelligence Agency                     32, I

[[Page 739]]

  Defense Logistics Agency                        32, I, XII; 48, 54
  Defense Mapping Agency                          32, I
  Engineers, Corps of                             33, II; 36, III
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 2
  Navy Department                                 32, VI; 48, 52
  Secretary of Defense, Office of                 32, I
Defense Contract Audit Agency                     32, I
Defense Intelligence Agency                       32, I
Defense Logistics Agency                          32, XII; 48, 54
Defense Mapping Agency                            32, I
Defense Nuclear Facilities Safety Board           10, XVII
Delaware River Basin Commission                   18, III
Drug Enforcement Administration                   21, II
East-West Foreign Trade Board                     15, XIII
Economic Affairs, Under Secretary                 37, V
Economic Analysis, Bureau of                      15, VIII
Economic Development Administration               13, III
Economic Research Service                         7, XXXVII
Education, Department of                          5, LIII
  Bilingual Education and Minority Languages      34, V
       Affairs, Office of
  Civil Rights, Office for                        34, I
  Educational Research and Improvement, Office    34, VII
       of
  Elementary and Secondary Education, Office of   34, II
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 34
  Postsecondary Education, Office of              34, VI
  Secretary of Education, Office of               34, Subtitle A
  Special Education and Rehabilitative Services,  34, III
       Office of
  Vocational and Adult Education, Office of       34, IV
Educational Research and Improvement, Office of   34, VII
Elementary and Secondary Education, Office of     34, II
Employees' Compensation Appeals Board             20, IV
Employees Loyalty Board                           5, V
Employment and Training Administration            20, V
Employment Standards Administration               20, VI
Endangered Species Committee                      50, IV
Energy, Department of                             5, XXIII; 10, II, III, X
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 9
  Federal Energy Regulatory Commission            5, XXIV; 18, I
  Property Management Regulations                 41, 109
Energy, Office of                                 7, XXIX
Engineers, Corps of                               33, II; 36, III
Engraving and Printing, Bureau of                 31, VI
Enrichment Corporation, United States             10, XI
Environmental Protection Agency                   5, LIV; 40, I
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 15
  Property Management Regulations                 41, 115
Environmental Quality, Office of                  7, XXXI
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission           5, LXII; 29, XIV
Equal Opportunity, Office of Assistant Secretary  24, I
     for
Executive Office of the President                 3, I
  Administration, Office of                       5, XV
  Environmental Quality, Council on               40, V
  Management and Budget, Office of                25, III, LXXVII; 48, 99
  National Drug Control Policy, Office of         21, III
  National Security Council                       32, XXI; 47, 2
  Presidential Documents                          3
  Science and Technology Policy, Office of        32, XXIV; 47, II
  Trade Representative, Office of the United      15, XX
       States
Export Administration, Bureau of                  15, VII
Export-Import Bank of the United States           5, LII; 12, IV
Family Assistance, Office of                      45, II
Farm Credit Administration                        5, XXXI; 12, VI
Farm Credit System Insurance Corporation          5, XXX; 12, XIV
Farm Service Agency                               7, VII, XVIII
Federal Acquisition Regulation                    48, 1
Federal Aviation Administration                   14, I
  Commercial Space Transportation                 14, III

[[Page 740]]

Federal Claims Collection Standards               4, II
Federal Communications Commission                 5, XXIX; 47, I
Federal Contract Compliance Programs, Office of   41, 60
Federal Crop Insurance Corporation                7, IV
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation             5, XXII; 12, III
Federal Election Commission                       11, I
Federal Emergency Management Agency               44, I
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 44
Federal Employees Group Life Insurance Federal    48, 21
     Acquisition Regulation
Federal Employees Health Benefits Acquisition     48, 16
     Regulation
Federal Energy Regulatory Commission              5, XXIV; 18, I
Federal Financial Institutions Examination        12, XI
     Council
Federal Financing Bank                            12, VIII
Federal Highway Administration                    23, I, II; 49, III
Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation            1, IV
Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight Office       12, XVII
Federal Housing Finance Board                     12, IX
Federal Inspector for the Alaska Natural Gas      10, XV
     Transportation System, Office of
Federal Labor Relations Authority, and General    5, XIV; 22, XIV
     Counsel of the Federal Labor Relations 
     Authority
Federal Law Enforcement Training Center           31, VII
Federal Maritime Commission                       46, IV
Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service        29, XII
Federal Mine Safety and Health Review Commission  5, LXXIV; 29, XXVII
Federal Pay, Advisory Committee on                5, IV
Federal Prison Industries, Inc.                   28, III
Federal Procurement Policy Office                 48, 99
Federal Property Management Regulations           41, 101
Federal Property Management Regulations System    41, Subtitle C
Federal Railroad Administration                   49, II
Federal Register, Administrative Committee of     1, I
Federal Register, Office of                       1, II
Federal Reserve System                            12, II
  Board of Governors                              5, LVIII
Federal Retirement Thrift Investment Board        5, VI, LXXVI
Federal Service Impasses Panel                    5, XIV
Federal Trade Commission                          5, XLVII; 16, I
Federal Transit Administration                    49, VI
Federal Travel Regulation System                  41, Subtitle F
Finance and Management, Office of                 7, XXX
Fine Arts, Commission on                          45, XXI
Fiscal Service                                    31, II
Fish and Wildlife Service, United States          50, I, IV
Fishery Conservation and Management               50, VI
Food and Drug Administration                      21, I
Food and Consumer Service                         7, II
Food Safety and Inspection Service                9, III
Foreign Agricultural Service                      7, XV
Foreign Assets Control, Office of                 31, V
Foreign Claims Settlement Commission of the       45, V
     United States
Foreign Service Grievance Board                   22, IX
Foreign Service Impasse Disputes Panel            22, XIV
Foreign Service Labor Relations Board             22, XIV
Foreign-Trade Zones Board                         15, IV
Forest Service                                    36, II
General Accounting Office                         4, I, II
General Services Administration                   5, LVII
  Contract Appeals, Board of                      48, 61
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 5
  Federal Property Management Regulations System  41, 101, 105
  Federal Travel Regulation System                41, Subtitle F
  Payment From a Non-Federal Source for Travel    41, 304
       Expenses
  Payment of Expenses Connected With the Death    41, 303
       of Certain Employees
  Relocation Allowances                           41, 302
  Travel Allowances                               41, 301

[[Page 741]]

Geological Survey                                 30, IV
Government Ethics, Office of                      5, XVI
Government National Mortgage Association          24, III
Grain Inspection, Packers and Stockyards          7, VIII; 9, II
     Administration
Great Lakes Pilotage                              46, III
Harry S. Truman Scholarship Foundation            45, XVIII
Health and Human Services, Department of          5, XLV; 45, Subtitle A
  Child Support Enforcement, Office of            45, III
  Children and Families, Administration for       45, II, III, IV, X
  Community Services, Office of                   45, X
  Family Assistance, Office of                    45, II
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 3
  Food and Drug Administration                    21, I
  Health Care Financing Administration            42, IV
  Human Development Services, Office of           45, XIII
  Indian Health Service                           25, V
  Inspector General (Health Care), Office of      42, V
  Public Health Service                           42, I
  Refugee Resettlement, Office of                 45, IV
Health Care Financing Administration              42, IV
Housing and Urban Development, Department of      5, LXV; 24, Subtitle B
  Community Planning and Development, Office of   24, V, VI
       Assistant Secretary for
  Equal Opportunity, Office of Assistant          24, I
       Secretary for
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 24
  Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight, Office    12, XVII
       of
  Government National Mortgage Association        24, III
  Housing--Federal Housing Commissioner, Office   24, II, VIII, X, XX
       of Assistant Secretary for
  Inspector General, Office of                    24, XII
  Public and Indian Housing, Office of Assistant  24, IX
       Secretary for
  Secretary, Office of                            24, Subtitle A, VII
Housing--Federal Housing Commissioner, Office of  24, II, VIII, X, XX
     Assistant Secretary for
Human Development Services, Office of             45, XIII
Immigration and Naturalization Service            8, I
Independent Counsel, Office of                    28, VII
Indian Affairs, Bureau of                         25, I, V
Indian Affairs, Office of the Assistant           25, VI
     Secretary
Indian Arts and Crafts Board                      25, II
Indian Health Service                             25, V
Information Agency, United States                 22, V
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 19
Information Resources Management, Office of       7, XXVII
Information Security Oversight Office, National   32, XX
     Archives and Records Administration
Inspector General
  Agriculture Department                          7, XXVI
  Health and Human Services Department            42, V
  Housing and Urban Development Department        24, XII
Institute of Peace, United States                 22, XVII
Inter-American Foundation                         5, LXIII; 22, X
Intergovernmental Relations, Advisory Commission  5, VII
     on
Interior Department
  Endangered Species Committee                    50, IV
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 14
  Federal Property Management Regulations System  41, 114
  Fish and Wildlife Service, United States        50, I, IV
  Geological Survey                               30, IV
  Indian Affairs, Bureau of                       25, I, V
  Indian Affairs, Office of the Assistant         25, VI
       Secretary
  Indian Arts and Crafts Board                    25, II
  Land Management, Bureau of                      43, II
  Minerals Management Service                     30, II
  Mines, Bureau of                                30, VI
  National Indian Gaming Commission               25, III
  National Park Service                           36, I
  Reclamation, Bureau of                          43, I

[[Page 742]]

  Secretary of the Interior, Office of            43, Subtitle A
  Surface Mining and Reclamation Appeals, Board   30, III
       of
  Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement,     30, VII
       Office of
Internal Revenue Service                          26, I
International Boundary and Water Commission,      22, XI
     United States and Mexico, United States 
     Section
International Development, Agency for             22, II
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 7
International Development Cooperation Agency,     22, XII
     United States
  International Development, Agency for           22, II; 48, 7
  Overseas Private Investment Corporation         5, XXXIII; 22, VII
International Fishing and Related Activities      50, III
International Investment, Office of               31, VIII
International Joint Commission, United States     22, IV
     and Canada
International Organizations Employees Loyalty     5, V
     Board
International Trade Administration                15, III; 19, III
International Trade Commission, United States     19, II
Interstate Commerce Commission                    5, XL
James Madison Memorial Fellowship Foundation      45, XXIV
Japan-United States Friendship Commission         22, XVI
Joint Board for the Enrollment of Actuaries       20, VIII
Justice Department                                5, XXVIII; 28, I
  Drug Enforcement Administration                 21, II
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 28
  Federal Claims Collection Standards             4, II
  Federal Prison Industries, Inc.                 28, III
  Foreign Claims Settlement Commission of the     45, V
       United States
  Immigration and Naturalization Service          8, I
  Offices of Independent Counsel                  28, VI
  Prisons, Bureau of                              28, V
  Property Management Regulations                 41, 128
Labor Department                                  5, XLII
  Benefits Review Board                           20, VII
  Employees' Compensation Appeals Board           20, IV
  Employment and Training Administration          20, V
  Employment Standards Administration             20, VI
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 29
  Federal Contract Compliance Programs, Office    41, 60
       of
  Federal Procurement Regulations System          41, 50
  Labor-Management Relations and Cooperative      29, II
       Programs, Bureau of
  Labor-Management Programs, Office of            29, IV
  Mine Safety and Health Administration           30, I
  Occupational Safety and Health Administration   29, XVII
  Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration     29, XXV
  Public Contracts                                41, 50
  Secretary of Labor, Office of                   29, Subtitle A
  Veterans' Employment and Training, Office of    41, 61; 20, IX
       the Assistant Secretary for
  Wage and Hour Division                          29, V
  Workers' Compensation Programs, Office of       20, I
Labor-Management Relations and Cooperative        29, II
     Programs, Bureau of
Labor-Management Programs, Office of              29, IV
Land Management, Bureau of                        43, II
Legal Services Corporation                        45, XVI
Library of Congress                               36, VII
  Copyright Office                                37, II
Management and Budget, Office of                  5, III, LXXVII; 48, 99
Marine Mammal Commission                          50, V
Maritime Administration                           46, II
Merit Systems Protection Board                    5, II
Micronesian Status Negotiations, Office for       32, XXVII
Mine Safety and Health Administration             30, I
Minerals Management Service                       30, II
Mines, Bureau of                                  30, VI

[[Page 743]]

Minority Business Development Agency              15, XIV
Miscellaneous Agencies                            1, IV
Monetary Offices                                  31, I
National Aeronautics and Space Administration     5, LIX; 14, V
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 18
National Agricultural Library                     7, XLI
National Agricultural Statistics Service          7, XXXVI
National Archives and Records Administration      5, LXVI; 36, XII
  Information Security Oversight Office           32, XX
National Bureau of Standards                      15, II
National Capital Planning Commission              1, IV
National Commission for Employment Policy         1, IV
National Commission on Libraries and Information  45, XVII
     Science
National and Community Service, Corporation for   45, XXV
National Council on Disability                    34, XII
National Credit Union Administration              12, VII
National Drug Control Policy, Office of           21, III
National Foundation on the Arts and the           45, XI
     Humanities
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration    23, II, III; 49, V
National Indian Gaming Commission                 25, III
National Institute for Literacy                   34, XI
National Institute of Standards and Technology    15, II
National Labor Relations Board                    29, I
National Marine Fisheries Service                 50, II, IV
National Mediation Board                          29, X
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration   15, IX; 50, II, III, IV, 
                                                  VI
National Park Service                             36, I
National Railroad Adjustment Board                29, III
National Railroad Passenger Corporation (AMTRAK)  49, VII
National Science Foundation                       5, XLIII; 45, VI
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 25
National Security Council                         32, XXI
National Security Council and Office of Science   47, II
     and Technology Policy
National Telecommunications and Information       15, XXIII; 47, III
     Administration
National Transportation Safety Board              49, VIII
National Weather Service                          15, IX
Natural Resources Conservation Service            7, VI
Navajo and Hopi Indian Relocation, Office of      25, IV
Navy Department                                   32, VI
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 52
Neighborhood Reinvestment Corporation             24, XXV
Nuclear Regulatory Commission                     5, XLVIII; 10, I
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 20
Occupational Safety and Health Administration     29, XVII
Occupational Safety and Health Review Commission  29, XX
Offices of Independent Counsel                    28, VI
Operations Office                                 7, XXVIII
Overseas Private Investment Corporation           5, XXXIII; 22, VII
Panama Canal Commission                           48, 35
Panama Canal Regulations                          35, I
Patent and Trademark Office                       37, I
Payment From a Non-Federal Source for Travel      41, 304
     Expenses
Payment of Expenses Connected With the Death of   41, 303
     Certain Employees
Peace Corps                                       22, III
Pennsylvania Avenue Development Corporation       36, IX
Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration       29, XXV
Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation              29, XL
Personnel Management, Office of                   5, I, XXXV; 45, VIII
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 17
  Federal Employees Group Life Insurance Federal  48, 21
       Acquisition Regulation
  Federal Employees Health Benefits Acquisition   48, 16
       Regulation
Postal Rate Commission                            5, XLVI; 39, III
Postal Service, United States                     5, LX; 39, I
Postsecondary Education, Office of                34, VI

[[Page 744]]

President's Commission on White House             1, IV
     Fellowships
Presidential Commission on the Assignment of      32, XXIX
     Women in the Armed Forces
Presidential Documents                            3
Prisons, Bureau of                                28, V
Productivity, Technology and Innovation,          37, IV
     Assistant Secretary
Public Contracts, Department of Labor             41, 50
Public and Indian Housing, Office of Assistant    24, IX
     Secretary for
Public Health Service                             42, I
Railroad Retirement Board                         20, II
Reclamation, Bureau of                            43, I
Refugee Resettlement, Office of                   45, IV
Regional Action Planning Commissions              13, V
Relocation Allowances                             41, 302
Research and Special Programs Administration      49, I
Rural Business-Cooperative Service                7, XVIII, XLII
Rural Development Administration                  7, XLII
Rural Housing Service                             7, XVIII, XXXV
Rural Telephone Bank                              7, XVI
Rural Utilities Service                           7, XVII, XVIII, XLII
Saint Lawrence Seaway Development Corporation     33, IV
Science and Technology Policy, Office of          32, XXIV
Science and Technology Policy, Office of, and     47, II
     National Security Council
Secret Service                                    31, IV
Securities and Exchange Commission                17, II
Selective Service System                          32, XVI
Small Business Administration                     13, I
Smithsonian Institution                           36, V
Social Security Administration                    20, III; 48, 23
Soldiers' and Airmen's Home, United States        5, XI
Special Counsel, Office of                        5, VIII
Special Education and Rehabilitative Services,    34, III
     Office of
Special Trustee for American Indians, Office of   25, VII
State Department                                  22, I
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 6
Surface Mining and Reclamation Appeals, Board of  30, III
Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement,       30, VII
     Office of
Surface Transportation Board                      49, X
Susquehanna River Basin Commission                18, VIII
Technology Administration                         15, XI
Technology Policy, Assistant Secretary for        37, IV
Technology, Under Secretary for                   37, V
Tennessee Valley Authority                        5, LXIX; 18, XIII
Thrift Depositor Protection Oversight Board       12, XV
Thrift Supervision Office, Department of the      12, V
     Treasury
Trade Representative, United States, Office of    15, XX
Transportation, Department of                     5, L
  Coast Guard                                     33, I; 46, I; 49, IV
  Commercial Space Transportation                 14, III
  Contract Appeals, Board of                      48, 63
  Emergency Management and Assistance             44, IV
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 12
  Federal Aviation Administration                 14, I
  Federal Highway Administration                  23, I, II; 49, III
  Federal Railroad Administration                 49, II
  Federal Transit Administration                  49, VI
  Maritime Administration                         46, II
  National Highway Traffic Safety Administration  23, II, III; 49, V
  Research and Special Programs Administration    49, I
  Saint Lawrence Seaway Development Corporation   33, IV
  Secretary of Transportation, Office of          14, II; 49, Subtitle A
  Surface Transportation Board                    49, X
Transportation, Office of                         7, XXXIII
Travel Allowances                                 41, 301
Treasury Department                               5, XXI; 17, IV
  Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, Bureau of        27, I

[[Page 745]]

  Community Development Financial Institutions    12, XVIII
       Fund
  Comptroller of the Currency                     12, I
  Customs Service, United States                  19, I
  Engraving and Printing, Bureau of               31, VI
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 10
  Federal Law Enforcement Training Center         31, VII
  Fiscal Service                                  31, II
  Foreign Assets Control, Office of               31, V
  Internal Revenue Service                        26, I
  International Investment, Office of             31, VIII
  Monetary Offices                                31, I
  Secret Service                                  31, IV
  Secretary of the Treasury, Office of            31, Subtitle A
  Thrift Supervision, Office of                   12, V
Truman, Harry S. Scholarship Foundation           45, XVIII
United States and Canada, International Joint     22, IV
     Commission
United States and Mexico, International Boundary  22, XI
     and Water Commission, United States Section
United States Enrichment Corporation              10, XI
Utah Reclamation Mitigation and Conservation      43, III
     Commission
Veterans Affairs Department                       38, I
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 8
Veterans' Employment and Training, Office of the  41, 61; 20, IX
     Assistant Secretary for
Vice President of the United States, Office of    32, XXVIII
Vocational and Adult Education, Office of         34, IV
Wage and Hour Division                            29, V
Water Resources Council                           18, VI
Workers' Compensation Programs, Office of         20, I
World Agricultural Outlook Board                  7, XXXVIII

[[Page 747]]

                                     

                                     


<R03>
                   Table of OMB Control NumbersSecs. 

<R04>

     PART 602--OMB CONTROL NUMBERS UNDER THE PAPERWORK REDUCTION ACT

Sec. 602.101  OMB Control numbers.

    (a) Purpose. This part collects and displays the control numbers 
assigned to collections of information in Internal Revenue Service 
regulations by the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) under the 
Paperwork Reduction Act of 1980. The Internal Revenue Service intends 
that this part (together with 26 CFR 601.9000) comply with the 
requirements of Secs. 1320.7(f), 1320.12, 1320.13, and 1320.14 of 5 CFR 
part 1320 (OMB regulations implementing the Paperwork Reduction Act), 
for the display of control numbers assigned by OMB to collections of 
information in Internal Revenue Service regulations. This part does not 
display control numbers assigned by the Office of Management and Budget 
to collections of information of the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and 
Firearms.
    (b) Cross-reference. For display of control numbers assigned by the 
Office of Management and Budget to Internal Revenue Service collections 
of information in the Statement of Procedural Rules (26 CFR part 601), 
see 26 CFR 601.9000.
    (c) Display.


------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                             Current OMB
     CFR part or section where identified and described      control No.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1.23-5.....................................................    1545-0074
1.25-1T....................................................    1545-0922
                                                               1545-0930
1.25-2T....................................................    1545-0922
                                                               1545-0930
1.25-3T....................................................    1545-0922
                                                               1545-0930
1.25-4T....................................................    1545-0922
1.25-5T....................................................    1545-0922
1.25-6T....................................................    1545-0922
1.25-7T....................................................    1545-0922
1.25-8T....................................................    1545-0922
1.28-1.....................................................    1545-0619
1.31-2.....................................................    1545-0074
1.32-2.....................................................    1545-0074
1.37-1.....................................................    1545-0074
1.37-3.....................................................    1545-0074
1.41-2.....................................................    1545-0619
1.41-3.....................................................    1545-0619
1.41-4A....................................................    1545-0074
1.41-4 (b) and (c).........................................    1545-0074
1.41-8(d)..................................................    1545-0732
1.41-9.....................................................    1545-0619
1.42-1T....................................................    1545-0984
                                                               1545-0988
1.42-2.....................................................    1545-1005
1.42-5.....................................................    1545-1291
1.42-6.....................................................    1545-1102
1.42-8.....................................................    1545-1102
1.42-10....................................................    1545-1102
1.42-13....................................................    1545-1357
1.42-14....................................................    1545-1423
1.43-3(a)(3)...............................................    1545-1292
1.43-3(b)(3)...............................................    1545-1292
1.44A-1....................................................    1545-0068
1.44A-3....................................................    1545-0074
1.44B-1....................................................    1545-0219
1.458-1....................................................    1545-0879
1.458-2....................................................    1545-0152
1.46-1.....................................................    1545-0123
                                                               1545-0155
1.46-3.....................................................    1545-0155
1.46-4.....................................................    1545-0155
1.46-5.....................................................    1545-0155
1.46-6.....................................................    1545-0155
1.46-8.....................................................    1545-0155
1.46-9.....................................................    1545-0155
1.46-10....................................................    1545-0118
1.46-11....................................................    1545-0155
1.47-1.....................................................    1545-0166
                                                               1545-0155
1.47-3.....................................................    1545-0166
                                                               1545-0155
1.47-4.....................................................    1545-0123
1.47-5.....................................................    1545-0092
1.47-6.....................................................    1545-0099
1.48-3.....................................................    1545-0155
1.48-4.....................................................    1545-0808
                                                               1545-0155
1.48-5.....................................................    1545-0155
1.48-6.....................................................    1545-0155
1.48-12....................................................    1545-0155
1.50A-1....................................................    1545-0895
1.50A-2....................................................    1545-0895
1.50A-3....................................................    1545-0895
1.50A-4....................................................    1545-0895
1.50A-5....................................................    1545-0895

[[Page 748]]

                                                                        
1.50A-6....................................................    1545-0895
1.50A-7....................................................    1545-0895
1.50B-1....................................................    1545-0895
1.50B-2....................................................    1545-0895
1.50B-3....................................................    1545-0895
1.50B-4....................................................    1545-0895
1.50B-5....................................................    1545-0895
1.51-1.....................................................    1545-0219
                                                               1545-0241
                                                               1545-0244
                                                               1545-0797
1.52-2.....................................................    1545-0219
1.52-3.....................................................    1545-0219
1.56-1.....................................................    1545-0123
1.56(g)-1..................................................    1545-1233
1.56A-1....................................................    1545-0227
1.56A-2....................................................    1545-0227
1.56A-3....................................................    1545-0227
1.56A-4....................................................    1545-0227
1.56A-5....................................................    1545-0227
1.57-5.....................................................    1545-0227
1.58-1.....................................................    1545-0175
1.58-9(c)(5)(iii)(B).......................................    1545-1093
1.58-9(e)(3)...............................................    1545-1093
1.61-2.....................................................    1545-0771
1.61-2T....................................................    1545-0771
1.61-4.....................................................    1545-0187
1.61-15....................................................    1545-0074
1.62-2.....................................................    1545-1148
1.63-1.....................................................    1545-0074
1.67-2T....................................................    1545-0110
1.67-3T....................................................    1545-0118
1.67-3.....................................................    1545-1018
1.71-1T....................................................    1545-0074
1.72-4.....................................................    1545-0074
1.72-6.....................................................    1545-0074
1.72-9.....................................................    1545-0074
1.72-17....................................................    1545-0074
1.72-17A...................................................    1545-0074
1.72-18....................................................    1545-0074
1.74-1.....................................................    1545-1100
1.79-2.....................................................    1545-0074
1.79-3.....................................................    1545-0074
1.83-2.....................................................    1545-0074
1.83-5.....................................................    1545-0074
1.83-6.....................................................    1545-1448
1.103-10...................................................    1545-0123
                                                               1545-0940
1.103-15AT.................................................    1545-0720
1.103-18...................................................    1545-1226
1.103(n)-2T................................................    1545-0874
1.103(n)-4T................................................    1545-0874
1.103A-2...................................................    1545-0720
1.105-4....................................................    1545-0074
1.105-5....................................................    1545-0074
1.105-6....................................................    1545-0074
1.108(a)-1.................................................    1545-0046
1.108(a)-2.................................................    1545-0046
1.108(c)-1.................................................    1545-1421
1.117-5....................................................    1545-0869
1.119-1....................................................    1545-0067
1.120-3....................................................    1545-0057
1.121-1....................................................    1545-0072
1.121-2....................................................    1545-0072
1.121-3....................................................    1545-0072
1.121-4....................................................    1545-0072
                                                               1545-0091
1.121-5....................................................    1545-0072
1.127-2....................................................    1545-0768
1.132-1T...................................................    1545-0771
1.132-2....................................................    1545-0771
1.132-2T...................................................    1545-0771
1.132-5....................................................    1545-0771
1.132-5T...................................................    1545-0771
                                                               1545-1098
1.141-1....................................................    1545-1451
1.141-12...................................................    1545-1451
1.142-2....................................................    1545-1451
1.148-0....................................................    1545-1098
1.148-1....................................................    1545-1098
1.148-2....................................................    1545-1098
                                                               1545-1347
1.148-3....................................................    1545-1098
                                                               1545-1347
1.148-4....................................................    1545-1098
                                                               1545-1347
1.148-5....................................................    1545-1098
1.148-6....................................................    1545-1098
                                                               1545-1451
1.148-7....................................................    1545-1098
1.148-7....................................................    1545-1347
1.148-8....................................................    1545-1098
1.148-11...................................................    1545-1098
1.148-11...................................................    1545-1347
1.149(e)-1.................................................    1545-0720
1.151-1....................................................    1545-0074
1.152-3....................................................    1545-0071
1.152-4....................................................    1545-0074
1.152-4T...................................................    1545-0074
1.162-1....................................................    1545-0139
1.162-2....................................................    1545-0139
1.162-3....................................................    1545-0139
1.162-4....................................................    1545-0139
1.162-5....................................................    1545-0139
1.162-6....................................................    1545-0139
1.162-7....................................................    1545-0139
1.162-8....................................................    1545-0139
1.162-9....................................................    1545-0139
1.162-10...................................................    1545-0139
1.162-11...................................................    1545-0139
1.162-12...................................................    1545-0139
1.162-13...................................................    1545-0139
1.162-14...................................................    1545-0139
1.162-15...................................................    1545-0139
1.162-16...................................................    1545-0139
1.162-17...................................................    1545-0139
1.162-18...................................................    1545-0139
1.162-19...................................................    1545-0139
1.162-20...................................................    1545-0139
1.162-27...................................................    1545-1466
1.163-5....................................................    1545-0786
                                                               1545-1132
1.163-8T...................................................    1545-0995
1.163-10T..................................................    1545-0074
1.163(d)-1.................................................    1545-1421
1.165-1....................................................    1545-0177
1.165-2....................................................    1545-0177
1.165-3....................................................    1545-0177
1.165-4....................................................    1545-0177
1.165-5....................................................    1545-0177
1.165-6....................................................    1545-0177
1.165-7....................................................    1545-0177
1.165-8....................................................    1545-0177
1.165-9....................................................    1545-0177
1.165-10...................................................    1545-0177
1.165-11...................................................    1545-0074
                                                               1545-0177
                                                               1545-0786
1.165-12...................................................    1545-0786
1.166-1....................................................    1545-0123
1.166-2....................................................    1545-1254
1.166-4....................................................    1545-0123
1.166-10...................................................    1545-0123
1.167(a)-5T................................................    1545-1021

[[Page 749]]

                                                                        
1.167(a)-7.................................................    1545-0172
1.167(a)-11................................................    1545-0152
                                                               1545-0172
1.167(a)-12................................................    1545-0172
1.167(d)-1.................................................    1545-0172
1.167(e)-1.................................................    1545-0172
1.167(f)-11................................................    1545-0172
1.167(l)-1.................................................    1545-0172
1.168(d)-1.................................................    1545-1146
1.168(f)(8)-1T.............................................    1545-0923
1.168(i)-1.................................................    1545-1331
1.168-5....................................................    1545-0172
1.169-4....................................................    1545-0172
1.170-1....................................................    1545-0074
1.170-2....................................................    1545-0074
1.170-3....................................................    1545-0123
1.170A-1...................................................    1545-0074
1.170A-2...................................................    1545-0074
1.170A-4(A)(b).............................................    1545-0123
1.170A-8...................................................    1545-0074
1.170A-9...................................................    1545-0052
                                                               1545-0074
1.170A-11..................................................    1545-0123
                                                               1545-0074
1.170A-12..................................................    1545-0020
                                                               1545-0074
1.170A-13..................................................    1545-0074
                                                               1545-0754
                                                               1545-0908
                                                               1545-1431
1.170A-13(f)...............................................    1545-1464
1.170A-14..................................................    1545-0763
1.171-3....................................................    1545-0172
1.172-1....................................................    1545-0172
1.172-13...................................................    1545-0863
1.173-1....................................................    1545-0172
1.174-3....................................................    1545-0152
1.174-4....................................................    1545-0152
1.175-3....................................................    1545-0187
1.175-6....................................................    1545-0152
1.177-1....................................................    1545-0172
1.179-2....................................................    1545-1201
1.179-3....................................................    1545-1201
1.179-5....................................................    1545-0172
1.180-2....................................................    1545-0074
1.182-6....................................................    1545-0074
1.183-1....................................................    1545-0195
1.183-2....................................................    1545-0195
1.183-3....................................................    1545-0195
1.183-4....................................................    1545-0195
1.190-3....................................................    1545-0074
1.194-2....................................................    1545-0735
1.194-4....................................................    1545-0735
1.197-1T...................................................    1545-1425
1.213-1....................................................    1545-0074
1.215-1T...................................................    1545-0074
1.217-2....................................................    1545-0182
1.243-3....................................................    1545-0123
1.243-4....................................................    1545-0123
1.243-5....................................................    1545-0123
1.248-1....................................................    1545-0172
1.261-1....................................................    1545-1041
1.263(e)-1.................................................    1545-0123
1.263A-1...................................................    1545-0987
1.263A-1T..................................................    1545-0187
1.263A-2...................................................    1545-0987
1.263A-3...................................................    1545-0987
                                                               1545-0987
1.263A-8(b)(2)(iii)........................................    1545-1265
1.263A-9(d)(1).............................................    1545-1265
1.263A-9(f)(1)(ii).........................................    1545-1265
1.263A-9(f)(2)(iv).........................................    1545-1265
1.263A-9(g)(2)(iv)(C)......................................    1545-1265
1.263A-9(g)(3)(iv).........................................    1545-1265
1.265-1....................................................    1545-0074
1.265-2....................................................    1545-0123
1.266-1....................................................    1545-0123
1.267(f)-1.................................................    1545-0885
1.268-1....................................................    1545-0184
1.274-1....................................................    1545-0139
1.274-2....................................................    1545-0139
1.274-3....................................................    1545-0139
1.274-4....................................................    1545-0139
1.274-5A...................................................    1545-0139
                                                               1545-0771
1.274-5T...................................................    1545-0074
                                                               1545-0172
                                                               1545-0771
1.274-6....................................................    1545-0139
                                                               1545-0771
1.274-6T...................................................    1545-0074
                                                               1545-0771
1.274-7....................................................    1545-0139
1.274-8....................................................    1545-0139
1.279-6....................................................    1545-0123
1.280C-4...................................................    1545-1155
1.280F-3T..................................................    1545-0074
1.281-4....................................................    1545-0123
1.302-4....................................................    1545-0074
1.305-3....................................................    1545-0123
1.305-5....................................................    1545-1438
1.307-2....................................................    1545-0074
1.312-15...................................................    1545-0172
1.316-1....................................................    1545-0123
1.331-1....................................................    1545-0074
1.332-4....................................................    1545-0123
1.332-6....................................................    1545-0123
1.337(d)-1.................................................    1545-1160
1.337(d)-2.................................................    1545-1160
1.338-1....................................................    1545-1295
1.338(b)-1.................................................    1545-1295
1.338(h)(10)-1.............................................    1545-1295
1.341-7....................................................    1545-0123
1.351-3....................................................    1545-0074
1.355-5....................................................    1545-0123
1.362-2....................................................    1545-0123
1.367(a)-1T................................................    1545-0026
1.367(a)-2T................................................    1545-0026
1.367(a)-3.................................................    1545-0026
                                                               1545-1478
1.367(a)-3T................................................    1545-0026
1.367(a)-6T................................................    1545-0026
1.367(d)-1T................................................    1545-0026
1.367(e)-1T................................................    1545-1487
1.367(e)-2T................................................    1545-1124
1.368-3....................................................    1545-0123
1.371-1....................................................    1545-0123
1.371-2....................................................    1545-0123
1.374-3....................................................    1545-0123
1.381(b)-1.................................................    1545-0123
1.381(c)(4)-1..............................................    1545-0123
                                                               1545-0152
                                                               1545-0879
1.381(c)(5)-1..............................................    1545-0123
                                                               1545-0152
1.381(c)(6)-1..............................................    1545-0123
                                                               1545-0152
1.381(c)(8)-1..............................................    1545-0123
1.381(c)(10)-1.............................................    1545-0123
1.381(c)(11)-1(k)..........................................    1545-0123
1.381(c)(13)-1.............................................    1545-0123
1.381(c)(17)-1.............................................    1545-0045
1.381(c)(25)-1.............................................    1545-0045
1.382-1T...................................................    1545-0123

[[Page 750]]

                                                                        
1.382-2....................................................    1545-0123
1.382-2T...................................................    1545-0123
1.382-3....................................................    1545-1281
                                                               1545-1345
1.382-4....................................................    1545-1120
1.382-6....................................................    1545-1381
1.382-8T...................................................    1545-1437
1.382-9....................................................    1545-1260
                                                               1545-1120
                                                               1545-1275
                                                               1545-1324
1.382-91...................................................    1545-1260
                                                               1545-1324
1.383-1....................................................    1545-0074
                                                               1545-1120
1.401(a)-11................................................    1545-0710
1.401(a)-20................................................    1545-0928
1.401(a)-31................................................    1545-1341
1.401(a)-50................................................    1545-0710
1.401(a)(31)-1.............................................    1545-1341
1.401(b)-1.................................................    1545-0197
1.401(f)-1.................................................    1545-0710
1.401(k)-1.................................................    1545-1039
                                                               1545-1069
1.401-1....................................................    1545-0020
                                                               1545-0197
                                                               1545-0200
                                                               1545-0534
                                                               1545-0710
1.401-12(n)................................................    1545-0806
1.401-14...................................................    1545-0710
1.402(c)-2.................................................    1545-1341
1.402(f)-1.................................................    1545-1341
1.403(b)-1.................................................    1545-0710
1.403(b)-2.................................................    1545-1341
1.404(a)-4.................................................    1545-0710
1.404(a)-12................................................    1545-0710
1.404A-2...................................................    1545-0123
1.404A-6...................................................    1545-0123
1.408-2....................................................    1545-0390
1.408-5....................................................    1545-0747
1.408-6....................................................    1545-0203
                                                               1545-0390
1.408-7....................................................    1545-0119
1.410(a)-2.................................................    1545-0710
1.410(d)-1.................................................    1545-0710
1.411(a)-11T...............................................    1545-1471
1.411(d)-6T................................................    1545-1477
1.412(b)-5.................................................    1545-0710
1.412(c)(1)-2..............................................    1545-0710
1.412(c)(2)-1..............................................    1545-0710
1.412(c)(3)-2..............................................    1545-0710
1.414(c)-5.................................................    1545-0797
1.414(r)-1.................................................    1545-1221
1.415-2....................................................    1545-0710
1.415-6....................................................    1545-0710
1.417(e)-1T................................................    1545-1471
1.441-3T...................................................    1545-0134
1.442-1....................................................    1545-0074
                                                               1545-0123
                                                               1545-0134
                                                               1545-0152
1.442-2T...................................................    1545-0134
1.442-3T...................................................    1545-0134
1.443-1....................................................    1545-0123
1.444-3T...................................................    1545-1036
1.446-1....................................................    1545-0074
                                                               1545-0152
1.446-4(d).................................................    1545-1412
1.448-1(g).................................................    1545-0152
1.448-1(h).................................................    1545-0152
1.448-1(i).................................................    1545-0152
1.448-2T...................................................    1545-0152
1.451-1....................................................    1545-0091
1.451-3....................................................    1545-0152
                                                               1545-0736
1.451-4....................................................    1545-0123
1.451-5....................................................    1545-0074
1.451-6....................................................    1545-0074
1.451-7....................................................    1545-0074
1.453-1....................................................    1545-0152
1.453-2....................................................    1545-0152
1.453-8....................................................    1545-0152
                                                               1545-0228
1.453-10...................................................    1545-0152
1.453A-1...................................................    1545-0152
                                                               1545-1134
1.453A-2...................................................    1545-0152
                                                               1545-1134
1.453A-3...................................................    1545-0963
1.454-1....................................................    1545-0074
1.455-2....................................................    1545-0152
1.455-6....................................................    1545-0123
1.456-2....................................................    1545-0123
1.456-6....................................................    1545-0123
1.456-7....................................................    1545-0123
1.458-1....................................................    1545-0879
1.458-2....................................................    1545-0152
1.460-6....................................................    1545-1031
1.461-1....................................................    1545-0074
1.461-2....................................................    1545-0096
1.461-4....................................................    1545-0917
1.461-5....................................................    1545-0917
1.463-1T...................................................    1545-0916
1.465-1T...................................................    1545-0712
1.466-1T...................................................    1545-0152
1.466-4....................................................    1545-0152
1.468A-3...................................................    1545-1269
                                                               1545-1378
1.468A-4...................................................    1545-0954
1.468A-7...................................................    1545-0954
1.468A-8...................................................    1545-1269
1.468B-1(j)................................................    1545-1299
1.468B-2(k)................................................    1545-1299
1.468B-2(l)................................................    1545-1299
1.468B-3(b)................................................    1545-1299
1.468B-3(e)................................................    1545-1299
1.468B-5(b)................................................    1545-1299
1.469-1....................................................    1545-1008
1.469-2T...................................................    1545-0712
                                                               1545-1091
1.469-4T...................................................    1545-0985
                                                               1545-1037
1.471-2....................................................    1545-0123
1.471-5....................................................    1545-0123
1.471-6....................................................    1545-0123
1.471-8....................................................    1545-0123
1.471-11...................................................    1545-0123
                                                               1545-0152
1.472-1....................................................    1545-0042
                                                               1545-0152
1.472-2....................................................    1545-0152
1.472-3....................................................    1545-0042
1.472-5....................................................    1545-0152
1.472-8....................................................    1545-0028
                                                               1545-0042
1.475(b)-4.................................................    1545-1496
1.481-4....................................................    1545-0152
1.481-5....................................................    1545-0152
1.482-1....................................................    1545-1364
1.482-4....................................................    1545-1364
1.482-7....................................................    1545-1364
1.501(a)-1.................................................    1545-0056
                                                               1545-0057

[[Page 751]]

                                                                        
1.501(c)(3)-1..............................................    1545-0056
1.501(c)(9)-5..............................................    1545-0047
1.501(c)(17)-3.............................................    1545-0047
1.501(e)-1.................................................    1545-0814
1.503(c)-1.................................................    1545-0047
                                                               1545-0052
1.505(c)-1T................................................    1545-0916
1.507-1....................................................    1545-0052
1.507-2....................................................    1545-0052
1.508-1....................................................    1545-0052
                                                               1545-0056
1.509(a)-3.................................................    1545-0047
1.509(a)-5.................................................    1545-0047
1.509(c)-1.................................................    1545-0052
1.512(a)-1.................................................    1545-0687
1.512(a)-4.................................................    1545-0047
                                                               1545-0687
1.521-1....................................................    1545-0051
                                                               1545-0058
1.527-2....................................................    1545-0129
1.527-5....................................................    1545-0129
1.527-6....................................................    1545-0129
1.527-9....................................................    1545-0129
1.528-8....................................................    1545-0127
1.533-2....................................................    1545-0123
1.534-2....................................................    1545-0123
1.542-3....................................................    1545-0123
1.545-2....................................................    1545-0123
1.545-3....................................................    1545-0123
1.547-2....................................................    1545-0045
                                                               1545-0123
1.547-3....................................................    1545-0123
1.551-4....................................................    1545-0074
1.552-3....................................................    1545-0099
1.552-4....................................................    1545-0099
1.552-5....................................................    1545-0099
1.556-2....................................................    1545-0704
1.561-1....................................................    1545-0044
1.561-2....................................................    1545-0123
1.562-3....................................................    1545-0123
1.563-2....................................................    1545-0123
1.564-1....................................................    1545-0123
1.565-1....................................................    1545-0043
                                                               1545-0123
1.565-2....................................................    1545-0043
1.565-3....................................................    1545-0043
1.565-5....................................................    1545-0043
1.565-6....................................................    1545-0043
1.585-1....................................................    1545-0123
1.585-3....................................................    1545-0123
1.585-8....................................................    1545-1290
1.586-2....................................................    1545-0123
1.593-1....................................................    1545-0123
1.593-6....................................................    1545-0123
1.593-6A...................................................    1545-0123
1.593-7....................................................    1545-0123
1.595-1....................................................    1545-0123
1.597-2....................................................    1545-1300
1.597-4....................................................    1545-1300
1.597-6....................................................    1545-1300
1.597-7....................................................    1545-1300
1.611-2....................................................    1545-0099
1.611-3....................................................    1545-0007
                                                               1545-0099
1.612-4....................................................    1545-0074
1.612-5....................................................    1545-0099
1.613-3....................................................    1545-0099
1.613-4....................................................    1545-0099
1.613-6....................................................    1545-0099
1.613-7....................................................    1545-0099
1.613A-3...................................................    1545-0919
1.613A-3(e)................................................    1545-1251
1.613A-3(l)................................................    1545-0919
1.613A-5...................................................    1545-0099
1.613A-6...................................................    1545-0099
1.614-2....................................................    1545-0099
1.614-3....................................................    1545-0099
1.614-5....................................................    1545-0099
1.614-6....................................................    1545-0099
1.614-8....................................................    1545-0099
1.617-1....................................................    1545-0099
1.617-3....................................................    1545-0099
1.617-4....................................................    1545-0099
1.631-1....................................................    1545-0007
1.631-2....................................................    1545-0007
1.641(b)-2.................................................    1545-0092
1.642(c)-1.................................................    1545-0092
1.642(c)-2.................................................    1545-0092
1.642(c)-5.................................................    1545-0074
1.642(c)-6.................................................    1545-0020
                                                               1545-0074
                                                               1545-0092
1.642(g)-1.................................................    1545-0092
1.642(i)-1.................................................    1545-0092
1.663(b)-2.................................................    1545-0092
1.664-1....................................................    1545-0196
1.664-2....................................................    1545-0196
1.664-3....................................................    1545-0196
1.664-4....................................................    1545-0020
                                                               1545-0196
1.665(a)-0A through                                                     
1.665(g)-2A................................................    1545-0192
1.666(d)-1A................................................    1545-0092
1.671-4....................................................    1545-1442
1.701-1....................................................    1545-0099
1.702-1....................................................    1545-0074
1.703-1....................................................    1545-0099
1.704-2....................................................    1545-1090
1.706-1....................................................    1545-0099
                                                               1545-0074
                                                               1545-0134
1.706-1T...................................................    1545-0099
1.707-3(c)(2)..............................................    1545-1243
1.707-5(a)(7)(ii)..........................................    1545-1243
1.707-6(c).................................................    1545-1243
1.707-8....................................................    1545-1243
1.708-1....................................................    1545-0099
1.732-1....................................................    1545-0099
1.736-1....................................................    1545-0074
1.743-1....................................................    1545-0074
1.751-1....................................................    1545-0074
                                                               1545-0099
                                                               1545-0941
1.752-5....................................................    1545-1090
1.754-1....................................................    1545-0099
1.755-1....................................................    1545-0099
1.755-2T...................................................    1545-1021
1.761-2....................................................    1545-1338
1.801-1....................................................    1545-0123
                                                               1545-0128
1.801-3....................................................    1545-0123
1.801-5....................................................    1545-0128
1.801-8....................................................    1545-0128
1.804-4....................................................    1545-0128
1.811-2....................................................    1545-0128
1.812-2....................................................    1545-0128
1.815-6....................................................    1545-0128
1.818-4....................................................    1545-0128
1.818-5....................................................    1545-0128
1.818-8....................................................    1545-0128
1.819-2....................................................    1545-0128
1.821-1....................................................    1545-1027
1.821-3....................................................    1545-1027
1.821-4....................................................    1545-1027

[[Page 752]]

                                                                        
1.822-5....................................................    1545-1027
1.822-6....................................................    1545-1027
1.822-8....................................................    1545-1027
1.822-9....................................................    1545-1027
1.823-2....................................................    1545-1027
1.823-5....................................................    1545-1027
1.823-6....................................................    1545-1027
1.825-1....................................................    1545-1027
1.826-1....................................................    1545-1027
1.826-2....................................................    1545-1027
1.826-3....................................................    1545-1027
1.826-4....................................................    1545-1027
1.826-6....................................................    1545-1027
1.831-3....................................................    1545-0123
1.831-4....................................................    1545-0123
1.832-4....................................................    1545-1227
1.832-5....................................................    1545-0123
1.848-2(g)(8)..............................................    1545-1287
1.848-2(h)(3)..............................................    1545-1287
1.848-2(i)(4)..............................................    1545-1287
1.851-2....................................................    1545-1010
1.851-4....................................................    1545-0123
1.852-1....................................................    1545-0123
1.852-4....................................................    1545-0123
                                                               1545-0145
1.852-6....................................................    1545-0123
                                                               1545-0144
1.852-7....................................................    1545-0074
1.852-9....................................................    1545-0074
                                                               1545-0123
                                                               1545-0144
                                                               1545-0145
1.852-11...................................................    1545-1094
1.853-3....................................................    1545-0123
1.853-4....................................................    1545-0123
1.854-2....................................................    1545-0123
1.855-1....................................................    1545-0123
1.856-2....................................................    1545-0123
                                                               1545-1004
1.856-6....................................................    1545-0123
1.856-7....................................................    1545-0123
1.856-8....................................................    1545-0123
1.857-8....................................................    1545-0123
1.857-9....................................................    1545-0074
1.858-1....................................................    1545-0123
1.860-2....................................................    1545-0045
1.860-4....................................................    1545-0045
                                                               1545-1054
                                                               1545-1057
1.860E-2(a)(5).............................................    1545-1276
1.860E-2(a)(7).............................................    1545-1276
1.860E-2(b)(2).............................................    1545-1276
1.861-2....................................................    1545-0089
1.861-3....................................................    1545-0089
1.861-8....................................................    1545-0126
1.861-8(e)(6) and (g)......................................    1545-1224
1.861-9T...................................................    1545-0121
                                                               1545-1072
1.863-1....................................................    1545-1476
1.863-3....................................................    1545-1467
1.863-3A...................................................    1545-0126
1.863-4....................................................    1545-0126
1.863-7....................................................    1545-0132
1.864-4....................................................    1545-0126
1.871-1....................................................    1545-0096
1.871-6....................................................    1545-0795
1.871-7....................................................    1545-0089
1.871-10...................................................    1545-0089
                                                               1545-0165
1.874-1....................................................    1545-0089
1.881-4....................................................    1545-1440
1.882-4....................................................    1545-0126
1.884-0....................................................    1545-1070
1.884-1....................................................    1545-1070
1.884-2....................................................    1545-1070
1.884-2T...................................................    1545-0126
                                                               1545-1070
1.884-4....................................................    1545-1070
1.884-5....................................................    1545-1070
1.892-1T...................................................    1545-1053
1.892-2T...................................................    1545-1053
1.892-3T...................................................    1545-1053
1.892-4T...................................................    1545-1053
1.892-5T...................................................    1545-1053
1.892-6T...................................................    1545-1053
1.892-7T...................................................    1545-1053
1.897-2....................................................    1545-0123
                                                               1545-0902
1.897-3....................................................    1545-0123
1.897-5T...................................................    1545-0902
1.897-6T...................................................    1545-0902
1.901-2....................................................    1545-0746
1.901-2A...................................................    1545-0746
1.901-3....................................................    1545-0122
1.902-1....................................................    1545-0122
                                                               1545-1458
1.904-1....................................................    1545-0121
                                                               1545-0122
1.904-2....................................................    1545-0121
                                                               1545-0122
1.904-3....................................................    1545-0121
1.904-4....................................................    1545-0121
1.904-5....................................................    1545-0121
1.904(f)-1.................................................    1545-0121
                                                               1545-0122
1.904(f)-2.................................................    1545-0121
1.904(f)-3.................................................    1545-0121
1.904(f)-4.................................................    1545-0121
1.904(f)-5.................................................    1545-0121
1.904(f)-6.................................................    1545-0121
1.904(f)-7.................................................    1545-1127
1.905-2....................................................    1545-0122
1.905-3T...................................................    1545-1056
1.905-4T...................................................    1545-1056
1.905-5T...................................................    1545-1056
1.911-1....................................................    1545-0067
                                                               1545-0070
1.911-2....................................................    1545-0067
                                                               1545-0070
1.911-3....................................................    1545-0067
                                                               1545-0070
1.911-4....................................................    1545-0067
                                                               1545-0070
1.911-5....................................................    1545-0067
                                                               1545-0070
1.911-6....................................................    1545-0067
                                                               1545-0070
1.911-7....................................................    1545-0067
                                                               1545-0070
1.913-13...................................................    1545-0067
1.921-1T...................................................    1545-0190
                                                               1545-0884
                                                               1545-0935
                                                               1545-0939
1.921-2....................................................    1545-0884
1.921-3T...................................................    1545-0935
1.923-1T...................................................    1545-0935
1.924(a)-1T................................................    1545-0935
1.925(a)-1T................................................    1545-0935
1.925(b)-1T................................................    1545-0935
1.926(a)-1T................................................    1545-0935
1.927(a)-1T................................................    1545-0935
1.927(b)-1T................................................    1545-0935
1.927(d)-1.................................................    1545-0884

[[Page 753]]

                                                                        
1.927(d)-2T................................................    1545-0935
1.927(e)-1T................................................    1545-0935
1.927(e)-2T................................................    1545-0935
1.927(f)-1.................................................    1545-0884
1.931-1....................................................    1545-0074
                                                               1545-0123
1.934-1....................................................    1545-0782
1.935-1....................................................    1545-0074
                                                               1545-0087
                                                               1545-0803
1.936-1....................................................    1545-0215
                                                               1545-0217
1.936-4....................................................    1545-0215
1.936-5....................................................    1545-0704
1.936-6....................................................    1545-0215
1.936-7....................................................    1545-0215
1.936-10(c)................................................    1545-1138
1.952-2....................................................    1545-0126
1.953-2....................................................    1545-0126
1.954-1....................................................    1545-1068
1.954-2....................................................    1545-1068
1.955-2....................................................    1545-0123
1.955-3....................................................    1545-0123
1.955A-2...................................................    1545-0755
1.955A-3...................................................    1545-0755
1.956-1....................................................    1545-0704
1.956-2....................................................    1545-0704
1.959-1....................................................    1545-0704
1.959-2....................................................    1545-0704
1.960-1....................................................    1545-0122
1.962-2....................................................    1545-0704
1.962-3....................................................    1545-0704
1.962-4....................................................    1545-0704
1.964-1....................................................    1545-0126
                                                               1545-0704
                                                               1545-1072
1.964-3....................................................    1545-0126
1.970-2....................................................    1545-0126
1.985-2....................................................    1545-1051
                                                               1545-1131
1.985-3....................................................    1545-1051
1.988-0....................................................    1545-1131
1.988-1....................................................    1545-1131
1.988-2....................................................    1545-1131
1.988-3....................................................    1545-1131
1.988-4....................................................    1545-1131
1.988-5....................................................    1545-1131
1.992-1....................................................    1545-0190
                                                               1545-0938
1.992-2....................................................    1545-0190
                                                               1545-0884
                                                               1545-0938
1.992-3....................................................    1545-0190
                                                               1545-0938
1.992-4....................................................    1545-0190
                                                               1545-0938
1.993-3....................................................    1545-0938
1.993-4....................................................    1545-0938
1.994-1....................................................    1545-0938
1.995-5....................................................    1545-0938
1.1012-1...................................................    1545-0074
                                                               1545-1139
1.1014-4...................................................    1545-0184
1.1015-1...................................................    1545-0020
1.1017-2...................................................    1545-0028
                                                               1545-0046
1.1031(d)-1T...............................................    1545-1021
1.1033(a)-2................................................    1545-0184
1.1033(g)-1................................................    1545-0184
1.1034-1...................................................    1545-0072
1.1039-1...................................................    1545-0184
1.1041-1T..................................................    1545-0074
1.1042-1T..................................................    1545-0916
1.1044(a)-1................................................    1545-1421
1.1060-1T..................................................    1545-1021
1.1071-1...................................................    1545-0184
1.1071-4...................................................    1545-0184
1.1081-4...................................................    1545-0028
                                                               1545-0046
                                                               1545-0123
1.1081-11..................................................    1545-0074
                                                               1545-0123
1.1082-1...................................................    1545-0046
1.1082-2...................................................    1545-0046
1.1082-3...................................................    1545-0046
                                                               1545-0184
1.1082-4...................................................    1545-0046
1.1082-5...................................................    1545-0046
1.1082-6...................................................    1545-0046
1.1083-1...................................................    1545-0123
1.1092(b)-1T...............................................    1545-0644
1.1092(b)-2T...............................................    1545-0644
1.1092(b)-3T...............................................    1545-0644
1.1092(b)-4T...............................................    1545-0644
1.1092(b)-5T...............................................    1545-0644
1.1211-1...................................................    1545-0074
1.1212-1...................................................    1545-0074
1.1221-2...................................................    1545-1403
1.1221-2(d)(2)(iv).........................................    1545-1480
1.1221-2(e)(5).............................................    1545-1480
1.1221-2(g)(5)(ii).........................................    1545-1480
1.1221-2(g)(6)(ii).........................................    1545-1480
1.1221-2(g)(6)(iii)........................................    1545-1480
1.1221-2T(c)...............................................    1545-1403
1.1231-1...................................................    1545-0177
                                                               1545-0184
1.1231-2...................................................    1545-0177
                                                               1545-0184
1.1231-2...................................................    1545-0074
1.1232-3...................................................    1545-0074
1.1237-1...................................................    1545-0184
1.1239-1...................................................    1545-0091
1.1242-1...................................................    1545-0184
1.1243-1...................................................    1545-0123
1.1244(e)-1................................................    1545-0123
                                                               1545-1447
1.1245-1...................................................    1545-0184
1.1245-2...................................................    1545-0184
1.1245-3...................................................    1545-0184
1.1245-4...................................................    1545-0184
1.1245-5...................................................    1545-0184
1.1245-6...................................................    1545-0184
1.1247-1...................................................    1545-0122
1.1247-2...................................................    1545-0122
1.1247-4...................................................    1545-0122
1.1247-5...................................................    1545-0122
1.1248-7...................................................    1545-0074
1.1250-1...................................................    1545-0184
1.1250-2...................................................    1545-0184
1.1250-3...................................................    1545-0184
1.1250-4...................................................    1545-0184
1.1250-5...................................................    1545-0184
1.1251-1...................................................    1545-0184
1.1251-2...................................................    1545-0074
                                                               1545-0184
1.1251-3...................................................    1545-0184
1.1251-4...................................................    1545-0184
1.1252-1...................................................    1545-0184
1.1252-2...................................................    1545-0184
1.1254-1(c)(3).............................................    1545-1352
1.1254-4...................................................    1545-1493
1.1254-5(d)(2).............................................    1545-1352
1.1258-1...................................................    1545-1452
1.1272-3...................................................    1545-1353

[[Page 754]]

                                                                        
1.1273-2(h)(2).............................................    1545-1353
1.1274-3(d)................................................    1545-1353
1.1274-5(b)................................................    1545-1353
1.1274A-1(c)...............................................    1545-1353
1.1275-2...................................................    1545-1450
1.1275-3...................................................    1545-0887
                                                               1545-1353
                                                               1545-1450
1.1275-4...................................................    1545-1450
1.1275-6...................................................    1545-1450
1.1287-1...................................................    1545-0786
1.1291-9...................................................    1545-1507
1.1291-10..................................................    1545-1507
                                                               1545-1304
1.1294-1T..................................................    1545-1002
                                                               1545-1028
1.1295-1T..................................................    1545-1028
1.1297-3T..................................................    1545-1028
1.1311(a)-1................................................    1545-0074
1.1361-1...................................................    1545-0731
1.1362-1...................................................    1545-1308
1.1362-2...................................................    1545-1308
1.1362-3...................................................    1545-1308
1.1362-4...................................................    1545-1308
1.1362-5...................................................    1545-1308
1.1362-6...................................................    1545-1308
1.1362-7...................................................    1545-1308
1.1367-1(f)................................................    1545-1139
1.1368-1(f)(2).............................................    1545-1139
1.1368-1(f)(3).............................................    1545-1139
1.1368-1(f)(4).............................................    1545-1139
1.1368-1(g)(2).............................................    1545-1139
1.1374-1A..................................................    1545-0130
1.1377-1...................................................    1545-1462
1.1383-1...................................................    1545-0074
1.1385-1...................................................    1545-0074
                                                               1545-0098
1.1388-1...................................................    1545-0118
                                                               1545-0123
1.1398-1...................................................    1545-1375
1.1398-2...................................................    1545-1375
1.1402(a)-2................................................    1545-0074
1.1402(a)-5................................................    1545-0074
1.1402(a)-11...............................................    1545-0074
1.1402(a)-15...............................................    1545-0074
1.1402(a)-16...............................................    1545-0074
1.1402(b)-1................................................    1545-0171
1.1402(c)-2................................................    1545-0074
1.1402(e)(1)-1.............................................    1545-0074
1.1402(e)(2)-1.............................................    1545-0074
1.1402(e)-1A...............................................    1545-0168
1.1402(e)-2A...............................................    1545-0168
1.1402(e)-3A...............................................    1545-0168
1.1402(e)-4A...............................................    1545-0168
1.1402(e)-5A...............................................    1545-0168
1.1402(f)-1................................................    1545-0074
1.1402(h)-1................................................    1545-0064
1.1441-2...................................................    1545-0795
1.1441-3...................................................    1545-0165
                                                               1545-0795
1.1441-5...................................................    1545-0096
                                                               1545-0795
1.1441-6...................................................    1545-0055
                                                               1545-0795
1.1441-7...................................................    1545-0795
1.1441-8T..................................................    1545-1053
1.1443-1...................................................    1545-0096
1.1445-1...................................................    1545-0902
1.1445-2...................................................    1545-0902
                                                               1545-1060
1.1445-3...................................................    1545-0902
                                                               1545-1060
1.1445-4...................................................    1545-0902
1.1445-5...................................................    1545-0902
1.1445-6...................................................    1545-0902
                                                               1545-1060
1.1445-7...................................................    1545-0902
1.1445-8...................................................    1545-0096
1.1445-9T..................................................    1545-0902
1.1445-10T.................................................    1545-0902
1.1451-1...................................................    1545-0054
1.1451-2...................................................    1545-0054
1.1461-1...................................................    1545-0054
                                                               1545-0055
                                                               1545-0795
1.1461-2...................................................    1545-0054
                                                               1545-0055
                                                               1545-0096
                                                               1545-0795
1.1461-3...................................................    1545-0054
                                                               1545-0055
                                                               1545-0096
                                                               1545-0795
1.1461-4...................................................    1545-0054
                                                               1545-0055
                                                               1545-0096
1.1462-1...................................................    1545-0795
1.1492-1...................................................    1545-0026
1.1494-1...................................................    1545-0026
1.1502-5...................................................    1545-0257
1.1502-9...................................................    1545-0121
1.1502-13..................................................    1545-0123
                                                               1545-0885
                                                               1545-1161
                                                               1545-1433
1.1502-16..................................................    1545-0123
1.1502-18..................................................    1545-0123
1.1502-19..................................................    1545-0123
1.1502-20..................................................    1545-1160
1.1502-21T.................................................    1545-1237
1.1502-31..................................................    1545-1344
1.1502-32..................................................    1545-1344
1.1502-33..................................................    1545-1344
1.1502-47..................................................    1545-0123
1.1502-75..................................................    1545-0025
                                                               1545-0123
                                                               1545-0133
                                                               1545-0152
1.1502-76..................................................    1545-1344
1.1502-77..................................................    1545-0123
1.1502-77T.................................................    1545-1046
1.1502-78..................................................    1545-0582
1.1502-95T.................................................    1545-1218
1.1503-2A..................................................    1545-1083
1.1552-1...................................................    1545-0123
1.1561-3...................................................    1545-0123
1.1563-1...................................................    1545-0123
                                                               1545-0797
1.1563-3...................................................    1545-0123
1.6001-1...................................................    1545-0058
                                                               1545-0074
                                                               1545-0099
                                                               1545-0123
                                                               1545-0865
1.6011-1...................................................    1545-0055
                                                               1545-0074
                                                               1545-0085
                                                               1545-0089
                                                               1545-0090
                                                               1545-0091
                                                               1545-0096
                                                               1545-0121
                                                               1545-0458
                                                               1545-0666

[[Page 755]]

                                                                        
                                                               1545-0675
                                                               1545-0908
1.6011-2...................................................    1545-0055
                                                               1545-0938
1.6011-3...................................................    1545-0238
                                                               1545-0239
1.6012-1...................................................    1545-0067
                                                               1545-0085
                                                               1545-0089
                                                               1545-0675
                                                               1545-0074
1.6012-2...................................................    1545-0047
                                                               1545-0051
                                                               1545-0067
                                                               1545-0123
                                                               1545-0126
                                                               1545-0130
                                                               1545-0128
                                                               1545-0175
                                                               1545-0687
                                                               1545-0890
                                                               1545-1023
                                                               1545-1027
1.6012-3...................................................    1545-0047
                                                               1545-0067
                                                               1545-0092
                                                               1545-0196
                                                               1545-0687
1.6012-4...................................................    1545-0067
1.6012-5...................................................    1545-0067
                                                               1545-0967
                                                               1545-0970
                                                               1545-0991
                                                               1545-0936
                                                               1545-1023
                                                               1545-1033
                                                               1545-1079
1.6012-6...................................................    1545-0067
1.6012-7T..................................................    1545-1348
                                                               1545-0089
                                                               1545-0129
1.6013-1...................................................    1545-0074
1.6013-2...................................................    1545-0091
1.6013-6...................................................    1545-0074
1.6013-7...................................................    1545-0074
1.6015(a)-1................................................    1545-0087
1.6015(b)-1................................................    1545-0087
1.6015(d)-1................................................    1545-0087
1.6015(e)-1................................................    1545-0087
1.6015(f)-1................................................    1545-0087
1.6015(g)-1................................................    1545-0087
1.6015(h)-1................................................    1545-0087
1.6015(i)-1................................................    1545-0087
1.6017-1...................................................    1545-0074
                                                               1545-0087
                                                               1545-0090
1.6031(b)-1T...............................................    1545-0099
1.6031(c)-1T...............................................    1545-0099
1.6031-1...................................................    1545-0099
                                                               1545-0970
1.6032-1...................................................    1545-0099
1.6033-2...................................................    1545-0047
                                                               1545-0049
                                                               1545-0052
                                                               1545-0092
                                                               1545-0687
                                                               1545-1150
1.6033-3...................................................    1545-0052
1.6034-1...................................................    1545-0092
                                                               1545-0094
1.6035-1...................................................    1545-0704
1.6035-2...................................................    1545-0704
1.6035-3...................................................    1545-0704
1.6037-1...................................................    1545-0130
                                                               1545-1023
1.6038-2...................................................    1545-0704
                                                               1545-0805
                                                               1545-1317
1.6038A-2..................................................    1545-1191
1.6038A-3..................................................    1545-1191
                                                               1545-1440
1.6038B-1T.................................................    1545-0026
1.6039-2...................................................    1545-0820
1.6041-1...................................................    1545-0008
                                                               1545-0108
                                                               1545-0112
                                                               1545-0115
                                                               1545-0120
                                                               1545-0295
                                                               1545-0350
                                                               1545-0367
                                                               1545-0387
                                                               1545-0441
                                                               1545-0957
1.6041-2...................................................    1545-0008
                                                               1545-0119
                                                               1545-0350
                                                               1545-0441
1.6041-3...................................................    1545-1148
1.6041-4...................................................    1545-0115
                                                               1545-0295
                                                               1545-0367
                                                               1545-0387
                                                               1545-0957
1.6041-5...................................................    1545-0295
                                                               1545-0367
                                                               1545-0387
                                                               1545-0957
1.6041-6...................................................    1545-0008
                                                               1545-0115
1.6041-7...................................................    1545-0112
                                                               1545-0295
                                                               1545-0350
                                                               1545-0367
                                                               1545-0387
                                                               1545-0441
                                                               1545-0957
1.6042-1...................................................    1545-0110
1.6042-2...................................................    1545-0110
                                                               1545-0295
                                                               1545-0367
                                                               1545-0387
                                                               1545-0957
1.6042-3...................................................    1545-0295
                                                               1545-0367
                                                               1545-0387
                                                               1545-0957
1.6042-4...................................................    1545-0110
1.6043-1...................................................    1545-0041
1.6043-2...................................................    1545-0041
                                                               1545-0110
                                                               1545-0295
                                                               1545-0387
1.6043-3...................................................    1545-0047
1.6044-1...................................................    1545-0118
1.6044-2...................................................    1545-0118
1.6044-3...................................................    1545-0118
1.6044-4...................................................    1545-0118
1.6044-5...................................................    1545-0118
1.6045-1...................................................    1545-0715
1.6045-2...................................................    1545-0115
1.6045-4...................................................    1545-1085
1.6046-1...................................................    1545-0704
                                                               1545-0794

[[Page 756]]

                                                                        
                                                               1545-1317
1.6046-2...................................................    1545-0704
1.6046-3...................................................    1545-0704
1.6047-1...................................................    1545-0119
                                                               1545-0295
                                                               1545-0387
1.6049-1...................................................    1545-0112
                                                               1545-0117
                                                               1545-0295
                                                               1545-0367
                                                               1545-0387
                                                               1545-0597
                                                               1545-0957
1.6049-2...................................................    1545-0117
1.6049-3...................................................    1545-0117
1.6049-4...................................................    1545-0096
                                                               1545-0112
                                                               1545-0117
                                                               1545-1018
                                                               1545-1050
1.6049-5...................................................    1545-0096
                                                               1545-0112
                                                               1545-0117
1.6049-6...................................................    1545-0096
1.6049-7...................................................    1545-1018
1.6049-7T..................................................    1545-0112
                                                               1545-0117
                                                               1545-0118
1.6050A-1..................................................    1545-0115
1.6050B-1..................................................    1545-0120
1.6050D-1..................................................    1545-0120
                                                               1545-0232
1.6050E-1..................................................    1545-0120
1.6050H-1..................................................    1545-0901
                                                               1545-1380
1.6050H-2..................................................    1545-0901
                                                               1545-1339
                                                               1545-1380
1.6050H-1T.................................................    1545-0901
1.6050I-2..................................................    1545-1449
1.6050J-1T.................................................    1545-0877
1.6050K-1..................................................    1545-0941
1.6050P-1..................................................    1545-1419
1.6050P-1T.................................................    1545-1419
1.6052-1...................................................    1545-0008
1.6052-2...................................................    1545-0008
1.6060-1...................................................    1545-0074
1.6061-1...................................................    1545-0123
1.6061-2T..................................................    1545-1348
1.6062-1...................................................    1545-0123
1.6063-1...................................................    1545-0123
1.6065-1...................................................    1545-0123
1.6071-1...................................................    1545-0123
                                                               1545-0810
1.6072-1...................................................    1545-0074
1.6072-2...................................................    1545-0123
                                                               1545-0807
1.6073-1...................................................    1545-0087
1.6073-2...................................................    1545-0087
1.6073-3...................................................    1545-0087
1.6073-4...................................................    1545-0087
1.6074-1...................................................    1545-0123
1.6074-2...................................................    1545-0123
1.6081-1...................................................    1545-0066
                                                               1545-0148
                                                               1545-0233
                                                               1545-1057
                                                               1545-1081
1.6081-2...................................................    1545-0148
                                                               1545-1054
                                                               1545-1036
1.6081-3...................................................    1545-0233
1.6081-4...................................................    1545-0188
                                                               1545-1479
6081-6.....................................................    1545-0148
                                                               1545-1054
6081-7.....................................................    1545-0148
                                                               1545-1054
1.6091-3...................................................    1545-0089
1.6107-1...................................................    1545-0074
1.6109-1...................................................    1545-0074
1.6109-2...................................................    1545-0074
1.6115-1...................................................    1545-1464
1.6151-1...................................................    1545-0074
1.6152-1...................................................    1545-0135
                                                               1545-0233
1.6153-1...................................................    1545-0087
1.6153-4...................................................    1545-0087
1.6154-2...................................................    1545-0257
1.6154-3...................................................    1545-0135
1.6154-5...................................................    1545-0976
1.6161-1...................................................    1545-0087
1.6162-1...................................................    1545-0087
1.6164-1...................................................    1545-0135
1.6164-2...................................................    1545-0135
1.6164-3...................................................    1545-0135
1.6164-5...................................................    1545-0135
1.6164-6...................................................    1545-0135
1.6164-7...................................................    1545-0135
1.6164-8...................................................    1545-0135
1.6164-9...................................................    1545-0135
1.6302-1...................................................    1545-0257
1.6302-2...................................................    1545-0098
                                                               1545-0257
1.6411-1...................................................    1545-0098
                                                               1545-0135
                                                               1545-0582
1.6411-2...................................................    1545-0098
                                                               1545-0582
1.6411-3...................................................    1545-0098
                                                               1545-0582
1.6411-4...................................................    1545-0582
1.6414-1...................................................    1545-0096
1.6425-1...................................................    1545-0170
1.6425-2...................................................    1545-0170
1.6425-3...................................................    1545-0170
1.6654-1...................................................    1545-0087
                                                               1545-0140
1.6654-2...................................................    1545-0087
1.6654-3...................................................    1545-0087
1.6654-4...................................................    1545-0087
1.6655-1...................................................    1545-0142
1.6655-2...................................................    1545-0142
1.6655-3...................................................    1545-0142
1.6655-7...................................................    1545-0123
1.6655(e)-1................................................    1545-1421
1.6661-3...................................................    1545-0988
                                                               1545-1031
1.6661-4...................................................    1545-0739
1.6662-3(c)................................................    1545-0889
1.6662-4(e) and (f)........................................    1545-0889
1.6662-6...................................................    1545-1426
1.6694-1...................................................    1545-0074
1.6694-2...................................................    1545-0074
1.6694-2(c)................................................    1545-1231
1.6694-3(e)................................................    1545-1231
1.6695-1...................................................    1545-0074
                                                               1545-1385
1.6696-1...................................................    1545-0074
                                                               1545-0240
1.6851-1...................................................    1545-0086
                                                               1545-0138
1.6851-2...................................................    1545-0086
                                                               1545-0138

[[Page 757]]

                                                                        
1.7476-1...................................................    1545-0197
1.7476-2...................................................    1545-0197
1.7519-2T..................................................    1545-1036
1.7520-1...................................................    1545-1343
1.7520-2...................................................    1545-1343
1.7520-3...................................................    1545-1343
1.7520-4...................................................    1545-1343
1.9100-1...................................................    1545-0074
1.9101-1...................................................    1545-0008
2.1-4......................................................    1545-0123
2.1-5......................................................    1545-0123
2.1-6......................................................    1545-0123
2.1-10.....................................................    1545-0123
2.1-11.....................................................    1545-0123
2.1-12.....................................................    1545-0123
2.1-13.....................................................    1545-0123
2.1-20.....................................................    1545-0123
2.1-22.....................................................    1545-0123
2.1-26.....................................................    1545-0123
3.2........................................................    1545-0123
4.954-1....................................................    1545-1068
4.954-2....................................................    1545-1068
5.6411-1...................................................    1545-0098
                                                               1545-0582
                                                               1545-0042
                                                               1545-0074
                                                               1545-0129
                                                               1545-0172
                                                               1545-0619
5c.44F-1...................................................    1545-0619
5c.128-1...................................................    1545-0123
5c.168(f)(8)-1.............................................    1545-0123
5c.168(f)(8)-2.............................................    1545-0123
5c.168(f)(8)-6.............................................    1545-0123
5c.168(f)(8)-8.............................................    1545-0123
5c.305-1...................................................    1545-0110
5c.442-1...................................................    1545-0152
5f.103-1...................................................    1545-0720
5f.103-3...................................................    1545-0720
5f.6045-1..................................................    1545-0715
6a.103A-2..................................................    1545-0123
                                                               1545-0720
6a.103A-3..................................................    1545-0720
7.367(b)-1.................................................    1545-0026
7.367(b)-3.................................................    1545-0026
7.367(b)-7.................................................    1545-0026
7.367(b)-9.................................................    1545-0026
7.367(b)-10................................................    1545-0026
7.465-1....................................................    1545-0712
7.465-2....................................................    1545-0712
7.465-3....................................................    1545-0712
7.465-4....................................................    1545-0712
7.465-5....................................................    1545-0712
7.936-1....................................................    1545-0217
7.999-1....................................................    1545-0216
7.6039A-1..................................................    1545-0015
7.6041-1...................................................    1545-0115
11.410-1...................................................    1545-0710
11.412(c)-7................................................    1545-0710
11.412(c)-11...............................................    1545-0710
12.7.......................................................    1545-0190
12.8.......................................................    1545-0191
12.9.......................................................    1545-0195
14a.422A-1.................................................    1545-0123
15A.453-1..................................................    1545-0228
16.3-1.....................................................    1545-0159
16A.126-2..................................................    1545-0074
16A.1255-1.................................................    1545-0184
16A.1255-2.................................................    1545-0184
18.1371-1..................................................    1545-0130
18.1378-1..................................................    1545-0130
18.1379-1..................................................    1545-0130
18.1379-2..................................................    1545-0130
20.2011-1..................................................    1545-0015
20.2014-5..................................................    1545-0015
                                                               1545-0260
20.2014-6..................................................    1545-0015
20.2016-1..................................................    1545-0015
20.2031-2..................................................    1545-0015
20.2031-3..................................................    1545-0015
20.2031-4..................................................    1545-0015
20.2031-6..................................................    1545-0015
20.2031-7..................................................    1545-0020
20.2031-10.................................................    1545-0015
20.2032-1..................................................    1545-0015
20.2032A-3.................................................    1545-0015
20.2032A-4.................................................    1545-0015
20.2032A-8.................................................    1545-0015
20.2039-4..................................................    1545-0015
20.2051-1..................................................    1545-0015
20.2053-3..................................................    1545-0015
20.2053-9..................................................    1545-0015
20.2053-10.................................................    1545-0015
20.2055-1..................................................    1545-0015
20.2055-2..................................................    1545-0015
                                                               1545-0092
20.2055-3..................................................    1545-0015
20.2056(b)-4...............................................    1545-0015
20.2056(b)-7...............................................    1545-0015
20.2056A-2.................................................    1545-1443
20.2056A-3.................................................    1545-1360
20.2056A-4.................................................    1545-1360
20.2056A-10................................................    1545-1360
20.2106-1..................................................    1545-0015
20.2106-2..................................................    1545-0015
20.2204-1..................................................    1545-0015
20.2204-2..................................................    1545-0015
20.6001-1..................................................    1545-0015
20.6011-1..................................................    1545-0015
20.6018-1..................................................    1545-0015
                                                               1545-0531
20.6018-2..................................................    1545-0015
20.6018-3..................................................    1545-0015
20.6018-4..................................................    1545-0015
                                                               1545-0022
20.6036-2..................................................    1545-0015
20.6061-1..................................................    1545-0015
20.6065-1..................................................    1545-0015
20.6075-1..................................................    1545-0015
20.6081-1..................................................    1545-0015
                                                               1545-0181
20.6091-1..................................................    1545-0015
20.6161-1..................................................    1545-0015
                                                               1545-0181
20.6161-2..................................................    1545-0015
                                                               1545-0181
20.6163-1..................................................    1545-0015
20.6166-1..................................................    1545-0181
20.6166A-1.................................................    1545-0015
20.6166A-3.................................................    1545-0015
20.6324A-1.................................................    1545-0754
20.7520-1..................................................    1545-1343
20.7520-2..................................................    1545-1343
20.7520-3..................................................    1545-1343
20.7520-4..................................................    1545-1343
22.0.......................................................    1545-0015
25.2511-2..................................................    1545-0020
25.2512-2..................................................    1545-0020
25.2512-3..................................................    1545-0020
25.2512-5..................................................    1545-0020
25.2512-9..................................................    1545-0020
25.2513-1..................................................    1545-0020
25.2513-2..................................................    1545-0020
                                                               1545-0021

[[Page 758]]

                                                                        
25.2513-3..................................................    1545-0020
25.2518-2..................................................    1545-0959
25.2522(a)-1...............................................    1545-0196
25.2522(c)-3...............................................    1545-0020
                                                               1545-0196
25.2523(a)-1...............................................    1545-0020
                                                               1545-0196
25.2523(f)-1...............................................    1545-0015
25.2701-2..................................................    1545-1241
25.2701-4..................................................    1545-1241
25.2701-5..................................................    1545-1273
25.2702-6..................................................    1545-1273
25.6001-1..................................................    1545-0020
                                                               1545-0022
25.6011-1..................................................    1545-0020
25.6019-1..................................................    1545-0020
25.6019-2..................................................    1545-0020
25.6019-3..................................................    1545-0020
25.6019-4..................................................    1545-0020
25.6061-1..................................................    1545-0020
25.6065-1..................................................    1545-0020
25.6075-1..................................................    1545-0020
25.6081-1..................................................    1545-0020
25.6091-1..................................................    1545-0020
25.6091-2..................................................    1545-0020
25.6151-1..................................................    1545-0020
25.6161-1..................................................    1545-0020
25.7520-1..................................................    1545-1343
25.7520-2..................................................    1545-1343
25.7520-3..................................................    1545-1343
25.7520-4..................................................    1545-1343
26.2601-1..................................................    1545-0985
26.2632-1..................................................    1545-0985
26.2642-1..................................................    1545-0985
26.2642-2..................................................    1545-0985
26.2642-3..................................................    1545-0985
26.2642-4..................................................    1545-0985
26.2652-2..................................................    1545-0985
26.2662-1..................................................    1545-0015
                                                               1545-0985
26.2662-2..................................................    1545-0985
31.3102-3..................................................    1545-0029
                                                               1545-0059
                                                               1545-0065
31.3121(b)(19)-1...........................................    1545-0029
31.3121(d)-1...............................................    1545-0004
31.3121(i)-1...............................................    1545-0034
31.3121(k)-4...............................................    1545-0137
31.3121(r)-1...............................................    1545-0029
31.3121(s)-1...............................................    1545-0029
31.3302(a)-2...............................................    1545-0028
31.3302(a)-3...............................................    1545-0028
31.3302(b)-2...............................................    1545-0028
31.3302(e)-1...............................................    1545-0028
31.3306(c)(18)-1...........................................    1545-0029
31.3401(a)-1...............................................    1545-0029
31.3401(a)(6)-1............................................    1545-0029
                                                               1545-0096
                                                               1545-0795
31.3401(a)(7)-1............................................    1545-0029
31.3401(a)(8)(A)-1 ........................................    1545-0029
                                                               1545-0666
31.3401(a)(8)(C)-1 ........................................    1545-0029
31.3401(a)(15)-1...........................................    1545-0182
31.3401(c)-1...............................................    1545-0004
31.3402(b)-1...............................................    1545-0010
31.3402(c)-1...............................................    1545-0010
31.3402(f)(1)-1............................................    1545-0010
31.3402(f)(2)-1............................................    1545-0010
                                                               1545-0410
31.3402(f)(3)-1............................................    1545-0010
31.3402(f)(4)-1............................................    1545-0010
31.3402(f)(4)-2............................................    1545-0010
31.3402(f)(5)-1............................................    1545-0010
                                                               1545-1435
31.3402(h)(1)-1............................................    1545-0029
31.3402(h)(3)-1............................................    1545-0010
31.3402(h)(3)-1............................................    1545-0029
31.3402(h)(4)-1............................................    1545-0010
31.3402(i)-(1).............................................    1545-0010
31.3402(i)-(2).............................................    1545-0010
31.3402(k)-1...............................................    1545-0065
31.3402(l)-(1).............................................    1545-0010
31.3402(m)-(1).............................................    1545-0010
31.3402(n)-(1).............................................    1545-0010
31.3402(o)-2...............................................    1545-0415
31.3402(o)-3...............................................    1545-0008
                                                               1545-0010
                                                               1545-0415
                                                               1545-0717
31.3402(p)-1...............................................    1545-0415
                                                               1545-0717
31.3402(q)-1...............................................    1545-0238
                                                               1545-0239
31.3404-1..................................................    1545-0029
31.3405(c)-1...............................................    1545-1341
31.3406(a)-1...............................................    1545-0112
31.3406(a)-2...............................................    1545-0112
31.3406(a)-3...............................................    1545-0112
31.3406(a)-4...............................................    1545-0112
31.3406(b)(2)-1............................................    1545-0112
31.3406(b)(2)-2............................................    1545-0112
31.3406(b)(2)-3............................................    1545-0112
31.3406(b)(2)-4............................................    1545-0112
31.3406(b)(2)-5............................................    1545-0112
31.3406(b)(3)-1............................................    1545-0112
31.3406(b)(3)-2............................................    1545-0112
31.3406(b)(3)-3............................................    1545-0112
31.3406(b)(3)-4............................................    1545-0112
31.3406(b)(4)-1............................................    1545-0112
31.3406(c)-1...............................................    1545-0112
31.3406(d)-1...............................................    1545-0112
31.3406(d)-2...............................................    1545-0112
31.3406(d)-3...............................................    1545-0112
31.3406(d)-4...............................................    1545-0112
31.3406(d)-5...............................................    1545-0112
31.3406(e)-1...............................................    1545-0112
31.3406(f)-1...............................................    1545-0112
31.3406(g)-1...............................................    1545-0096
                                                               1545-0112
31.3406(g)-2...............................................    1545-0112
31.3406(g)-3...............................................    1545-0112
31.3406(h)-1...............................................    1545-0112
31.3406(h)-2...............................................    1545-0112
31.3406(h)-3...............................................    1545-0112
31.3406(i)-1...............................................    1545-0112
31.3501(a)-1T..............................................    1545-0771
31.3503-1..................................................    1545-0024
31.3504-1..................................................    1545-0029
31.6001-1..................................................    1545-0798
31.6001-2..................................................    1545-0034
                                                               1545-0798
31.6001-3..................................................    1545-0798
31.6001-4..................................................    1545-0028
31.6001-5..................................................    1545-0798
31.6001-6..................................................    1545-0029
                                                               1459-0798
31.6011(a)-1...............................................    1545-0029
                                                               1545-0034
                                                               1545-0035
                                                               1545-0059
                                                               1545-0074
                                                               1545-0718
                                                               1545-0256

[[Page 759]]

                                                                        
31.6011(a)-2...............................................    1545-0001
                                                               1545-0002
31.6011(a)-3...............................................    1545-0028
31.6011(a)-3A..............................................    1545-0955
31.6011(a)-4...............................................    1545-0034
                                                               1545-0035
                                                               1545-0718
                                                               1545-1413
31.6011(a)-5...............................................    1545-0718
                                                               1545-0028
31.6011(a)-6...............................................    1545-0028
31.6011(a)-7...............................................    1545-0074
31.6011(a)-8...............................................    1545-0028
31.6011(a)-9...............................................    1545-0028
31.6011(a)-10..............................................    1545-0112
31.6011(b)-1...............................................    1545-0003
31.6011(b)-2...............................................    1545-0029
31.6051-1..................................................    1545-0008
                                                               1545-0182
                                                               1545-0458
31.6051-2..................................................    1545-0008
31.6051-3..................................................    1545-0008
31.6053-1..................................................    1545-0029
                                                               1545-0062
                                                               1545-0064
                                                               1545-0065
31.6053-2..................................................    1545-0008
31.6053-3..................................................    1545-0065
                                                               1545-0714
31.6053-4..................................................    1545-0065
31.6065(a)-1...............................................    1545-0029
31.6071(a)-1...............................................    1545-0001
                                                               1545-0028
                                                               1545-0029
31.6071(a)-1A..............................................    1545-0955
31.6081(a)-1...............................................    1545-0008
                                                               1545-0028
31.6091-1..................................................    1545-0028
                                                               1545-0029
31.6157-1..................................................    1545-0955
31.6205-1..................................................    1545-0029
31.6301(c)-1AT.............................................    1545-0035
                                                               1545-0112
                                                               1545-0257
31.6302-1..................................................    1545-1413
31.6302-2..................................................    1545-1413
31.6302-3..................................................    1545-1413
31.6302-4..................................................    1545-1413
31.6302(c)-2...............................................    1545-0001
                                                               1545-0257
31.6302(c)-2A..............................................    1545-0955
31.6302(c)-3...............................................    1545-0257
31.6402(a)-2...............................................    1545-0256
31.6413(a)-1...............................................    1545-0029
31.6413(a)-2...............................................    1545-0029
                                                               1545-0256
31.6413(c)-1...............................................    1545-0029
                                                               1545-0171
31.6414-1..................................................    1545-0029
32.1.......................................................    1545-0029
                                                               1545-0415
32.2.......................................................    1545-0029
35a.3406-2.................................................    1545-0112
35a.9999-3.................................................    1545-0112
35a.9999-5.................................................    1545-0029
36.3121(l)(1)-1............................................    1545-0137
36.3121(l)(1)-2............................................    1545-0137
36.3121(l)(3)-1............................................    1545-0123
36.3121(1)(7)-1............................................    1545-0123
36.3121(1)(10)-1...........................................    1545-0029
36.3121(1)(10)-3...........................................    1545-0029
36.3121(1)(10)-4...........................................    1545-0257
40.6302(c)-3(b)(2)(ii).....................................    1545-1296
40.6302(c)-3(b)(2)(iii)....................................    1545-1296
40.6302(c)-3(e)............................................    1545-1296
40.6302(c)-3(f)(2)(ii).....................................    1545-1296
41.4481-1..................................................    1545-0143
41.4481-1T.................................................    1545-0143
41.4481-2..................................................    1545-0143
41.4482(b)-1T..............................................    1545-0143
41.4483-3..................................................    1545-0143
41.6001-1..................................................    1545-0143
41.6001-2..................................................    1545-0143
41.6001-3..................................................    1545-0143
41.6071(a)-1...............................................    1545-0143
41.6081(a)-1...............................................    1545-0143
41.6091-1..................................................    1545-0143
41.6109-1..................................................    1545-0143
41.6151(a)-1...............................................    1545-0143
41.6156-1..................................................    1545-0143
41.6161(a)(1)-1............................................    1545-0143
44.4401-1..................................................    1545-0235
44.4403-1..................................................    1545-0235
44.4412-1..................................................    1545-0236
44.4901-1..................................................    1545-0236
44.4905-1..................................................    1545-0236
44.4905-2..................................................    1545-0236
44.6001-1..................................................    1545-0235
44.6011(a)-1...............................................    1545-0235
                                                               1545-0236
44.6071-1..................................................    1545-0235
44.6091-1..................................................    1545-0235
44.6151-1..................................................    1545-0235
44.6419-1..................................................    1545-0235
44.6419-1..................................................    1545-0235
44.6419-2..................................................    1545-0235
46.4371-4..................................................    1545-0023
46.4374-1..................................................    1545-0023
46.4701-1..................................................    1545-0023
                                                               1545-0257
48.4041-4..................................................    1545-0023
48.4041-5..................................................    1545-0023
48.4041-6..................................................    1545-0023
48.4041-7..................................................    1545-0023
48.4041-9..................................................    1545-0023
48.4041-10.................................................    1545-0023
48.4041-11.................................................    1545-0023
48.4041-12.................................................    1545-0023
48.4041-13.................................................    1545-0023
48.4041-18.................................................    1545-0023
48.4041-19.................................................    1545-0023
48.4041-20.................................................    1545-0023
48.4041-21.................................................    1545-1270
48.4042-2..................................................    1545-0023
48.4061(a)-1...............................................    1545-0023
48.4061(a)-2...............................................    1545-0023
48.4061(b)-3...............................................    1545-0023
48.4064-1..................................................    1545-0014
                                                               1545-0242
48.4071-1..................................................    1545-0023
48.4073-1..................................................    1545-0023
48.4073-3..................................................    1545-0023
                                                               1545-1074
                                                               1545-1087
48.4081-2(c)(3)............................................    1545-1270
48.4081-3(d)(2)(iii).......................................    1545-1270
48.4081-3(e)(2)(ii)........................................    1545-1270
48.4081-3(f)(2)(ii)........................................    1545-1270
48.4081-4(b)(2)(ii)........................................    1545-1270
48.4081-4(b)(3)(i).........................................    1545-1270
48.4081-4(c)...............................................    1545-1270
48.4081-6(c)(1)(ii)........................................    1545-1270
48.4081-7..................................................    1545-1270
48.4081-9..................................................    1545-1270

[[Page 760]]

                                                                        
48.4082-2..................................................    1545-1418
48.4101-1..................................................    1545-1418
48.4101-2..................................................    1545-1418
48.4161(a)-1...............................................    1545-0723
48.4161(a)-2...............................................    1545-0723
48.4161(a)-3...............................................    1545-0723
48.4161(b)-1...............................................    1545-0723
                                                               1545-0723
48.4216(a)-2...............................................    1545-0023
48.4216(a)-3...............................................    1545-0023
48.4216(c)-1...............................................    1545-0023
48.4221-1..................................................    1545-0023
48.4221-2..................................................    1545-0023
48.4221-3..................................................    1545-0023
48.4221-4..................................................    1545-0023
48.4221-5..................................................    1545-0023
48.4221-6..................................................    1545-0023
48.4221-7..................................................    1545-0023
48.4222(a)-1...............................................    1545-0023
                                                               1545-0014
48.4222(b)-1...............................................    1545-0023
48.4223-1..................................................    1545-0023
                                                               1545-0723
                                                               1545-0723
                                                               1545-0723
                                                               1545-0257
48.6302(c)-1...............................................    1545-0023
                                                               1545-0257
48.6412-1..................................................    1545-0723
48.6416(a)-1...............................................    1545-0023
                                                               1545-0723
48.6416(a)-2...............................................    1545-0723
48.6416(a)-3...............................................    1545-0723
48.6416(b)(2)-3............................................    1545-1087
48.6416(b)(1)-1............................................    1545-0723
48.6416(b)(1)-2............................................    1545-0723
48.6416(b)(1)-3............................................    1545-0723
48.6416(b)(1)-4............................................    1545-0723
48.6416(b)(2)-1............................................    1545-0723
48.6416(b)(2)-2............................................    1545-0723
48.6416(b)(2)-3............................................    1545-0723
                                                               1545-1087
48.6416(b)(2)-4............................................    1545-0723
48.6416(b)(3)-1............................................    1545-0723
48.6416(b)(3)-2............................................    1545-0723
48.6416(b)(3)-3............................................    1545-0723
48.6416(b)(4)-1............................................    1545-0723
48.6416(b)(5)-1............................................    1545-0723
48.6416(c)-1...............................................    1545-0723
48.6416(e)-1...............................................    1545-0023
                                                               1545-0723
48.6416(f)-1...............................................    1545-0023
                                                               1545-0723
48.6416(g)-1...............................................    1545-0723
48.6416(h)-1...............................................    1545-0723
48.6420(c)-2...............................................    1545-0023
48.6420(f)-1...............................................    1545-0023
48.6420-1..................................................    1545-0162
                                                               1545-0723
48.6420-2..................................................    1545-0162
                                                               1545-0723
48.6420-3..................................................    1545-0162
                                                               1545-0723
48.6420-4..................................................    1545-0162
                                                               1545-0723
48.6420-5..................................................    1545-0162
                                                               1545-0723
48.6420-6..................................................    1545-0162
                                                               1545-0723
48.6420-7..................................................    1545-0162
                                                               1545-0723
48.6421-0..................................................    1545-0162
                                                               1545-0723
48.6421-1..................................................    1545-0162
                                                               1545-0723
48.6421-2..................................................    1545-0162
                                                               1545-0723
48.6421-3..................................................    1545-0162
                                                               1545-0723
48.6421-4..................................................    1545-0162
                                                               1545-0723
48.6421-5..................................................    1545-0162
                                                               1545-0723
48.6421-6..................................................    1545-0162
                                                               1545-0723
48.6421-7..................................................    1545-0162
                                                               1545-0723
48.6424-0..................................................    1545-0723
48.6424-1..................................................    1545-0723
48.6424-2..................................................    1545-0723
48.6424-3..................................................    1545-0723
48.6424-4..................................................    1545-0723
48.6424-5..................................................    1545-0723
48.6424-6..................................................    1545-0723
48.6427-0..................................................    1545-0723
48.6427-1..................................................    1545-0023
                                                               1545-0162
                                                               1545-0723
48.6427-2..................................................    1545-0162
                                                               1545-0723
48.6427-3..................................................    1545-0723
48.6427-4..................................................    1545-0723
48.6427-5..................................................    1545-0723
48.6427-8..................................................    1545-1418
48.6427-9..................................................    1545-1418
49.4251-1..................................................    1545-1075
49.4251-2..................................................    1545-1075
49.4253-3..................................................    1545-0023
49.4253-4..................................................    1545-0023
49.4264(b)-1...............................................    1545-0023
                                                               1545-0226
                                                               1545-0226
                                                               1545-0912
                                                               1545-0912
                                                               1545-0257
                                                               1545-0230
                                                               1545-0224
                                                               1545-0225
                                                               1545-0224
                                                               1545-0230
49.4271-1(d)...............................................    1545-0685
52.4682-1(b)(2)(iii).......................................    1545-1153
52.4682-2(b)...............................................    1545-1153
                                                               1545-1361
52.4682-2(d)...............................................    1545-1153
                                                               1545-1361
52.4682-3(c)(2)............................................    1545-1153
52.4682-3(g)...............................................    1545-1153
52.4682-4(f)...............................................    1545-1153
                                                               1545-0257
52.4682-5(d)...............................................    1545-1361
52.4682-5(f)...............................................    1545-1361
53.4940-1..................................................    1545-0052
                                                               1545-0196
53.4942(a)-1...............................................    1545-0052
53.4942(a)-2...............................................    1545-0052
53.4942(a)-3...............................................    1545-0052
53.4942(b)-3...............................................    1545-0052
53.4945-1..................................................    1545-0052
53.4945-4..................................................    1545-0052
53.4945-5..................................................    1545-0052
53.4945-6..................................................    1545-0052
53.4947-1..................................................    1545-0196
53.4947-2..................................................    1545-0196

[[Page 761]]

                                                                        
53.4948-1..................................................    1545-0052
53.4961-2..................................................    1545-0024
53.4963-1..................................................    1545-0024
53.6001-1..................................................    1545-0052
53.6011-1..................................................    1545-0049
                                                               1545-0052
                                                               1545-0092
                                                               1545-0196
53.6065-1..................................................    1545-0052
53.6071-1..................................................    1545-0049
53.6081-1..................................................    1545-0066
                                                               1545-0148
53.6161-1..................................................    1545-0575
54.4972-1..................................................    1545-0197
54.4975-7..................................................    1545-0575
54.4977-1T.................................................    1545-0771
54.4981A-1T................................................    1545-0203
54.6011-1..................................................    1545-0575
54.6011-1T.................................................    1545-0575
55.6001-1..................................................    1545-0123
55.6011-1..................................................    1545-0999
                                                               1545-0123
                                                               1545-1016
55.6061-1..................................................    1545-0999
55.6071-1..................................................    1545-0999
56.4911-6..................................................    1545-0052
56.4911-7..................................................    1545-0052
56.4911-9..................................................    1545-0052
56.4911-10.................................................    1545-0052
56.6001-1..................................................    1545-1049
56.6011-1..................................................    1545-1049
56.6081-1..................................................    1545-1049
56.6161-1..................................................    1545-1049
                                                               1545-0257
145.4051-1.................................................    1545-0745
145.4052-1.................................................    1545-0120
                                                               1545-0745
                                                               1545-1076
145.4061-1.................................................    1545-0745
                                                               1545-0257
                                                               1545-0230
                                                               1545-0224
156.6001-1.................................................    1545-1049
156.6011-1.................................................    1545-1049
156.6081-1.................................................    1545-1049
156.6161-1.................................................    1545-1049
301.6011-2.................................................    1545-0225
                                                               1545-0350
                                                               1545-0387
                                                               1545-0441
                                                               1545-0957
301.6017-1.................................................    1545-0090
301.6034-1.................................................    1545-0092
301.6035-1.................................................    1545-0123
301.6036-1.................................................    1545-0013
                                                               1545-0773
301.6047-1.................................................    1545-0367
                                                               1545-0957
301.6057-1.................................................    1545-0710
301.6057-2.................................................    1545-0710
301.6058-1.................................................    1545-0710
301.6059-1.................................................    1545-0710
301.6103(c)-1..............................................    1545-0280
301.6104(a)-1..............................................    1545-0495
301.6104(a)-5..............................................    1545-0056
301.6104(a)-6..............................................    1545-0056
301.6104(b)-1..............................................    1545-0094
                                                               1545-0742
301.6104(d)-1..............................................    1545-0092
301.6109-1.................................................    1545-0003
                                                               1545-0295
                                                               1545-0367
                                                               1545-0387
                                                               1545-0957
                                                               1545-1461
301.6110-3.................................................    1545-0074
301.6110-5.................................................    1545-0074
301.6111-1T................................................    1545-0865
                                                               1545-0881
301.6112-1T................................................    1545-0865
301.6222(a)-2T.............................................    1545-0790
301.6222(b)-1T.............................................    1545-0790
301.6222(b)-2T.............................................    1545-0790
301.6222(b)-3T.............................................    1545-0790
301.6227(b)-1T.............................................    1545-0790
                                                               1545-0790
301.6231(a)(7)-1...........................................    1545-0790
301.6241-1T................................................    1545-0130
301.6316-4.................................................    1545-0074
301.6316-5.................................................    1545-0074
301.6316-6.................................................    1545-0074
301.6316-7.................................................    1545-0029
301.6324A-1................................................    1545-0015
301.6361-1.................................................    1545-0074
                                                               1545-0024
301.6361-2.................................................    1545-0024
301.6361-3.................................................    1545-0074
301.6402-2.................................................    1545-0024
                                                               1545-0073
                                                               1545-0091
301.6402-3.................................................    1545-0055
                                                               1545-0073
                                                               1545-0091
                                                               1545-0132
301.6402-5.................................................    1545-0928
301.6404-1.................................................    1545-0024
301.6404-2T................................................    1545-0024
301.6404-3.................................................    1545-0024
301.6405-1.................................................    1545-0024
301.6501(c)-1..............................................    1545-1241
301.6501(d)-1..............................................    1545-0074
                                                               1545-0430
301.6501(o)-2..............................................    1545-0728
301.6511(d)-1..............................................    1545-0582
                                                               1545-0024
301.6511(d)-2..............................................    1545-0582
                                                               1545-0024
301.6511(d)-3..............................................    1545-0024
                                                               1545-0582
301.6652-2.................................................    1545-0092
301.6656-1.................................................    1545-0794
301.6656-2.................................................    1545-0794
301.6685-1.................................................    1545-0092
301.6689-1T................................................    1545-1056
301.6707-1T................................................    1545-0865
                                                               1545-0881
301.6708-1T................................................    1545-0865
301.6712-1.................................................    1545-1126
301.6723-1A(d).............................................    1545-0909
301.6903-1.................................................    1545-0013
301.6905-1.................................................    1545-0074
301.7001-1.................................................    1545-0123
301.7101-1.................................................    1545-1029
301.7207-1.................................................    1545-0092
301.7216-2.................................................    1545-0074
301.7216-2(o)..............................................    1545-1209
301.7425-3.................................................    1545-0854
301.7430-2(c)..............................................    1545-1356
301.7507-8.................................................    1545-0123
301.7507-9.................................................    1545-0123
301.7513-1.................................................    1545-0429
301.7517-1.................................................    1545-0015
301.7605-1.................................................    1545-0795
301.7623-1.................................................    1545-0409

[[Page 762]]

                                                                        
301.7654-1.................................................    1545-0803
301.7701-3.................................................    1545-1486
301.7701-4.................................................    1545-1465
301.7701-16................................................    1545-0795
301.7701(b)-1..............................................    1545-0089
301.7701(b)-2..............................................    1545-0089
301.7701(b)-3..............................................    1545-0089
301.7701(b)-4..............................................    1545-0089
301.7701(b)-5..............................................    1545-0089
301.7701(b)-6..............................................    1545-0089
301.7701(b)-7..............................................    1545-0089
301.7701(b)-9..............................................    1545-0089
301.7805-1.................................................    1545-0805
301.9001-1.................................................    1545-0220
301.9001-2T................................................    1545-1488
301.9001-3T................................................    1545-1488
301.9100-4T................................................    1545-0016
                                                               1545-0042
                                                               1545-0074
                                                               1545-0129
                                                               1545-0172
                                                               1545-0619
301.9100-6T................................................    1545-0872
301.9100-7T................................................    1545-0982
301.9100-8.................................................    1545-1112
301.9100-11T...............................................    1545-0123
301.9100-12T...............................................    1545-0026
                                                               1545-0074
                                                               1545-0172
                                                               1545-1027
301.9100-13T...............................................    1545-0046
301.9100-14T...............................................    1545-0046
301.9100-15T...............................................    1545-0046
301.9100-16T...............................................    1545-0152
302.1-7....................................................    1545-0024
305.7701-1.................................................    1545-0823
305.7871-1.................................................    1545-0823
404.6048-1.................................................    1545-0160
420.0-1....................................................    1545-0710
Part 502...................................................    1545-0844
Part 503...................................................    1545-0837
Part 509...................................................    1545-0846
Part 513...................................................    1545-0834
Part 514...................................................    1545-0845
Part 516...................................................    1545-0841
Part 517...................................................    1545-0849
Part 520...................................................    1545-0833
Part 521...................................................    1545-0848
601.104....................................................    1545-0233
601.105....................................................    1545-0091
601.201....................................................    1545-0019
                                                               1545-0819
601.204....................................................    1545-0152
601.401....................................................    1545-0257
601.504....................................................    1545-0150
601.601....................................................    1545-0800
601.602....................................................    1545-0295
                                                               1545-0387
                                                               1545-0957
601.702....................................................    1545-0429
------------------------------------------------------------------------

(26 U.S.C. 7805)

[T.D. 8011, 50 FR 10222, Mar. 14, 1985]

    Editorial Note: For Federal Register citations affecting 
Sec. 602.101, see the List of CFR Sections Affected in the Findings Aids 
section of 26 CFR part 600-end.

    Effective Date Note: By T.D. 8712, at 62 FR 2275, Jan. 16, 1997, in 
Sec. 602.1, the table in paragraph (c) was amended by adding entries for 
Secs. 1.141-1, 1.141-12, 1,142-2 and 1.148-6, effective May 16, 1997.

[[Page 763]]


<R03>
List of CFR Sections Affected

<R04>


All changes to sections of part 1 (Secs. 1.851 to 1.1000) of title 26 of 
the Code of Federal Regulations which were made by documents published 
in the Federal Register since January 1, 1986, are enumerated in the 
following list. Entries indicate the nature of the changes effected. 
Page numbers refer to Federal Register pages. The user should consult 
the entries for chapters and parts as well as sections for revisions.
For the period before January 1, 1986, see the ``List of CFR Sections 
Affected, 1949-1963, 1964-1972, and 1973-1985'' published in seven 
separate volumes.

                                  1986

26 CFR
                                                                   51 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter I
1.936-4  Added.....................................................21524
1.936-5  Added.....................................................21524
    (a) Example (2), (b)(4) and (7) corrected......................27174
1.936-6  Added.....................................................21532
    (b)(1)(iv) Example (2) corrected...............................27174
1.936-7  Added.....................................................21545

                                  1987

26 CFR
                                                                   52 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter I
1.921-1T  (a)(4) Question 4A and Answer 4A, (9) Question 11A and 
        Answer 11A, and (10) Question 12A and Answer 12A added 
        (temporary).................................................6434
    (b)(1) Answer 1 revised; (b)(12) Answer 12 amended (temporary)
                                                                    6435
1.921-2  Added......................................................6469
1.921-2T  Removed...................................................6469
1.921-3T  Added (temporary).........................................6435
1.922-1  Added......................................................6470
1.922-1T  Removed...................................................6469
1.923-1T  Added (temporary).........................................6438
1.924(a)-1T  Added (temporary)......................................6438
1.924(c)-1  Added...................................................5089
1.924(c)-1T  Removed...............................................10742
1.924(d)-1  Added...................................................5090
1.924(d)-1T  Removed...............................................10742
1.924(e)-1  Added...................................................5094
1.924(e)-1T  Removed...............................................10742
1.925(a)-1T  Added (temporary)......................................6443
1.925(b)-1T  Removed................................................6435
    Added (temporary)...............................................6455
1.925(c)-1T  Removed................................................6435
1.926(a)-1T  Added (temporary)......................................6458
1.927-1T  Removed...................................................6465
1.927(a)-1T  Added (temporary)......................................6459
1.927(b)-1T  Added (temporary)......................................6464
1.927(d)-1  Added...................................................6473
1.927(d)-1T  Removed................................................6469
1.927(d)-2T  Added (temporary)......................................6465
1.927(e)-1T  Added (temporary)......................................6465
1.927(e)-2T  Added (temporary)......................................6465
1.927(f)-1  Added...................................................6475
1.927(f)-1T  Removed................................................6469

                                  1988

26 CFR
                                                                   53 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter I
1.936-6  Intercompany pricing rules study..........................43522
1.954-0T  Added....................................................27491
1.954-1  Redesignated as 1.954A-1..................................27492
1.954-1T  Added (temporary)........................................27492
1.954-2  Redesignated as 1.954A-2..................................27498
1.954-2T  Added (temporary)........................................27498
    (a)(3)(ii) Example (2) corrected...............................29801

[[Page 764]]

1.954A-1  Redesignated from 1.954-1................................27492
1.954A-2  Redesignated from 1.954-2................................27498
1.956-1  (b)(4) removed............................................22171
1.956-1T  Added (temporary)........................................22171
1.956-2  (d)(2) removed............................................22171
1.956-2T  Added (temporary)........................................22171
1.956-3T  Added (temporary)........................................22169
1.957-1  (a) removed...............................................27510
1.957-1T  Added (temporary)........................................27510
1.985-0T  Added (temporary)........................................20311
1.985-1T  Added (temporary)........................................20311
    (c)(6) and (f) Example (11) corrected..........................23232
1.985-2T  Added (temporary)........................................20314
1.985-3T  Added (temporary)........................................20315
    (c)(8) Example (1) and table and (d)(2) introductory text 
corrected; (d)(6) heading correctly revised........................23232
1.985-4T  Added (temporary)........................................20319
1.985-5T  Heading added (temporary)................................20319
1.987-0T  Added (temporary)........................................32385
    Correctly designated...........................................35953
1.987-1T  Added (temporary)........................................32386
    (a)(1) corrected...............................................35467
    (a)(2) corrected...............................................35953
1.989(a)-0T  Added (temporary).....................................20613
1.989(a)-1T  Added (temporary).....................................20613
1.989(c)-0T  Added (temporary).....................................20616
1.989(c)-1T  Added (temporary).....................................20616

                                  1989

26 CFR
                                                                   54 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter I
1.911-1--1.911-8  Undesignated center heading added.................3021
1.912-2  Revised...................................................28620
1.936-8T  Added (temporary)........................................38973
1.936-9T  Added (temporary)........................................38973
1.936-10T  Added (temporary).......................................38973
1.985-0  Added.....................................................38653
1.985-0T--1.985-4T  Removed........................................38653
1.985-1  Added.....................................................38653
1.985-2  Added.....................................................38656
1.985-3  Added.....................................................38658
1.985-4  Added.....................................................38661
1.985-5T  Revised..................................................38662
1.985-6T  Added....................................................38663
1.988-0T  Added (temporary)........................................38823
1.988-1T  Added (temporary)........................................38824
    (a)(3) Example (11) corrected..................................41443
    (a)(6)(ii) Example (1) corrected...............................41443
1.988-2T  Added....................................................38829
    (d)(4)(ii) corrected...........................................41443
1.988-3T  Added....................................................38841
1.988-4T  Added....................................................38842
1.988-5T  Added....................................................38843
    (a)(5)(vi) corrected...........................................41443
    (b)(4)(vi) corrected...........................................41443
1.989(b)-1T  Added (temporary).....................................38664

                                  1990

26 CFR
                                                                   55 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter I
1.964-1T  Added (temporary).........................................2516
    (g)(6) Example (1)(iii) and (g)(6) Example (2)(iii) and (g)(6) 
Example (3)(iii) corrected..........................................7711
1.988-1T  (a)(6)(ii) Example (1) corrected..........................3792
1.988-5T  Corrected.................................................3792
1.989(a)-0T  Removed.................................................284
1.989(a)-1  Added....................................................284
1.989(a)-1T  Removed.................................................284

                                  1991

26 CFR
                                                                   56 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter I
1.926(a)-1  Added..................................................11093
1.926(a)-1T  (b)(1) revised........................................11093
1.936-10  Added....................................................21927
1.936-10T  Removed.................................................21927
1.952-1  (a)(2) amended.............................................2846
1.954A-1  (a), (b)(3)(i), (c), (e) introductory text, (f) 
        introductory text and (3) amended; (f)(4) added.............2846
1.954-8  Added......................................................28
</pre></body></html>
